UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Chaotic Neural Network Model of Insightful Problem Solving and the Generation Process of
Constraints

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tr6n90s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Wajima, Yuichiro
Abe, Keiga
Nakagawa, Masanori

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Chaotic Neural Network Model of Insightful Problem Solving
and the Generation Process of Constraints
Yuichiro Wajima (wajima@nm.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Keiga Abe (abe@nm.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Masanori Nakagawa (nakagawa@nm.hum.titech.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Decision Science Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology
2-12-1, Ookayama, Meguro-Ku, Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan
Abstract
The solution of an insightful problem needs a drastic change
from the "impasse" to the "insight" stage. It is assumed that in
this type of a problem, solvers encounter the impasse stage
because of special "constraints" like common sense. Abe,
Wajima, and Nakagawa (2003) proposed a model of insight
problem solving using a chaotic neural network. The model
successfully simulates an insight problem. Based on this
system, we developed a new model to explain the generation
process of new constraints. We hypothesized that once people
have solved a problem using insight, the experience of the
insight generates new constraints.
In order to verify the above hypothesis, we conducted a
psychological experiment and executed a computational
simulation of the model.
In the experiment, participants were instructed to solve the
two pictorial puzzles, one was an insight problem and the
other was a non-insight problem. The experimental results
showed that the solution of the insight problem generated a
new constraint, while inhibiting the solution of non-insight
problem.
We constructed a new model that represents a reinforcement
state after solving the insightful problem and several
simulations were executed.
The result of model's simulation showed a close similarity
with the experimental result. The model successfully
simulated the process of generation of new constraints.
Keywords: insight; constraint; generation process; neural
network; modeling.

Introduction
Insight is the process by which a problem is suddenly solved
after an "impasse," which is the period when the solver is
unable to solve the problem (Wallas, 1926). The process of
insightful problem solving is the change from the state of
"impasse" to the state of "insight," when problem is solved.
In previous studies, it is generally assumed that the impasse
stage is due to constraints such as common sense (Knoblich,
Ohlsson, Haider & Rhenius, 1999).
Some constraints can be effective in guiding how people
tackle everyday problems, but for problems that require
some new insight, such constraints can obstruct the solver
from seeing the solution to the problem. It has been
suggested that insight is the product of breaking away from
such constraints by discovering new effective directions
during previous failed attempts at solving the problem.
Abe, Wajima, and Nakagawa (2003) proposed a model for
insight problem solving using chaotic neural network.

This model consists of two components, namely, a
"constraint component," and an "avoidance component." In
order to represent these components, a system of
simultaneous differential equations is proposed, with each
variable denoting a single node of a neural network. In the
model, the "constraint component" is represented by
controlling the ease with which the nodes can activate,
while the "avoidance component" is represented by the term
causing the system to move in the direction in which the
value of an evaluation function becomes the largest. This
movement corresponds to the avoidance reaction of humans
that is a result of failed trials. The model successfully
simulates an insight problem.
However, in the previous research, sufficient
consideration was not given to the generation process of
constraints. Furthermore, the previous research did not refer
to the possibility of the insight experience generating a new
constraint due to reinforcement, once people had
experienced solving a problem using insight.
We report here the development of a new model based on
the insightful problem solving model to represent the
generation of new constraints by hypothesizing that once
people solved a problem using insight, the experience of the
insight generates new constraints. In order to verify the
above hypothesis, we conducted a psychological experiment
and a computational simulation of the present model.
First, we set up an experiment in order to show that new
constraints are generated by insight. In this experiment,
participants were instructed to solve a non-insight problem
after solving an insight problem to examine how the
experience of insight subsequently changed the
performance.
Second, we constructed a new model, by adding a
mechanism to the previous model; a new constraint was
generated by reinforcement of insight experience, while
computational simulations were executed according to the
variation of reinforcement values.

Hypothesis
We explain our hypothesis of a new constraint generating
process by using the "T-puzzle" and the "Arrow-puzzle"
solving process.
The T-puzzle is an example of an insight problem (Figure
1, 2). In the T-puzzle, the solver constructs a "T" using
pieces of the following four shapes: a triangle, a small
trapezoid, a large-trapezoid, and a pentagon with a notch.
1623

Figure 1: Pieces comprising the puzzle

Figure 2: T-puzzle
Figure 4: Hypothesis

Experiment

Figure 3: Arrow-puzzle
This puzzle has one constraint: "to fill the notch of
pentagon." When participants solve this puzzle, they often
fill the notch of pentagon (Suzuki & Hiraki, 1997). In order
to solve the T-puzzle, participants need the insight to escape
from this constraint.
By using same four pieces used in the T-puzzle, an
"Arrow" is constructed (Figure 3). We refer to this puzzle as
the Arrow-puzzle. The Arrow-puzzle has the same
constraint as that of the T-puzzle. In order to solve the
Arrow-puzzle, participants need to fill the notch. The
constraint aids solving the Arrow-puzzle. Thus, the
participants do not need the insight acquired while solving
the T-puzzle to solve the Arrow-puzzle.
In order to examine the effect of the previous insight on
the solution of the next task, we instructed the participants
to solve the Arrow-puzzle (non-insight problem) after they
had solved the T-puzzle using insight. In this case, we
assumed the solving process as follows (Figure 4):
• First, due to the constraint, i.e., "fill the notch of the
pentagon," the T-puzzle was not solved.
• Insight was acquired, and participants discovered that the
notch need not be filled.
• Reinforcement was acquired by solving the T-puzzle using
insight, and a new constraint, i.e., "do not fill," was
generated.
• Due to the new constraint, i.e., "do not fill," it became
easy to select "not fill the notch of pentagon" when
participants solved the Arrow-puzzle after solved the Tpuzzle.
It is considered that this change from filling the notch to not
filling the notch is one process that generates constraints.
Therefore, we focused on the change of frequency of the
filling the notch.

In this experiment, we examine how the experience of
insight subsequently changes the performance. Our
hypotheses in this experiment are as follows:
• When participants experienced the insight by escaping
from the initial constraint, a new constraint was generated.
Under this condition, the participant's performances while
solving the next task changed due to the new constraint.
• If participants did not experience insight, the participant's
performances did not change.

Method
Participants. The participants comprised 30 graduate and
undergraduate students who had never solved the T-puzzle
or the Arrow-puzzle.
Tasks. Training task: Using 3 pieces to make any shapes
other than the "T" or the "Arrow" within 3 minutes.
Completion task: Completing the goal shapes ("T" or
"Arrow") by referring to the goal image silhouette.
Procedure. Participants were assigned to two groups ("TArrow" or "Arrow-T"). Participants in the T-Arrow group
were instructed to first solve the T-puzzle and then the
Arrow-puzzle. On the other hand, participants in Arrow-T
group were instructed to first solve the Arrow-puzzle and
then the T-puzzle.

Result
In this study, "one trial" is defined as one segment that
spans the period from connecting pieces to separating those
pieces (Suzuki & Hiraki, 1997).
The average time to solve the Arrow-puzzle was 433.50s
for Arrow-T group and 306.33s for T-Arrow group; there is
no significant difference between the two groups. The
average trials count to reach the solution was 25.40 for the
Arrow-T group and 35.14 for the T-Arrow group; there is no
significant difference between the two groups. The average
of frequency of filling the notch was 0.55 for the Arrow-T
group and 0.28 for the T-Arrow group. The t-test revealed a

1624

significant difference between the Arrow-T group and TArrow group, (t(22) = 3.97, p = 0.0007 > 0.01).
In order to examine the changes in the frequency of filling
the notch, all participants' trials for each group was divided
into 4 sections in the time series, and the average of the
frequency of filling the notch in each section was plotted
(Figure 5). In the case of the Arrow-T group, the frequency
of filling the notch in the Arrow-puzzle was approximately
0.55 in all sections. In the case of the T-Arrow group, the
frequency was approximately 0.2 in t1 ~ t3, and it rapidly
increased to 0.61 in t4.
For the Arrow-puzzle, the frequency change of filling the
notch was examined by the analysis of variance, by
considering the "Within factor" section and the "Between
factor" group. The results indicated significant effects of the
section, group, and their interaction. For the effect of group,
F(1,27) = 15.716, p < .001; for the effect of section, F(3,81)
= 7.894, p < .001; and for the interaction effect, F(3,81) =
3.224, p < .05. This result shows that the change of the
frequency of filling the notch was affected by the experience
of solving the T-puzzle.
For solving the T-puzzle, the average time to obtain the
solution was 972.73 s for T-Arrow group and 849.85s for
Arrow-T group, and thus no significant difference was
observed between the groups. The average trials count to
solution was 69.47 for the T-Arrow group and 81.0 for the
Arrow-T group, and no significant difference was observed
between the groups. The average of frequency of filling the
notch was 0.50 for the T-Arrow group and 0.45 for the
Arrow-T group; there was no significant difference between
both the groups.
For the frequency of filling the notch in the T-puzzle, we
obtained three common tendencies between both groups: the
frequency was approximately 0.5 in t1, approximately 0.4 in
t4, and decreased in t1 ~ t4 (Figure 6).
For the T-puzzle, the frequency change of filling the notch
was examined by the analysis of variance by considering the
"Within factor" section and the "Between factor" group. The
results indicated significant effects of section only. For the
effect of section, F = (3,81) = 0.208, p < .005. This result
shows that the change of the frequency of filling the notch
was not affected by experience of solving the Arrow-puzzle.

Discussion of experiment
There is a significant difference between the averages of the
frequency of filling the notch for the T-Arrow group and the
Arrow-T group. The experiment shows that the experience
of insight affects the performances while solving the next
task.
For the Arrow-puzzle, in first section (t1), there is a
considerable difference of the frequencies between the TArrow group and Arrow-T group. This result indicates that
the constraint, "to fill the notch" is changed to the constraint,
"not filling the notch," by the experience of insight in
solving the T-puzzle. Additionally, the frequency in the last
section (t4) increased greatly. This increased result meant

Figure 5: Result of experiment for Arrow-puzzle

Figure 6: Result of experiment for T-puzzle
the escaping from the new generated constraint, "not filling
the notch" in solving the T-puzzle.
Conversely, with regard to the T-puzzle, there is no
significant difference between the T-Arrow group and the
Arrow-T group for the solution time, trial count, and the
frequency of filling the notch. This result shows that the
experience of solving the Arrow-puzzle does not affect the
performances while solving the next task.
The result of the experiment clarifies that a new constraint
is generated by the experience of insight. However, this
result does not show whether there is reinforcement by the
insight. In the next section, we construct a new model,
which has a mechanism for the generation of a new
constraint by reinforcement, and we simulate the generation
process of constraints.

Model
In this study, we construct a new model that includes a
component for the generation of new constraints (constraint
generating component), based on the previous insightful
problem solving model (Abe, Wajima, & Nakagawa, 2003).

Previous Model
The model of insightful problem solving has two main
components, the "Constraint component" and the
"Avoidance component." Along with both the components,
the model is represented by a system of simultaneous

1625

differential equations, with each variable denoting each
node of the neural network as follows:

⎞
⎛
∂Ev
&x&i + g ( x&i , t , xi ) = β ⎜⎜ ∑ wij u j + θ i ⎟⎟ + γ
∂ui
⎝ j
⎠
1
ui =
1 − e100 xi
g ( x& i , t , x i ) = ( d 0 sin( ω t ) + d 1 ) x& i + d 2 x& i2 sign ( x& i )
Ev =

n

∑η

k

log U dk − U

2

k

⎧0 : x ≤ 0
sign ( x ) = ⎨
⎩1 : x > 0
where xi , u i and θ i denote the inner state of node i, the
output of node i, and the threshold of node i, respectively,
wij means the weight from j to i, U dk represents the
problem state of nth trial, and U represents the current
state.
"Constraint component" represents constraints faced by
humans while solving problems. "Constraint component"
was constructed to control the ease with which nodes are
activated. In this model, the larger θ i is, the easier it is for

node i to be activated. β represents the effect of the
"Constraint component."
"Avoidance component" represents the avoidance for
failed trials. Nakagawa's psychological avoidance behavior
model has the term that moves the system in the direction in
which the value of the Ev becomes the largest (Nakagawa,
1978). This move for the term corresponds to the avoidance
of failed trials. To construct the "Avoidance component,"
this model was applied. γ represents the effect of the
"Avoidance component."
After repeating some failed trials, because of competition
between "Constraint component" and "Avoidance
component", the model falls into a kind of local minimum
where the model can not chose any adequate operator.
In order to escape from this local minimum, we applied the
chaotic steepest descent method (CSD) (Tani, 1991). CSD
has the chaotic term that unstabilizes the component when it
reaches a local minimum. Therefore, the component escapes
from a local minimum. The competition of the "Constraint
component" and "Avoidance component" is solved by using
CSD.

T-Puzzle and Arrow-Puzzle Solving Model
We constructed the T-puzzle and Arrow-puzzle solving
model as an application of the above mentioned "insightful
problem solving model." This model selects 2 of the 4
pieces, and decides 6 attributes' states: the direction of the
figure to connect, the direction of the figure to be connected,
fill or clear of the pentagon notch, types of connections,
lengths of connected lines are equal or unequal, and if the

same angle as the goal object exists or not. And the nodes
u1 Ku15 represent attributes' states (Figure 7). In order to
choose only one length and only one direction,

wij is set as

follows,
⎛ 0 − 1 −1
⎜
⎜ −1 0 −1
⎜ −1 − 1 0
⎜
0 −1 − 1
⎜
⎜
−1 0 −1
⎜
− 1 −1 0
⎜
0 −1
⎜
w=⎜
−
1 0
⎜
0 −1
⎜
⎜
−1 0
⎜
O
−1 − 1
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

θi

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
O
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
−1
⎟
⎟
−1
⎟
0
⎟
⎟
0 −1
⎟
−1 0
⎟
0 −1⎟
−1 0 ⎟⎠

is set, as shown in Figure 7, so that 'fill of the

pentagon notch' is easily chosen.
Then, the model connects the selected two pieces based
on the decided 6 attributes' states. After connecting the
pieces three times, the shape of connected pieces is checked
to determine if it matches the "T" shape or the "Arrow"
shape. The above operations are repeated for the model until
the shape of connected pieces matches the "T" or the
"Arrow."

Proposed Constraint Generating Component
In the new model, the constraint generating component
increases some θ i values of attributes that were activated
by insight. Consequently it becomes easy to choose those
attributes in the following problem solving.
For example, in the model, as the initial state of the notch
of pentagon, the "fill" node is easy to activate, while the
"clear" node is difficult to activate. However, after solving
the T puzzle using insight, the state changes to make the
"clear" node easy to activate.
This process is represented by a mechanism that lowers
the threshold of the "clear" node ( θ 8

new

= θ 8 − α k ). This

process represents the generation of new constraints that
makes the Arrow-puzzle difficult to solve, because the
solution of the Arrow-puzzle needs the state in which the
"clear" node is difficult to activate (Figure 8).

Simulation
Simulation 1
First, a simulation that solves the Arrow-puzzle was
executed for β = 0.1, γ = 1 and ω = 0.07 . In this case,
the solution time was t = 4841.5, the trial count to solution
1626

Figure 7: T-puzzle and Arrow-puzzle solving model

Figure 9: Result of simulation 1

Simulation 3
Figure 8: Constraint generation component
was 33, and the average of frequency of filling the notch
was 0.51. The change in frequency for all sections was
negligible (Figure 9).

Simulation 2
Several simulations that solved the Arrow-puzzle after
solving T-puzzle were executed, changing the α k , where

β , γ ,and ω were maintained. In the case of α k = 0.1,

solution time was t = 18103.0, trial count for the solution
was 52, and the average of frequency of filling the notch
was 0.33. The frequency was approximately 0.2 in t1 ~ t3,
and increased rapidly to 0.61 in t4.

In the case of

α k = 0.02,

the solution time was t =

12567.6, the trial count for the solution was 41, and the
average of frequency of filling the notch was 0.51. The
frequency change was negligible in all sections (Figure 10).

Comparison between the experiment result and the
simulation result
When the Arrow-puzzle was solved without the experience
of the solving the T-puzzle, the experiment results showed
that the average trials count was 25.4 and the frequency of
filling the notch was 0.55. The result of the simulation of
solving the Arrow-puzzle without the experience to solve
the T-puzzle was almost identical to the experiment, the
average trials count was 33 and the frequency of filling the
notch was 0.51. Additionally, the frequency of filling the
notch in both the experiment and the simulation showed
negligible change in all sections. Since the result of

1627

Conclusion

Figure 10: Result of simulation 2 and 3
simulation 1 is similar to that of the experiment of the
Arrow-puzzle in the Arrow-T group, our model of solving
the Arrow-puzzle represent human performance of solving
the Arrow-puzzle.
When the Arrow-puzzle is solved after solving the Tpuzzle, the experiment results showed that average trials
count was 81.0 and the frequency of filling the notch was
0.45. The results of simulation 2 ( α k = 0.1 ) of the Arrowpuzzle being solved after solving T-puzzle showed that
average trials count was 52 and the frequency of filling the
notch was 0.33. The experiment result of the changes of
frequency of filling the notch was almost identical the
simulation 2's result. These frequencies did not change in
section t1 ~ t3 at 0.2, and increased rapidly to 0.61 in t4.
Since the result of simulation 2 is similar to that of the
Arrow-puzzle solving experiment in the T-Arrow group, our
model of solving the Arrow-puzzle, where α k = 0.1,
represented human performance of solving the Arrowpuzzle after solving the T-puzzle.This result showing that
the frequencies in t1 ~ t3 were lower and increased rapidly
in t4 was caused by a new constraint "Not filling the notch"
that was generated by insight.
In the case of simulation 3 ( α k = 0.02 ), average trials
count was 41 and the frequency of filling the notch was 0.51.
The change in frequency was negligible at approximately
0.5 in all sections. This result of simulation 3 showed a
difference from results of the experiment in the T-Arrow
group. Thus, the simulation for α k = 0.02 cannot
represent human performance to solve the Arrow-puzzle
after solving the T-puzzle.
In the case of α k = 0.02, the nodes of filling the notch
after operating the constraint generation component was
easier to activate than that of not filling the notch. This
means a new constraint was not generated.
In the case of α k = 0.1, it is easier to activate the nodes of
not filling the notch after operating the constraint generation
component than those of filling the notch. In this state of the
nodes, the frequency of not filling the notch increases. This
process is identical that observed in the human
reinforcement process. These result show that there is a
reinforcement process generated by insight.

In this study, the experiment showed that a new constraint is
generated by experience of insight. A new constraint was
generated when participants experienced insight, while it
was not generated without the experience of insight.
We constructed a new model that has a mechanism where
a new constraint is generated by reinforcement when insight
is experienced. Simulation results showed that there is a
reinforcement process generated by insight. The results also
indicated that reinforcement caused by insight generates a
new constraint.
People usually experience a strong emotion (happiness,
surprise, etc.) when they have solved a problem using
insight (Davidson, 1995). It is considered that this strong
emotion is very important for reinforcement by insight. We
propose the hypothesis that the reinforcement is a result of
the reward of the above emotional experiences, and a new
constraint is generated by the reinforcement.
In order to verify the above hypothesis, we are planning a
new experiment that will examine a new constraint that is
not generated if a participant does not experience a strong
emotion while acquiring insight.

Acknowledgements
The present research is supported by Tokyo Institute of
Technology
21COE
Program,
"Framework
for
Systematization and Application of Large-scale Knowledge
Resources."

Reference
Abe, K. , Wajima, Y. & Nakagawa, M. (2003). The Chaotic
Neural Networks Model of Insight Problem Solving.
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the Japanese
Cognitive Science Society, 90-91.
Davidson, J. E. (1995). The suddenness of insight, in
Sternberg, R. J. and Davidson, J. E. eds., The nature of
insight, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H. & Rhenius, D. (1999).
Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in insight
problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology :
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(6), 1534-1555.
Nakagawa, M. (1978). A mathematical model of approach
and avoidance behavior in psychological field. Japanese
Psychological Reserch, 29(2), 59-70.
Suzuki, H. & Hiraki, K. (1997). Constraints and their
relaxation in the processes of insight. ETL Technical
Report, TR-97-13.
Tani, J. (1991). Proposal of Chaotic Steepest Descent
Method for Neural Networks and Analysis of Their
Dynamics. The transactions of the Institute of Electronics
and Communication Engineers of Japan, J74-A, 8, 12081215.
Wallas, G. (1926). The art of thought, Harcout, Brace, and
World.

1628

