UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Connectionist Model of Attitude Strength and Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0df619bb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Monroe, Brian M.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Connectionist Model of Attitude Strength and Change
Brian M. Monroe (monroe@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
Abstract
A localist constraint satisfaction neural network model is
presented to account for a broad collection of attitude and
attitude change phenomena. Activations and weights among
units in the recurrent network are used to vary the structure
and properties of the attitude and a persuasive message. The
model uses Hebbian learning to update weights, allowing it to
represent long term changes in attitude as well as temporary
construction of attitudes. Phenomena modeled include attitude
strength, motivated reasoning, and heuristic vs. systematic
persuasion. The same set of simple mechanisms is used to
model all the phenomena, which allows the model to offer a
parsimonious theoretical account of much of the literature on
attitude change. The model also provides a specified
structural description of attitudes that could lead to new
predictions and a more complete understanding of the
construct and its effects.
Keywords: social cognition; attitudes; computer simulation;
neural networks.

Introduction
Attitudes are not just important to social psychology
researchers, but have very immediate and practical
implications for everyday life: from stereotypes and
prejudice to even larger scale human relations, such as
politics, international conflicts, and acts of terrorism.
Currently in social psychology there is no general theory of
attitudes.
Existing theoretical models of attitude change, such as the
Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM; Petty & Cacioppo,
1986) and Heuristic-Systematic Model (HSM; Chaiken,
1980; Chen & Chaiken, 1999) specify many postulates that
address under which conditions attitudes might be more
likely to change. Factors that influence the degree of
attitude change include characteristics of the persuasive
message, characteristics of the source of that message (such
as credibility), and characteristics of the message receiver.
Multiple pathways to persuasion have been identified and
integrated into these models; some involve a minimal
amount of thought and others involve quite elaborate,
deliberate thought (Chaiken, 1980; Fazio, 1990; Petty &
Cacioppo, 1986). The causes and effects of attitude change
are not simply predicted though, and most often rest on
contingent relationships between factors. These are not
models that offer an explanation of the actual process
involved. The antecedents of attitude strength are complex
as well, the basis of which has proved to be far richer than
the sheer amount of knowledge or related experience
(Krosnick et al. 1993; Krosnick & Petty, 1995).
The current state of attitude research, while sophisticated
with respect to the concepts it invokes, ultimately rests not

1313

on a unified framework of precise mechanisms, but instead
on a set of moderating variables and messy interactions that
does not allow more precise prediction. Here I use a
connectionist model to account for many of the phenomena
with one framework.
There are many reasons to think of attitudes as associative
networks. I believe the existing research and evidence
clearly suggests this kind of formulation. For example,
elaboration has been found to be extremely important in
predicting many attitude measures (Petty, Haugtvedt, &
Smith, 1995), and specifically imparts more substantial and
complex internal structure to attitudes (Wegener, Petty,
Smoak, & Fabrigar, 2004). Processing of attitude
information often proceeds in parallel (Holyoak & Simon,
1999), just as would be expected from a network. Attitudes
appear to exhibit constraint satisfaction behavior (Kunda &
Thagard, 1996; Simon, Snow, & Read, 2004) and nonlinear
effects (Vallacher, Nowak, & Kaufman, 1994).
Constraint satisfaction models have been used previously
to model limited and specific phenomena related to
attitudes. These include cognitive dissonance (Shultz &
Lepper, 1996), stereotype acquisition (Queller & Smith,
2002), and hypothesis evaluation (Thagard, 1989). The
current model uses a general architecture in a more
comprehensive attempt to account for a wider range of
attitude phenomena, and in the process offer a parsimonious
theoretical unification that is currently lacking, rather than a
painstaking reproduction of laboratory results.

The Model
Architecture
The model (Figure 1) uses a recurrent localist connectionist
architecture and consists of 102 interconnected units. They
are organized into 4 layers for clarity of process and
procedural considerations. One unit represents the attitude
object. Another unit represents an evaluation dimension.
This is consistent with virtually all current attitude
theorizing, which says an attitude, minimally, is composed
of a target entity or issue, and a connected evaluative
component (e.g. Fazio, 1990).
The evaluation unit represents not a general good-bad
continuum, but the specific dimension of evaluation.
Several dimensions could potentially be evaluated at the
same time, although this is not explored here. The
remaining 100 units are divided up into two parcels: an 80unit cognitorium (the entire network of cognitions relevant
to an attitude) and a 20-unit parcel representing persuasive
communications. Both the cognitorium and the persuasive

communication have equal stature in the model in terms of
their connectivity to the attitude object and the evaluation
dimension. All units in both layers are intended to be the
same kind of thoughts. The distinction is made for
conceptual clarity and operational convenience. Units in the
model represent abstract features or objects.

can be controlled more precisely and the constraints applied
by the weights below work in a conceptually clear way (for
example, since the weights come from a distribution (Table
1) and are not individually controlled, if some of the weights
between the attitude object and the cognitorium were
negative, and the weights from some of those cognitorium
units to the evaluation were also negative, it would
indirectly be giving the evaluation unintended positive
activation).
Table 1: Initialized Weights
Layers
AO-Cogn
AO-Pers
Cogn-Pers
Cogn lateral
Pers lateral
Eval-Cogn
Eval-Pers
AO-Eval

Figure 1: The attitude model.

Dynamics and Learning
Activations vary between -1 and +1. Weights vary between
-1 and +1. Activation is governed by a sigmoidal activation
function and updates over a series of cycles until activation
settles. After settling, weights update using an unsupervised
Hebbian learning rule.

Assessment
Assessment of the model is carried out primarily by
measuring the activation on the evaluation unit at the end of
the settling process. This represents a typical (explicit)
attitude measure. So if the attitude object is the President of
the United States, and the evaluation dimension is his worth
as a human being, a positive activation of the evaluation unit
corresponds to endorsing the attitude that the President is a
fine human being, and a negative activation on that unit
corresponds to the agent feeling that the President is a
horrible person. Activations of the other units are examined
to understand the processes occurring in the model. Each
activation of an individual unit in the cognitorium represents
the activation of a cognition.

Additional Properties
The attitude object is given special status in the model, and
mainly functions as an organized way to inject activation
into the rest of the network. Its fixed activation represents
the idea that it is constantly in awareness as processing
occurs. The attitude object is also connected to the objects
in the cognitorium and persuasion communication with
exclusively positive weights, for a practical reason. This
was done so the activation can be injected into the network
in a way that ensures these activations are positive, so the
relationship between the attitude and the other cognitions

1314

Initialized
Values
.02 ± .1*
.05 ± .05
0 ± .1
0 ± .1
0 ± .1
Vary
Vary
0

Distribution
Function
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform
Uniform
Gaussian
Gaussian
--

Learning
Rate
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
0
0.2

The weights have been initialized in the following way to
facilitate the specific tasks the model is designed to explore:
The weight distribution between the attitude object and the
units in the cognitorium and the units in the persuasion
layers is truncated to the range 0 to 1. The weights between
the attitude object and the cognitorium ensure the
association between the attitude and the objects in the
cognitorium is positive as mentioned previously, but also
that there is a wide variation in weights and that many of the
cognitorium units initially have no association with the
attitude object. The weights between the attitude object and
the persuasive communication ensure that all cognitions in
the persuasion layer have positive weights to the attitude
object; this in turn ensures they are relevant to the attitude in
a consistent way. The weight between the attitude object
and the evaluation starts at zero, which ensures that
evaluation of the attitude object is a result of the cognitions
in the cognitorium and the learning process. The weights
between the cognitorium and the evaluation vary from
simulation to simulation but generally have a positive mean
value, and do not learn. This ensures that the attitude
(which is based on the cognitorium) will be predisposed in
the positive direction, in the absence of any persuasion. The
weights between the persuasion layer and the evaluation
node are initialized from a Gaussian distribution, and
depend on the particular simulation. This special treatment
has to do with the different proposed types of persuasion.
They do not learn, and will be described as appropriate.
Finally, the lateral weights among the cognitorium units, the
lateral weights among the units in the persuasion layer, and
the weights between the cognitorium and the persuasion
layer are all treated the same; they represent a variety of
possible relations, both positive and negative. This
emphasizes that the cognitorium units are not different from

the persuasion units, other than their initial evaluative bias
(because the essence of a persuasion is that its evaluation
varies from the existing beliefs) and slight differences in the
associative distribution with the attitude object (which again
will be discussed for each appropriate simulation).

Simulations
A set of simulations was chosen to represent a broad range
of attitude phenomena. The goal of these simulations is to
successfully show that constraint satisfaction processes and
other emergent properties of connectionist networks can
account for the covered attitude phenomena. The
simulations are 1) attitude structure and strength, 2)
motivated reasoning, and 3) heuristic vs. systematic
persuasion. This suite of simulations was chosen because it
demonstrates some of the most basic properties of attitudes
and could be used as a jumping-off point for any number of
other more advanced simulations.

Simulation 1: Attitude Strength
One of the defining attributes of attitude strength is that
stronger attitudes tend to resist persuasive attempts. In this
simulation, I wanted to show that while keeping the
persuasive attempt the same across conditions, the degree of
interconnectedness between cognitions in the cognitorium
and the accompanying strength of the attitude would
moderate the amount of attitude change.
In this simulation, there were four conditions. One
corresponded to no existing attitude, and the other three
corresponded to existing attitudes of various strengths: low,
medium, and high. For this simulation, a preliminary phase
had to be run for the purpose of inducing (or learning) the
initial attitude. This was done by repeatedly activating the
attitude object and letting activation spread throughout the
network until it settled. Weights would update for as many
trials as needed. Through this process, the evaluation would
polarize on its own. This result is extremely similar to the
behavior examined in the context of self-generated attitude
polarization (Tesser, 1978). For the low strength condition,
the network was initialized and the attitude unit was
activated repeatedly until the evaluation unit polarized to an
activation of .104. For the medium and high strength
conditions, the same weight initialization was used; the
attitude was allowed to polarize until activation reached .18
and .28, respectively. The weights between the persuasion
and the evaluation were initialized from a Gaussian
distribution with a mean of –0.1 and a variance of 0.02.
This ensured that the evaluative implication of the
persuasion was negative, regardless of the randomization.
Twenty different runs were performed in each condition,
each with a different initialization of these weights. To
represent the actual persuasion attempt, three units out of 20
in the persuasion layer were externally fully activated, as
well as the attitude object.
Attitudes were assessed two different ways. In the first,
activation of the evaluation unit was taken when the
network settled after activating the persuasion, as above.

1315

This corresponds to someone being asked their opinion
immediately upon receipt of the persuasive message. In the
second method, after this settling, weights were allowed to
update, activation was reset at 0, and then only the attitude
object was given external activation. The network was
allowed to settle at which point activation of the evaluation
unit was measured. This second method represents a
delayed assessment, as if someone were asked about their
attitude long after the persuasion episode occurred.
Table 2: Simulation 1 Results

Measure
AC
Method 1
AC
Method 2
CUA
Method 1
CUA
Method 2

No
Train

Condition
Low
Mid
Train
Train

High
Train

.202a

.179a

.143b

.076c

.055a

.033a

-.032b

-.127c

.90d

8.15c

23.25b

41.40a

0d

8.75c

33.50b

52.55a

Notes. AC=Attitude Change. CUA=Cognitorium Units Active.
Values that do not share superscripts within each row differ at p
<.01. Values that do share superscripts are not significantly
different. Positive values of attitude change should be interpreted
as greater persuasion.

As shown in Table 2, attitude change using the first
method was greatest in the condition where the attitude was
initially non-existent. Change in the low strength condition
was not significantly different from the no train condition.
The attitude changed significantly less in the medium
strength condition, and least of all in the high strength
condition. When attitudes were measured using the second
method, one sees that change in the direction of the
persuasion does take place in the zero and low-strength
conditions, the moderate strength condition shows slight
polarization in the direction of the initial attitude, and the
high strength condition polarizes in this direction even
more. The number of units in the cognitorium which
become active also consistently increases as strength
increases. The number of cycles the network took to settle
also generally increased as attitude strength increased,
corresponding to the amount of time the course of thought
took—the better-developed the attitude was, the more
processing was required to sort out the communication.
Discussion. This simulation showed that persuasion
attempts do not affect all networks equally. The networks
that had more opportunity to self-organize (and thus had
stronger attitudes) resisted the change in the direction of the
persuasion. During the training of the networks, an
increased number of thinking events led to more activation
flowing through the network, and due to the weight update
rule, the overall weights in the model increased. These selforganized and stable patterns of weights prevented the well-

developed attitudes from changing as much as the
minimally-developed attitudes. This is the essence of the
constraint satisfaction process as it relates to attitudes. This
mechanism is likely responsible for many effects where
elaborated attitudes are harder to change.

network to keep its existing position, one where the biased
unit was negatively related to the existing attitude and
biased in the direction of the persuasion attempt, and a third
where no special activation was given to the biased unit.
Table 3: Simulation 2 Results.

Simulation 2: Motivated Reasoning
In the first simulation, the effects depended on a general
constraint satisfaction mechanism. Greater connectivity
imparts greater constraint, and thus greater stability. In
certain cases, more specific constraints are important, for
example the constraint supplied by having a particular
belief. A clear example of this is the domain of motivated
reasoning. Generally, motivated reasoning can be thought
of as an individual coming to a conclusion that is desired or
congenial with existing beliefs. An example of this would
be the propensity of two groups of fans watching their
favorite sports teams play each other coming to different
conclusions (that help their favored team) on rule infractions
or other judgment calls, after watching the same exact play;
this kind of bias is undoubtedly driven by the differing goals
that the observers have. This has been identified as a
candidate for constraint satisfaction processes (Kunda &
Thagard, 1996) and phenomena such as impression
formation biased by stereotypes have already been modeled
by other networks. Kunda and Thagard (1996) have
suggested that this biased processing is handled
automatically as a result of the natural interaction of all
relevant cognitions. This reasoning is extended to the
present simulations. It is proposed that existing beliefs
and/or goals naturally constrain or bias processing in such a
way that the individual reaches the conclusion which is
congenial with these beliefs; in other words, people will
come to the conclusion that they desire.
To show that goals and strongly held beliefs would affect
the processing related to a persuasive attempt, the standard
persuasion process was implemented, and then modified in
the following way. One unit in the cognitorium was
designated as a “biased” unit. This can be thought of as a
goal, or some other belief or thought that is highly related to
a particular evaluation. The weight from this unit to the
evaluation unit was fixed at 0.5, which is much stronger
than any of the other weights; this represented the strong
relation between the two; all other weights to this unit were
determined normally from the initializing distributions.
During the persuasion attempt, this special unit had its
activation manipulated externally (as with the attitude
object) to control whether the network was “using” this
particular thought. In the control condition, the persuasion
was run without this unit activated. In a second condition
(cognitorium-biased), the biased unit was given positive
activation, and in a third condition (persuasion-biased), the
unit was given negative activation. This negative activation
can be thought of as activating the cognition opposite to that
same unit when there is positive activation. Thus there were
three conditions: one where the biased unit was positively
related to the existing attitude, thus presumably biasing the

1316

Condition
Measure
AC Method 1
AC Method 2
CUA
Method 1
CUA
Method 2

Cognitorium
Bias
-.003c
-.021c

No Bias
.170b
.014b

Persuasion
Bias
.343a
.036a

14.30a

9.45b#

6.85b#

12.70b

14.90ab

15.95a

Notes. AC=Attitude Change. CUA=Cognitorium Units Active.
Values that do not share superscripts within each row differ at p
<.01. Values that do share superscripts are not significantly
different. Positive values of attitude change should be interpreted
as greater persuasion.
# values in these conditions differ at p <.05.

The results from simulation 2 are presented in Table 3.
Using the first attitude assessment method, the cognitoriumbiased processing resulted in less attitude change than the no
bias condition, which in turn resulted in less attitude change
than the persuasion-biased condition. More cognitorium
units exceeded threshold in the cognitorium-biased
condition than the two other conditions. Using the second
(delayed) attitude assessment method, persuasion was least
effective in the cognitorium-biased condition, followed by
the no bias condition, and most effective in the persuasionbiased condition. Not surprisingly, in the cognitoriumbiased condition more cognitorium units were active, and in
the persuasion-biased condition more persuasion units were
active. This is in line with the notion that an individual will
arrive at a conclusion consistent with the evaluation that is
necessitated by their beliefs.
Discussion. The motivated reasoning simulation showed
how strongly held beliefs and goals can influence the state
of the overall network. The combination of a strong weight
and sufficient activation drove the state of the network to be
consistent with a single node. The evaluation of an entire
attitude was influenced by a single cognition, measured
using both attitude assessment methods; the second method
showed influence due to weigh change even after the
cognition was no longer active. Thus the temporary
activation of a cognition more permanently influenced an
evaluation. This simulation suggests that biased judgment
effects do not need a special form of processing. Biased
judgments are guided by the activations and weights that
happen to strongly favor one conclusion over the other.

Simulation 3: Heuristic vs. Systematic Processing
Both the Elaboration Likelihood Model (Petty & Cacioppo,
1986) and the Heuristic-Systematic Model (Chaiken, 1980,

Chen & Chaiken, 1999) argue that there are two important
routes toward attitude change. The first route requires
concentrated cognitive effort and attention and
comprehension of the central message. The second route is
much less effortful, only using learned cognitive shortcuts
(heuristics) or other processing mechanisms that require
minimal effort. Both models suggest that the type of change
these routes to persuasion induce are not the same, for
example stating that the more cognitive effort that is
involved in processing the message, the more stable the
resulting attitude will be. However, a competing theory,
dubbed the Unimodel of persuasion (Kruglanski &
Thompson, 1999) claims that there is only one processing
mechanism, and the two types of persuasion suggested by
the above models are the same but only vary in complexity.
A network model like the present one might help clarify this
debate if it is able to handle the two “different” types of
persuasion in the same framework, and explain how and
why the processes differ.
I attempted to implement the two different forms of
persuasion: systematic/effortful and heuristic/low effort.
The implementation of the persuasive messages is different,
but I was careful to set up the two persuasion attempts so
that they would have equivalent impacts on the activation of
the evaluation node. We did this so that we could test the
possibility that even when the two forms of persuasion had
an equivalent impact on an evaluation, they might have
different impacts on the persistence or stability of attitude
change.
Since both dual process models under
consideration argue that the more effortful persuasion
should produce a more persistent attitude, a second
persuasion attempt was implemented to try to move the
evaluation back in the direction of the initial attitude and
confirm these predictions.
To capture these differences in forms of persuasion, in the
heuristic persuasion condition the weights between the
evaluation unit and the persuasion layer came from a
distribution with a mean of -0.25 and a variance of 0.02.
Weights within the persuasion layer had a mean of 0 and a
variance of 0.1. The high weights (-0.25) help represent the
strong associations mentioned above, while the low weights
within the persuasion layer represent the simple,
unconnected nature of these associations. In the systematic
condition, evaluation-persuasion weights had a mean of
–0.05 and a variance of 0.02 showing that the persuasion
units were not as directly related to the evaluation, and
weights among the persuasion units had a mean of 0.1 and a
variance of 0.1 showing the persuasion units were more
related to each other as in an integrated argument. The
network was initialized so that the pre-persuasion attitude
was identical across conditions. The persuasive message
was implemented with the same activation patterns as in the
previous simulations, with three active units in the
persuasion layer. In the systematic condition, this would
result in more units not in the original message being
recruited, because of the strong weights between the units in
the persuasion layer.

1317

Figure 2: Simulation 3 Results.
In both the heuristic and systematic conditions, the
attitude changed by approximately the same amount (see
Figure 2). This shows that attitude change can be
accomplished using two different types of persuasive
messages: One which is mainly associative and simple, and
the other where the evaluative implication is not as direct,
but is achieved through the increased amount of processing
recruiting more units. To investigate the temporal stability
of the attitudes, the second persuasion attempt was
implemented after the attitude changed due to the initial
persuasion. This re-persuasion was the same across the two
conditions. The results of the re-persuasion attempt (also see
Figure 2) show much more stability in the systematic
condition than in the heuristic condition.
Discussion. This simulation suggests that the different
routes to persuasion can be accomplished merely by
changing some parameters within the same framework, and
using the same mechanism. While implementation of both
types of persuasion led to attitude change, the differences
were the interesting aspect of the simulation. In the
systematic persuasion, the weights among the persuasion
units were higher than they were in the heuristic persuasion.
This pattern of weights recruited more units from the
persuasion layer and from the cognitorium, and resulted in
deeper processing. While the activation on the evaluation
unit changed comparably across conditions, in the effortful
condition the weights throughout a larger segment of the
network changed more as a result of this increased
processing. Because of this, the attitude resulting from the
systematic persuasion was not as susceptible to repersuasion. Weights controlling the stability of the attitude
system is consistent with the results from simulation 1.

Discussion and Conclusion
The model starts from the premise that all relevant
cognitions are organized in a recurrent network. This
allows activation to spread through the connections and
change the activation of the attitude as well as of any other

unit in the network. The impact of this spreading is most
notable in the process of attitude inducement (sim 1) where
it is what allows the network to self-organize, and in the
complex persuasive message of the systematic persuasion
simulation where the weights allow the message to recruit
other cognitions in the persuasion and cognitorium layers.
Constraint satisfaction follows from this spreading
activation, and can be due either to the weights throughout
the cognitorium as in the attitude strength simulations where
they provide stable structures that resist persuasion, or to a
single unit as in the motivated reasoning simulation.
The simulations point to the fact that both the activations
and the weights are each critical to understanding the
behavior of the network and the corresponding attitude. The
momentary activation of the network is due to more than
just the pattern of weights because of the constraint
processes acting to organize them, and the weight change is
equally important in understanding the temporal stability of
attitude change, most notably demonstrated in the different
persuasion units in simulation 3, where increased weight
change due to the systematic processing led to a more stable
long-term attitude.
Creating models to account for the general mechanisms
by which attitudes gain their strength and also change has
not been a focus of attitude research in social psychology. It
is believed that this model makes a significant theoretical
contribution. The simulations represent attitudes in a more
specified way, and the method allows us to isolate and
identify structural features and how they evolve during
persuasion, giving us a better picture of the components
responsible for strength and change. It is believed this
model highlights the ability for models using simple
mechanisms to be built up to account for what are
traditionally seen as complex phenomena not amenable to
concise explanations. According to this model, attitudes at a
fundamental level may be much simpler to explain than
previously thought.

References
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic processing
and the use of source versus message cues in persuasion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 752766.
Chen, S., & Chaiken, S. (1999). The heuristic-systematic
model in its broader context. In S. Chaiken & Y. Trope
(eds.) Dual-process theories in social psychology. New
York: Guilford Press.
Fazio, R.H. (1990) Multiple processes by which attitudes
guide behavior: The MODE model as an integrative
framework. In M.P. Zanna (ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 23). New York:
Academic Press.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128(1), 3-31.

1318

Judd, C. M., Drake, R. A., Downing, J. W., & Krosnick, J.
A. (1991). Some dynamic properties of attitude structures:
Context-induced response facilitation and polarization.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 60(2), 193202.
Krosnick, J. A., & Petty, R. E. (1995). Attitude strength: An
overview. In R. E. Petty, & J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude
strength: Antecedents and consequences. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Krosnick, J. A., Boninger, D. S., Chuang, Y. C., & Berent,
M. K. (1993). Attitude strength: One construct or many
related constructs? Journal of personality and social
psychology, 65(6), 1132-1151.
Kruglanski, A.W., & Thompson, E.P. (1999). Persuasion by
a single route: A view from the unimodel. Psychological
Inquiry, 10, 83-109.
Kunda, Z., & Thagard, P. (1996). Forming impressions from
stereotypes, traits, and behaviors: A parallel-constraintsatisfaction theory. Psychological review, 103(2), 284308.
Petty, R.E., & Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). The elaborationlikelihood model of persuasion. In L.Berkowitz (ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 19).
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Petty, R.E., Haugtvedt, C. P., & Smith, S. M. (1995).
Elaboration as a determinant of attitude strength: Creating
attitudes that are persistent, resistant, and predictive of
behavior. In R. E. Petty, & J. A. Krosnick (Eds.), Attitude
strength: Antecedents and consequences. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Queller, S., & Smith, E.R. (2002). Subtyping versus
bookkeeping in stereotype learning and change:
Connectionist simulations and empirical findings. Journal
of personality and social psychology, 82(3), 300-313.
Shultz, T. R., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Cognitive dissonance
reduction as constraint satisfaction. Psychological review,
103(2), 219-240.
Simon, D., Snow, C. J., & Read, S. J. (2004). The redux of
cognitive consistency theories: Evidence judgments by
constraint satisfaction. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 86(6), 814-837.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 12(3), 435-502.
Vallacher, R. R., Nowak, A., & Kaufman, J. (1994).
Intrinsic dynamics of social judgment. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 67(1), 20-34.
Wegener, D. T., Petty, R. E., Smoak, N. D., & Fabrigar, L.
R. (2004). Multiple routes to resisting attitude change. In
E. S. Knowles, & J. A. Linn (Eds.), Resistance and
persuasion. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

