UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Dynamic Field Theory of Visual Recognization in Infant Looking Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47853579

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Perone, Sammy
Spencer, John P.
Schoner, Gregor

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Dynamic Field Theory of Visual Recognition in Infant Looking Tasks
Sammy Perone (sammy-perone@uiowa.edu) and John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, 11 Seashore Hall East
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

Gregor Schöner
Institut für Neroinformatick
Ruhr-Universität-Bochum, Germany
Abstract
Infant looking tasks are fruitful sources of data on infant
cognition. Researchers using these tasks measure differential
looking times as infants look at multiple stimuli. These looks
are used to infer stimulus recognition and visual processing of
familiar and novel stimuli. We propose here that looking
behavior in two of these tasks, infant categorization and
visual paired comparison, arise from a common visual
recognition mechanism. We propose a dynamic field theory
(DFT) of visual recognition in infant looking tasks and
describe simulations using a dynamic neural network that
capture looking behavior associated with central phenomena
in the infant categorization and infant recognition memory
literatures. Critically, these phenomena are supported by a
common recognition mechanism.
Keywords: Dynamic Field Theory; Infant Categorization;
Visual Recognition Memory; Looking Behavior.

Infant Visual Recognition Tasks
A variety of tasks used to examine infant categorization and
infant visual memory can be classified more generally as
visual recognition tasks. In a typical categorization task,
infants are familiarized with a collection of category
exemplars (e.g., land animals), to which their looking
typically decreases with the number of exposures. The scope
of infants’ categories is probed by evaluating looking time
to a novel within category exemplar (e.g., tiger) and an outof-category exemplar (e.g., seal). If infants sustain low
looking to the within category exemplar after the
familiarization period, they are said to have generalized
category membership or recognized the novel exemplar as
belonging to the familiar category. Infants are said to have
learned an exclusive category if they increase their looking
to an out-of-category exemplar, but they are said to have
learned an inclusive category if they look at low levels to
both a within and out-of-category exemplar.
Visual recognition memory is typically examined in the
visual paired comparison task in which infants are typically
presented with pairs of identical stimuli for a fixed number
of trials or until a looking criterion is met. To test
recognition of the familiar stimulus, infants are
simultaneously presented with the familiar stimulus paired
with a novel stimulus. Preferential looking to one stimulus often low looking to the familiar stimulus and preferential
looking to the novel stimulus - is taken as evidence of
recognition of the familiar stimulus.

One important commonality among these tasks is that
differential looking behavior is taken as evidence of visual
recognition. Although this is the case, the infant
categorization and infant visual recognition memory
literatures remain isolated, and there has been little
discussion of the common processes that might underlie
looking in these tasks. We propose here that a common
visual recognition mechanism supports looking behaviors in
both tasks. Specifically, infant categorization tasks can be
classified as tasks that assess whether novel stimuli are
recognized as belonging to a familiar category, and visual
paired comparison tasks can be classified as tasks that
assess whether identical stimuli are recognized as familiar.
We sketch a dynamic field theory (DFT) of visual
recognition in infant looking tasks and present simulations
that demonstrate looking behaviors commonly observed in
infant categorization and visual paired comparison tasks.
Moreover, we provide a unified account of a collection of
diverse findings obtained from both paradigms. We focus
here on two central findings obtained from each task.
Specifically, in infant categorization tasks, we focus on the
role of perceptual similarity among category exemplars in
learning inclusive and exclusive categories, and in visual
paired comparison tasks, we focus on preferential looking to
a novel stimulus in the context of simultaneously present
familiar and novel stimuli.

A Dynamic Field Theory of Visual Recognition
in Infant Looking Tasks

1391

The DFT is a process-based theory of visuo-motor decisionmaking. Thelen, Schöner, Scheier, and Smith (2001)
originally proposed the DFT to explain the memory
processes that support reaching behavior in the Piagetian Anot-B task. The DFT has been extended by Spencer and
colleagues to capture spatial cognition processes and their
development (e.g., Schutte, Spencer, & Schöner, 2003). The
DFT is formalized in a dynamic neural network that
simulates real-time behavior, integrated with the longer timescale of task-specific learning.
The network described here recognizes a visual stimulus,
indexed by looks away from the stimulus toward something
more novel, if the network has previously perceptually
represented the stimulus and is actively maintaining or can
rapidly regenerate a working memory representation of the
stimulus. The network consists of five layers of neurons
tuned to respond to continuous feature dimensions (e.g., the

color of an object, the object’s orientation, and so on). In
particular, the network consists of a perceptual layer, u(x),
working memory layer, w(x), and a shared layer of
(inhibitory) interneurons, v(x). The perceptual and working
memory layers are reciprocally coupled to associated longterm memory fields, ultm(x) and wltm(x). A bistable looking
node is also reciprocally coupled to the perceptual layer.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the network. We
describe here how the network processes and remembers a
stimulus and how this process maps onto looking behavior.
At the onset of stimulus presentation, the looking node
receives transient, excitatory input via an attention-getting
stimulus, turning the node from a look away state (i.e., below
threshold or “off” state) to a fixation state (i.e., in a selfstabilized “on” state). When the node is in the fixation state,
the node passes global excitation to the perceptual layer.
Moreover, the look node acts as a perceptual “gate”: when
this node is fixating the stimulus, excitatory input enters the
perceptual field and excites neurons tuned to the stimulus
properties present at the fixated location. The perceptual
layer, in turn, passes excitatory input back to the looking
node, supporting the fixation state while neurons in the
perceptual layer are active.
Excited neurons in the perceptual layer activate
associated neurons in the perceptual long-term memory layer.
The long-term memory traces grow according to a slower
time scale; thus, activation in ultm(x) builds up gradually at
stimulated sites and decays slowly when competing inputs
are present. Activation in ultm(x) feeds back onto the
perceptual layer, enhancing activation at remembered feature
values. Excited neurons in the perceptual layer also activate
similarly tuned neurons in the working memory layer, which,
in turn, activate associated neurons in the long-term layer
associated with working memory.
The final type of cross-layer interaction in the network
centers on the shared layer of (inhibitory) interneurons: the
perceptual and working memory layers activate similarly
tuned interneurons. Reciprocal feedback to and from the
inhibitory layer creates a locally-excitatory / laterallyinhibitory type of interaction within the perceptual and
working memory layers. If activation is sufficiently strong
and localized, these neural interactions can lead to the
formation of self-sustaining peaks of activation—the basis
for strong working memory representations in the network.
Critically, such working memory peaks effectively suppress
activation at associated sites in the perceptual layer due to the
shared layer of interneurons. This is the basis for visual
recognition.
The ability of the network to recognize a stimulus
emerges as a long-term memory representation of the input is
generated. During each stimulus presentation, activation in
the working memory layer is strengthened by activation at
associated sites in wltm(x). This increase in excitation in the
working memory layer strengthens activation in the
inhibitory layer, which in turn strengthens the inhibitory
contribution to the perceptual layer. If the inhibitory
contribution is strong enough, it will inhibit further
perceptual processing of the input (i.e., suppress activation in

the perceptual layer). Consequently, the perceptual layer will
no longer support activation of the looking node, the looking
node will enter the “off” state, and the network will look
away from the stimulus.
To summarize, as a stimulus is repeatedly presented to
the network, activation in the working memory layer will
become more energetic via facilitation from the accumulating
long-term memory trace. Ultimately, this will lead to an
increasingly more rapid destabilization of perceptual
processing of the repeated input. Consequently, the
perceptual layer will support the fixation state for
increasingly brief durations as the stimulus or a collection of
similar stimuli are repeatedly presented. The low looking
behavior of the network to a familiar stimulus—the
recognition of the familiar stimulus—is attributable to this
dynamic interplay among the multiple layers in the network.
In the sections that follow, we demonstrate how these
dynamic interactions lead to the looking behaviors infants
demonstrate in two canonical visual recognition paradigms.

Recognition of Novel Stimuli
Input Distribution One central finding in the infant
categorization literature is that when infants are familiarized
with a collection of perceptually similar category exemplars,
they learn an exclusive category, but when they are
familiarized with a collection of perceptually variable
category exemplars, they learn an inclusive category (e.g.,
French, Mareschal, Mermillod, & Quinn, 2004). In other
words, when infants are familiarized with a collection of
perceptually similar category exemplars, they recognize a
constricted range of within category exemplars as belonging
to a familiar category, but when infants are familiarized with
a collection of perceptually variable category exemplars, they
recognize a broader range of exemplars as belonging to a
familiar category. Here, we simulate looking behavior in a
categorization context in which exemplars are successively
presented in isolation. In this context, exclusive
categorization is indexed by an increase in looking to an outof-category exemplar and inclusive categorization is indexed
by sustained low levels of looking to within and out-ofcategory exemplars (e.g., Oakes, Coppage, & Dingel, 1997).
In our network, recognition of novel stimuli as
belonging to a familiar category depends on the distribution
of activation in long-term memory. Any long-term memory
trace at sites tuned to novel stimuli strengthens activation in
the working memory layer, which leads to the rapid
generation of a working memory peak and ultimately, via
strong inhibition of activation in the perceptual layer, looking
away. The more precise the long-term memory trace, the
more likely that novel inputs will fail to overlap with longterm memory traces leading to longer fixations. The more
distributed the pattern of long-term memory activation, the
more likely that novel inputs will overlap with long-term
memory traces leading to shorter fixations.
To illustrate (1) that the distribution of input contributes
to the range of excited neurons in long-term memory, and (2)
that the range of neurons excited in long-term memory
affects category decisions (i.e., looking behaviors), we

1392

simulations, recognition was tested with a metrically close
test probe 20 neurons from the input shared by both
distributions, which we selected to correspond to a within
category test, and with a metrically distant test probe 40
neurons from the input shared by both distributions, which
we selected to correspond to an out-of-category test.
Figure 1 shows a sample simulation presented with the
distributed set of input. The solid lines directed at the
perceptual layer show the distribution of inputs presented
during familiarization. As can be seen in the figure, a peak of
activation is associated with each input and stimulus
presentation. As inputs are repeatedly presented, activation
in the perceptual layer is sustained for increasingly brief
durations. The source of this decrease in activation is the
increasing energy of activation in the working memory layer
and associated long-term memory.
The dotted lines directed at the perceptual layer toward
the right of this simulation show the close and far test
probes. As can be seen in the figure, this network shows
relatively small perceptual peaks (i.e., low levels of looking)
when looking at the close and far test probes, looking
behavior consistent with inclusive categorization or
recognition of both inputs as familiar. Activation in the
perceptual layer cannot be sustained for extended durations
because the distributed set of inputs generated excitation
across a broad range in wltm(x), facilitating the rapid
generation of a working memory peak and inhibition of
perceptual processing.
The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows the looking times
accumulated across familiarization trials and test probes for
the distributed and undistributed set of inputs. The looking
times are means calculated from eight simulations for each
distribution; on four of the simulations the metrically close
test probe was presented first and on four of the simulations
the metrically distant test probe was presented first. Looking
was computed as the number of time steps the looking node
was above threshold on each trial. Note that fifty time steps
equal one second. This time step to seconds mapping was
chosen to effectively capture the hypothesized memory
processes and keep simulation time reasonable.
The looking plots show that each network exhibited a
decrease in looking across stimulus presentations, a typical
observation with infants. As discussed above, when the
model was presented with the distributed set, looking
remained low across both the close and far probes. The
network presented with the undistributed set of inputs, in

10
9

Looking Time (in s)

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

P9

P10

P11

P12

Close

Distant

Stimulus Presentation
Undistributed Inputs

Undistributed Tests

Distributed Inputs

Distributed Tests

Figure 1. Simulation of one run through an infant
categorization task with a distributed set of inputs. Top
shows looking node architecture. Middle section shows the
5-layered structure of the DFT and between-layer
connections. Note that strongly activated neurons are shown
in red and inhibited neurons shown in blue. Bottom panel
shows looking time results from the model when
familiarized with distributed and undistributed sets of inputs.
simulated familiarization with perceptually similar and
perceptually variable stimulus sets. For the perceptually
similar set, we presented the network with four relatively
undistributed inputs separated by 30 neurons, and for the
perceptually variable set, we presented the network with four
relatively distributed inputs separated by 40 neurons. In both
simulations, every input was presented once in random order
across three blocks of four trials.
Figure 2 shows the input distribution (solid lines) and
test probes (dotted lines). Notice that the input closest to the
test probes in both distributions is identical; thus, any low
looking to the test probes cannot be attributed to the distance
between familiarization inputs and test probes. In both

Figure 2. Solid lines of top panel show the undistributed
familiarization set; solid lines of bottom panel show the
distributed familiarization set. Dotted lines show test probes.

1393

presentations, followed by the presentation of a single
critical test probe 40 neurons from the closet familiar input.
10
9
8

Looking Time (in s)

contrast, exhibited low looking to the close test probe and
an increase in looking to the far test probe, looking behavior
consistent with exclusive categorization. This looking
behavior occurred because the distant test probe excited
neurons in the perceptual layer not associated with a strong
long-term memory representation. Consequently, the model
was not able to build a robust working memory of the far
test probe and it continued looking at this novel stimulus. It
is important to emphasize that the same network produced
the two patterns of looking times shown in Figure 1. The
only difference across simulations was in the distribution of
the inputs.
Mareschal and colleagues (e.g., Mareschal, French, &
Quinn, 2000; French et al., 2004) have extensively
examined the role of input distribution in asymmetric
categorization and have tested predictions of an autoencoder
network. They have shown that the probability that young
infants will generalize category membership to out-ofcategory exemplars depends on whether the distribution of
familiar feature values (e.g., ear length, nose width, etc.) is
broad and encompasses feature values associated with outof-category exemplars. The autoencoder recognizes a novel
category exemplar as familiar if it can reproduce its inputs,
and similarly, the network described here recognizes a novel
category exemplar if it can rapidly build a working memory
representation of the stimulus. In both networks, recognition
depends on the distribution of feature values presented
during familiarization. Here, we show input distributed only
on one dimension, which approximates the small number of
potentially
diagnostic
dimensions
in
complex,
multidimensional exemplars in infant experiments (see
Mareshal et al, 2000). One interesting hypothesis generated
by our network is that developments in the precision in
which feature values are processed and remembered
enhances the likelihood that infants will hone in on the
relevant dimensions that differentiate similar visual
categories. Older infants have indeed been shown to
differentiate categories that young infants treat
asymmetrically (Furrer & Younger, 2005).
Input Frequency When infants are presented with a
typical category exemplar more frequently during
familiarization than a collection of non-typical exemplars,
they exhibit evidence of learning an exclusive category.
When infants are familiarized with a non-typical category
exemplar frequently, however, they exhibit evidence of
learning an inclusive category (see Oakes & Spalding,
1997). Here, we illustrate how the metric properties of the
input interact with the frequency of stimulus presentation to
produce this pattern of looking behavior.
We presented the same network described above with
the distributed stimulus set, but in a central frequent
distribution, the two center inputs were presented three
times as often as the end inputs, and in an end frequent
distribution, the two end inputs were presented three times
as often. Note that Oakes and Spalding (1997) used the
same frequent and infrequent ratio in experiment. The four
inputs were distributed randomly across twelve stimulus

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
P1

P2

P3

Center Frequent

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

Stimulus Presentation
Center Frequent Test

P9

P10

End Frequent

P11

P12

Test

End Frequent Test

Figure 3
Figure 3 shows the mean looking times of four simulations
with central inputs frequent and the mean looking times of
four simulations with end inputs frequent. As can be seen,
the network presented with the central inputs more
frequently increased looking to the test probe, looking
behavior consistent with exclusive categorization. The
network presented with the end inputs more frequently did
not increase looking to the test probe, looking behavior
consistent with inclusive categorization. These looking
patterns emerge because the metric properties of frequent
and non-frequent inputs contributes to the range of active
neurons in the long-term memory layers, which influences
the probability that the network will recognize a novel
stimulus as belonging to a familiar category.

1394

Recognition of Identical Stimuli
Visual recognition of identical stimuli in the visual
paired comparison task typically involves familiarization
with pairs of identical stimuli followed by a test event in
which the familiar stimulus is paired with a novel stimulus.
To examine visual recognition in the visual paired
comparison task, we implemented a simple, multi-location
fixation system (Goldberg, 2005), and to take a first step
toward representing multiple feature dimensions, we
coupled the fixation system to two identical five-layer
networks that each process and remember feature values
along a single dimension. Importantly, the network is
identical to the network described above but simply engages
processing along an additional dimension when a
multidimensional stimulus is present. This architecture is
consistent with neurophysiological evidence from monkeys
and humans that suggest that object properties (e.g., color,
size, etc.) are encoded in a distributed manner across
different neural populations (Felleman & Van Essen, 1991;
Tootle, Tsao,& Vanduffel, 2003).
The fixation system consists of a collection of bi-stable
and mutually inhibitory nodes that gate featural input at the
fixated spatial locations to the perceptual layers. The top
portion of Figure 4 shows a schematic of the fixation system.
The dotted line in the schematic shows a fixated two-

dimensional stimulus (i.e., small, dark-grey rectangle)
located at a right location. The line projecting from the right
node shows that when the right node is fixated, the perceptual
gate allows “small” input to enter the first 5-layer network
and “dark-grey” input to enter the second 5-layer network.
The left bottom portion of Figure 4 shows the real-time
behavior of the looking nodes when fixating a left location,
followed by fixation at a right location, and finally a look
away. This panel also shows the corresponding activation in
one of the perceptual layers. Notice that when the left object
is fixated, excitation at one feature value is presented to the
network, and when the right object is fixated, a different
feature value is presented to the network. Also notice that no
input is presented to the network when the look away node is
fixated and the activation produced by the just-previous look
at the right object gradually decays away. To capture the
stochastic nature of infant looking among multiple spatial

locations, the left and right nodes were presented with noisy
inputs associated with the presence of a stimulus at a
particular spatial location. Noisy, low-level input was
constantly presented to the away node to reflect the
continuously available input in the task space (e.g., the edges
of a computer monitor, the infant’s toes, etc). Noise
facilitates spontaneous sampling of objects in the task space.
A below threshold node may spontaneously pierce threshold,
for instance, and compete for fixation via mutual inhibition.
To facilitate competition among the nodes, we also
algorithmically implemented a drop in the resting level of the
fixated node, which allows the node to be sustained by the
perceptual layer but also gives a competitive advantage to the
non-fixated nodes (Goldberg, 2005).
Looking behavior in visual paired comparison tasks is
clearly more complex than in tasks in which a single stimulus
is presented in isolation, and there is a large literature

0.7

Looking Preference

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3
Familiar

Novel

Figure 4. Schematic of fixation system and method of gating input into two 5-layer neural networks. Bottom left panel
shows node behavior in real-time and corresponding activation in one perceptual layer. Bottom right panel shows mean
preference to look at a familiar and a novel stimulus during test.
1395

examining development in processing speed, novelty
detection, and looking dynamics in the visual paired
comparison procedure (e.g., see Rose, Feldman, &
Jankowski, 2007 for a review). We are currently exploring
the ramifications of this complexity for processing and
remembering visual stimuli. As a first step in this direction,
we simulated a particular pattern of looking behavior in the
visual paired comparison task: low levels of looking to a
familiar stimulus and preferential looking to a novel stimulus
following familiarization. We presented the model with two
two-dimensional inputs separated by forty neurons along
each dimension. Specifically, when the network fixated one
location, neurons tuned to similar values along each
dimension were excited, and when the network fixated
another location, neurons tuned to different similar values
along each dimension were excited. As in real tasks, the
spatial location of the inputs occasionally alternated
positions, which altered the input gated by each node.
To probe the network for recognition, we presented the
network with one familiar stimulus paired with one novel
stimulus. The novel stimulus was separated by 80 neurons
from the absent stimulus presented during familiarization and
120 neurons from the simultaneously available familiar
stimulus. The dotted lines directed at the perceptual layer in
Figure 4 show activation peaks generated by the familiar and
novel test inputs. The bottom right panel of Figure 4 shows
mean familiarity and novelty preferences. A novelty
preference was calculated by dividing the total amount of
looking time to the novel stimulus on each test trial by the
total amount of looking time accumulated to the familiar and
novel stimulus on each test trial. On four of the simulations
the novel stimulus was presented on the left first, and on four
of the simulations the novel stimulus was presented on the
right first. As can be seen in the figure, the network exhibited
longer looking to a novel stimulus than to a simultaneously
presented familiar stimulus.
Why does a novelty preference emerge? When the
network fixates the familiar stimulus, a strong peak of
activation emerges in working memory supported by longterm memories of the familiar stimulus. Consequently,
associated neurons in the perceptual layer are inhibited, destabilizing the currently active looking node and generating a
look to the novel object. When the network fixates the novel
stimulus, in contrast, the activated looking node can sustain
fixation because activation in the perceptual layers lingers.

Conclusions
The present report outlines a DFT of visual recognition in
infant looking tasks, which posits that a stimulus will be
recognized if a working memory representation of the
stimulus is actively maintained or can rapidly be regenerated.
The DFT further posits that recognition critically depends on
the distribution of activation in long-term memory built up

during familiarization. Visual recognition in the DFT is
indexed by low looking to familiar stimuli and increased or
preferential looking to novel stimuli, which we demonstrated
can arise from the same recognition mechanism in the
categorization and visual paired comparison tasks. Finally,
this work highlights how brain and behavior are integrated
across the multiple time-scales involved in looking, building
perceptual and working memory representations, and
generating long-term memory representations in a specific
task context.

Acknowledgments
This work supported by NIMH RO1 MH62480 and NSF
HSD 0527698 awarded to JPS.

References
French, R. M., Mareschal, D., Mermillod, M., & Quinn, P.
C. (2004). The role of bottom-up processing in perceptual
categorization by 3- to 4-month-old infants: Simulations
and data. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 133, 382397.
Furrer, S. S. & Younger, B. A. (2005). Beyond the
distributional input? A developmental investigation of
asymmetry in infants’ categorization of cats and dogs.
Developmental Science, 8, 544-550.
Goldberg, J. (June, 2005). Dynamic systems modeling of
infant preferential looking. Poster presented at
Connectionist and Dynamic Systems Approaches to
Development, Iowa City, IA.
Mareschal, D., French, R., & Quinn, P.C. (2000). A
connectionist account of asymmetric category learning in
early infancy. Developmental Psychology, 36, 635-645.
Oakes, L. M., Coppage, D. J., & Dingel, A. (1997). By land
or by sea: The role of perceptual similarity in infants’
categorization of animals. Developmental Psychology, 33,
396-407.
Oakes, L. M. & Spalding, T. (1997). The role exemplar
distribution in infants’ differentiation of categories. Infant
Behavior and Development, 20, 457-475.
Rose, S. A., Feldman, J. F., & Jankowski, J. J. (2007).
Developmental aspects of visual recognition memory in
infancy. In L. M. Oakes & P. J. Bauer (Eds) Short- and
Long-term Memory in Infancy and Early Childhood (pp.
153-178). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schoner, G. (2003). Testing
the dynamic field theory: Working memory for locations
becomes more spatially precise over development. Child
Development, 74, 1393-1417.
Thelen, E., Schoner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of
infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 1-86.

1396

