UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Process Analysis of Idea Generation and Failure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0nk1m6wm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Wang, Hao-Chuan
Rose, Carolyn Penstein

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Process Analysis of Idea Generation and Failure
Hao-Chuan Wang and Carolyn Penstein Rosé (haochuan,cprose@cs.cmu.edu)
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
This paper presents an experimental study and detailed
process analysis investigating the temporal characteristics of
idea generation and idea failure during brainstorming. In this
investigation, we test the hypothesis that cognitive
interference resulting from group interactions has a temporary
effect and thus decays as the rate of unique idea generation
decays. A further hypothesis is that the effects of cognitive
stimulation from external stimuli become more evident over
time as the effects of cognitive interference decay. Both of
these hypotheses are confirmed by our process analysis.
Keywords: Cognitive stimulation; cognitive interference.

Introduction
The task of idea generation in brainstorming groups has
been extensively studied through controlled experiments
(Diehl & Stroebe, 1987) and simulation studies (Nijstad &
Stroebe, 2006). In the study of group brainstorming for idea
generation, empirical work has repeatedly revealed evidence
of process losses, in which a group with idea sharing may
not always perform better than a collection of noninteracting individuals whose contributions are simply
pooled afterwards (i.e., nominal groups), both in terms of
the quantity and quality of unique ideas (Hill, 1982; Diehl &
Stroebe). A wide range of social and cognitive explanations
for process losses have been proposed and evaluated,
including social pressure (e.g., evaluation apprehension),
social loafing (e.g., “free riding”), production blocking
resulting from turn taking conventions (Diehl & Stroebe),
and cognitive interference from exposure to similar ideas to
the current idea generation focus (Nijstad & Stroebe).
One influential explanation for process losses in group
idea generation grows out of the theory of cognitive
stimulation and cognitive interference, which models idea
generation by individuals as a memory retrieval process
(Dugosh, Paulus, Roland & Yang, 2000; Nijstad & Stroebe,
2006). Idea failure related to cognitive interference occurs
when one fails to retrieve an image from memory, retrieves
an image but fails to generate an idea from it, repeatedly
activates the same images, or generates ideas that have
already been mentioned. When brainstorming in groups,
ideas verbalized by peers may serve as external stimulation
potentially leading to one of two extreme results, either
process gains or process losses. In the first case, overhearing
a peer’s ideas may serve as cognitive stimulation for
memory retrieval and idea generation when those ideas are
significantly different from what an individual was capable
of generating alone, while in the later case, this external
stimulation becomes a source of cognitive interference
leading to process losses. This may occur because the same

domain knowledge continues to be activated, which
facilitates the generation of similar ideas to those mentioned
recently. In cases such as these, brainstorming individuals
may believe they have exhausted the number of ideas they
are able to generate (Nijstad & Stroebe).
The temporal properties of priming and cognitive
stimulation have been investigated (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin,
1981), but a similar investigation of the temporal properties
of cognitive interference have not been investigated. Rather,
the effects of cognitive interference and related process
losses have primarily been evaluated summatively. In order
to investigate the temporal properties of cognitive
interference and resulting process losses, we present in this
paper an experimental study and detailed process analysis.
In the remainder of the paper we discuss the theoretical
model of idea generation that underlies this work, our
experimental study, and findings from our process analysis.

Theoretical Model
Brainstorming may be modeled from a cognitive
perspective as a two stage process in which a search is
initiated in response to a challenge presented during the first
stage, and then an idea is constructed during this search by
means of inferences building upon prior knowledge (Nijstad
& Stroebe, 2006). Psychological studies in spreading
activation have demonstrated that it is more efficient to
retrieve a concept from memory when relevant information
is offered as a prime or cue (Anderson, 2005). Based on the
cognitive theory of associative memory (Anderson; Brown
& Paulus, 2002; Dugosh et al., 2000), idea generation can
be viewed as a process of building on the retrieval of
information encoded in the stimulated portions of a
semantic network stored in one’s long-term memory.
The process of generating a new idea is said to involve a
constructive process analogous to that of self-explanation
(Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu & Lavancher, 1994) in which
bridging inferences link instances of known domain facts on
the way towards generating ideas (Brown & Paulus, 2002).
For example, someone may have access to the following
two domain facts: (1) Debris flow refers to the mass
movement of rocks and sedimentary materials in a fluid like
manner. And, (2) There are many typhoons, or hurricanes,
in Taiwan in the summer time. That person may then make
the following two bridging inferences: (1) Heavy rain
implies the presence of a massive amount of water. And, (2)
The presence of a massive amount of water may lead to
erosion or the movement of rocks in a fluid like manner.
That person may then generate the following idea:
“Typhoons may be a factor leading to the occurrence of a
debris flow hazard.” It is the middle stage, where bridging

1629

inferences are generated, that makes this process similar to
that of self-explanation. And because of those bridging
inferences we have hypothesized that the process of ideageneration may lead to learning (Wang et al., 2007).
The first hypothesis we investigate in this paper is that
cognitive interference has a temporary effect, since the
activation of knowledge from idea contributions is
temporary. If this is true, we expect to see that the
magnitude of important effects like process losses of group
work might differ during different periods of time. In
particular, across all conditions, we see that the rate at
which ideas are contributed decays exponentially over time.
If our first hypothesis is true, then we further hypothesize
that there will be more cognitive interference from peers
early in a group brainstorming session because of the higher
frequency of contributed ideas. It should decay over time
since the interference from earlier ideas will decay over time,
and there will be fewer ideas contributed later to cause new
interference later. Thus, over time we expect the effect of
the external stimuli to begin to overtake that of the cognitive
interference.

Method
Experimental Design
In order to test our hypotheses, we conducted an
experiment in which participants engaged in a
brainstorming task. The selected task, namely the Debris
Flow Hazard (DFH) task, has been designed by science
educators to engage students in scientific inquiry in the area
of Earth sciences (Chang & Tsai, 2005). The learning
objective of this task is to make concepts related to geology,
agriculture, and urban development concrete for students as
they grapple with the manner in which these very different
types of factors interact in real world scenarios. We
manipulated whether brainstorming took place as an
individual or pair activity and whether feedback designed to
provide cognitive stimulation was offered or not, both as
between subjects factors. Thus, the experiment was a 2
(individual brainstorming vs. pair brainstorming) X 2 (no
system-generated feedback vs. system-generated feedback)
factorial design resulting in four experimental conditions,
which are referred to in the remainder of the paper as IN
(Individual-No feedback), IF (Individual-Feedback), PN
(Pair-No feedback), and PF (Pair-Feedback).

Experimental Infrastructure
In order to implement the four conditions in a way that
maintains maximal consistency across conditions, we built
our experimental infrastructure on top of a well known
instant messaging (IM) service over the Internet, MSN
messenger. Due to the popularity of this IM service with the
target user population, using an MSN-based client also
lessens potential concerns of software difficulty or novelty
effects. More importantly, because strict turn taking is not
enforced in this environment, there is a potential for
supporting a group interaction that avoids process losses.

A brainstorming feedback agent called VIBRANT (Wang,
Rosé, Cui, Chang, Huang, Li, 2007) was used to provide
prompts in response to conversational behavior in the two
feedback-enabled conditions. In order to be adapted to a
specific task, VIBRANT must be provided with an idea
hierarchy at multiple levels of abstraction. In our domain
idea hierarchy, the top node representing the entire DFH
task is first broken down into 5 general topic areas including
geology (e.g., shale rock area), agriculture (e.g., having
shallow-rooted economic plants which cannot solidify the
soil mass as much as original forests), influences caused by
other natural phenomena (e.g., typhoons which break the
hydraulic balance), urban development (e.g., building
houses on a potentially dangerous slope), and social factors
(e.g., improper environmental policies). Each subtopic is
divided into specific idea nodes. A total of 19 specific idea
nodes are included. Feedback messages are attached to the
nodes of the idea hierarchy both at the general topic level
and the specific idea level. Similarly, at the specific idea
level, prototype expressions of the related idea collected in
previous studies involving the DFH task are attached to idea
nodes. In this way, participant conversational contributions
can be matched to nodes in the hierarchy by matching the
text of their contribution to the associated prototype texts
using a simple semantic similarity measure.
The feedback provided by VIBRANT consists of two
parts. The initial portion, which we refer to as the comment,
acknowledges the idea that was matched, and how it fits or
doesn’t fit into the hierarchy. The second portion, which we
refer to as the tutorial, offers a hint for thinking about a new
contribution.
Feedback messages are constructed by
concatenating a selected comment with a selected tutorial.
For example, if the participant has contributed the idea
“deforestation”, the system will acknowledge this with the
following comment, “Good, you seem familiar with the
effects of excessive urban development.” A next focus for
brainstorming that follows coherently from this would be
more discussion related to urban development, for example
“Can you think of a farming practice motivated by
economic concerns that may increase the risk of a debris
flow hazard?” VIBRANT never offers participants specific
example ideas. Instead, the hints offered by VIBRANT are
more similar to the “category label” stimuli (such as
“improve parking” for the task of “how can your university
be improved?”) demonstrated to enhance idea production in
previous studies of group and individual brainstorming
behavior (Dugosh et al., 2000; Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006).
VIBRANT’s built in strategy for selecting a next focus was
designed to balance breadth and depth across the idea
hierarchy while maintaining coherence. This design is
motivated by prior findings that brainstorming is more
efficient when successive ideas are clustered so that
semantically related ideas are contributed in close proximity,
and transitions between general idea categories are
relatively rare (Nijstad & Stroebe).
For the IF condition, VIBRANT offered feedback in
response to each contribution of the participant. For the PF

1630

condition, in order to avoid having the feedback from the
agent prohibit interaction between participants, the system
collected and evaluated the two participants’ contributions
during a fixed period of time, and then gave feedback based
on the accumulated text rather than contributing a response
to every contribution. In this study, the time delay parameter
was set to 30 seconds, which was observed during a pilot
experiment to allow participants enough time to interact
with one another. No feedback from the system was offered
to participants in the two no feedback conditions. Thus, in
contrast to the two feedback-enabled conditions just
described, for the IN and PN conditions, a simple computer
agent did nothing but simply recorded participants’
contributions. In the IN condition, where participants
worked alone, they were simply instructed to use the IM
program as a text input buffer.

whether the experimental manipulation that takes place in
phase 3 has a lasting effect on brainstorming behavior
beyond the duration of the manipulation that can be detected
within a new brainstorming task. Again, the transfer task is
part of the learning assessment, which is not a focus of this
paper. We strictly controlled for time in all phases. Here
we describe the whole procedure in detail.
Phase 1. Background Reading (10 minutes)
During phase 1, the participants read a 3 page packet of
background reading materials on the climate, geology, and
development of Taiwan as well as some information about
natural disasters but no specific information about debris
flow hazards. This packet was compiled by domain experts
working in a science education center at National Taiwan
Normal University. The readings were designed to offer
participants a wide range of background material related to
the topics contained within the idea hierarchy discussed
above, however it did not contain the direct answers to any
questions on the test nor did it directly express the ideas
participants were required to contribute in the brainstorming
task. The reading material itself does not explicitly
introduce the factors underlying DFH occurrences. The
purpose of the reading materials was to prepare participants
for the brainstorming task. Participants in all conditions
were instructed to read the material for 10 minutes, and to
learn as much as possible from the material.

Participants
The study was conducted in a computer classroom of a
public high school located in central Taiwan. Four sessions
were scheduled on the same day, two in the morning and
two in the afternoon. In each session, the classroom
accommodated at most 16 participants. Every participant
worked at a computer assigned to him or her. Participating
students were allowed to choose the session they attended,
and were randomly assigned to experimental conditions
within that session. For experimental conditions PN and PF,
participants were paired into dyads randomly. The version
of the MSN based software used as our experimental
infrastructure was configured so that in the pair conditions,
the other participant assigned to the same dyad appeared in
the “buddy list” of that participant. Additionally, in the
feedback-enabled conditions, the computer agent that
provides feedback also appeared in the “buddy list”. Thus,
when the participants launched the application during the
experimental manipulation, their MSN based client was
configured to support a conversation between all of the
relevant parties. Altogether, there were 7 participants in the
IN condition, 7 participants in IF, 14 participants in PN (i.e.,
7 pairs), and 14 participants in PF (i.e., 7 pairs). During the
study, all participants were blind to the experimental design,
and unaware of the existence of other conditions.

Experimental Procedure
The experimental procedure can be divided into five
phases, namely (1) background readings, (2) pretest, (3)
brainstorming 1, (4) brainstorming 2, and (5) the post test.
The experimental manipulation took place during phase (3),
which is the first brainstorming phase. All other phases
were conducted the same way for all participants, and in all
phases other than the experimental manipulation phase, all
participants worked alone.
The pre/post tests were
administered in order to investigate the relationship between
idea generation and learning, which is addressed in a
separate paper (Wang et al., 2007). Thus, the learning
results will not be discussed in the remainder of the paper.
The purpose of the second brainstorming phase is to test

Phase 2. Pre-brainstorming Test (15 minutes)
In phase 2, participants took an on-line pretest assessing
their conceptual knowledge and reasoning about debris flow
hazards.
Phase 3. Brainstorming Activity 1 (30 minutes)
After the pretest, the participants participated in the first
brainstorming phase, which is where the experimental
manipulation took place. Participants were instructed to
launch the MSN program and to start working on the DFH
brainstorming task. Specific instructions for the task
appeared as the first prompt in the MSN messenger window.
Participants were given a scenario about a specific debris
flow hazard and then asked to generate as many thoughts as
possible in answer to the question, “what are the possible
factors that may cause a debris flow hazard to happen?”
During this activity, participants were invited to use the
reading materials from Phase 1 as a resource. The duration
of the brainstorming session was limited to 30 minutes.
Phase 4. Brainstorming Activity 2 (10 minutes)
Upon the completion of the brainstorming task,
participants regardless of experimental condition were then
instructed to do individual brainstorming on a second
brainstorming task. In this idea generation task, participants
were requested to offer preventive solutions for DFH. The
prompt for this solution-finding brainstorming activity was
“what facilities or solutions may prevent a debris flow
hazard from happening?” No system-generated feedback,

1631

reading material, or peer interaction was provided when
doing this transfer task.

productivity in “nominal pairs” with productivity in real
pairs.

Phase 5. Post-brainstorming Test (15 minutes)
Finally, participants took an on-line post-test identical to
the one used as a pretest.

Results

1632

12

Unique Ideas

8
6
0

2

4

#Unique Ideas

10

IN
IF
PN
PF

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time Stamp

Figure 1: Accumulation of unique ideas per condition.
In particular, roughly half of the unique ideas contributed
during the 30 minute brainstorming session were generated
within the first 5 minutes, as depicted in Figure 1.

40

Idea Attempts

20

#Attempts

30

IN
IF
PN
PF

10

Logs of all IM behavior in all conditions were saved for
analysis. Altogether we collected 28 logs, 7 in each
condition. Note that in the pairs conditions, there is only
one log per pair rather than one log per participant.
To derive appropriate quantitative measures of idea
generation for analyses, including task performance
(number of unique ideas in the main idea generation task)
and transfer performance (number of unique ideas the
solution-finding transfer task), data collected in the main
brainstorming phase (i.e., phase 3) and the transfer task
phase (i.e., phase 4) have been coded and inventoried.
For the main idea generation task, participant IM logs
were first segmented into idea units, since during IM
conversations, participants may contribute more than one
idea per turn. The inter-rater reliability between two
independent coders over 10% of the data for segmentation
was satisfactory (Kappa= .7). Each unit contribution was
then classified into one of the 19 domain concepts in the
aforementioned idea hierarchy. If an idea would count as an
acceptable idea for the transfer task, as defined in the next
paragraph, it received the label of “off-task idea”, since it
was a valid idea, but not for the current task. Otherwise, if
there was no feasible label for a particular contribution, the
label of “junky ideas” was given, since the idea was not
appropriate for either of the two related tasks. The interrater reliability for the concept coding over 10% of the data
was sufficiently high (Kappa=.84). From this coding we
computed how many unique high quality ideas were
generated within a session. In the pairs conditions, an idea
only counted as a unique idea the first time it was
mentioned by either participant in that session.
For the second brainstorming task, participants’ responses
were coded according to a similar coding scheme developed
by domain experts for this task based on the distribution of
observed participant responses in prior studies. The
categories in that coding scheme represent what the experts
consider the 15 most common “valuable” ideas from this
distribution. The inter-rater reliability of this coding of two
independent coders over 10% of the data was Kappa=.74,
which is satisfactory.
To achieve a fair comparison between individual idea
generation and group idea generation, it is standard to form
“nominal pairs” by randomly selecting people from
experimental conditions in which participants worked
individually, and then pool their ideas collectively for a
comparison with real pairs. As in the pairs conditions, each
of the 19 ideas is only counted at most once per session.
Thus, in the remainder of the paper, when we compare
individuals to pairs, what we are really comparing is

In all conditions, we observed an exponential decay of
idea productivity over time, which we argue below affects
the magnitude of cognitive interference in the pairs
conditions over time.

0

Verbal Protocol Analysis

Exponential Decay of Idea Productivity Over Time

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time Stamp

Figure 2: Accumulation of idea attempts per condition.
However, as displayed in Figure 2, the decay of idea
attempts over time was much more gradual. By the end of
the 30 minute brainstorming session, idea attempts have
only begun to level off in the pairs with no feedback
condition. In the pairs condition with feedback, idea
attempts continue at a constant rate. And in the two
individual conditions, a slow down in the rate of idea
contributions only begins to become apparent in the second
half of the brainstorming session.
Thus, over time
participants in all conditions experience more and more

failed attempts to generate unique ideas. In the remainder of
our analysis we will examine the process of idea failure,
how cognitive interference affects that process, and how
system generated feedback mitigates that effect. Note that
this consistent pattern of decay across conditions is not what
we refer to as process losses. Process losses are evident in
the comparison between real pairs and nominal pairs,
examined in the Cognitive Interference section below.

Ind+No_Feedback

Pair+No_Feedback

40
Count

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time Stamp

Figure 4: Accumulation of instances of idea categories over
time in the IN condition.
This qualitative image is confirmed in our statistical
analysis. By using the elapsed time since the start of the
session for each idea attempt as the dependent variable and
idea type as a four level independent variable (with unique,
repetition, off-task, and junky as the four levels) in an
ANOVA analysis, it is found that the difference in elapsed
time across idea types was statistically significant (F(3,
655)=52.85, p<.001). From a post-hoc analysis using a
Tukey-test, it is found that the unique ideas occurred
significantly earlier than the other three types of idea
contributions (effect size Cohen’s d=0.9).

20

Cognitive Interference

0

10

Count

20
0
0

30

40

attempt
unique
repetition
valuable-offtask
junky

10

High Level View of the Process of Idea Failure
In order to examine the process of idea failure, we
classified idea attempts into four categories based on their
classification from the verbal protocol analysis discussed
earlier in the paper. Above we introduced these four
categories as unique ideas, repetitions, off-task ideas, and
junky ideas. In Figures 3 and 4 it is possible to observe how
these types of contributions accumulate over time in the
pairs with no feedback (PN) and individuals with no
feedback (IN) conditions respectively.
First, let us look qualitatively at the patterns that emerge
from these graphs. It is clear that the proportion of
successful idea attempts is highest in the first 5 minutes.
The gap between the line representing number of attempts
and the line representing unique ideas widens over time.

attempt
unique
repetition
valuable-offtask
junky

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Time Stamp

Figure 3: Accumulation of instances of idea categories over
time in the PN condition.
During the first five minutes, repetitions, off-task, and junky
ideas are almost non-existent in the pairs condition.
Repetitions occur almost half the time during this time
interval in the individual condition, although junky and offtask ideas are almost non-existent. Moving on from the first
5 minute interval, the picture begins to change in both the
IN and PN conditions. In the PN condition, the proportion
of repetitions and junky ideas begins to increase at the 5
minute mark, with repetitions increasing at a higher rate.
By the end of the brainstorming session, unique ideas and
repetitions are in equal proportion, with junky and off-task
ideas remaining a smaller proportion. In the IN condition
the picture is similar. In both cases, repetitions are a more
common, and possibly earlier, form of idea failure, with
junky ideas being less frequent and possibly later.

Process losses are hypothesized to result from cognitive
interference experienced because of exposure to a partner’s
similar idea contributions. Because the frequency of idea
contributions is highest in the first five minutes, we
hypothesize that cognitive interference has the greatest
effect during that time. If we consider only brainstorming
behavior during that period, we already see significant
evidence of process losses by the five minute mark when we
compare unique ideas generated by “nominal pairs” with
unique ideas generated by real pairs, F(1, 24)=12.22, p<.005.
The effect size of the advantage for “nominal pairs” is 1
standard deviation. If we then look just at brainstorming
behavior after the five minute mark, we still see significant
process losses due to working in pairs, however the effect
size is only .61, F(1, 24)=4.61, p<.05. This is consistent
with earlier conjectures that process losses may be worse
during the early stage of a brainstorming session, although
this was not investigated directly in prior work (Diehl &
Stroebe, 1991; Nijstad & Stroebe, 2006). One possible
explanation is that the cognitive interference experienced as
a result of the exposure to similar ideas is only a temporary
effect. Thus, cognitive interference decays over time as the
frequency of unique idea contributions decays. We see
evidence of this in the way the effect of feedback changes
over time, as examined in the next section.

1633

The Effect of Feedback
Based on summative measures, we do not see a
significant benefit of feedback on idea productivity. As
mentioned, there is a main negative effect of working in
pairs on idea productivity, with no interaction with feedback.
If we take a process level view, however, we see a different
picture. We saw above that it is reasonable to conjecture
that cognitive interference is highest during the first five
minutes of the brainstorming session where the frequency of
idea contributions is highest. If the inhibitory effect of
exposure to a similar idea is only temporary, then we would
expect the level of cognitive interference to decay over time
with the frequency of new idea contributions, and the
pattern we saw was consistent with this. It is possible that
during the time when cognitive interference is the strongest,
the effect of the feedback, which may be smaller in
comparison, may not be visible. Thus, we might expect the
positive effect of feedback to become more noticeable as the
negative effect of cognitive interference decays. If the
positive effect of the feedback is not evident during the first
five minutes where cognitive interference is the strongest,
then the individual conditions would have the opportunity to
gain an enduring advantage during that time that might not
be compensated for later even if cognitive interference
could be completely removed as a result of the feedback and
pairs could experience equal success at idea generation as
individuals. If that was the case, we would expect to see
process losses evidenced by summative measures computed
over the entire brainstorming session, but possibly not by
summative measures computed over the remaining segment
of time following the initial five minutes.
In line with this, we see in Figure 1, that the gap between
individuals with no feedback (IN) and pairs with feedback
(PF) narrows slightly over time past the five minute mark
rather than widens. The difference between IN and PF
during the first five minutes is significant, t(12) = 3.49,
p<.005, effect size Cohen’s d = 1.5. After the first five
minutes to the end of the session, PF actually slightly
outperformed IN during this period of time, although the
difference is not significant, t(12) = -1.55, effect size
Cohen’s d = 0.65. This confirms that the feedback was
effective in mitigating process losses except during the first
five minutes where cognitive interference was the strongest.

Conclusions and Current Directions
In this paper, we have presented an experimental study
and detailed process analysis investigating the temporal
characteristics of idea generation and idea failure during
brainstorming.
While summative measures of idea
generation productivity show strong evidence of process
losses in brainstorming pairs even with the support of
feedback, a detailed process analysis demonstrates that after
the first five minutes of the brainstorming session, the that
process loss is removed so that productivity over the
remainder of the session for pairs with the support of
feedback is nearly identical to that of individuals without
feedback. However, since feedback also increased the

productivity of individuals, we do see process losses in pairs
with feedback in comparison with individuals supported
with the same feedback. The results from our process
analysis confirm conjectures put forward in earlier work that
process losses may mainly occur early in brainstorming
sessions. These results also explain why earlier studies
found process losses with interacting groups in comparison
with “nominal groups” even when the interacting groups
were given more time (Diehl & Stroebe, 1991).
This work was funded in part by the National Science
Council (NSC), Republic of China grant number NSC 942511-S-003-028 and National Science Foundation grant
number SBE0354420.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2005). Cognitive psychology and its
implications (6 ed.). New York: Worth.
Brown, V. R., & Paulus, P. B. (2002). Making group
brainstorming more effective: recommendations from an
associative memory perspective. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11(6), 208-212.
Chang C., & Tsai, C. (2005). The interplay between
different forms of CAI and students’ preferences of
learning environment in the secondary science class.
Science Education, 89, 707-724.
Chi, M. H., De Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & Lavancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-488.
Diehl, M., & Stroebe, W. (1987). Productivity loss in
brainstorming groups: toward the solution of a riddle.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 53(3), 497509.
Diehl, M. & Stroebe, W. (1991). Productivity loss in ideagenerating groups: tracking down the blocking effect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(3), 392403.
Dugosh, K. L., Paulus, P. B., Roland, E. J., & Yang, H.
(2000). Cognitive stimulation in brainstorming. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology. 79(5), 722-735.
Hill, G. W. (1982). Group versus individual performance:
are N+1 heads better than one? Psychological Bulletin,
91(3), 517-539.
Nijstad, B. A., Stroebe, W., & Lodewijkx. F. M. (2002).
Cognitive stimulation and interference in groups:
Exposure effects in an idea generation task. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 535-544.
Nijstad, B. A., & Stroebe, W. (2006). How the group affects
the mind: a cognitive model of idea generation in groups.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(3), 186213.
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93.134.
Wang, H. C., Rosé, C.P., Cui, Y., Chang, C. Y, Huang, C.
C., Li, T. Y. (2007). Thinking Hard Together: The Long
and Short of Collaborative Idea Generation for Scientific
Inquiry, Proceedings of CSCL 2007.

1634

