UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Qualitative Analysis of Expert-Expert Differences in Understanding Aquariums

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81s5b1p3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Marathe, Surabhi
Hmelo-Silver, Cindy E.
Liu, Lei

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Qualitative Analysis of Expert-Expert Differences in Understanding Aquariums
Surabhi Marathe (surabhim@gmail.com)
Department of Educational Psychology, 10 Seminary Place,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1183, USA

Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver (chmelo@rci.rutgers.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 10 Seminary Place,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1183, USA

Lei Liu (leiliu@eden.rutgers.edu)
Department of Educational Psychology, 10 Seminary Place,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1183, USA
Abstract
Research has shown that different kinds of experts within the
same domain differ from each other in terms of how they
organize and use knowledge. Expertise varies as a function of
practice, culture, and goals. Previous research by HmeloSilver and Pfeffer (2004) has shown that two kinds of
aquarium experts, hobbyists and scientists, have differing
mental models of the system. This paper presents a detailed
analysis of the experts’ interviews to better understand what
they choose to talk about and the kinds of reasoning they use.
Results show that what experts choose to focus on varies as a
function of type of expertise and the goals of different kinds
of experts.
Keywords: expertise; expert-expert differences

Introduction
The conceptual reorganization that takes place as a person
moves from a novice status to an expert status is well
documented (Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981; Glaser & Chi,
1988). The change from novice to expert status involves
both quantitative and qualitative changes in the novice’s
knowledge, and is a function of contextual factors present
during the development of expertise.
Novices have
differing beliefs about what constitutes knowledge and is
worth learning, and how it is best understood. These beliefs
constrain the type of data that they observe. The empirical
data observed in turn helps refine the mental model of the
developing expert. Through many iterations of this process,
flexible, adaptive expertise develops. Since different types
of experts in the same field (e.g. genetic counselors and
molecular biologists) have different goals and different
kinds of ontological categories, it is reasonable to assume
that they pay attention to different types of empirical data.
As a result they conceptualize the data differently, and
expert-expert differences emerge. Expert–expert differences
are a function of goals (Hmelo- Silver, Marathe & Liu, in
press; Smith, 1990), culture (Medin et al., 2006) and
practice (Patel & Groen, 1991).
Medin et al. (2006) asked expert fishermen from two
cultures, Native American and majority culture, to sort a set
of fish they were familiar with and to justify their sort.
Experts were also questioned about relations between

different kinds of fish in nature. The results underscored the
importance of knowledge organization. Results showed that
both kinds of experts were equally knowledgeable but their
classifications differed. The Native- American fishermen
lived off the land and had a stake in conserving the natural
diversity and harnessing resources in a sustainable manner,
therefore their categorization was based on ecological
criterion. They also talked about relations between adult and
juvenile fish. The majority culture fisherman mostly fished
for sport, and sorted fish in categories that were defined by
goals (e.g. big fish which are prestigious to catch, fish
which are good to eat). Because they usually threw back the
juvenile fish, their reasoning about relations among fish was
based exclusively on adult fish. The experts’ knowledge
was task-oriented and organized such that the categories
they used most often were most salient.
Chi (2006) defines expertise as, “the manifestation of
skills and understanding resulting from the accumulation of
a large body of knowledge.” (p. 167). Thus expertise is
made up of both understanding developed from
accumulated knowledge and the ability to use it in some
way. Expertise can develop in many ways. One of the
salient ways people develop expertise is through formal
training (Chi et al., 1981). However, experts are
characterized by extensive planning. So expertise consists
not only of knowing what to do; but also involves knowing
when not to apply the standard procedure to problem
solving, as they will not yield the desired result. Dorner and
Scholkopf (1991) call this type of expertise “grandmothers
know how.” This kind of expertise is very important when
experts have to control the working of complex causal
systems (e.g. maintaining an aquarium, planning an
economic policy and implementing it.) It can develop as
novices gain informal experience in managing complex
systems over a significant duration of time. The practical
experience and self-directed learning that people engage in
as well as personal mentoring that novices gain from other
experts in the domain helps them to become experts. This
suggests experts can develop different kinds of expertise in
the same domain as a function of their training and practical
experience.

1265

Coding and Analysis

Recent research by Hmelo-Silver et al. (in press) found
differences within-domains in two complex systems fields.
Hmelo-Silver et al. conducted clinical interviews with two
kinds of experts, hobbyist and scientists, and novices within
the domain of aquarium ecosystem. Analysis of the
interviews showed that the two kinds of experts were
equally knowledgeable. Experts as a group showed better
understanding of the complex system than the novices. The
two kinds of experts did not differ with respect to amount of
knowledge but did have different mental models of their
domain. The hobbyists focused on how to maintain healthy
aquaria whereas the mental models of the aquarium
scientists were focused on how energy flows across the
system and on principles that control ecological systems.
This paper is attempts to further analyze the qualitative
differences observed between hobbyists and scientists by
Hmelo-Silver et al.

Research in expert-expert differences has shown that
knowledge is organized based on how it is used. The
categories that are used the most being the most salient
(Lynch, Coley & Medin, 2000). We therefore expected to
see differences in what experts chose to talk about in the
domain and also the way they reasoned about it. In order to
see these differences each statement was coded twice.
Firstly we coded for the Focus of the statement, which
describes the larger background against which the statement
is made. Secondly we coded for the Type of reasoning.
Reasoning type describes the way the expert makes
connections between the different structures, functions and
processes in their domain. The following sections describe
the two-level coding and the codes used in greater detail.

Method

Focus of statement: Focus describes the overarching
content of a given statement and the background against
which it is made. We coded for five different foci (shown in
Table 1). These foci were, component, chemical balance,
fish, situated system and abstract system. Focus identifies
what the expert chooses to talk about. Previous research has
shown that experts organize domain knowledge in a goaloriented manner (Smith, 1990). Since the two kinds of
experts used their domain knowledge to achieve different
objectives, we expected them to talk about different aspects
about the system. We expected the hobbyists, who had
hands on experience with maintaining many aquaria, to have
detailed knowledge about fish and the components that
make up healthy aquaria, and think in terms of the aquarium
in particular and not systems in general. Therefore we
started out with component focus, fish focus and the situated
systems focus. On the other hand because scientific training
is based on learning the general underlying principles of a
given domain, we expected the scientists to focus on the
abstract system view of the aquarium ecosystem. On further
analysis of the transcripts we found that these four
categories were not sufficient to describe the focus of a
large number of statements. Analysis showed that these
uncodeable statements were not random and dealt with the
chemical aspects of the aquarium. We coded for the
chemical balance focus to capture this kind of talk.

Participants and Procedures
Five scientists and five aquarium hobbyists were
interviewed as part of a larger study (Hmelo-Silver &
Pfeffer, 2004; Hmelo-Silver et al., in press). The hobbyists
had gained expertise by reading fish books, going to
aquarium society meetings, talking with other hobbyist, and
through 10 to 20 years of maintaining aquaria. The scientists
had advanced degrees in biology and more than 10 years of
experience. The individual interviews ranged from 20 to 40
minutes. All interviews were tape-recorded and transcribed.
The participants were presented with a piece of paper that
had a three-sided rectangular shape (representing an
aquarium). They were asked to draw a picture of “anything
you think is in an aquarium,” while thinking aloud. The
interviews included open-ended questions (e.g., “what is an
aquarium?” and “what do we mean when we talk about an
aquarium as a system?”) and problems (e.g., “What would
happen to the aquarium system if the pH went from slightly
acidic to slightly alkaline?”) to elicit participants’
knowledge about their domain.

Parsing

Types of reasoning: The type of reasoning in a statement
was used to identify how experts understood their domain.
Experts made connections between the components of the
systems, and the processes that were involved in allowing
the system to function optimally. Type of reasoning coded
for how an expert made these kinds of connections. We
coded for five kinds of reasoning: elaboration, causal,
functional, hierarchic, and simple assertions (shown in
Table 2).
Experts who maintain complex causal systems possess
elaborated knowledge about interactions between different
components of the system (Dorner & Scholkopf, 1991). We
coded for elaborated reasoning to quantify this kind of indepth knowledge about aquarium ecosystems. We

The interviews were parsed into statements for the purposes
of coding. Statements were of varying length (they could be
part of a sentence or several sentences long) and each was
concerned with a particular topic. When the topic of
discussion changed (for example, if the participant started
talking about role of filters after discussing their positioning
in the tank), the unit was parsed as a separate statement.
Interview questions, fillers (for example, “umm.., could
you repeat that?”), and off topic conversation (for example,
the participant talking about how he/she gained expertise)
were not coded.

1266

anticipated that since the hobbyists’ primary concern was
successfully running and maintaining aquaria they would be
more knowledgeable about the day-to day maintenance, and
detailed working mechanisms of various components in the
aquarium and this would be captured by their greater use of
elaborated reasoning. We coded for causal and functional
reasoning because research has shown that expert reasoning
is causal and functional in nature (Profitt, Coley & Medin,

2000). We expected that the scientists would talk more
about the ecological mechanisms underlying the aquarium
ecosystem, because scientific training emphasizes the
hierarchical and interconnected nature of all systems more
than the hobbyists training. In order to capture this kind of
talk we included the hierarchic reasoning category. A small
number of statements stated facts without any kind of
supporting evidence and were coded as assertions.

Table 1: Focus of statement
Focus
Component

Chemical
Balance

Fish

Situated
system

Abstract
system

Definition
Statement discussed considerations involving physical
and biological parts of the aquarium and how they are
arranged with respect to each other. These could be the
filter, light etc.
Statement either explained various gases, chemicals or
chemical wastes dissolved in water in the aquarium
system (oxygen, nitrogen etc.), or delineated their
effects/ role in the aquarium.
Statement was primarily concerned with keeping the
aquarium at an optimum level for the fish. It also
stressed how a change in the biological, physical or
chemical components of the aquarium affected fishes’
health in general and in particular.
Statement is concerned with the function, components,
and health of the aquarium system. This is a very
integrated systemic view. However it talks about the
aquarium system in particular rather than systems or
ecosystems in general.
Statement explicitly deals with the aquarium as an
ecosystem. The emphasis is on the system as a concept
and not aquarium systems in particular. It does not
presuppose that maintaining a healthy aquarium is a
prime objective.

Example
“And you would level the gravel bottom, so
that there is more gravel on the bottom of the
tank…In that way you see the fish up front”
“Carbon dioxide is a by product, … of
respiration …But the plants, in turn can
reutilize it to produce sugars in photosynthesis
and provide themselves with food to grow on.”
“...well, the fish might be a little stressed out
and not used to the change, so the fish may
behave erratic, or their fins might be clammed”
“…you might have some snails that help eat
the algae in the tank, and actually there is
bright algae that will grow in the tank if you
have the light...”
“…In a stagnant system in fact you could have
lots of life. It’s just not the kind that you want
for your display,…”

Table 2: Type of reasoning
Type of
reasoning
Assertion
Elaboration
Causal
Functional
Hierarchic

Definition

Example

Statement consists of facts without any
elaboration or explanation.
Statement gives details and non-causal relations
between the physical and biological components
of the system
Statement refers to how change in some
components, actions or processes, affects other
components or processes.
Statement explicitly details why some
component or process is important and how it fit
in the overall system.
Statement explains a chain of causation. These
statements are concerned with how a change in
one component or process leads to a cascade of
events.

“Ok, we’ll put the tube light…in the hood.”

1267

“…gravel acts as a bed for nitrifying bacteria to
gather.”
“...bacteria breaks down the ammonia and the nitrites
fish produce”
“..the gills of a fish…are meant to take oxygen from
water, and the lungs of humans are meant to take
oxygen from air…yeah from air.”
“You would immediately see an increase in carbon
dioxide and an increase in waste materials, …, after
this initial effect, you’d probably see a lag effect …,
where the increased carbon dioxide would possibly be
taken up by plants, which in fact could generate move
oxygen …to come to some new balance in the system.”

Coding procedure
Coding was done blind with respect to type of expertise in
each condition. One researcher coded all the interviews. An
independent second researcher coded 20% of the interviews.
Inter-rater reliability was greater than 90% for both type of
reasoning and focus of statement.

Results
Since the experts’ interviews were of differing length and
differed in the number of codeable statements, percentages
were used for all comparisons. Percentages were calculated
based on the number of times a type of reasoning was used
or focus was mentioned divided by the total number of
statements that could be coded. This section first presents
the results for the focus of statement and then for type of
reasoning.

plants, which produce oxygen, which provides oxygen
for the fish so…
This answer suggests that the hobbyist could think of the
aquarium as a system, in a general sense. He did not talk
about components of the aquarium when specifically asked
about its systemic nature. Therefore, while the component
focus was salient for the hobbyists, they could demonstrate
broader understanding when the task demands required it.
Similarly the scientists could also focus on the
components of the aquarium in particular and not think of
the aquarium as a general system, as can be seen from the
following statement made by a scientist concerning
placement of light in the aquarium, “…we’ll put a tube light
on top, because light is important. It’s in the hood.”
Table 3: Descriptive statistics for focus of statement

Focus of statement

Focus

Scientists (n = 5)
Mean (S.D.)
24.93 (4.45)
8.11 (2.50)

Component*
Chemical
balance
Fish
16.55 (5.69)
Situated system
16.67 (13.94)
Abstract
system**
33.75 (7.58)
* p<.05 ** p<.001

We expected that the hobbyists would focus more on the
component, fish and situated systems view of the aquarium
because they developed expertise while maintaining aquaria
for over a decade. Similarly we anticipated that the
scientists, because of their training, would focus more on
the abstract system view of the aquarium system than the
hobbyists. In short, type of expertise would interact with
type of focus. As shown by table 3, the experts’ differing
knowledge organization about the aquarium ecosystem was
reflected in the focus of their statements. The hobbyists
were more focused on the components in an aquarium than
the scientists. The scientists focused more on the abstract
system view of the aquarium. Even when specifically asked
about a component of the aquarium system, namely light,
the focus of a scientist was on the general/ abstract systemic
nature of the aquarium as in this example when he said,
“Light is essential in the ecological sense of the system in
that it provides for the photosynthesis by the plants.”
The results of ANOVA show a significant interaction
between focus and the type of expertise (F(1,4) = 7.86,
p<.001). The hobbyists’ statements had component focus
reliably more than those of scientists (F(1,8) = 6.87, p< .05).
The scientists used abstract system focus more than the
hobbyists (F(1,8) =50.62, p<. 001). We also expected the
hobbyists’ interview to have more statements that focused
on the situated system focus and fish than the scientists.
While this was the case, the differences were not
statistically significant.
Experts were, however, flexible in how they viewed the
aquarium ecosystem. Though the hobbyists focused mostly
on the component view of the aquarium they could change
gears when asked to do so. The hobbyists were capable of
thinking of the aquarium as an abstract system or
ecosystem. When specifically asked about the aquarium as a
system, one hobbyist said,
An aquarium as a system…implies the life cycle
of…fish consuming food, which produces waste, which
feeds the nitrifying bacteria, which then feeds the

Hobbyists (n =5)
Mean (S.D.)
37.42 (9.67)
8.82 (4.21)
25.36 (8.35)
21.24 (10.38)
7.15 (3.52)

Type of reasoning
We expected the scientists to reason more hierarchically
because scientific training emphasizes the hierarchic nature
of systems. The hobbyists had significant hands-on
knowledge of maintaining aquaria. They were therefore
more likely to know about the various components of the
aquarium in greater detail and to use elaborations more than
the scientists. However as can be seen from table 4, while
the differences were in the direction predicted they were
not significant. We conducted a set of orthogonal within
subject contrasts. The results showed that both scientists and
hobbyists used elaborated, causal, functional and hierarchic
reasoning more than simple assertions. The results were
statistically significant for hobbyist at p< .01 (F(1,4) =
17.46) and for scientists at p< .001 (F 1,4)= 92.12). It is
possible that the type reasoning is a function of expertise in
general and not related to type of expertise.
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for type of reasoning
Type of reasoning

1268

Assertion
Elaboration
Causal
Functional
Hierarchic

Scientists (n = 5)
Mean (S.D.)
6.79 (3.08)
40.01 (6.97)
23.26 (11.21)
27.05 (10.18)
2.90 (1.64)

Hobbyists (n =5)
Mean (S.D.)
9.09 (5.84)
48.11 (11.79)
18.22 (10.93)
22.84 (8.04)
1.73 (1.17)

experts, may not be appropriate under all circumstances.
Scientific and non-scientific experts organize knowledge
differently. This difference in knowledge organization is
seen between molecular biologists and genetic counselors
(Smith, 1990), between taxonomists and landscapers
(Lynch et al., 2000), and between scientists and hobbyists
in the present study. Evidence from these studies suggests
that the pattern of classifying according to underlying
principle may be characteristic of expertise of only a
certain type, that of scientists and academicians.
Researchers use basic principles in the domain to design
experiments and their knowledge is therefore organized
around these principles. Other kinds of experts (e.g.
genetic counselors, landscapers, aquarium hobbyists,
respiratory therapists) use their domain knowledge to solve
practical problems. Their knowledge is organized around
solution techniques and so their classification differs from
that of scientists. The present study also shows that while
experts have their privileged categories, these categories
are not rigid. The experts can be flexible when needed in
response to situational demands, consistent with Lynch et
al.
We did not see any difference in the kinds of reasoning
experts’ use across the type of expertise within the
aquarium system. Thus while types of reasoning might be
useful to distinguish between experts and novices they
might not be very useful to differentiate between different
kinds of within-domain expertise. It is also possible that
greater differences were not observed because the expert
interviews were conducted to elucidate expert-novice
differences and may not have been ideal for studying
expert-expert differences. More application questions
requiring hierarchic answers might have resulted in more
hierarchic reasoning and resulted in better differentiation
of expert-expert differences in this domain. The experts
were also asked specifically about components of the
aquarium during the course of the interview. This might
have cued the experts to talk about them. In the absence of
these direct questions it is possible that experts might have
talked about certain aspects of the systems differentially;
and their knowledge about other aspects of the system
might have remained unarticulated and implicit. Thus
showing greater differences in what they choose to focus
on.
Another limitation of this study is the small sample size.
The small sample size makes it difficult to find statistically
significant differences between the two kinds of experts.
The limitations of the interview structure and sample size
not withstanding, significant differences were observed
between experts in what they chose to focus on.

Discussion
The results of this study show that there are considerable
differences between how hobbyists and scientists
understand aquariums. The scientists focused on the
aquarium as an abstract system that approximates an
ecosystem. The hobbyists’ focus was more practical as they
emphasized the components that comprise the aquarium
system, and how they affect each other.
The results from this study are in keeping with prior
research that has shown that practice in applying knowledge
to solve problems has a very big effect on what facets of the
knowledge are used in a privileged manner (Patel & Groen,
1991; Wineburg, 1998). This differential focus on local and
global issues underlying a complex system, by two kinds of
experts is similar to what Barnett and Koslowski (2000)
demonstrated in another domain. They showed that
management consultants were better able to provide
solutions for systemic problems (i.e., problems created by
location, peoples’ intentions and changes in highways
routes) facing a restaurant than the restaurant managers
responsible for its day-to-day running. This was true even
when the consultants were not very knowledgeable about
restaurants in particular. They proposed that this pattern of
results is likely given the fact that restaurant managers are
very busy in making sure that the restaurant functions
smoothly. Their cognitive resources are used up in thinking
about everyday problems of running a complex system (i.e.
the restaurant). They cannot spare any resources to look at
the “big picture.” The results of this study show a similar
pattern with the hobbyists focusing more on components
while the scientists take a more abstract view of their
domain and focus on the big picture.
The higher levels of organization are those that help
people apply their knowledge to the task at hand (Eylon &
Reif, 1984). The hobbyists’ domain knowledge about the
aquarium system was acquired through trying to maintain
numerous aquaria over a long period of time, as well as
through informal learning opportunities. It is not surprising
then that their knowledge is organized around the
aquarium. While hobbyists can think about an aquarium as
an ecosystem approximation, they do not necessarily think
about it as such, unless specifically asked. However, they
do have the domain knowledge to think more flexibly
when needed. Similarly the scientists’ knowledge is
organized around the scientific principles that govern the
system. They can think and reason about the practicalities
of running an aquarium but, they do not do so unless
specifically asked., as other expert-expert studies have
demonstrated (Lynch et al, 2000; Medin et al, 2006).
Most expert-novice studies focus on mostly scientific
experts. Since these experts acquire domain knowledge
within the culture of academia, they focus on the
underlying principles governing the domain (Chi et al,
1981). However this type of principle centered knowledge
organization may not be characteristic of all kinds of
experts. Generalizing the characteristics observed in
formally-trained scientific experts, to all kinds of adaptive

Conclusion

1269

This study demonstrates that expert-expert differences exist
in the domain of aquarium ecosystem. Results indicate that
these differences are of a qualitative nature and knowledge

organization is a function of how knowledge is applied and
used by the experts. The two kinds of experts have in-depth
knowledge of their domain and are able to reason about it
in a sophisticated manner. They use predominantly
elaborated, causal and functional reasoning. However
further research needs to be done to understand precisely the
effect that goals and practice have on development of
expertise within complex domains.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF CAREER Grant #
0133533 to Cindy E. Hmelo-Silver. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Science Foundation.

References
Chi, M.T.H., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Chi, M.T.H. (2006). Laboratory methods for assessing
experts’ and novices’ knowledge. In K.A. Ericsson,
N.Charness, P.J. Feltovich, R.R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert
performance (pp.167-184). New York, NY: Cambridge
university press.
Barnett, S.M. & Koslowski, B. (2002). Adaptive expertise:
Effects of type of experience and the level of theoretical
understanding it generates. Thinking and Reasoning, 8,
237-267.
Dorner, D., & Scholkopf, J. (1991). Controlling complex
systems; or, expertise as “grandmother’s know-how”. In
K.A. Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.), Towards a general
theory of expertise: Prospects and limits. New York, NY:
Cambridge university press

1270

Eylon, B.S., & Reif, F. (1984). Effects of knowledge
organization on task performance. Cognition and
Instruction, 1, 5-44.
Glaser, R., & Chi, M.T.H. (1988). Overview. In M.T.H.
Chi, R. Glaser & M.J. Farr (Eds.), The nature of expertise.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E., & Pfeffer, M.G. (2004). Comparing
expert and novice understanding of a complex system
from the perspective of structures, behaviors, and
function. Cognitive Science, 28, 127-138.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E., Marathe, S. & Liu, L. (in press). Fish
swim, rocks sit, and lungs breathe: Expert-novice
understanding of complex systems. Journal of the
Learning Sciences.
Lynch, E.B., Coley, J.D., & Medin, D.L. (2000). Tall is
typical: Central tendency, ideal dimensions and graded
category structure among tree experts and novices.
Memory and Cognition, 28, 41-50.
Medin, D.L., Ross, N.O., Atran, S., Cox, D., Coley, J.D.,
Proffitt, J.B. & Blok, S. (2006) Folkbiology of freshwater
fish. Cognition, 99, 237-273.
Patel, V.L. & Groen, G. J. (1991). The general and specific
nature of medical expertise: a critical look. In K.A.
Ericsson & J. Smith (Eds.), Towards a general theory of
expertise: Prospects and limits. New York, NY:
Cambridge university press.
Profitt, J.B., Coley, J.D. & Medin, D.L. (2000). Expertise
and category-based induction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 4, 811-828.
Smith, M.U. (1990). Knowledge structures and the nature of
expertise in classical genetics. Cognition and Instruction,
7, 287-302.
Wineburg, S. (1998). Reading Abraham Lincoln: An expert/
expert study in the interpretation of historical texts.
Cognitive Science, 22, 319-346.

