UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Study on Creativity in Comparison with Linguistic Interpretation Process

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5v48p452

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Morita, Junya
Nagai, Yukari
Taura, Toshiharu
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Study on Creativity in Comparison with Linguistic Interpretation Process
Junya Morita,1 Yukari Nagai,1 Toshiharu Taura,1,2 and Tomohiko Takeuchi1
{j-morita,ynagai,t-taura,t-takeuchi}@jaist.ac.jp
1 School

of Knowledge Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa, Japan
2
Graduate School of Engineering, Kobe University.
1-1 Rokkodai, Nada-ku, Kobe, Japan

Abstract
We investigated the process of design creativity by examining
the characteristics of thinking during design activity involving
concept synthesis. In our experiments, subjects were asked
to perform two tasks - to interpret novel noun-noun combinations and to create a design based on novel noun-noun combinations. We analyzed and compared the thinking used in each
task using a method reported in cognitive linguistics literature,
which assigns the interpretation of novel noun-noun combinations to one of three types: concept abstraction, blending, and
thematic relation. We classified the design processes used by
our subjects to create design concepts according to these three
types and evaluated the creativity of the designs along two dimensions, practicality and originality. Our results showed a
significant difference in the amount of blending involved in interpretation and design creation. The proportion of blending
during the design task was higher than that during interpretation, and the creativity of design results produced using blending was higher than that based on other types. Since concept
blending is an effective way of creating a new idea, we suggest
that blending is an important characteristic of the process of
creativity.
Keywords: Concept combination; design creation; creative
thinking.

Introduction
Many studies have been conducted to analyze the characteristics of the design thought process from the viewpoint
of creativity. As a result, it has been found that conceptsynthesizing processes, such as analogical reasoning or the
blending or integration of two different concepts, are keys to
creative thinking. Analogical reasoning and concept abstraction are known to play very important roles in creative design
(Gero & Maher, 1991; Goldschmidt, 2001). For example, the
“swan chair” is a famous example of a design imaged by using concept abstraction. Its form resembles a swan, and users
understand its message of “this chair is soft and elegant, like
a swan”.
From the viewpoint of mental cognition in the domain of
cognitive science, Finke, Ward, and Smith (1992) described
conceptual synthesis as an efficient means of developing creative insights into new inventions, and they carried out experiments on creation as mental products generated by imagery synthesis. On the other hand, in studies of cognitive linguistics, Fauconnier (1994) focused on the process
of construction of meaning in ordinary discourse. He analyzed how conceptual integration creates mental products
and how to deploy systems of mapping and blending between
mental spaces. From the viewpoint of mental space theory,

he showed that conceptual integration operates on two input mental spaces to yield a third space, which is called the
“blend”. This blended space inherits partial structures from
each input space and has emergent structures of its own. Both
mental products-imagery and discourse-show emergent features and have stimulated creativity. Fauconnier and Turner
(2002) suggested that a watch is designed by conceptual
blending.
Contrary to the above studies, which indicate the importance of creativity in design, other research has pointed out
that creative interpretation occurs in the context of the everyday understanding of language, implying that it is a ubiquitous feature in human cognition (Wisniewski, 1996; Costello
& Keane, 2000). Given these studies, the following questions
arise: Does design have features distinct from those of ordinal human cognition? If so, what is the nature of design
creativity? In this paper, we try to address these questions.
We investigated these topics by comparing two different
thinking patterns: those used to interpret novel noun-noun
combinations and those used to create a design from such
noun combinations. People use and interpret combination
terms (a type of noun phrase) in daily conversation without
requiring special knowledge or professional education. For
example, we can easily interpret the meaning of terms such
as road sign, dog sled, and wheel chair. The way in which
people interpret novel noun-noun combinations has been investigated in the field of cognitive linguistics. Wisniewski
(1996) showed that people combine concepts by using three
basic strategies. We can also create a new concept by taking a cue from a combination term. For example, a new type
of chair shaped like a swan could be designed by taking a
cue from the words “swan chair”. In this design process, two
concepts are synthesized to generate a new concept. We have
built on these studies through experimental research focused
on the design creation process to determine both the types of
concepts that are related to higher creativity and the characteristics of the process of concept synthesis. These studies
showed that: (1) higher creativity is more likely when two
concepts are highly dissimilar than when they are relatively
similar (Taura, Nagai, & Tanaka, 2005); (2) creativity and
the extension of the designer’s idea space are strongly correlated (Harakawa, Nagai, & Taura, 2005); (3) the presence
of a thematic relationship between two concepts during the
design process leads to greater creativity (Harakawa et al.,
2005); and (4) compounding of the synthesis of two concepts

1319

that individually have many associated concepts leads to a
creative design concept whose imagined actions and scenes
are related to the originality of the design concept (Nagai &
Taura, 2006).
Thus, combination terms are used in the creation of design concepts as well as in interpretive behavior. Consistently
with reports from linguistic research, we show that there are
three kinds of design thinking patterns in concept synthesis.
We first describe the correspondence between different types
of linguistic interpretation process and different types of creative design process through concept synthesis. We then look
at differences in the proportionate use of various thinking patterns to interpret noun phrases and create designs on the basis
of noun phrases, and we analyze which patterns of thinking
lead to the highest levels of creativity.

jects typically gave vague meanings (e.g., “a type of plastic”
for fish plastic, “a kind of snake” for clock snake), or used an
alternative adjective or the verb form of a constituent (e.g., “a
glass used as a pan” for pan glass; “a small paperback book”
for pony book).
Wisniewski’s Classification Results The interpretations
obtained from Wisniewski’s experiment were classified as
follows: 53% were relation linking, 41% were property mapping, and 1% was hybrid. That is, most of the participants
in Wisniewski’s experiment used relation linking or property
mapping to interpret noun phrases; only a few interpretations
were classified as hybrid.

Types of Design Creation
We have studied the processes through which a new concept
is created by synthesizing two concepts, and found that three
types of synthesizing processes are used in design (Nagai &
Taura, 2006).

Aims
We conducted an experiment aimed at revealing the nature of
creativity in the process of design creation and the differences
in the thinking patterns of design creation compared to those
of ordinal language interpretation. Our experimental method
followed that used in studies in the field of cognitive linguistics, in which novel noun-noun combinations (e.g., clock
chair, stone skunk) are used. In our experiment, each subject
performed two tasks. In the first task, they were required to
interpret combinations, and in the second, they were required
to create a design concept from a combination. In addition,
we clarified the relationships between the characteristic patterns of thinking during design and creativity processes by
evaluating the creativity of the design results along two dimensions, practicality and originality (Finke et al., 1992).

Concept abstraction This process is based on commonalities of two concepts. For example, “white tomato” for snow
tomato, a substance that is a snow-like tomato. This process is
a method of concept creation based on transferring the characteristics of an existing concept to a new concept.
Concept blending Concept blending is process that blends
two basic concepts at the abstract level and produces a new
concept that inherits the abstract features of the two base concepts, but the concrete features of neither; for example, “powder ketchup” for snow tomato, a substance that could be used
to add a tomato flavor to food, like powder snow.
Concept integration (Thematic Relation) Concept integration is process that combines two basic concepts from the
viewpoint of a thematic scene and generates a new concept.
For example, “non-drying refrigerator” for snow tomato, a
new concept formed from a scene “a tomato is stored in
snow.”
It is commonly acknowledged that the process of concept
abstraction plays an important role in creative design. In fact,
it is frequently used in real-world design processes. However,
designs produced by concept abstraction are limited in terms
of the originality of ideas because concept abstraction cannot
extend beyond the domain of a given concept. In contrast,
the process of concept blending can create a truly new concept because the concepts produced by this process do not
belong in the domain of the given concepts. Therefore, concept blending seems more suited to creative design thinking
than concept abstraction.

Types of Linguistic Interpretation
Wisniewski (1996) conducted experiments in which participants interpreted a novel noun-noun phrase. Interpretations
obtained from the experiments were categorized into three
types:
Property mapping An interpretation was classified as
property mapping if one or more properties of a constituent
were asserted for the referent of the combination, as in “grey
clay” for elephant clay, “thin broom” for pencil broom, and
“pony with stripes” for tiger pony.
Hybrid An interpretation was classified as a hybrid if it involved combinations of the two objects or of entities involving both of the objects, as in “a very large heavy creature sharing properties of both an elephant and a moose” for moose
elephant, or “a combination ladder/broom” for ladder broom.
Relation linking An interpretation was classified as relation linking if it involved a relation between two objects, as in
“box that holds ladders” for ladder box, “squirrel that chases
cars” for car squirrel, and “robin that eats snakes” for snake
robin.
An interpretation was classified as “other” if it did not fit
into one of the three categories. For these interpretations, sub-

Correspondence between Types of Linguistic
Interpretation and Design Creation Using Concept
Synthesis

1320

The patterns of linguistic interpretation and those of design
creation involved in concept synthesis correspond to each
other. Transfer is involved in both property mapping and con-

cept abstraction. Hybrid and concept blending involve the
same process that creates a new concept by blending the features of two concepts. Relation linking and concept integration share the process that links the two concepts from the
viewpoint of a thematic relation.

Table 1: Lists of combinations.

Methods

artifact-animal
car skunk
pan elephant
chair deer
vase frog
box deer

The experiment required subjects to perform two tasks: to
interpret the meaning of novel noun-noun phrases and to design a new concept with reference to those phrases. The types
of thinking used for each task were analyzed and the results
compared. The creativity of the design results was also evaluated.

Tasks

substance-animal
glass skunk
clay elephant
stone squirrel
chocolate fish
chocolate squirrel

The tasks were presented in a booklet containing question and
answer forms. A book was given to each subject.

artifact-substance
box plastic
book glass
car chocolate
broom clay
clock chocolate

Interpretation Task The interpretation task required each
subject to interpret 15 phrases. The subjects wrote down a
description of the most natural meaning for each novel phrase
on the answer form. The answer form for this task had one
line for each noun phrase.
Design Task In the design task, the subjects designed a new
concept from each of three noun phrases and described the
concept on the answer form. The answer form for this task
had five lines with a free drawing space for each noun phrase.

List 1
animal-artifact
snake broom
frog box
sparrow vase
fish clock
deer box
List 2
animal-animal
skunk frog
deer elephant
sparrow squirrel
fish elephant
fish frog
List 3
animal-substance
skunk chocolate
snake plastic
snake clay
pony stone
squirrel chocolate

substance-artifact
stone pencil
glass pencil
clay chair
glass clock
stone vase
artifact-artifact
chair box
pan ladder
car broom
book vase
ladder pan
substance-animal
plastic sparrow
stone pony
stone deer
plastic pony
glass elephant

constructed by randomly pairing each artifact with two animals, such that each of the 10 animal terms appeared twice
as a head noun. The animal-artifact terms were formed by
reversing these combinations.

Task Booklets
The task booklets were prepared with reference to Wisniewski’s research using the following procedure.
Preparing the Noun-Noun Phrases Three categories of
nouns were used to construct combinations: substance terms,
artifact-count terms, and animal-count terms. Pairing these
categories yields nine combination types. Eight of these
types were used in the study; substance-substance types were
excluded. To construct examples of the eight combination
types, we arbitrarily selected 5 substance terms, 10 artifactcount terms, and 10 animal-count terms.
We constructed 160 noun-noun combinations consisting
of 20 examples of each of the eight types. They were derived in the following manner. Substance-artifact pairs were
constructed by randomly pairing each of the five substance
terms with four artifacts, so that each of the 10 artifacts appeared twice in the head noun position. Substance-animal
terms were constructed in a similar manner. The animalsubstance and artifact-substance terms were made by reversing these combinations. The artifact-artifact pairs were constructed by randomly dividing the artifacts into two lists of
five artifacts and pairing each noun from the first list with
two from the second list, such that each artifact in the second list appeared twice as a head noun. These combinations
were then reversed, so that each artifact in the first list then
appeared twice as a head noun. Animal-animal terms were
constructed in a similar manner. Artifact-animal terms were

Making the Booklets We reduced the number of combinations to 45 because the number of subjects was less than
the number Wisniewski used in his experiment. The combinations were divided into three lists. Table 1 shows details
of the lists of combinations. Each booklet consisted of 12
pages: six pages for the interpretation task, four pages for the
design task (a cover sheet described each task), and two blank
pages between the interpretation and design tasks. The noun
phrases for the interpretation task consisted of a set of phrases
from one of the three lists. Those for the design task were
randomly picked from the list used for the interpretation task
in an effort to avoid any overlap in the type of combination;
thus, if the interpretation task was composed using a set of
phrases from list 1, the phrases for the design task consisted
of three phrases from list 1.

1321

To control for order effects in carrying out the tasks, we
divided the subjects into two groups, A and B. Subjects in
group A performed the interpretation task then the design task
in that order, while subjects in group B performed them in
the reverse order. To divide the subjects into two groups, we
labeled each booklet with A-1 to 3 or B-1 to 3 according to
the task order with the number in each label corresponding to
the number of the list used to make the booklet.

Explanatory Text on the Cover The explanatory text
typed on the cover sheet for both tasks is as follows.
• Interpretation task
Below, you will read some noun phrases. Noun phrases
that you have probably heard before include “road sign”,
“car window”, and “mouse pad”. Many of the phrases you
will see in this booklet are probably novel to you - you may
never have heard them before. Examples of possible novel
noun phrases are “factory fish”, “bottle frog”, “earthquake
school”, and so on.
Your task is to write down a description of the most likely
meaning of each novel phrase. Pretend that you have just
heard the phrase during a conversation. What meaning of
the phrase would seem most natural to you?
The cover sheet for the interpretation task asked subjects
to “Write down a description of the most natural meaning
of each novel combination”, to encourage the subjects to
approximate their usual cognitive behavior.

The subjects were told various details about the task but
were not told what the actual task was. Each subject performed the task with reference to the explanatory text on
the cover sheet for the task.
3. Performance of first task (30 minutes)
Group A subjects did the interpretation task and group B
subjects did the design task.
4. Order to stop working on first task and verbal explanation
of second task (5 minutes)
The subjects were again told details about the task but not
what the actual task was. Each subject carried out the task
with reference to the explanatory text on the cover sheet for
the task.
5. Performance of second-half task (30 minutes)
Group A subjects did the design task and group B subjects
did the interpretation task.

Method of analysis
Classification of thinking pattern

• Design task
Below, you will read some noun phrases. Many of
the phrases are probably novel to you - you may never
have heard them before. Examples of possible novel
noun phrases are “factory fish”, “bottle frog”, “earthquake
school”, and so on. Your task is to design a new concept
with reference to each novel phrase. For instance, you
might design a new vehicle, furniture, or stationery concept.
The answer form is divided into two parts. You can use the
upper part to draw figures or sketches, and the lower part to
write an explanation of the design concept. For example,
what is your design, what function does it have, when is it
used, and why is it used?
The design idea will be evaluated from the viewpoint of
creativity (practicality and originality). Please make an effort to think as creatively as possible. The design idea will
not be evaluated only from the sketch. Please write an explanation of the design concept.

We set the classification standards with reference to Wisniewski’s classification. Table 2 shows the classification standards and examples. The thinking used in each task was classified according to the standards and compared.
In this experiment, there were some answers to which we
could not directly apply Wisniewski’s classification. Such answers were classified by the following standards for exceptions:

Subjects

• Some design ideas did not directly indicate either of the
two concepts presented. For example, one participant suggested “a vacuum cleaner shaped like a snake” for snake
broom). It can be considered that these ideas were created
by associating a new concept with the ones presented. Such
ideas were classified according to the relation between the
new concept and the presented concepts (the above example was classified as an “property mapping”). When the
features of a new concept associated with the one presented
disagreed with the conventional features of that concept,
the idea was classified as “blending”. For example, “a living vacuum cleaner that acts like a snake” for snake broom.
A ‘living vacuum cleaner’ differs markedly from existing
vacuum cleaners. Therefore, it was considered that it was
neither a snake nor a vacuum cleaner.

The subjects were 37 undergraduate students with no formal
experience in design. There were 18 subjects in group A and
19 in group B.

Procedure

• Some answers were classified with reference to the sketch
drawn by the subject. For example, an answer with a
sketch of a broom could obviously be considered to include
“broom” even if “broom” was not used in the written explanation.

The experiment was done in a group setting, and was structured as follows:
1. Booklet distribution (10 minutes)
The subjects were each given a booklet at random. They
were then divided into two groups depending on the label
on the booklet they received.

Creativity evaluation
The creativity of the design results was evaluated from the
viewpoint of practicality (whether the idea seemed possible
to achieve and was feasible) and originality (whether the idea

2. Verbal explanation of task to be done in first half of experiment (5 minutes)
1322

Classification
Property mapping

Blending

Thematic relation

Other

Table 2: Classification standards and examples.
Classification standard and example
This category corresponds to “property mapping”. Properties of one noun are mapped onto the
other noun. One can say that A is like B (absolutely B, and a new kind of B) or B is like A.
(Example from an interpretation task: “a squirrel that doesn’t move at all” for stone squirrel )
(Example from a design task: “A broom with a handle curved like a snake. It is useful for
cleaning inner spaces.” for snake broom)
This category corresponds to “hybrid”. Something can have the properties of both A and B yet
be neither A nor B. One can say it is both A and B.
(Example from an interpretation task: “a creature sharing properties of both a deer and an elephant” for deer elephant)
(Example from a design task: “It is a computer virus that hardens various applications into stone
(that is, it causes various applications to crash). It transmits important information in the computer to the hacker like a squirrel taking an acorn home to its nest” for stone squirrel)
This category corresponds to “relation linking”. The two nouns are combined from the viewpoint
of a thematic scene. (Example from an interpretation task: “cage for deer” for deer box)
(Example from a design task: “It is a defense system shaped like a skunk to prevent car break-ins.
It is set up in an obvious place within the car. It puts a criminal out of action by emitting a gas
that irritates the eyes and nose.” for skunk car)
Cases that do not fit into any of the other three categories.
(Example from an interpretation task: “shooting star” for stone pony)
(Example from a design task: “a machine that display a vision of fishes” for fish elephant)

Property
Analogy
mapping
Interpretation task

4

Design task

3

Interpretation task

2

Design task

1

Blending

Thematic relation

Other

Group A

Group B

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Proportion

Figure 1: Results of classification.

was innovative and novel) based on Finke et al. (1992)’s creativity evaluation. Twenty raters evaluated the creativity of all
ideas (n= 109) on a four-point scale (1: low - 4: high). The
rating scores were averaged for each idea. Ideas with lower
average scores for practicality than the overall average scores
for practicality were excluded from the following analysis.
For the remaining ideas, average scores for originality were
considered as the measure of creativity.

Results
Comparison of interpretation and design task
Figure 1 shows the proportion of property mapping, blending, thematic relation, and other for each task for group A
and group B. In the interpretation task, there was a high proportion of property mapping and thematic relation, and the

proportion of blending was low for both groups. This is consistent with the results of Wisniewski’s experiments.
In the design task, the proportion of property mapping was
lower, and the proportion of blending was higher than for
the interpretation task for each group. The proportion of thematic relation was higher than that for the interpretation task
for group A, but not for group B. A chi-square test showed
that there was a significant difference between the results of
the interpretation and design tasks for each group: Group A,
χ2 (3) = 12.269, p < .01; Group B, χ2 (3) = 35.734, p < .01.
A significant difference was found in blending for group A,
and significant differences for property mapping and blending were found for group B using residual analysis (Ryan’s
method).
These results show that there were differences between the
two groups in the proportion of the thinking patterns applied,
even though the order effect of each task was controlled.

Result of creativity evaluation
The consistency between raters was calculated using
Kendall’s coefficient of concordance. For both practicality
and originality, significant concordances were obtained: practicality, W = 0.176, χ2 (19, 108) = 380.889, p < .01; originality, W = 0.242, χ2 (19, 108) = 521.556, and p < .01.
Figure 2 shows the average scores for creativity for each
thinking pattern. Consistent with our hypothesis, “blending”
seemed to produce the highest creativity. To verify this, we
conducted an analysis of variance, which showed significant
differences between the creativity assessed for each pattern
of thinking: F(3, 49) = 3.71, p < .05. Multiple comparisons
(LSD) showed a significant difference between “blending”

1323

4

ture of ideas evaluated as being more creative and appears
to be a useful thinking pattern in creating a novel idea. For
this reason, we consider that blending is a requirement of the
creative design process.

3.5
3

Creativity

2.5

Conclusion

2

To understand the nature of creativity during the process of
design, we attempted to clarify the differences between the
characteristic thinking used in performing ordinary tasks and
that used in design creation. Our aim was to identify the characteristics of design thinking and find key factors that could
be used to develop a design-support methodology. The results
from our experiments suggest that the characteristic thinking
used in ordinary interpretation is based on “property mapping” and “thematic relation”, but the characteristic thinking
used in the design process is based on “blending”. When the
creativity of design concepts was evaluated, thinking categorized as “blending” produced the highest ratings for creativity. Concept blending is an effective way of creating a novel
idea, and novelty is considered important in creativity. Our
results indicate that the nature of creativity in the process of
design creation is based on “blending”. We believe this work
will lead to more specific methods to support the creative design process.

1.5
1
0.5
0
Property
Analogy Blending Thematic
mapping
relation

Other

Figure 2: Result of creativity evaluation. The error bar shows
the standard error of the mean.

and the other three patterns (“property mapping”, “thematic
relation”, “other”). There were no significant differences between “property mapping”, “thematic relation”, and “other”.

Discussion
Our experiments on the interpretation of combination terms
followed those of Wisniewski (1996). Our results from the
interpretation task were consistent with his, supporting the
belief that ordinary cognitive behaviors (e.g., language interpretation) are based on property mapping or thematic relation. The proportion of blending used in the design task
was significantly higher than that in the interpretation task
for both groups, suggesting that the characteristics of design
behavior are based on blending. This result supports the belief that blending is more pro-design thinking than “property
mapping”, as mentioned in the ealier section.
When they are in the act of designing something, people
have to think about various aspects that are not included in
the interpretation of language (e.g., shape and function). In
the design task, conceiving a design idea also requires a degree of originality. We believe that the need to consider more
creative concepts (that is, newer concepts) results in the application of blending. The differences between groups A and
B regarding the proportionate use of each thinking pattern
might have been due to the order effect of the tasks, or the
purpose of the task might not have been explained to the subjects clearly enough.
While there was some variation, every rater seemed to
evaluate the ideas according to a consistent policy; that is,
whether or not the design idea was novel compared with an
existing concept. For example, there were two ideas for car
chocolate: “Chocolate that is eaten in a car to relax and reduce tiredness while driving”, and “Chocolate that can erase
alcohol eaten in a car to prevent drunken driving”. The former idea incorporates the existing features of chocolate, but
the latter does not. Therefore, the latter was rated higher (especially on originality) than the former. Blending was a fea-

References
Costello, E. J., & Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient creativity: Constraint-guided conceptual combination. Cognitive
Science, 24, 299–349.
Fauconnier, G. (1994). Mental spaces. UK: Cambridge University Press.
Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002). The way we think conceptual blending and the mind’s hidden complexities.
NY: Basic Book.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
cognition: Theory, research, and applications. Cambridge:
The MIT Press.
Gero, J. S., & Maher, M. L. (1991). Mutation and analogy
to support creativity in computer-aided design. In Caad
futures (pp. 241–249). ETH.
Goldschmidt, G. (2001). Visual analogy. In Cognition in
design education (p. 199-219). UK: Elsevier.
Harakawa, J., Nagai, Y., & Taura, T. (2005). Study on conceptual synthesis in design creation - role of thematic relation in creativity. In Proceedings of the first international
design congress.
Nagai, Y., & Taura, T. (2006). Formal description of conceptsynthesizing process for creative design. In Proceedings of
second international conference on design computing and
cognition (pp. 443–460).
Taura, T., Nagai, Y., & Tanaka, S. (2005). Design space
blending. In Proceedings of international conference on
engineering design - ’05.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1996). Construal and similarity in conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and Language, 35,
434–453.

1324

