UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Unified Framework for Perception in Autonomous Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2dx8x3q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Lopez, Ignacio
Sanz, Ricardo
Bermejo, Julita

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Unified Framework for Perception in Autonomous Systems
Ignacio López (ilopez@etsii.upm.es)
Ricardo Sanz (ricardo.sanz@upm.es)
Julita Bermejo (jbermejo@etsii.upm.es)
Autonomous Systems Laboratory (ASLab),
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM).
José Gutiérrez Abascal, 2. Madrid 28006 Spain
Abstract
This paper presents the top level goals and perception concepts of the ASys Framework. This is an unified framework
for cognitive, autonomous systems to be used both in the analysis of natural phenomena and in the synthesis of artificial autonomous systems. Perception in ASys is conceived within
an holonic, systemic concept, not as an isolated phenomenon.
This general perspective allows: (1) Integrating the main approaches to perception developed so far (a brief comparative
analysis is offered). (2) A coherent framework for system analysis and design.
Keywords: Perception; cognition; embodied cognition; autonomous systems; cognitive systems; engineering.

Introduction: Motivation and Context
In spite of the advances in artificial systems, many tasks are
still out of their capacities. Advanced context recognition,
decision-making, high degrees of autonomous operation (in
uncontrolled environments) and efficient social interaction
are examples of them. They represent major drives for the
research in advanced cognitive systems and affective computing (Cañamero & et al., 2004; Picard, 1998). Bioinspired
architectures, algorithms and processes were thought to allow designing more efficient, intelligent and dependable artificial systems. However, it is not the easy path that we once
thought.
On one side, the substrates of natural and artificial systems
present important differences of structural nature. Their properties are so diverse that overcoming the disparity of their
structural constraints is extremely difficult. As a result, the
type of processes that can be efficiently implemented in artificial substrates is radically different from natural ones. On the
other side, biological systems are not known well enough yet.
Isolated, low-level phenomena have been traced and modelled on one end, and psychological explanations for highlevel phenomena have been built on the other. But there does
not exist a common, unique, integrated theory explaining all.
In our view, the solution to the problem does not rely on
just biomimetic approaches or on classical engineering patterns of design. An effort in building a general theory which
integrates concepts, relations and principles must be made.
A sufficient level of generality would allow analyzing and
conceptualizing the natural and the artificial upon a common
background. This is what we call the ASys approach. In this
way bioinspiration would be possible at a conceptual level, in
spite of implementational differences at lower ones.
Obviously the abstraction back-step from reality that this
approach imposes will render a theory that may be missing
1229

some details of relevance in current analyses of autonomy and
perception. However we believe that these details will be regained, placed in their proper place and better grounded on
further elaborations of the theory for specific domains.
The approach to perception exposed here forms part of
ASys and must be necessarily understood within the goals,
resources, operation and constraints of a concrete observer
system —a perceptor. An observer system may carry out multiple processes concurrently, share resources among them,
satisfy real–time constraints, etc. We, animals, do that all
the time, and many machines do so as well. Only some of
all those processes will be devoted to perception. But they
should correspond to the goals and capacities of the system.
In fact, they should be a part of them.
The ASys perceptual framework is a general, unifying approach, within which other perception theories may be analysed. It starts from a formal notion of system, inherited from
the Theory of General Systems (Klir, 1969). Hopefully, it
will create a common theoretical background for natural and
artificial systems upon which new bio-inspired engineering
solutions can be developed.

Studies of Perception
The topic of perception has been studied from uncountable
perspectives. Some explain aspects regarding specific phenomena, and some try to provide a global vision. Let us develop a brief overview. We could divide the studies of perception in three main categories.
Many lines of research, both in natural and artificial perception, focus on low-level aspects, for example the biological structure of sensors and their electrochemical behaviour
or research on signal processing. Examples of ongoing work
in this trend are Bengtsson and Ullén (2006) and Koelsch and
Siebel (2005), which assess recognition of different aspects
of auditory signals and neural correlates. Farah (2000) offers
an overview of neural correlates across the different low and
medium level perception processes.
A second category of studies would concentrate on the process of perceiving actual objects in the environment. Examples of this are Barth, La Mont, Lipton, and Spelke (2005),
(Mandler, 2004), (Smith, Johnson, & Spelke, 2003) which
assess object formation. Object perception is related to many
other aspects of the observer system. Bodner and Lindsay
(2003), Kensinger, Garoff-Eaton, and Schacter (2007) and
Radvansky and Copeland (2006) explore memory retrieval in

relation with perceptual aspects.
A third category of studies of perception would aim at
global aspects of the process, focusing on three main topics:
1) The role of perception within the observer system (natural
or artificial); 2) Causes for perceptual phenomena. Systemic
explanations accounting perception and also for illusions,
hallucinations, particular aspects of perception (perception of
movement, volumes, etc.) and 3) Cognitive (neuro–) science:
Relation of concepts, concept formation and concept recognition with neurophysiological substrate.
We could summarize two fundamental perspectives within
this category. First, the well-known ecological theory, also
called direct perception, whose formulation can be found in
Gibson (1966) and Gibson (1987). The main idea is that the
senses are adapted to the needs of the system up to such a
degree that they convey meaning directly, without intermediate deliberation or inferential process. The observer system would therefore perceive affordances in its environment;
in other words, what the environment can afford the system:
support, nourishment, etc.
Many approaches, however, adopt the opposite view, usually referred to as mediated perception, indirect perception,
or the computational approach. These have their root in
Helmholtz’s initial formulation of the problem (Helmholtz,
2005), who assumed that perception was an inferential process to find the most probable explanation for the readings of
the sensors. A conceptual overview and discussion related to
this trend can be found in Rock (1985) and Rock (1997). As a
matter of fact, current approaches allow certain degree of “directedness” within an overall inferential process (Pylyshyn,
1999; Shanahan, 2005).

Figure 1: Two phases of the perceptual process.

Perceptual Stance of the ASys Framework

specific form and body. In other words, as a particular instantiation of the actual referents. It is this instantiation which
will be represented by perception as a perceived object.
The perceptive process might be implicit or explicitly oriented towards its referents. If the process manipulates symbolic representations of its referents, the orientation will be
explicit; otherwise it will be implicit.
Singularities are patterns in the values of the proximal
stimulation. This stands for any particular feature which characterizes it. It is a generalization of other similar concepts
found in the literature, used with specific meanings in each
context; feature and cue are the most common in both natural
and artificial systems (Duda, Hart, & Stork, 2001), (Levine,
2000), (Schifmann, 2001), (Selfridge, 1959), (Ullman, 1996).
These singularities are attributed by DP to a certain configuration of the objects in the environment. It is this configuration which is represented into the perceived object.
This attribution consists in actually assigning an equivalence between a state of the referent and the state of the object
in the environment. As we just mentioned, a perceived object
is therefore a representation of a particular state of a referent which is recognized in the environment: an instantiated
referent.

The main ideas of ASys regarding perception will be introduced in five points that are addressed in the following sections.

The Perceptive Process
Any perceptive process is based on three aspects: proximal
stimulation, singularities and objects. The process consists
in relating the three aspects. It is what is called perceiving or
perception. Globally, perception always follows a sequence
of two phases which will be called fundamental sequence,
represented schematically in Figure 1.
SP and DP represent the two phases of the fundamental sequence. They constitute the perceptive process that is directed
to recognizing certain entities in the environment, while ignoring others. These entities to which perception is referred
to, shall be called referents of the process.
As we were saying, referents are concepts in the system,
objects1 which perception will strive to find in the environment. They are conceptual and cannot be found as such in
the environment. If they actually exist, they will appear in a
1 Object

in the sense of idea, concept, conceptual entity.

1230

The context of perception
Perception depends on the system and its environment; it is
influenced by the rest of the processes in the system, and influences the rest of the system in two ways: through the potential explicit effect of the perceived objects —their meaning—, and by inducing changes in the system during the process (we shall call this implicit perception.)
It must be understood that a specific perceptive process
may be immerse in an extremely complex systemic context
of operation, which will impose constraints on perception:
multiple perceptive processes grounded in resources which
may be mutually dependent or shared, correspondence between perceptive processes, system behaviour, system structure, system goals and other, which will largely determine the
purpose, task, capacties and relevance of a specific perceptive
process in the system.

Cognitive relevance
This point only stresses the fact that perception is referred to
concepts which we have been called referents of the process:
ideas, abstract concepts, objects. These referents establish the
point of view of perception: what is interesting and what is
not. In other words, they establish the finality of the perceptive process.
The perceived objects which result from perception are
needed for solving problems, planning actions and monitoring the state of the system and the environment. They are the
link between the real world and the operation of the system.
Operations with referents and perceived objects2 are
needed to simulate hypothetical scenarios, to refine algorithms and processes and to enhance knowledge. They are
needed to create new referents which can in turn be perceived.

Perceived domain
A perceptive process perceives over a part of the universe
which we shall call perceptive environment. It includes the
outside of the observer system, system environment, as well
as —in the general case— parts of the system itself. In other
words, this means that perception can recognize referents
both outside and inside the system.3
Perceiving externally or internally to the system —or
both— is irrelevant as to the structure and nature of a perceptive process.
There may appear differences as to the grounding, level of
processing or other aspects specific to a process and a system. For example, processes which perceive inside biological
systems frequently operate upon richer proximal stimulation
(essentially in number and nature of inputs,) given the density
of nervous/chemical connections inside the system.

cessing.4 These are all examples of top-down interaction.
But sensory processing may also influence directed processing (bottom-up). For example, preconfiguring inference processes with heuristics as in Shanahan (2005), or indirectly
through the rest of the system as in the case of emotions.5
Both types of processing can interact and be mutually influenced throughout a perceptive process.

This Framework in the Scientific Context
The unified vision proposed here relies on a framework on
general autonomous systems which has not been described in
detail yet(López & Sanz, 2006). However, some implications
have been mentioned, such as the influence of system goals,
resource requirements and real-time constraints on perception. They are essential to understanding the context in which
perceptive processes take place in a system, whether natural
or artificial, and provide generality to this approach. In fact,
generality has been a strategy for unification.
It is possible to put other approaches to perception in the
context of this framework, and see how it can be particularized to each case. We can develop a short comparative discussion covering the main trends.
1. Abductive perception. Perhaps the formalization of perception which is closest —conceptually— to this work is
Shanahan (2005). The understanding of the phenomenon
is similar in many aspects:

Interaction between sensory and directed processing
In spite of being qualitatively different, sensory and directed
processing are not independent. This means that they are different parts of the same process, and therefore there exists a
strong relation between them. They can be equally subject to
the same operational and implementational constraints, apart
from answering to the same finality.
Apart from a conceptual relation between sensory and directed processing, there can also exist a mutual influence as
to their operation. Complex directed processing might eventually require specific sensory processing: re-sensing, for example. Inferential processes taking place during directed processing might eventually require scanning a region neighbouring the original focus. Simulation which might be taking place at the directed phase may depend on sensory pro-

• The understanding of the perceptive process and the fundamental sequence is basically shared, allowing a certain degree of proximal information processing and a
phase of cognitive information processing.
• The actual role of singularities is also identified not necessarily as a description of the external world, but of the
state of the sensors (sensory system here.) This implies
a certain cognitive equivalence between system concepts
and the outside world, to be established by the inferential
process (cognitive information processing.)
• It also assumes that perception implies both a bottom-up
and a top-down information flow, from stages within the
cognitive information processing phase to the proximal
information processing phase and vice-versa.
There are, however, some points of difference:
• This work is understood within a framework of general
autonomous systems, which establishes the operational
context in which perceptive processes exist: multiple
processes, goals, finality, real-time etc.
Although Shanahan (2005) refers to sensory fusion,
which implies multiple perceptive processes, this is only
4 The field of active perception (Noë, 2004; Hurley, 2001) is actually based on this. There is evidence that sensorimotor areas of the
brain have cognitive relevance. For a case in musical perception see
Koelsch and Siebel (2005).
5 For a background on emotions see Damasio (2000), H. Van
Dyke Parunak, Bisson, Brueckner, Matthews, and Sauter (2006),
Spinola de Freitas, Gudwin, and Queiroz (2005).

2 Examples

of these operations are: generalization, analogy, association and particularization of concepts.
3 Perception inside the system gives rise to proprioception and
metaperception (among many other phenomena.) Note that these
types of perception are in close connection with the principles of the
perceptual symbol theory (Barsalou, 1999).

1231

a particular case, which leaves systemic aspects uncovered: relation of perception with core and efferent processes, functional decomposition, directiveness, etc.
• Top-down information flow is assessed only in the particular case of ‘expectation’. The term is understood as
‘prediction’, and it is described as a heuristic mechanism
included in the inference carried out in the cognitive information processing phase. According to ASys, however, there exist multiple mechanisms of top-down flow.
Implicit perception, and re–sensing for example.
The context of general autonomous systems also allows
the identification of other kinds of factors influencing the
directed process, apart from problem–solving oriented
heuristics: real-time constraints, resource constraints,
coordination constraints, etc., and other factors through
the interaction with the rest of the processes in the system.

This is the reason why perception is direct. It means that
affordances are perceived exclusively by proximal processing. In terms of the present work, this equals to saying
that the stage of cognitive information processing proposed
here has no bearing in perception. We shall say that cognitive information processing is the identity, i.e. that it yields
an identical result to its input. Direct perception is thus
represented in case (a) of figure 3.

Figure 3: Fundamental Sequence of Direct Perception and
Sense Data.

The present work can be considered to follow the major
ideas of abductive perception. The similarities with Shanahan (2005) and with notions and views in other works
(Rock, 1985, 1997) are clear. However, it is formulated
from a wider context including systemic aspects. This allows realizing their actual influence and relevance on the
process and achieving a higher degree of generality.

We might observe that this is equal to saying that direct
perception occurs on —at least— two particular conditions
with respect to the general case presented in this paper:

2. Direct perception. Direct perception assumes that meaning results directly from the senses. This is supported in
specific contexts by evidence in the corresponding references, mentioned above. However, we conclude that (1) it
explains specific aspects of perception but lacks generality (2) in accordance with this, its scope can be determined
in terms of the ASys theory. We shall now attempt this in
order to comment further.
A first approach to representing direct perception in the
terms of the ASys framework is shown in figure 2. Our
notion of referent is implicit in direct perception. However, it coincides with the observer system.6 It can be observed that, according to ecological perception, the perceptive process consists of a unique phase from proximal stimulation to the perception of affordances: surfaces as potential support, substances as nutrition, etc. (Gibson, 1987).

Figure 2: Direct Perception in Terms of this Work.
According to direct perception, the sensory systems of animals are intrinsically adapted to perceiving affordances.
6 Note

that: (1) The system perceives the affordances of the environment. (2) “[Affordances] have to be measured relative to the
animal” (Gibson, 1987). In conclusion: the animal —i.e.: observer
system— is the referent of the perceptive process.

1232

• Cognitive information processing is a unit process. In
other words: the represented referent equals the singularities processed by the perceptor.
• The set of singularities provided by proximal information processing are actually meaningful as to what the
environment actually affords. This implies that the resources involved are adapted and configured to that purpose: sensory system, etc.
In this light, we may raise the following points:
1. A unit cognitive information processing phase implies
that the proximal information processing phase necessarily has to be adapted to the process referents. In other
words, the sensory system must be specific to the referents: the resources on which it is embodied and the
singularities it considers.
The range of perceivable referents is restricted by the
specificity of the sensory systems. If a sensory system
would be too specific, new or modified referents could
not be perceived.
2. Direct perception is largely based on physical attributes
of the environment. Perception of abstract referents
based on abstract or conceptual singularities is not accounted for.
The ecological approach would categorize this kind
of processing as second-hand or conventional (Gibson,
1965). However, it is clear that first-hand and secondhand processing are related and mutually influenced.
Also, that second-hand processing has effects in terms
of physiological response and activation of brain areas which in many cases are undistinguishable from
first-hand processing.7 The relation between first- and
second-hand processing is not accounted for.
7 This

has actually led to research in active perception, already

3. Affordances as defined in the ecological approach (Gibson, 1966, 1987) are referred to aspects such as support and nurishment, which answer finally to system survival. In our vision (López & Sanz, 2006), this would be
regarded as a long-term objective of the system.
However: (1) a system, in the general case, may have
more long-term objectives apart from survival. (2) Survival may not necessarily be an objective in all systems,
especially in artificial ones.
4. Long-term objectives are frequently realized by a hierarchy of shorter term ones which might differ significantly from them.8 This structure is adapted to shorter
time-scopes and levels of abstraction, according to the
instantaneous requirements imposed by the environment
and the capacities of the system. Therefore, the higher
the degree of autonomy of the system, the lower the degree of specificity of the system should be, to be able to
react to fast-changing, uncertain environments.
The lack of generality of direct perception leaves multiple
aspects uncovered, especially regarding complex, abstract
perceived objects.

Examples of singularities in biological systems are: spatial proximity/continuity/symmetry of values as in object recognition, proximity/continuity of values in time,
as in event-following, discontinuity of values in time, as
in attention shift, and frequency spectrum patterns as in
voice recognition. These examples show intrinsic differences of kind among the particular forms that singularities might adopt.
• This work conceives perception within the broader notion of system function (López & Sanz, 2006), which in
turn operates within a larger topology of system functions (functional structure). This implies that perception must answer to more criteria than optimality9 in
order to be consistent with the functional structure (coordination between processes, system goals, etc.). The
existence of these constraints explains why singularities might present such different natures, and why their
interpretation is not necessarily optimal in real perceptive systems. Optimality was a unique requirement for
Gestalt.
4. Marr Theory of Vision. The ASys Framework has multiple ideas in common with the Marr theory of vision:

The direct character it assumes in perception does not allow explaining coordination and other forms of mutual depencence between perceptive processes in complex systems, where multiple processes might be taking place concurrently.
However, it must be remarked, against purely symbolic
notions of perception, that in the general case a phase of
proximal information processing must be contemplated, although it will, in general, be dependent on the operation of
the rest of the system.

• Both are aware of the duality between representation and
processing. In ASys this duality resides in the role of the
referents in perception and in the role of implicit perception in the system.
Referents largely determine the point of view of a perceptive process —its objective—, and therefore partially
determine all the intermediate phases. Of course, referents also influence the perceived objects that perception
will produce, and consequently, the derived cognitive
processes. Implicit perception stands for the influence
of the process of perception over the rest of the system.
• Both distinguish a qualitative difference between the
analysis of the primal sketch (proximal stimulation in
ASys) and the rest of perceptive processes. However, in
our view, there is no qualitative, fundamental difference
between Marr’s 2 12 and 3-D models.
The 2 12 and 3-D models differ in their point of view. The
first is centered in the system and the second is neutral.
This work assumes that each perceptive process has its
own point of view. The main aspect that defines the point
of view is the referent of the process. Therefore, systemcentered perception or neutrally-objected perception answer mainly to different referents, but there is no qualitative or fundamental difference at this level of analysis.

3. Gestalt perception. The present framework has relation
with Gestalt perception in key aspects:
Singularities stand for relations between the values of sensory system quantities. Directed processing stands for establishing a relation between singularities and referents,
which in turn represent a relation between referents and
the environment. This framework is therefore based in the
concept of relation among parts, following the Gestalt inspiration.
• Gestalt assumed that perception was concentrated on the
analysis of some relations such as symmetry. However,
this work imposes no constraints in the relations that a
perceptive process might consider as singularities. A
review of the literature regarding low-level perception
in biological systems shows sufficient evidence as to the
heterogeneous nature of singularities, that no restriction
can be imposed on the notion.

Conclusions
A general understanding of the concept of system, in particular of its organizational and operational principles, is essential

mentioned. It has also inspired aspects of other approaches (Barsalou, 1999; Marr, 1982).
8 An example of this in an artificial cognitive architecture is the
hierarchy of goals and subgoals in the SOAR architecture (Newell,
1990; Rosenbloom, Laird, & Newell, 1993; Laird, Bates Congdon,
& Coulter, 1999).

9 The

Gestalt movement conceived perception as an inferential
process to find the best interpretation of the proximal stimulation.
best was understood as regularity: symmetry, analogy, temporal regularity, etc.

1233

in order to explain any aspect of cognition. Systems science,
knowledge on parallel distributed systems, theories on cognition, artificial intelligence and perception must be merged
into a unique and consistent framework in order to design
better artificial systems and analyze natural ones. This is the
approach taken in the ASys Framework for the analysis of extant cognitive systems and the construction of artificial ones.
A process of perception is necessarily related to the system
in which it takes place. The relation derives from its referents and the interaction with the rest of the system (coordination, resource-sharing, constraints) during the whole process.
There exist both sensory and directed processes in perception
which interact between themselves and with the rest of the
system.
None of these interactions may be neglected if we want a
systematic account of perceptual behavior and strive to have a
universal theory of cognitive autonomy of applicability both
to the natural and the artificial.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual Symbol Systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Barth, H., La Mont, K., Lipton, J., & Spelke, E. (2005). Abstract number and arithmetic in preschool children. In
102 (Ed.), Proceedings of the national academy of sciences (Vol. 39, p. 14117-14121).
Bengtsson, S. L., & Ullén, F. (2006). Dissociation between
melodic and rhythmic processing during piano performance from musical scores. NeuroImage, 30, 272-284.
Bodner, G. E., & Lindsay, D. S. (2003). Remembering and
knowing in context. Journal of Memory and Language,
48, 563-580.
Cañamero, L., & et al. (2004, May). Preliminary plans for
exemplars: Cognition & action (Tech. Rep. No. D7b).
HUMAINE IST 507422.
Damasio, A. (2000). The feeling of what happens: Body,
emotion and the making of consciousness. Vintage.
Duda, R. O., Hart, P. E., & Stork, D. G. (2001). Pattern
classification. Wiley Interscience.
Farah, M. J. (2000). The cognitive neuroscience of vision.
Blackwell.
Gibson, J. J. (1965). The comparison of mediated perception with direct perception. (Purple Perils, Unpuplished
manuscripts, web edition)
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual
systems. Houghton Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. (1987). The ecological approach to visual perception. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
H. Van Dyke Parunak, Bisson, R., Brueckner, S., Matthews,
R., & Sauter, J. (2006). A model of emotions for situated agents. In Proceedings of the fifth international
joint conference on autonomous agents and multiagent
systems. (p. 993-995). Hakodate, Japan.
Helmholtz, H. von. (2005). Treatise on physiological optics
(1962 ed., Vol. III). Dover Phoenix.

Hurley, S. (2001). Perception and action: Alternative views.
Synthese, 129, 3-40.
Kensinger, E. A., Garoff-Eaton, R. J., & Schacter, D. L.
(2007). Effects of emotion on memory specificity:
Memory trade-offs elicited by negative visually arousing stimuli. Journal of Memory and Language, 56,
575-591.
Klir, G. J. (1969). An approach to general systems theory.
Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Koelsch, S., & Siebel, W. A. (2005, December). Towards a
neural basis of music perception. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9(12), 578-584.
Laird, J. E., Bates Congdon, C., & Coulter, K. J. (1999). The
Soar User’s Manual Version 8.2.
Levine, M. W. (2000). Fundamentals of sensation and perception (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.
López, I., & Sanz, R. (2006). A vision of autonomous systems
(Tech. Rep. No. R-2006-08). Autonomous Systems
Laboratory ASLab. Universidad Politécnica de Madrid,
UPM.
Mandler, J. M. (2004). The foundations of mind: Origins of
conceptual thought. Oxford University Press.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. W. H. Freeman and Company.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified theories of cognition. Harvard
University Press.
Noë, A. (2004). action in perception. MIT Press.
Picard, R. (1998). Affective computing. MIT Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1999). Is vision continuous with cognition? the
case for cognitive impenetrability of visual perception.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 341-364.
Radvansky, G. A., & Copeland, D. E. (2006). Memory retrieval and interference: Working memory issues. Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 33-46.
Rock, I. (1985). Perception (Reprint edition (August 1995)
ed.). W. H. Freeman and Company.
Rock, I. (1997). Indirect perception. MIT Press.
Rosenbloom, P. S., Laird, J. E., & Newell, A. (Eds.). (1993).
The soar papers (Vol. 2). MIT Press.
Schifmann, H. R. (2001). Sensation and perception. John
Wiley & Sons.
Selfridge, O. G. (1959). The mechanization of thought processes. In (p. 511-529). London: H. M. Stationary
Office.
Shanahan, M. (2005). Perception as abduction: turning, sensor data into meaningful representation. Cognitive Science, 29, 103-134.
Smith, W. C., Johnson, S. P., & Spelke, E. (2003). Motion and
edge sensitivity in perception of object unity. Cognitive
Psychology, 46, 31-64.
Spinola de Freitas, J., Gudwin, R. R., & Queiroz, J.
(2005). Emotion in artificial intelligence and artificial life research: Facing problems. In Intelligent virtual agents: 5th international working conference, iva
2005. Springer.
Ullman, S. (1996). High-level vision. MIT Press.

1234

