UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Mapping and Perception: Can Mapping Cause a Re-Representation of the Target
Stimulus?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2tr578jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Kokinov, Biocho
Bliznashki, Svetoslav
Kosev, Svetlin
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Mapping and Perception:
Can Mapping Cause a Re-Representation of the Target Stimulus?
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Svetoslav Bliznashki (valsotevs@gmail.com)
Svetlin Kosev (skosev@cogs.nbu.bg)
Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
This paper is trying to explore the issue of whether analogical
mapping may influence perception and cause re-interpretation
of the target stimulus. An attempt is made to put this rather
complicated issue at experimental test bed. Two experiments
are described which demonstrate that the process of
analogical mapping may reorganize the perceptual input and
stimulate a re-representation of the input image thus allowing
the participants to discover meanings that were not initially
available to them. The experiments are not decisive on when
this re-representation happens.
Keywords: analogy; perception; representation;
representation; psychological experimentation.

re-

Introduction
The debate about the inseparability of perception and
mapping in analogy-making was very hot in the 90s
(Chalmers, French, & Hofstadter, 1992, Morrison, &
Dietrich, 1995, Hoffman, 1995, Forbus, Gentner, Markman,
Ferguson, 1998) but began to fade out later on even though
it remained unresolved. This debate was probably too
emotional and needed some break. However, it is an
important debate that needs to be continued in a more
constructive way. One problematic aspect of the debate as it
was carried out in the 90s was that it stayed at a very
abstract philosophical level and there were no proposals for
how to try to answer the questions in an empirical way. This
paper makes an attempt to reinitiate the debate, but to put it
on experimental grounds. We fully realize that it is slippery
to test empirically such subtle issues, but let us make some
small steps in that direction.
First of all, let us point out that since the time the debate
was initiated a number of models were developed that
addressed related issues. Thus Keane & Brayshaw (1988),
Keane, Ledgeway, and Duff (1994) and Forbus, Ferguson,
& Gentner (1994) have given up the “one step view” on the
mapping process and introduced the so called “incremental
view”. This approach allowed the mapping to dynamically
adjust to the new coming information about the target.
These approaches also allowed backtracking, i.e. old partial
mappings can be destroyed and new mappings to be built on
their place. However, none of these approaches ever
discussed the possibility for re-representation of the target

or the base themselves. In contrast, the CopyCat and
TableTop models (Hofstadter, 1995, Mitchell, 1993, French,
1995) introduced the idea of re-representation of the target
and the base, which are both perceived from the
environment. Since the representation building is running in
parallel with the mapping process in these models, there is
constant re-representation of the target and the base (e.g.
grouping and re-grouping of the elements, representing
them as letters or numbers, etc.). The AMBR model
introduced the idea of re-representation of the base while it
is being retrieved from long term memory and mapped to
the target (Kokinov & Petrov, 2000) and as result memory
distortions were predicted which were later on
experimentally confirmed. Finally, Yan, Forbus, and
Gentner (2003) suggested a whole library of transformation
functions that can allow for the re-representation of the
target when it does not match well the base. Thus many
models seem to have adopted the idea of re-representation to
some degree and developed at least partial mechanisms for
performing it (even though these mechanisms are often very
different from each other). However, there are not many
experimental studies that test whether such rerepresentations actually happen in human analogy-making.
The closest experimental study we are aware of is
performed by Medin, Goldstone and Gentner (1993). They
demonstrated that comparing two objects may influence
their encoding. They used ambiguous abstract figures that
could be seen in two different ways. Each ambiguous target
figure was presented in pair with another unambiguous
figure and the participants were instructed to compare the
two figures and to list their similarities and differences. The
same target figure was paired with two different figures in a
between group design. Since the participants produced
different sets of attributes, depending on the figure the target
was compared with, the authors concluded that they
perceive and encode the target figures differently depending
on the figure to be compared with. These results coupled
together with the mounting evidence that alignment is a
central aspect of similarity comparisons (Goldstone and
Medin, 1993; Markman and Gentner, 1990) are backing up
the hypothesis that analogical mapping may cause rerepresentation of the target stimulus. However, this study
was not designed explicitly to test this hypothesis and that is
why the task was not to make an analogy, but rather to list
superficial similarities in most cases. Another problem with

1175

this study is that people may perceive the ambiguous figure
in an unbiased way, but being forced to describe the
similarities and differences in comparison with the other
figure, they had to use a common terminology for both of
them.
In the experiments described in this paper we tried to
study spontaneous re-representation during problem
solving, i.e. we do not ask them to describe what they see in
relation to something else, but rather to solve a problem and
we test whether during the problem solving process a
spontaneous re-representation will happen. We ask the
participants what they have seen after the problem solving
has finished and the test stimulus is not anymore available
to them. Also, we explicitly manipulated the analogical
mapping the target stimulus is involved in, to test whether
analogy is actually causing re-representation of the target.
Two experiments were performed. In both of them the
target stimulus was an ambiguous figure which can
potentially be interpreted either as a human face or as a
rotated inscription, but the inscription is hard to be seen at
the beginning (Figure 1). In a pre-test we found that hardly
anyone sees the inscription spontaneously.

represent the stimulus and the ambiguous figure will be
more often reinterpreted as an inscription..

Design
The experiment has a between group design and the
manipulated variable is the type of task the ambiguous
figure is involved:
• Strong mapping: the figure is involved in a
proportional analogy with a strong pressure (rotation
and colour reversal) for an unusual mapping that will
potentially lead to re-representation of the figure as an
inscription.
• Weak mapping: the figure is involved in a
proportional analogy with a weak pressure (rotation
only) for an unusual mapping that will potentially lead
to re-representation of the figure as an inscription.
• No mapping: the figure is involved in a task that does
not require analogical mapping and therefore there is
no pressure for re-representation.
The dependent variable is the number of participants who
will manage to see the inscription.

Procedure

Figure 1. The ambiguous figures used in experiment 1 and
2, respectively. The inscription on the left figure reads
“KOTKA” which means CAT in Bulgarian. The inscription
on the right figure reads “VALK” which means WOLF.

Each participant is tested in a sound proven booth on a
computer running e-Prime. The experiment consists of a
series of 4 tasks each of which is a proportional analogy task
with 4 possible answers to choose from. This is true for the
two mapping groups. In the No mapping group the task is to
choose between the four alternatives the one that the subject
feels best fits the target figure. The participants have 30
seconds for each slide before they can respond (this was a
way to ensure that even if they solve a task very rapidly,
they will still have some time to observe the figure and
eventually re-represent it). After the 4th slide (which was the
test slide containing the ambiguous figure) disappears, a
question is posed to the participants asking what they have
seen at the target figure. We tell them that there might have
been a nontrivial alternative interpretation of the figure, and
ask them if they have seen it without any chance to look
back at the picture itself.

The main idea of both experiments is to include these
ambiguous figures in proportional analogies and see
whether the mapping may influence the perceptual process
and facilitate a re-representation that will allow the
participants to see the inscription. We test this in two
experiments.

Stimuli

Experiment 1

In the last (the test) trial the participants saw one of the three
slides presented in Figure 2 depending on the group they
belonged to. The previous slides contained similar tasks and
were arranged in an order of increasing difficulty.
These tasks do permit more than one possible answer.
Thus participants may choose an alternative on various
grounds.

The goal of our first experiment is to find out whether
analogical mapping can actually cause re-representation.

Hypothesis
Our hypothesis is that analogical mapping, if appropriate,
will exert a pressure on the perceptual processes to re-

1176

word is presented in negative. The very presence of this
black alternative makes another feature of the objects in the
first row more accessible and we can expect this feature to
be represented more often by the perceptual process: the
second picture is in black while the first one is in white.
This makes a really strong pressure to put the human face in
correspondence with the “tomato” word. Once this
correspondence is tried out it generates the pressure to
reinterpret the ambiguous figure as a text. This pressure will
be much higher in slide 1 than in slide 2, because of the
higher systematicity of the mapping in slide 1.

:
A

B

:
C

?
D

домат

чанта
1

3

2

Participants

4

Our sample consisted of 60 subjects randomly assigned to
the three conditions. Thus each condition contained 15
subjects. Their age ranged from 18 to 43. Some of the
subjects were students at NBU participating for credits,
others were professors at NBU and a third part was recruited
from outside the institution.

:
A

B

:
C

?

The main effect of the group manipulation is significant
(χ2(2)=9.573, p=0.008) and the average data for each group
are presented in Figure 3. The result shows that higher
percentage of participants are making reinterpretation and
seeing the inscription in the strong mapping condition than
in the weak mapping condition, and even more so compared
to the no mapping condition. This is exactly what was
expected.

D

домат

чанта
1

Results and discussion

3

2

4

Inscription seen (%)

:
C

?

40
30

D

2

20

домат

чанта
1

40

3

10

4

strong
10

weak
5

no

0

Figure 2. Test items: a) test item in the strong mapping
group; b) test item in the weak mapping group; c) test item
in the no mapping group. The two words in Bulgarian
among the options provided are CHANTA (Bulgarian word
for BAG) and DOMAT (Bulgarian word for tomato).

Figure 3. Percentage of participants who saw the inscription
in each group. These differences are significant
[χ2(2)=9.573, p=0.008]

In both mapping conditions there is the possibility to
choose either “bag” or “tomato”. This would be particularly
true if one has seen the inscription in the ambiguous figure.
In this case you get picture to picture in the first row, and
text to text in the second row. However, the opposite
influence could potentially also work: if for any other reason
we choose a text answer, then there will be a pressure to reinterpret the figure as a text as well in order to have the nice
“text to text, picture to picture” analogy. No such pressure is
expected in the third group (the no mapping case).
If we now compare slides 1 and 2, we will see that the
only difference is in the background colour: the “tomato”

Pairwise comparisons show that the strong mapping group
result is significantly better than the result in each of the two
other groups, but there is no significant difference between
the weak mapping and no mapping groups. This speaks in
favour of the role that analogical mapping plays in the
process of the reinterpretation, and especially of the role of
the systematicity constraint.
One may assume that making a textual response for
whatever reason will force the participant to make a rerepresentation and see the target figure as a text as well. Let
us see whether the group makes any difference in the above
relationship (Figure 4). The data show that in the control

1177

Experiment 2

group (no analogy) even when the participant has chosen a
textual response for whatever reason this is not reflected in a
higher probability of seeing the inscription. Contrary to that
in both mapping groups the textual responses increase the
chances of the participant to see the CAT (from 6% to 25%
in the weak group, and from 31% to 57% in the strong one).
This is in line with our hypothesis that the analogical
mapping will actually cause reinterpretation of the figure.
Inscription seen (%)

The goal of this second experiment is to explore the process
of reinterpretation in more detail. The main idea is to see
whether a local correspondence established between
elements of the two terms in the proportional analogy, will
eventually spread over the entire group and produce a global
reinterpretation of the whole image. This will be a good
illustration of how the analogical mapping interplays with
the perceptual processes and how small steps in the mapping
process influence certain representation building
subprocesses.

57

60

Hypothesis

50
40

31

20
10
0

strong

25

30

weak

Design

no

6 6
picture

Our hypothesis was that the type of local mapping
established will be crucial for the process of reinterpretation.
The experiment has a between group design and the
manipulated variable is the type of the local correspondence
established between the first and the second term of the
proportional analogy:
• literal condition: the medal of the sportsman is put in
correspondence with a medal.
• reinterpretation condition: the medal of the
sportsman is put into correspondence with the letter O.
The dependent variable is the number of reinterpretations
of the ambiguous figure, i.e. the number of participants
who have seen the inscription “wolf” in each group.

0
text

Figure 4. Percentage of subjects who have seen the
inscription CAT as a function of their response and the
mapping group they belonged to. There is an interaction
(textual response increases the likelihood of reinterpretation
but only in the mapping conditions, no reinterpretation at all
when there is a lack of mapping pressure). In addition, the
strong
mapping
produces
more
reinterpretations
independently of the response (in both cases: when a picture
response and a textual response is produced).
An important note is needed here: All subjects who
actually saw the inscription spontaneously reported verbally
seeing it1 before the thirty seconds had passed. This was true
for everybody except for one subject in the weak mapping
condition. However when asked, she also claimed that she
had seen the inscription before the sound signal. Thus it
appears that it was not the case that the subjects in the
strong mapping group saw the inscription more often
because of spending more time looking at the slide than
subjects from the other two groups. This result made it
unnecessary to compare the reaction times of the subjects in
the three conditions.
This experiment has demonstrated that analogical
mapping does produce re-interpretation of the target
stimulus and the stronger the mapping the bigger the effect
is. Moreover, the observation above suggests that this reinterpretation is likely to happen somewhere during the
mapping process and before a response is being produced.
The difference between the strong and weak analogy
conditions (which objectively differ only in the background
color of the “tomato” alternative) shows how important the
relational mapping is: the combined pressure of two
relations being mapped is much higher than the pressure of
just one relational mapping.

Stimuli
The stimuli in this experiment are shown in Figure 5.

:

P
1

:?

::

В
2

3

4

:?

: O ::

P
1

В
2

3

4

Figure 5. Test items in the two groups.
1
This re-representation of the target picture was often
accompanied by strong and positive emotional responses.

1178

subjects who actually made the target analogy (Figure 7),
because this analogy is not that obvious and only about half
of the subjects in the “reinterpretation analogy” condition
actually produced the analogy.

The two tasks are exactly the same, including the alternative
provided. The only difference is in the second term of the
analogy.
In the literal condition, the second term is a medal and
this is supposed to establish a correspondence between the
medal of the sportsman and the medal and to build a
representation of the relation part-of(medal, sportsman), this
is
supposed
to
suggest
the
analogy:
Sportsman:medal::human face:glasses. This analogy should
not make any pressure for reinterpretation of the human
face.
In the reinterpretation condition, the second term is the
letter O. Trying to find what is the relation between the
sportsman and the letter O one might discover that there is
an inscription on the sportsman jacket and a correspondence
might be established between the medal of the sportsman
and the letter O, i.e. a representation is built of the relation
is_like(medal, O). This is possibly going to activate the
concept of IS_LIKE and other similarities between objects
and letter might be sought. This may result in establishing a
correspondence between the glasses at the human face and
the letter B. Here the analogy may stop happily and the
response will be the letter B. When asked afterwards,
participants may not necessarily have seen another
interpretation of the human face. However, if the process of
analogical mapping continues it may find new
correspondences, e.g. the letter O corresponds to the medal,
but the medal itself may be considered a letter O and thus
the inscription on the jacket of the sportsman reads DOM
(which means home in Bulgarian). In this way a more
complicated correspondence may be established: O
corresponds to a letter in a whole word. Than one may try to
find out whether the same relation is present in the right
term of the analogy. This could lead to seeing the glasses as
only one letter among many in a word, and if that happens a
strong pressure would exist for reinterpreting various
elements of the human face and recognizing letters in it.
This could finally result in a global reinterpretation of the
face as the word VALK (“wolf” in Bulgarian).
These are the hypothetical processes that we envisaged
when the stimulus material was designed.

Inscription seen (%)
60
48

50
40
30

20

20

20
10

4

0
wolf seen
literal

"some letters" seen
reinterpretation

Figure 6. Percentage of participants in each group who
saw “some letters” and the whole word “wolf” in the
ambiguous picture as result of the analogy-making process.
[the difference in the number of participants who have
seen “some letters” is significant at the p=0.036 level, while
the difference between those who have seen the whole word
“wolf” in the two groups is significant at the p=0.095 level
measured by the Fisher’s exact test]
Inscription seen (%)
80

71

70
60
50

36

40
30

20

20

Procedure

10

The procedure is the same as in Experiment 1.

4

0

Participants

wolf seen

Fifty students at the New Bulgarian University (25 males
and 25 females) participated in the experiment, the age
ranged from 19 to 35 years. They were randomly assigned
to one of the two conditions.

literal

reinterpretation

Figure 7. Percentage of participants who saw “some
letters” and the whole word “wolf” in the ambiguous picture
taking into account only those who made the target analogy.
[the difference in the number of participants who have
seen “some letters” is significant at the p=0.016 level, and
the difference between those who have seen the whole word
“wolf” is p=0.002 measured by the Fisher’s exact test]

Results and discussion
The results from the experiment are represented in Figure 6
and Figure 7. In line with our hypothesis there is a
significant difference between the number of subjects who
saw at least “some letters” at the human face (i.e. produced
partial re-representation), and marginally significant
difference between the number of subjects who fully rerepresented the face into the word “wolf” (Figure 6). The
difference is even stronger if we take into account only the

"some letters" seen

There is a clear main effect of the type of analogymaking: literal vs. reinterpretation analogy. This effect is
stronger if we take into account only the subjects who

1179

successfully made the target analogy; if we take all subjects
it is marginal for the effect on the whole word “wolf” but
still significant on the recognition of some letters on the
human face. This might mean that the process of
reinterpretation requires some time, so some people stop
before they have arrived at the global reinterpretation and
are satisfied at a point when only a few letters are
recognized.

General Discussion
The two experiments have demonstrated that as expected
analogy-making can make a reverse pressure to reinterpret
the initial perceptual data in order to make the mapping
more coherent. This process seems to run gradually over
time starting with some local correspondences established
and gradually building a global mapping and exerting more
and more pressure. The more consistent the mapping is, the
stronger the effect seems to be (the systematicity principle
in action).
These experiments cannot tell apart the interactionist and
the modular view on the analogy-making process, since
possibly both could explain the data. However, it seems that
the gradual process of spreading the influence over the
whole mapping and from reinterpreting local features to
global reinterpretation will more naturally fit the
interactionist view. Further experimentation is needed. In
particular we are currently running a similar experiment
using gaze tracking equipment, which may allow us to track
the process of reinterpretation.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the ANALOGY
project (NEST program, contract 29088) funded by the EC.

References
Brugger, P. (1999). One hundred years of an ambiguous
figure: Happy birthday, duck-rabbit! Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 89, 973–977.
Chalmers, D. J., French, R. M., & Hofstadter, D. R. (1992).
High-level perception, representation and analogy: A
critique of artificial intelligence methodology. Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 4,
185-211.
Forbus, K. D., Ferguson, R. W., & Gentner, D. (1994).
Incremental structure mapping. In A. Ram & K. Eiselt
(Eds.), Proceedings of the sixteenth annual conference of
the cognitive science society (pp. 313-318). Atlanta, GA:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Forbus, K., Gentner, D., Markman, A., Ferguson, R. (1998).
Analogy just looks like high-level perception. Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 10,
231-257.
French, R. M. (1995) . The Subtlety of Sameness. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press
Goldstone, R. and Medin, D. (1993). Similarity, interactive
activation, and mapping: An overview. In K. Holyoak and
J. Barnden (Eds), Advances in connectionist and neural
computation theory, Vol.2: Connectionist approaches to
analogy, metaphor, and case-based reasoning, Norwood,
NJ:Ablex
Hoffman, R. R. (1995). Monster analogies. AI Magazine,
16(3), 11-35.
Hofstadter, D. & the FARG (1995). Fluid concepts and
creative analogies. New York: Basic Books
Keane, M., & Brayshaw, M. (1988). The incremental analogy
machine: A computational model of analogy. In D.
Sleeman (Ed.), Proceedings of the third european working
session on learning (pp. 53-62). London: Pitman.
Keane, M., Ledgeway, T. & Duff, S. (1994). Constraints on
Analogical Mapping: A Comparison of Three Models.
Cognitive Science, 18, pp. 387-438
Kokinov, B. Petrov, A. (2000). Dynamic Extension of
Episode Representation in Analogy-Making in AMBR. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Markman, A. and Gentner, D. (1990). Analogical mapping
during similarity judgments. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Scociety, p.38-44, Hillsdale, NJ:ErlBaum
Medin, D., Goldstone, R., and Gentner, D. (1993). Respects
for Similarity, Psychological Review, 100, 254-278
Mitchell, M. (1993). Analogy-Making as Perception: A
Computer Model. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press
Morrison, C. & Dietrich, E. (1995). Structure-Mapping vs.
High-level Perception: the mistaken fight over the
explanation of analogy. In the Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp.678-682.
Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K. J., & Morrison, R. G. (2001).
Analogical priming via semantic relations. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 383-393
Yan, J., Forbus, K., and Gentner, D. (2003). A theory of
rerepresentation in analogical matching. Proceedings of the
Twenty-fifth Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.

1180

