UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attentional Highlighting as a Mechanism behind Early Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1vt914tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Yoshida, Hanako
Hanania, Rima

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attentional Highlighting as a Mechanism behind Early Word Learning
Hanako Yoshida (yoshida@uh.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Houston, 126 Heyne Building
Houston, TX 77204-5022 USA

Rima Hanania (rhanania@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences and Program in Cognitive Science, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

children’s early language learning. How might attentional
mechanisms work to guide selection to relevant
information, and what role do these processes play in
children’s early word learning?
Research suggests that part of the answer to the question
of how selective attention is guided lies in understanding
that what we learn to attend to in one moment and context
affects what we attend to in a later moment with an
overlapping context. There is strong evidence in the adult
literature to support the idea that attention is guided by past
learning, and by the relationship between the current
moment and what was learned in the past.
One
phenomenon where this is apparent is Highlighting
(Kruschke, 1996.) Of particular interest to this paper is the
attention-shifting
mechanism
that
accounts
for
Highlighting and which, broadly described, operates by
reallocating attention to new information if old information
is paired with a novel outcome. This type of attentionshifting mechanism could be very relevant to early word
learning in children, and might provide a key ingredient
that allows children to bootstrap themselves into language
learning without the need for higher-level syntactic
knowledge.
Could general mechanisms of selective
attention and appropriate attention shifting account for
language learning phenomena without recourse to
assumptions about children’s knowledge of language
structure? We pursue this question in the domain of
adjective learning.
First we discuss adjective learning and present one
particular finding. We then briefly describe the adult
phenomenon, Highlighting, drawing parallels between it
and adjective learning. This leads us to consider the
attentional explanation for Highlighting to suggest a type
of mechanism that could also underlie word learning. We
test the plausibility of such a mechanism in two
experiments and discuss the results.

This paper investigates the role of general attention-shifting
mechanisms in children’s early adjective learning. A novel
version of an adjective-learning paradigm was used to probe
whether attentional mechanisms could account for early
adjective learning without recourse to high-level syntactic
knowledge.
Two- and 3-year-olds participated. One
condition removed all syntactic information by presenting
words in incorrect syntactic order, but with explicit naming
of known properties. According to the attention-shifting
account, activation of past learned associations through the
mention of known words should focus attention on the right
association: novel adjective to novel property. Younger
children with less linguistic experience successfully learned
novel adjectives in this condition, supporting the attentional
account. We discuss the attention-shifting mechanism by
analogy to attentional highlighting, which accounts for the
phenomenon of highlighting in the adult associative learning
literature.
Keywords: Attentional learning; highlighting phenomena;
early word learning; selective attention.

Attentional mechanisms in early word
learning
Attention to relevant information is central to all
learning. Selectively attending to appropriate information
enables quick learning, generalization to new situations,
and successful decision making; attending to irrelevant
information, on the other hand, can lead to error and to a
failure to learn. In language learning, mapping words to
referents is a key process of learning words, and selective
attention to the appropriate referent for a given label is
crucial for successful word learning. For nouns such as the
word “cup”, for instance, attention to the correct referent
object, a cup, and the relevant feature of that object, its
shape, facilitates learning the noun. For adjectives such as
the word “red”, attention to the correct feature of an object,
its color, facilitates learning the adjective. Selective
attention to incorrect information, on the other hand, e.g.
the shape of a cup on hearing the word “red”, would lead to
error in interpreting the meaning of “cup” or the meaning
of “red” in future settings. Given the importance of
selective attention in word learning, it is essential to
understand the role of selective attention mechanisms in

Adjective Learning
Different kinds of words refer to different kinds of
meanings. It has been suggested that early-learned noun
categories are most likely organized by shape (Samuelson
& Smith, 1999); adjectives typically refer to other
properties, those that can vary within an object category
(Klibanoff & Waxman, 2000). Relative to common nouns,

719

children learn adjectives slowly (see Gasser and Smith,
1998; for a review) and, indeed, often misinterpret
adjectives as referring to an object category rather than a
property (Clark, 1997; Golinkoff, Mervis, and Hirsh-Pasek,
1994; Soja, Carey, and Spelke, 1991; Markman, 1990;
Landau, Smith, and Jones, 1988; Macnamara, 1982; Keil,
1991). However, children’s adjective-like interpretations
of novel words increase (Klibanoff and Waxman, 2000;
Waxman and Klibanoff, 2000; Waxman, 1998) in contexts
in which the object category is named. These phenomena
have been interpreted by some as indicating early
knowledge of syntax-meaning correspondences (Waxman,
1998; Mintz and Gleitman, 2002).
Mintz and Gleitman (2002) reported the specific result
that motivates the experiments in this paper. They
contrasted two kinds of sentences in which a novel
adjective might be embedded. In one of these, the novel
adjective modified a pronoun, “This is a stoof one”. In the
other, the novel adjective modified a basic level noun,
“This is a stoof elephant”. They reasoned, on linguistic
grounds, that children should more successfully map the
novel adjective to a property given the noun rather than the
pronoun because the syntactic role of the adjective as a
modifier of a noun was more obvious. This prediction was
supported by the performances of 3-year-olds, but not by
that of younger children who performed at chance. Mintz
and Gleitman interpreted these results in terms of emerging
knowledge of syntax and linkages between syntactic
categories and meaning.
Mintz and Gleitman’s interpretation suggests that
children younger than 3 years old cannot learn the meaning
of adjectives since they do not have sufficient knowledge
of syntax - that knowledge of syntax is necessary for
learning adjectives. We suggest, in contrast, that young
children can learn adjectives even without knowledge of
language structure because general attentional mechanisms
automatically guide selective attention to the appropriate
object feature. We explain this view by first introducing a
phenomenon and explanation from the adult associative
learning literature.

previous learning and constrain new learning in novel
situations.

Figure 1: Illustration of a parallel structure between
highlighting and adjective learning
There are important parallels between the pattern of
learning in Highlighting tasks and the pattern for learning
adjectives, particularly in Mintz and Gleitman’s 2002
adjective learning task. Figure 1 illustrates the parallel
structure of the two phenomena. Children learn nouns
before adjectives, and they learn that shape is associated
with nouns.
That is, they learn early in language
development that “elephant” refers to animals of a
particular shape and particular texture, having seen various
examples of elephants that have been referred to as
“elephant”. This is analogous to having learned that A+B
predicts X in the first phase of Highlighting tasks, where A
is elephant shape, B is elephant texture, and X is the word
“elephant”. (There may be other associations as well, but
these are the ones relevant to our explanation). This
knowledge is in place before children come to the
adjective-learning experiment. In an adjective-learning
task such as Mintz and Gleitman’s, a novel feature is
introduced along with a novel label for a known object.
This is analogous to the second phase of Highlighting
tasks, where A (elephant shape) is now paired with C (a
novel texture) and the outcome is Y (a novel word). In
Highlighting tasks, this results in associating C (the novel
texture) with Y (the novel word), while continuing to
associate A (elephant shape) with X (“elephant”), which is
equivalent to learning the meaning of the adjective in the
adjective learning task.
Just as the mechanisms underlying Highlighting involve
attentionally highlighting the novel cue given a novel
outcome, we propose similar mechanisms might be at work
in the adjective learning task, with attention shifting away
from known features to unknown features when a new
label is given. Connecting this idea to Mintz and
Gleitman’s findings, the presence of the basic level noun in

Attentional Highlighting
Highlighting is a robust phenomenon in adult associative
learning. The phenomenon emerges in tasks, as illustrated
in Figure 1, in which learners first learn a conjunctive cue
(A+B) that predicts an outcome (X) and then are presented
with a new conjunctive cue that contains one old
component (A) plus a new one (C) and predicts a new
outcome (Y). During this second phase, learners associate
the new cue with the new outcome more than the old cue
with the new outcome. In brief, novel cues are associated
with novel outcomes. By one explanation, this derives
from the rapid shifting of attention away from the
previously learned cue in the context of the new outcome –
the new cue thus becoming attentionally highlighted and
strongly associated with the new outcome (e.g., Kruschke,
1996, 2005).
Such attentional mechanisms preserve

720

constructions such as “This is a stoof elephant” may have
aided adjective learning because the noun activated a
previously established association between the noun and
relevant object properties (e.g., shape). In the context of
this noun, the novel label may have shifted attention from
these properties to an object feature, such as texture, that
was not associated with the noun.
Highlighting and adjective learning are roughly
analogous, and no claim is being made here that the
phenomena are exactly the same. Given the similarity in
their structure, however, it is plausible to consider that
similar attentional mechanisms might be at work in both
phenomena – mechanisms of rapid attention shifting to
novel cues in the presence of novel outcomes (or words).
Determining the viability of an attention shifting account
of adjective learning is important for two reasons. First, it
may unify a robust laboratory phenomenon in adult
learning with a significant class of real world learning,
showing that the mechanisms of attention shifting are
capable of doing real developmental work. Second,
although older children and adults surely do acquire the
syntactic categories and the syntax-semantic linkages that
Mintz and Gleitman propose, children cannot know them at
the start and must acquire them. General attentional
mechanisms that shift attention to relevant information
based on previous associations and learned attention may
help language learning get started, prior to children’s
learning of syntactic categories.

Stimulus Materials The stimuli replicate those of Mintz
and Gleitman (2002). For each set, the 3 training objects
were instances of 3 different basic level categories, all the
same color and surface texture (see Figure 2). The test
objects included one category present in the training set but
with a different texture and one novel category instance of
the same target texture as the training set. Both test objects
were the same color as the training objects. All objects
were approximately 10 cm3. Texture - the intended target
property - was chosen to be highly novel and included: a
star pattern, a wire surface, bumpy striped, a felt surface, a
Velcro surface, and holes. These properties were named by
novel labels such as Brickish, Stoof, Zav, Afe, Vap, and
Toop, respectively.

Figure 2: The photographs of a set of the stimuli
objects used in one trial.
Procedure On each trial, the child heard each of the 3
training objects labeled by the same novel adjective. The 2
test objects were then placed on the table and the child was
allowed to play with them to reduce choices based on toy
preference. The 2 test objects were then placed equally
distant from the child and the child was asked to select the
named one. This procedure was repeated for the 6 trials.
Children in the Noun condition heard the training objects
labeled in a sentence containing the novel adjective, a color
word, and a basic-level noun, but in a scrambled order e.g., “This is an elephant red stoof”. Children in the
Pronoun condition heard each training object labeled with
the novel word embedded in a correctly ordered English
sentence but with the adjective modifying a pronoun - e.g.,
“This is a stoof one”. Children in both conditions were
queried with the very same carrier phrase, “Can you get me
the stoof one?”

Experiment 1
In the Mintz and Gleitman experiment, 3-year-olds
successfully mapped the novel adjective to the property of
the named object when the sentence contained a basic level
noun rather than a pronoun, for example, in sentences of
the form “This is a stoof elephant”. The syntactic role of
stoof as an adjective is specified by its position before the
noun. In Experiment 1, we take this information away by
using sentences of the form “This is an elephant red stoof”.
If children are using syntactic information to map the novel
word to a property, they should fail given this sentence
since the syntactic information would not specify “stoof” as
an adjective (but perhaps as a noun). However, by an
attention-shifting account that operates analogously to
attentional highlighting, this order of information should
not matter since naming the noun (and color) would
activate prior associations resulting in attention shifting
rapidly to an unassociated property (e.g., texture) with the
novel word “stoof”.

Results
Children’s performance in terms of their choices of the
texture matching test objects is shown in Figure 3. A
2(Condition) X 2(Age) analysis of variances of these
choices revealed a main effect of Age; F(1, 38)=5.544,
p<.05 and an interaction between Age and Condition, F(1,
38)=4.38, p<.05. In the Noun condition, younger children
performed better than older children and above chance,
t(9)=2.88, p<.05, whereas older children did not. Both
older and younger children performed comparably and at
chance level in the Pronoun condition. Thus, younger
children were able to successfully map the novel word to

Method
Participants Twenty 2-year-olds (mean=25.6 months) and
28 3-year-olds (mean=36.1 months) were randomly
assigned to the Noun or the Pronoun condition.

721

the target property despite the scrambled order and lack of
syntactic information.

and object, attention should be shifted away from these
competitors and thus toward the novel texture properties.
Experiment 2 tests the role of explicit labeling of color.

Method
Participants The participants were 12 2-year-olds
(mean=26.7 months, ranging from 22.6 to 30.4 months);
none had participated in Experiment 1.
Stimuli Materials and Procedure The stimuli replicate
those of Mintz and Gleitman (2002 Two conditions varied
within subject. On half of the trials, the +Color trials, these
were identical to the Noun condition in Experiment 1 (e.g.,
“This is an elephant red stoof”) and on half, the –Color
trials, the color word was dropped (e.g., “This is an
elephant stoof.”) Order of the +Color and –Color trials was
randomized across children. All other aspects of the
procedure were the same as Experiment 1.

Figure 3: The proportion of texture match object
choices (property matched test object choices) made
by younger children and older children in the Noun
and Pronoun conditions.

Results
Mentioning the color clearly mattered as shown in Figure
4. Children mapped the novel word to the texture more in
the +Color than –Color condition; t(11)=2.016, p<.05.
Children performed above chance in the +Color trials;
t(11)=2.016, p<.05 but not in –Color condition; t(11)=-1.2.

This pattern is consistent with the attentional hypothesis.
If activated past associations induce attention shifting to
novel cues given novel outcomes, this condition contains
just the right information to shift attention away from the
shape and parts of the named test objects, away from color,
and toward the novel texture. That the younger children
did not succeed in the syntactically well ordered pronoun
condition---that lacked mention of the noun or color--supports the idea that the activation of these past
associations contributed to the shift in attention to texture.
The 2-year-olds’ pattern of performance thus fits the
hypothesis, and shows how a domain general mechanism
of attention shifting could lead to the learning of adjectives
without any necessary knowledge of the syntactic category
of adjective or its link to semantic categories.
The older children’s pattern of performance does not fit
this prediction. Given sentence frames with scrambled
word order or with only a modified pronoun, these children
do not map the novel word to a property. Given older
children’s successful performance in Mintz and Gleitman’s
original study which used proper English word order, it
would seem that for these children syntactic cues and not
the mere activation of prior labeled associations (and the
attention shifting that engenders) matters.

Figure 4: The proportion of texture match object
choices (property matched test object choices) made by
children on the +Color and –Color trials.
This pattern is consistent with the attention-shifting
hypothesis, demonstrating the role of additional previously
formed associations (in this case, color words) in reducing
competition for attention.

Experiment 2
Two-year-olds in Experiment 1 succeeded in mapping the
novel word to texture given a scrambled word order in
which the object and its color were explicitly labeled. By
our attention-shifting account, the mention of color should
matter. By activating any past association between a color
word and COLOR along with past association of the noun

General Discussion
Highlighting along with phenomena such as blocking,
learned irrelevance and categorical perception (Goldstone
1998; Kruschke & Blair, 2000; Kruschke 2006), reveal a

722

fundamental truth about associative learning: that the
contingencies present in the moment are not all that
matters; rather it is the relationship among these
contingencies and past learned associations that determines
what is attended to and learned in the moment. The present
results show such mechanisms may benefit early word
learning. When a prior learned association is activated, for
example elephant shape cueing the word “elephant” and the
color red cueing the word “red”, this activation effectively
shifts attention to the novel property (texture) with the
novel word (“stoof”), such that they are selectively linked.
Given this learning mechanism, there is no need to
presume higher-level explanations of the process, such as
word learning constraints. One could argue, in particular,
that these types of processes of learned attention and
attention shifting could be the mechanisms responsible for
the word-learning phenomenon of Mutual Exclusivity.
This phenomenon is often explained in terms of a
constraint, suggesting that children constrain their early
word learning by assuming names of things are mutually
exclusive, and this would explain the tendency children
have of using only one label for one instance – a
phenomenon which has long been reported and shown by a
number of studies even across different languages (e.g.,
Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Markman, 1989; Merriman &
Bowman, 1989). However, there have been very few
attempts to explain how this tendency could be generated.
Many researchers in child language have proposed that
word learning builds on itself, with learners using past
knowledge to guide subsequent learning (Smith, Jones,
Landau, Gershkoff-Stowe, and Samuelson, 2002; Graf
Estes, Evans, Alibali, and Saffran, in press), but there has
been little specification of the precise mechanisms
involved, neither how they operate at the moment of
learning nor precisely how prior learning directs current
learning (see Merriman,1999, for one exception). The
present results thus provide evidence for one such
explanation, a mechanism that is well known and well
studied in adult human learning. In addition, the present
study demonstrates the importance of such a mechanism in
the developmental process, in solving a real developmental
problem such as how to get word learning started when one
does not yet know much (if anything) about words and
their syntactic categories or linkages from syntactic
categories to meanings.
Thus, the main contribution of our experimental results
with respect to children’s learning of adjectives is centered
on the performances of the youngest children, 2-year-olds.
Past work using methods similar to those used here (by
Mintz and Gleitman, 2002) suggests that children this
young have considerable difficulty in mapping an adjective
to a property such as texture rather than the whole object or
its shape (Clark, 1997; Golinkoff, Mervis, and Hirsh-Pasek,
1994; Soja, Carey, and Spelke, 1991; Markman, 1990;
Landau, Smith, and Jones, 1988; Macnamara, 1982; Keil,
1991). Nonetheless, children this age succeeded in making

this mapping in Experiment 1 which provided two
apparently key ingredients: the explicit labeling of the noun
and the explicit labeling of a competing property (color).
By the attentional hypothesis, the explicit mention of these
words did this by activating specific past associations and
thus shifting attention to the novel cue and outcomes
presented in the learning context. These children’s success
however did not depend on using English word order,
which is critical to the syntactic definition of a word as an
adjective. This implies that these younger children were
not using knowledge about the syntactic category of the
novel word to guide their learning. Given the general
learning mechanism of attentional highlighting, they do not
need it. Past learning of other words, and the activation of
that learning by the explicit mention of these words can
work to appropriately direct attention and learning.
The performance of the older children (3-year-olds) in
Experiment 1 does not support the attentional hypothesis.
The original motivation of these experiments was, in a
sense, to “explain away” Mintz and Gleitman’s results by
showing that the success they reported for 3-year-olds in
their study did not require knowledge of syntactic
categories or their linkage to semantic categories. We did
not do this, and Mintz and Gleitman’s original conclusion –
about the role of the noun in defining the syntactic category
of adjective – still stands for 3-year-olds. The fact that 3year-olds in the present experiment performed worse than
2-year-olds when English word order was taken away
shows that these children are using syntactic knowledge.
What we add to Mintz and Gleitman prior results, then, is
new insights into an earlier origin for adjective learning,
one that does not depend on having yet acquired that
syntactic knowledge.
In conclusion, the power of associative learning is the
effect of systems of interacting associations that both build
over time and exert direct influence on attention and
learning in the moment. Early adjective learning, like
Highlighting, may be an example of the effects of known
words and referents on the learning of new ones, and also a
demonstration of how associative learning, through its
effects on attention, contributes to smart word learning.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIMH grant (R01MH60200), NIH-NICHHD grant (R01-HD28675.) We
thank the children and parents who participated in this
study.

References
Clark, E. V. (1997) Conceptual perspective and lexical
choice in acquisition. Cognition 64, 1-37.
Gasser, M. & Smith, L. B. (1998). Learning nouns and
adjectives: a connectionist account. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 13, 269-306

723

Goldstone, R. L. (1998). Perceptual learning. Annual
Review of Psychology, 49, 585-612.
Golinkoff, R., Mervis, C., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (1994).
Early object labels: The case for a developmental lexical
principles framework. Journal of Child Language, 21,
125-155.
Graf Estes, K., Evans, J. L., Alibali, M. W., & Saffran, J.
R. (in press). Can infants map meaning to newly
segmented words? Statistical segmentation and word
learning. Psychological Science.
Keil, F. C. (1991). Theories, concepts, and the acquisition
of word meaning. In J. P. Byrnes & S. A. Gelman
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and cognition:
interrelations in development (pp. 197–224). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Klibanoff, R. S. & Waxman, S. (2000). Basic Level Object
Categories Support the Acquisition of Novel Adjectives:
Evidence from Preschool-Aged Children. Child
Development, 71(3), 649-659.
Kruschke, J. K. (1996). Base rates in category learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22(1), 3-26.
Kruschke, J. K. & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and
backward blocking involve learned inattention.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 636-645.
Kruschke, J. K., Kappenman, E. S., & Hetrick, W. P.
(2005). Eye gaze and individual differences consistent
with learned attention in associative blocking and
highlighting. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(5), 830-845.
Landau. B., Smith. L. B., & Jones. S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive
Development, 3, 299-321.
Macnamara, J. (1982). Names for things: A study of human
learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books

Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on
word meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Markman, E. M. (1991). The whole-object, taxonomic,
and mutual exclusivity assumptions as initial constraints
on word meanings. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(eds), Perspectives on language and thought :
interrelations in development.
New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Markman, E. M. & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words.
Cognitive Psychology 20, 121–57.
Mintz, T. H. & Gleitman, L. (2002). Adjectives really do
modify nouns: the incremental and restricted nature of
early adjective acquisition. Cognition, 84, 267-293.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: Do ontology, category organization and
syntax correspond? Cognition, 73(1), 1-33.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.
& Samuelson, L. (2002).
Object Name Learning
Provides
On-the-Job
Training
for
Attention.
Psychological Science, 13, 13-19.
Soja. N. N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. S. (1991) Ontological
categories guide young children's inductions of word
meaning: Object terms and substance terms. Cognition.
38, 179-211.
Waxman, S. R. (1998). Linking object categorization and
naming: Early expectations and the shaping role of
language. In D. L. Medin (Ed.), The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, Vol. 38 (pp. 249-291). San
Diego: Academic Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2000). The role of
comparison in the extension of novel adjectives.
Developmental Psychology, 36 (5), 571-581.

724

