UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Auditory Dominance: Overshadowing or Response Competition?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jv5c1rk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Robinson, Christopher W.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Auditory Dominance:
Overshadowing or Response Competition?
Christopher W. Robinson (robinson.777@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208F Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004; in press-a; in
press-b; Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003). Second, there
is an auditory dominance effect: While the presence
of an auditory stimulus often hinders visual
discrimination, the presence of a visual stimulus
often has little or no effect on auditory discrimination
(Sloutsky & Robinson, in press). Third, auditory
dominance decreases in the course of development
(Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004; Sloutsky & Napolitano,
2003). Fourth, auditory dominance can be reversed or
attenuated by manipulating the familiarity of the
auditory and visual stimuli (Napolitano & Sloutsky,
2004; Robinson & Sloutsky, in press-a; Sloutsky &
Robinson, in press). Finally, while unfamiliar sounds
and words often have different effects on visual tasks,
familiar sounds and words often have comparable
effects on visual tasks (Robinson & Sloutsky, in
press-a; Sloutsky & Robinson, in press).
Although auditory dominance is well documented,
the mechanism(s) underlying these effects need
further examination. For example, one mechanism
that can result in auditory dominance is
overshadowing. According to this account, poor
visual discrimination in bimodal conditions stems
from the auditory stimulus pulling attention away
from the visual stimulus and, thus, attenuating the
encoding of visual input. However, it is also possible
that some of these effects stem from response
competition. According to this account, children
encode both modalities, however, the auditory input
interferes with or is preferred when making a
decision or response. The primary goal of the current
research is to distinguish between these two possible
mechanisms that may underlie auditory dominance.
The current study employed a variation of the
immediate recognition task recently used by
Napolitano and Sloutsky (2004). Children were first
presented with a target stimulus, which was followed
by a test stimulus. Children were instructed to say

Abstract
The ability to process simultaneously presented auditory and
visual information is a necessary component underlying many
cognitive tasks. While this ability is often taken for granted,
previous research has demonstrated that there are many
occasions where infants and young children are better at
discriminating a visual stimulus when it is presented in
isolation than when paired with an auditory stimulus. The
current study expands on this research by examining whether
this attenuated discrimination stems from overshadowing
(auditory stimulus disrupts encoding of visual stimulus) or
from response competition (auditory input interferes with
visual processing during the decision or response phase).
While attenuated discrimination in the current study stemmed
from response competition, we argue that both overshadowing
and response competition underlie auditory dominance
effects.
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Language
Acquisition, Psychology, Human Experimentation.

Introduction
The ability to process simultaneously presented auditory
and visual information is a necessary component
underlying many cognitive tasks. For example, word
learning and effects of linguistic labels on categorization,
induction and object individuation all hinge on the ability
to encode and store arbitrary, auditory-visual pairings
(Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004;
Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001; Welder & Graham, 2001;
Xu, 2002). The current research can shed light on many
different aspects of cognitive development by examining
how children process simultaneously presented auditory
and visual stimuli more generally.
The research that has examined infants’ and young
children’s processing of arbitrary auditory-visual pairings
has documented several important findings. First, infants
and young children are often better at discriminating a
visual stimulus when it is presented in isolation than when
paired with an auditory stimulus (Napolitano & Sloutsky,

605

animal-like creatures (see Figure 1 for examples of
visual stimuli). Although children did not know the
referents for the nonsense words, the words are
familiar to children in the sense that they can ably
identify the source of these stimuli (i.e., a person
produced the words). The auditory and visual stimuli
were presented on a Dell Inspiron laptop computer
with Presentation software. Visual stimuli were
approximately 10 cm by 10 cm in size. Auditory
stimuli consisted of child-directed labels, which were
produced by a female experimenter. Both the familiar
sounds and nonsense labels were edited using Cool
Edit 2000 to ensure that auditory stimuli were equal
in duration (1 s) and presented at 65-70 dB.

“same” if the target and test stimuli were exactly the same
and say “different” if the target and test stimuli differed in
any way.
In the first experiment both the target stimulus and the
test stimulus consisted of arbitrary, auditory-visual
pairings (e.g., AUD-VIS → AUD-VIS). Children were
instructed to say “same” if the target and test stimuli were
exactly the same (i.e., if the auditory and visual stimuli
were in agreement) and say “different” if either the
auditory component changed, the visual component
changed or both components changed. Given that the
auditory stimulus was present in the target stimulus as
well as in the test stimulus, auditory dominance could
stem from overshadowing or from response competition.
In Experiment 2, children were also shown an auditoryvisual target stimulus. However, this time either the
auditory stimulus was removed at test (e.g., AUD-VIS →
VIS) or the visual stimulus was removed at test (e.g.,
AUD-VIS → AUD). In the former trial types (visual
trials), children had to determine if the two pictures were
exactly the same or different. In the latter trial types
(auditory trials), children had to determine if the two
auditory stimuli were exactly the same or different.
Because the auditory stimulus was not present at test to
interfere with a response on visual trials, any attenuated
discrimination in Experiment 2 could be directly
attributed to the auditory stimulus attenuating the
encoding of the visual stimulus. Thus, by manipulating
whether the auditory stimulus is present or absent at test,
the current study will shed light on children’s processing
of simultaneously presented auditory and visual stimuli,
which has implications for higher-level tasks that hinge
on this process.

Procedure The experiment consisted of two phases.
In the first phase, children’s discrimination of the
auditory and visual stimuli was assessed when the
stimuli were presented bimodally (bimodal
presentation). In the second phase, children’s
discrimination of the auditory and visual stimuli was
assessed when the stimuli were presented in isolation
(unimodal presentation).
Prior to the experiment, children were told that
they were going to play a matching game where they
would be given a picture and a sound and then
another picture and sound. If both the pictures and
sounds were exactly the same, they were instructed to
say “same”. If the sound changed, the picture
changed or both the sound and picture changed, they
were instructed to say “different”.
Six different auditory-visual targets were
constructed, and each target had four different test
trials, which resulted in 24 trials (see Figure 1 for
trial types). On each trial, an AUD-VIS target
stimulus was presented for 1 s, followed by a 1 s
inter-stimulus interval. An AUD-VIS test stimulus
was then presented for 1 s. Some of the test items had
the same auditory-visual components as the target
(i.e., same trials). A correct response on these trials
was “same” because the auditory and visual stimuli
were in agreement. The remaining test trials had a
change in either the auditory component (i.e.,
different auditory/same visual), the visual component
(i.e., different visual/same auditory) or in both
components (i.e., both different). A correct response
on these trials was “different”. Six trials were
presented from each of the four trial types, and the 24
trials were randomized for each subject.
After completing the 24 bimodal trials, children
moved to the next phase where discrimination of the
unimodal stimuli was assessed. Prior to the unimodal
phase, children were told that they were going to play
a similar game, however, this time they would only
see pictures or only hear sounds. The unimodal phase
also consisted of 24 trials (12 auditory trials and 12

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to first identify conditions
that result in auditory dominance. Based on Napolitano
and Sloutsky’s (2004) findings, it was expected that
familiar auditory stimuli (e.g., familiar sounds and human
speech) would be more likely to attenuate visual
discrimination than unfamiliar sounds. Thus, familiar
auditory stimuli were used in the current experiments.

Method
Participants Twenty-three four-year olds (13 girls and 10
boys, M = 4.5 years, SD = .30 years) participated in this
experiment. Ten children heard familiar sounds during the
experiment and 13 children heard words. Children were
recruited through local day-care centers located in
middle- and upper-middle-class suburbs of Columbus,
Ohio. The majority of children were Caucasian.
Stimuli The auditory and visual stimuli consisted of 12
familiar sounds (e.g., car horn, telephone ring, etc.), 12
nonsense labels (e.g., vika, toma, etc.) and 12 novel

606

the same stimuli in the unimodal phase by submitting
accuracy scores to a 2 (Modality: Auditory vs.
Visual) x 2 (Presentation: Bimodal vs. Unimodal) x 2
(Stimulus Condition: Familiar Sound vs. Nonsense
Label) ANOVA with Modality and Presentation
manipulated within subjects (see Figure 2 for Means
and Standard Errors).

visual trials), which were randomized for each child. Half
of the trials within each modality were same trials and
half were different trials. The auditory and visual stimuli
were identical to those presented in the bimodal phase,
thus, making performance in this phase a measure of
baseline discrimination.
Test Trial Types
AUDT

Unimodal

Same

Bimodal

1
0.9

AUDnew

Hits - FA

0.8

Different
auditory/
Same visual

AUDT

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

AUDT

Target

0

Different
visual/
Same auditory

AUDnew

Auditory

Modality

Visual

Figure 2: Children’s discrimination of auditory and
visual input in Experiment 1. Means and standard
errors are collapsed across stimulus condition.

Both
different

The analysis revealed a Presentation x Modality
interaction, F (1, 21) = 15.28, p < .001, which
suggests that the auditory stimulus hindered visual
discrimination more than the visual stimulus hindered
auditory discrimination. As can be seen above, the
analysis also revealed effects of Presentation and
Modality, Fs > 21.44, ps > .001. It is also important
to note that there was no significant effect of
Stimulus Condition nor did Stimulus Condition
significantly interact with the other factors, Fs < 1.14,
ps > .30. This suggests that nonsense labels and
familiar sounds had comparable effects on
attenuating visual discrimination.
In summary, Experiment 1 is consistent with
previous research examining processing of arbitrary,
auditory-visual pairings in young children: Familiar
auditory stimuli such as familiar sounds and human
speech both had comparable effects on visual
discrimination (Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004;
Robinson & Sloutsky, in press-a).

Figure 1: Overview of trial types in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Discrimination accuracy was calculated separately for the
unimodal trials and for the bimodal trials. For example,
discrimination of visual stimuli in the unimodal condition
was calculated by subtracting the proportion of false
alarms on different trials from the proportion of hits on
same trials. Accuracy in the auditory and visual unimodal
conditions are reported in the black bars of Figure 2. As
can be seen in the figure, unimodal accuracy in both
modalities approached ceiling.
Discrimination accuracy in the bimodal conditions was
also calculated by subtracting the proportion of false
alarms on different trials from the proportion of hits on
same trials. Discrimination of the visual stimuli was
calculated by subtracting the proportion of false alarms on
different visual/same auditory trials from the proportion
of hits on same trials. Discrimination of the auditory
stimuli was calculated by subtracting the proportion of
false alarms on different auditory/same visual trials from
the proportion of hits on same trials. These values are
reported in the gray bars in Figure 2. Note that
participants had no difficulty rejecting both different
trials, correct rejections > .94.
Discrimination of auditory and visual stimuli when
presented bimodally was compared to discrimination of

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to further examine the
auditory dominance effects found in Experiment 1.
As in Experiment 1, children were presented with an
auditory-visual compound target stimulus. However,
in contrast to the previous experiment, children were
only presented with one modality at test (e.g., AUDVIS → VIS). Because the auditory stimulus was not
present at test to interfere with a response, any
attenuated discrimination in Experiment 2 could be

607

directly attributed to the auditory stimulus attenuating the
encoding of the target visual stimulus. On the other hand,
if auditory dominance effects disappear, this would
suggest that children did encode the target visual
stimulus, however, the auditory stimulus interfered with
their decision or response.

Results and Discussion
As in Experiment 1, discrimination accuracy scores
were submitted to a 2 (Modality: Auditory vs. Visual)
x 2 (Presentation: Bimodal vs. Unimodal) x 2
(Stimulus Condition: Familiar Sound vs. Nonsense
Label) ANOVA with Modality and Presentation
manipulated within subjects. As can be seen in Figure
4, the analysis revealed no significant effects or
interactions, all Fs < 1.91, ps > .19. Thus, while
familiar sounds and nonsense labels markedly
attenuated visual discrimination in Experiment 1,
these same stimuli had no significant effect when
they were removed from the testing stimulus.

Method
Participants Eighteen four-year olds (12 girls and 6 boys,
M = 4.4 years, SD = .30 years) participated in this
experiment. Nine children heard familiar sounds paired
with the visual stimuli and nine children heard nonsense
labels paired with the same visual stimuli. Demographics
and subject recruitment were identical to Experiment 1.

Unimodal
Bimodal

Stimuli and Procedure The auditory and visual stimuli
were identical to Experiment 1. Children were first
presented with 24 bimodal trials and then 24 unimodal
trials. The unimodal trials were identical to Experiment 1.
As mentioned above, the bimodal trials differed from the
previous experiment in one important way: While the
target stimulus was presented bimodally, only one
modality was presented at test (see Figure 3 for an
overview of trial types). Half of the trials were auditory
trials and half of the trials were visual trials, and trials
were randomized for each child. Thus, children had no
way of knowing whether they were going to be asked
about the auditory or visual stimulus while the target
stimulus was presented. On visual test trials children were
asked “were those two pictures the same or different” and
on auditory test trials they were asked “were those two
sounds (or words) the same or different”.

1
0.9

Hits - FA

0.8

AUDT

Same

AUDnew

Different
Auditory

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.1
0

Auditory

Modality

Visual

Figure 4: Children’s discrimination of auditory and
visual input in Experiment 2. Means and standard
errors are collapsed across stimulus condition.

General Discussion
The current study reveals several important
findings. First, when auditory and visual stimuli are
paired together, the presence of an auditory stimulus
often corresponds with a decrease in visual
discrimination (Experiment 1). Second, this effect is
not restricted to linguistic input: Both familiar sounds
and linguistic labels had comparable effects on visual
discrimination. Finally, the attenuated discrimination
found in Experiment 1 is likely to stem from auditory
input interfering with visual processing during the
decision or response phase (Experiment 2).
The current findings are important for
understanding how children process auditory and
visual pairings more generally, however, it will also
be important to integrate these findings with
children’s performance on more sophisticated tasks.
For example, in categorization and induction tasks
(e.g., Gelman & Markman, 1986; Sloutsky & Fisher,
2004), an experimenter labels a target picture and
then labels two test pictures. Children’s task is to
generalize a non-obvious property or category
membership, and they can rely on appearance
(visual) or on the label (auditory) to make their

Visual Trials
Target

0.6

0.2

Auditory Trials
AUDT

0.7

Same

Different
Visual

Figure 3: Overview of trial types in Experiment 2.

608

novel exemplar from the familiar category and a
novel exemplar from a novel category. Even though
no auditory input was provided at test, recognition
and categorization performance was often worse in
the auditory conditions compared to a silent baseline.
Furthermore, unfamiliar sounds were more likely to
attenuate categorization and recognition than familiar
auditory stimuli (“a cat”). These findings provide
strong evidence that overshadowing can also drive
auditory dominance effects. These findings also
suggest that familiarity may have different effects
during the encoding phase and during the decision or
response phase.
In summary, there are many tasks that require
infants and children to process simultaneously
presented auditory and visual information, and it is
likely that both overshadowing and response
competition affect the way children respond to these
stimuli. Understanding these processes may not only
shed light on how attention is allocated to crossmodal stimuli, but it is likely that many of these lowlevel effects also permeate children’s responses in a
variety of cognitive tasks.

generalizations. It is often found that young children are
more likely to rely on the label when making a
generalization than on appearance. Several different
explanations can account for this effect, and these
explanations are not mutually exclusive. The first
possibility is that children understand the conceptual
importance of labels, with labels serving as proxies to
category membership (Gelman & Coley, 1991). A second
possibility is that auditory input (including words)
overshadows or attenuates the processing of visual input
(Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003), and children rely more on
the label because they did not fully encode the visual
stimulus. The current study offers a third possibility: Even
under situations where there is no evidence of
overshadowing, it is possible that the auditory stimulus
interferes with a child’s response.
The current study may also resolve a discrepancy
surrounding the role of familiarity in modality dominance.
In some conditions, increasing the familiarity of the
auditory stimulus corresponds with stronger auditory
dominance effects (Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004).
However, in other conditions, increasing the familiarity of
the auditory stimulus attenuates auditory dominance
effects (Robinson & Sloutsky, in press-a; in press-b). One
possible explanation that may resolve this discrepancy is
by positing that stimulus familiarity has different effects
during the encoding phase than during the
decision/response phase. During encoding, unfamiliar
auditory stimuli are likely to require more attentional
resources than familiar auditory stimuli, and therefore
making unfamiliar auditory stimuli more likely to
interfere with the encoding of a visual stimulus. However,
when the task is to make a response or to make
comparisons in memory, familiar auditory stimuli may be
retrieved faster and more efficiently than unfamiliar
auditory stimuli. This in turn could make familiar
auditory stimuli more likely to dominate a decision or
response.
If these considerations are correct, then the
differential familiarity effects should fluctuate under
different experimental conditions. In tasks such as
Experiment 1 (see also Napolitano & Sloutsky, 2004;
Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003) where the auditory
stimulus is presented when the child needs to make a
response, more familiar auditory stimuli elicit stronger
auditory dominance effects than unfamiliar auditory
stimuli. In contrast, when the auditory stimulus is only
presented during the encoding phase, it is often found that
unfamiliar auditory stimuli are more likely to interfere
with visual processing than familiar auditory stimuli
(Robinson & Sloutsky, in press-b). For example, in
Robinson and Sloutsky’s (in press-b) study, infants were
familiarized to different exemplars from within a
category. Category members were either associated with
unfamiliar sounds (laser sound) or words (e.g., “a cat”).
After familiarization, infants were shown two stimuli: a

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
NSF (REC 0208103) and from the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
(R305H050125) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old
infants?
Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 64, 3-26.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind
terms. In S.A. Gelman, & J.P. Byrnes (Eds.).
Perspectives
on
language
and
thought:
Interrelations in development (146-196). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories
and induction in young children. Cognition, 23,
183-209.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a
Picture Worth a Thousand Words? The Flexible
Nature of Modality Dominance in Young Children.
Child Development, 75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004).
Auditory dominance and its change in the course of
development. Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C, W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (in press-a).
Visual processing speed: Effects of auditory input
on visual processing. Developmental Science.

609

modality in young children. Child Development,
74, 822-833.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Robinson, C. W. (in press). The
role of words and sounds in visual processing:
From overshadowing to attentional tuning.
Cognitive Science.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The
influences of shape similarity and shared labels on
infants’ inductive inferences about nonobvious
object properties. Child Development, 72, 16531673.
Xu, F. (2002). The role of language in acquiring object
kind concepts in infancy. Cognition, 85, 223-250.

Robinson, C, W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (in press-b).
Linguistic labels and categorization in infancy: Do
labels facilitate or hinder?. Infancy.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar?
Linguistic labels, similarity, and the development of
inductive inference. Child Development, 72, 16951709.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? Preference for auditory

610

