UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Bayesian Models of Judgments of Causal Strength: A Comparison

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3w11d56t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Lu, Hongjing
Yuille, Alan
Liljeholm, Mimi
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Bayesian Models of Judgments of Causal Strength: A Comparison
Hongjing Lu (hongjing@hkucc.hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Alan Yuille (yuille@stat.ucla.edu)
Department of Statistics, UCLA

Mimi Liljeholm (mlil@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA

Patricia W. Cheng (cheng@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
(representing causal strengths) on the causal links for B and
C, respectively.

Abstract
We formulate four alternative Bayesian models of causal
strength judgments, and compare their predictions to two sets of
human data. The models were derived by factorially varying the
causal generating function for integrating multiple causes
(based on either the power PC theory or the ∆P rule) and priors
on strengths (favoring necessary and sufficient (NS) causes, or
uniform). The models based on the causal generating function
derived from the power PC theory provided much better fits
than those based on the function derived from the ∆P rule. The
models that included NS priors were able to account for subtle
asymmetries between strength judgments for generative and
preventive causes. These results complement previous model
comparisons for judgments of causal structure (Lu et al., 2006).
Keywords: Bayesian inference; causal strength; causal power

B

C

w0

w1

Figure 1. A simple causal graph.
B, C, and E are binary variables.
Weights w0 and w1 in Graph 1
indicate causal strength of the
background cause, B, and the
candidate cause, C, respectively.

E

Derivation of Bayesian Models

Strength Judgments in a Bayesian Framework
Within the Bayesian framework, two major types of queries
about causal knowledge can be distinguished. A query about
model selection requires assessing the underlying causal
structure, (e.g., does a causal link exist between the HIV
virus and AIDS?). A query about parameter estimation
requires assessing the strength of a cause that acts to
produce or prevent an associated effect. For example, the
HIV virus almost always leads to development of the
disease AIDS (high causal strength), whereas smoking a
pack of cigarette every day for a year leads to cancer with
some small probability (low causal strength). Our previous
work (Lu et al., 2006) focused on model selection. The
present paper, in contrast, focuses on parameter estimation.
Judging causal strength can be formalized as a Bayesian
problem of parameter estimation within a fixed causal graph,
as shown in Figure 1 (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005; Jaynes,
2003). Within the Bayesian framework, inference depends
jointly on the likelihoods of data given alternative
hypotheses, and on priors for these hypotheses. Likelihoods
depend on the causal generating function, i.e., how do the
influences of potential causes B and C in Graph 1 combine
to influence E? The relevant priors are initial probabilities
assigned to possible values of the weights wo and w1

In previous work (Lu et al., 2006) we compared alternative
Bayesian models of human judgments concerning
confidence that a causal link exists (structure judgments).
Here we compare a broader set of Bayesian models to sets
of human data concerning causal strength. Based on
observation of contingency data D, a Bayesian model is able
to assess the probability distribution of w1 so as to quantify
statistical properties of the causal strength of candidate
cause C to produce or prevent E. In this paper we compare
the average human strength rating with the mean of w1 in
the causal structure shown in Figure 1. The mean of w1 is
determined by
1

w1 = ∫ w1P( w1 | D) .

(1)

0

The posterior distribution P( w1 | D) is obtained by applying
Bayes rule,
1
1 P( D | w , w ) P ( w , w )
(2)
0
1
0
1
P ( w | D ) = P( w , w | D )dw =
dw ,
1

where

∫

0

0

1

P ( D | w0 , w1 )

0

is

∫

the

0

0

P( D)

likelihood

term.

P ( w0 , w1 )

corresponds to prior probabilities that model the learner’s
beliefs about the values of causal strengths. P(D) is the
normalizing term, denoting the probability of obtaining the
observed data. Let + / − indicate the value of the variable
to be 1 (present) versus 0 (absent). The likelihood term
P ( D | w0 , w1 ) is given by

1241

−
+
P ( D | w0 , w1 ) =  N (+c )−  N (+c )+ ∏ P (e | b, c; w0 , w1 ) N ( e, c )
 N ( e ,c )  N ( e ,c )  e, c

where

(3)

b, c, e ∈ {0,1} denotes the absence and the presence

of the causes B, C, and the effect E.  n  denotes the number
 
k

of ways of picking k unordered outcomes from n
possibilities.
Alternative Causal Generating Functions Griffiths and
Tenenbaum (2005) pointed out that Bayesian models of
causal judgments can be constructed using either of two
causal generating functions derived from models in the
psychological literature. The causal generating function
adopted by Griffiths and Tenenbaum in their “causal
support” model is the power generating function, derived
from the power PC theory (Cheng, 1997; see Glymour,
2001). For the situation in which background cause B and
candidate cause C are both potential generative causes, the
probability of observing the effect E is given by a noisy-OR
function,
(4)
P(e + | b,c;w 0 ,w1 ) = w 0b + w1c − w 0 w1bc.
It is assumed that b = 1 because the background cause B is
always present in the experimental setup. In the preventive
case, B is again assumed to be potentially generative
(following the power PC theory, which specifies that the
background must not include preventive causes), whereas C
is potentially preventive. The resulting noisy-AND-NOT
generating function for preventive causes is
(5)
P (e + | b, c; w0 , w1 ) = w0 b − w0 w1bc.
For convenience we will refer to Eqs. 4-5 together as the
power generating function. Because the power generating
function obeys the laws of probability, the weights w0 and
w1 are inherently constrained to the range [0,1].
Using the power generating function, Cheng (1997)
derived quantitative predictions for judgments of causal
strength. Let q represent a point estimate of the value of
causal power. When certain assumptions are satisfied, the
predicted value of causal power for a generative cause is

qG =

∆P
,
1 − P(e + | c − )

(6)

and the predicted value of power for a preventive cause is

qP =

−∆P
,
P(e + | c − )

(7)

where ∆P is simply the difference between the probability
of the effect in the presence versus absence of the candidate
cause, i.e.,
(8)
∆P = P(e + | c + ) − P(e + | c − ).
Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2005) showed that causal power
(q in Eqs. 6-7) corresponds to the maximum likelihood
estimate for the random variable w1 on a fixed graph (as
shown in Figure 1) under the power generating function.
The term P(e + | c − ) in the denominator of Eqs. 6-7 is
often termed the base rate of the effect, as it gives the
prevalence of the effect under background conditions in the

absence of the candidate cause. The base rate determines the
value of w0 in the causal structural graph shown in Figure 1.
An alternative causal generating function can be derived
directly from ∆P (Eq. 8), which has been interpreted by
some theorists as an estimate of causal strength (Jenkins &
Ward, 1965). Under certain conditions, when learning is at
asymptote the ∆P rule is equivalent to the Rescorla-Wagner
associative learning model (see Danks, 2003), which has
been advanced as a model of causal inference (Shanks &
Dickinson, 1987). The ∆P model yields a linear generating
function,
(9)
P(e + | b,c;w 0,w1 ) = w 0b + w1c
where w0 is within the range [0,1], and w1 is within the
range [-1,1] and with an additional constraint that w0 + w1
must lie in the range [0,1] so as to result in a legitimate
probability distribution. Eq. 9 simply states that the
candidate cause C changes the probability of E by a constant
amount regardless of the presence or absence of other
causes, such as B. Griffiths and Tenenbaum (2005) proved
that Eq. 9 yields ∆P as the maximum likelihood estimate of
w1 when substituted for Eqs. 4-5.
Alternative Priors The second component in Eq. 2 is the
prior on causal strength, P ( w0 , w1 ) , within the causal
structure in Figure 1. When C is an unfamiliar cause, a
natural assumption is that people will have no substantive
priors about the values of w0 and w1, modeled by priors that
are uniform over the range [0,1]. Griffiths and Tenenbaum
(2005) adopted uniform priors in their causal support model.
An alternative proposal is that people have priors for
necessary and sufficient (NS) causes (Lu et al., 2006). Our
NS power model integrates the power generating function
with generic priors (cf. Lu & Yuille, 2006) about the
relationship between the powers of alternative potential
causes. We make the assumption that people prefer causal
networks that are relatively simple (Novick & Cheng, 2004,
p. 471) and that people have a deterministic bias regarding
causal strength. Causal simplicity (Chater & Vitányi, 2003)
potentially manifests itself in multiple ways, which likely
include a preference for fewer causes (Lombrozo, 2007) and
for causes that do not involve interactions (Novick & Cheng,
2004; Liljeholm & Cheng, in press). Deterministic causal
preference biases causal strength towards 0 and/or 1. NS
priors imply that people have a prior belief favoring causes
that are necessary and sufficient (e.g., a genetic defect on
chromosome 4 is necessary and sufficient to cause
Huntington’s disease). But rather than being a strict logical
condition, NS priors are assumed to be probabilistic. Pearl
(2000) interpreted generative causal power (Eq. 3) as
“probability of sufficiency,” and ∆P (Eq. 6) as “probability
of necessity and sufficiency.” (For preventive causes the
analogous quantities are preventive causal power and −∆P,
respectively.) Developmental data provide support for the
assumption of NS priors. Recent evidence indicates that
preschool children tacitly believe in “causal determinism”,

1242

inferring unobserved causes to explain apparently stochastic
patterns of effects (Schultz & Sommerville, 2006).
For the generative case, the background B and candidate
C are both potentially generative, and hence will implicitly
compete as alternative NS causes. Accordingly, we set
priors favoring NS generative causes with the prior
distribution peaks for w0 , w1 at 0,1 (C is an NS cause) and
1,0 (B is) (see Figure 2A). We specify the priors using a
mixed distribution with exponential functions,

P ( w0 , w1 | gen ) =

e −αw0 −α (1− w1 ) + e −α (1− w0 )−αw1
, (10)
Z (α )

where α is a parameter controlling how strongly necessary
and sufficient causes are preferred. When α = 0 , the prior
follows a uniform distribution, indicating no preference to
any values of causal strength. Z (α ) = 2(1 − e −α ) 2 / α 2 denotes a
normalization term that ensures the sum of the prior
probabilities equals 1. Figure 2A depicts the shape of a
distribution when α = 5.

Figure 2. Prior distributions over w0 and w1 with NS priors. A:
Generative case, α = 5 (peaks at 0,1 and 1,0); B: Preventive case,
α = 5 (peaks at 1,1 and 1,0).

The NS prior will differ for the preventive case (Figure
2B). Because the background cause, B, is assumed to be
generative regardless of the existence of the preventive
candidate cause C, B and C will not compete as alternative
NS causes in the preventive case. The issue of prevention
will arise under the assumption that the effect is being
generated; hence the peak weight of w0 for the background
cause B (the only possible generative cause) is assumed to
be biased towards 1. The maximum probability of necessity
and sufficiency for C as a preventer will then obtain when B
is a sufficient generative cause, w 0 = 1 , yielding a
distribution peak for

In summary, the factorial combination of two alternative
causal generating functions (power versus linear) and two
alternative priors (NS or uniform) yields four alternative
Bayesian models: Model I (power, NS), Model II (power,
uniform), Model III (linear, NS), and Model IV (linear,
uniform). Model I corresponds to the NS power model (Lu
et al., 2006) when adapted to estimate causal strength.
Model II corresponds to the causal support model (Griffiths
& Tenenbaum, 2005) when adapted to estimate strength
(Danks, Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2003). Model IV
corresponds to a Bayesian formulation of the ∆P rule
(Jenkins & Ward, 1965) and the equivalent variant of the
Rescorla-Wagner model (e.g., Shanks & Dickinson, 1987).
Model III, identical to Model IV except with NS priors, has
never been previously considered.

Simulations of Human Strength Judgments
We tested these four models by comparing the predictions
of each for two data sets of human judgments of causal
strength. Methodological issues arise in selecting data for
quantitative modeling of strength judgments. Many studies
have used rating scales to assess causal strength. As pointed
out by Buehner et al. (2003), such scales may be ambiguous,
leading participants to give responses that conflate causal
strength with reliability. An elicitation procedure for
strength judgments that minimizes ambiguity is to ask
participants to estimate the frequency with which the
candidate cause would produce (or prevent) the effect in a
new set of cases that do not already exhibit the effect
(Buehner et al., 2003, Experiments 2-3). The two data sets
we selected for modeling used this type of query, coupled
with summary displays of contingency information in which
individual cases are presented in a single organized display
(see Figure 3 for an example). Such presentations provide a
vivid display of individual cases, making salient the
frequencies of the various types of cases, while minimizing
memory demands.

Data Set 1: “Headache” Cover Story

w0 , w1 at 1,1. If C is not sufficient,

the alternative consistent with causal determinism is that it
is completely ineffective, yielding an additional peak at 1,0.
We again use an exponential formulation,

e −α (1− w0 ) −α (1− w1 ) + e −α (1− w0 ) −αw1
, (11)
P( w0 , w1 | prev) =
Z (α )
where all parameters are defined as in Eq. 10.
Note that the two peaks of the NS priors for the
preventive case (Figure 2B) are not symmetrical with those
for the generative case (Figure 2A). As we will see, the
asymmetrical NS priors for generative versus preventive
causes yield systematic asymmetries in human causal
judgments as a function of causal direction.

We first modeled a large data set from a study by Liljeholm
and Cheng (2007, Experiment 1).
Method Fifty-two undergraduates at the University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA) were assigned in equal
numbers to generative and preventive conditions.
Participants first read a cover story about a pharmaceutical
company investigating whether various minerals in an
allergy medicine might produce headache (generative
condition) as a side effect. The preventive cover story was
identical except that the word “remove” was substituted for
“produce”. Participants were further informed that each
mineral was to be tested in a different lab, and that the
number of patients who had a headache before receiving any
mineral, as well as the total number of patients, might vary
across patient groups from different labs. Participants were
then presented with data from the tests of the allergy
medicine. Each trial was depicted as the face of an allergy
patient. As illustrated in Figure 3, each patient was

1243

represented by a cartoon face that was either frowning
(headache) or smiling (no headache). The data were divided
into 2 subsets, each an array of faces. The top subset
represented patients before receiving the mineral and
depicted P(e+|c-); the bottom subset represented patients
after receiving the mineral and depicted P(e+|c+).
= head ache

When t he se pat ient s we re not given any
med icine, t his is how t h ey w ere:
No

Me dic ine

Whe n Medicine A w as g ive n to th em ,
t his is ho w t hey we re:
Medicine

simulations the mean of w1 for each contingency was used
to predict the corresponding mean strength rating.
Following Buehner et al. (2003) and Liljeholm and Cheng
(2007), we assume that mean strength ratings on the 100point scale approximate a ratio scale of causal power.1

Figure 3. Example of a
“headache”
display,
showing patients who
had not (top) or had
(bottom) received a
mineral used in an
allergy medicine, and
who had or had not
developed headaches.

A

Contingency conditions were varied within-subjects. Two
samples sizes (16 and 64) were combined with two causal
powers, .25 and 1, and three base rates: 0 (for generative; 1
for preventive), .25, and .75, yielding a total of 24
conditions (see Figure 4). The code in Figure 4 indicates
number of patients with headache out of total number before
receiving the mineral (i.e., base rate of the effect), and
number with headache out of total number after receiving
the mineral (where the mineral is C and headache is E). In
Figure 4, generative and preventive conditions are identical
except that the frequencies of headache and no headache are
transposed. For example, the generative case 0/16, 4/16,
where the base rate P(e+|c-) = 0, P(e+|c+) = .25, power
= .25, and the sample size is 16, is matched to the
symmetrical preventive case 16/16, 12/16, where P(e+|c-) =
1, P(e+|c+) = .75, power = .25, and the sample size is 16.
Before answering the strength query, participants were
asked if “The mineral has absolutely no influence on
headache.” Strength ratings were not obtained for those
participants who agreed with this assertion. The subsequent
query (generative conditions) was, “Suppose that there are
100 people that do not have headaches. If this mineral was
given to these 100 people, how many of them would have
headaches?” The preventive version simply substituted “do”
for “do not” and “have” for “not have”. Participants had
been instructed not to provide any numerical rating when
selecting the first answer option, as well as to not put a zero
rating when selecting the second answer option. The
dependent measure of causal strength was the average of
numerical rating (1-100) elicited in each condition for the
second query.
Fits of Bayesian Models
Predicted mean strength values can be derived from
Bayesian models under the assumption that people estimate
strength by implicitly sampling values drawn at random
from the posterior probability distribution over w1 (cf.
Mamassian & Landy, 1998). Accordingly, in our

Figure 4. Strength ratings (Data Set 1). Numbers along top show
stimulus contingencies for generative cases; those along bottom
show contingencies for matched negative cases. A: Mean human
ratings (error bars indicate 1 standard error); B~E: Predictions
from four models.

Hence, a successful model must aim to account for the
actual values obtained for human strength judgments,
without any further data transformation. Accordingly, we
report model fits not only based on correlations, but also on
root-mean-squared (RMS) deviations from the human data.
In addition, the models with NS priors predict systematic
interactions as a function of causal direction. For Models I
and III only, we therefore computed not only the overall
correlation of model predictions with human data, but also
the correlation (rd) between the observed and predicted
difference between the mean strength judgments for
matched generative and preventive contingencies. The
1

The assumption of a ratio scale is likely to break down for
strength estimates near the extremes (0 or 100 on the scale) due to
measurement issues (errors necessarily fall one side of the true
mean).

1244

predicted difference score is always 0 for Models II and IV,
which assume uniform priors; hence rd is not computable.
The human data (Figure 4A) were well fit overall by
Models I and II based on the power generating function,
either with NS priors (Figure 4B) or uniform priors (Figure
4C; r = .97 and .96, respectively). Model I (NS power) has a
slight advantage in terms of lower RMS, and in addition
yields a positive correlation with the difference in strength
ratings for matched generative and preventive contingencies
(rd = .41). Models III and IV based on the linear generating
function (Figure 4D-E) yielded substantially poorer overall
fits (r = .86 for each), roughly doubling the RMS relative to
the models based on the power generating function. The
reason for the poor fits of the linear models is that they
erroneously predict that human strength judgments will
asymptote at values corresponding to values of ∆P, whereas
human judgments actually approach values of causal power
at asymptote. The linear Model III with NS priors does,
however, yield a positive correlation with difference scores
for generative versus preventive causes (rd = .61).

both models, with a slight advantage (less than 1 point on
the 100-point scale) for Model II. However, Model I (NS
power) yielded a substantial positive correlation with the
difference in strength ratings for matched generative and
preventive contingencies (rd = .80), whereas Model II with
uniform priors is completely unable to account for the
pattern of interactions with causal direction.
Figure 5. Example of a
“DNA” display, with DNA
strands that had not (top) or
had (bottom) been exposed
to a protein, and indicating
whether a gene was off or
on.

Data Set 2: “DNA” Cover Story
For generality, we performed an experiment to obtain
strength ratings using a different cover story.
Method Seventy-four UCLA undergraduates served in the
study. The cover story concerned a bio-genetics company
testing the influence of various proteins on the expression of
a gene. Participant were told that, in each of several
experiments, DNA strands extracted from hair samples
would be exposed to a particular protein and that the
expression of the gene would then be assessed. They were
told that their job was to evaluate the influence of each
protein on the expression of the gene. Each participant then
saw a series of “experiments”, each of which showed two
samples of DNA strands, depicted as “vivid summaries” of
the same basic sort used the “headache” study (see Figure 5).
One sample of DNA strands had not been exposed to a
particular protein, while the other sample of DNA strands
had been exposed to that protein. The 16 contingencies used
in the experiment are shown in Figure 6. Causal direction
was varied between-subjects, contingency within-subjects.
Strength judgments were obtained from all participants.
The causal query in the generative condition was: “Suppose
that there is a sample of 100 DNA strands and that the gene
is OFF in all those DNA strands. If these 100 strands were
exposed to the protein, in how many of them would the gene
be TURNED ON?” The preventive query was identical
except that “OFF” was replaced by “ON” and “TURNED
ON” by “TURNED OFF”.
Fits of Bayesian Models
As for the data for the “headache” cover story, the human
data based on the “DNA” cover story (Figure 6A) was well
fit overall by Models I and II based on the power generating
function, either with NS (Figure 6B) or uniform priors
(Figure 6C; r = .98 for each). The RMS was very low for

Figure 6. Strength ratings (Data Set 2). Same conventions as in
Figure 4.

Once again, Models III and IV based on the linear
generating function (Figure 6D for NS priors, Figure 6E for
uniform priors) yielded substantially poorer overall fits (r
= .77 and .76, respectively), roughly quadrupling the RMS
relative to the models based on the power generating
function. Model III with NS priors did, however, yield a

1245

positive correlation with difference scores for generative
versus preventive causes (rd = .81).

General Discussion
In summary, the best overall account of human strength
judgments for both the “headache” and “DNA” data sets
was provided by the NS power model (Model I), which
combines the power generating function with NS priors. NS
priors provide the only formal account to date of
asymmetries between causal judgments for generative and
preventive causes. Similar asymmetries have been observed
for judgments of whether or not a causal link is present
(structure judgments; Lu et al., 2006).2
The quantitative failure of the linear generating function
(Models III and IV) confirms the negative conclusion that
has been reached on the basis of more qualitative
comparisons (e.g., Buehner et al., 2003; Liljeholm & Cheng,
2007; Novick & Cheng, 2004). We thus can rule out the
possibility that adopting the Bayesian framework might
somehow salvage the linear generating function as a
psychological model of human causal learning (see also
Danks et al., 2003), regardless of whether the linear function
is cast directly in terms of ∆P (Jenkins & Ward, 1965) or
indirectly in the Rescorla-Wagner model (Shanks &
Dickinson, 1987).
An important meta-point is that there may be many
potential “rational” models of a given cognitive task. The
Bayesian framework simply derives rational predictions
from stated theoretical premises: if a reasoner has certain
entering causal beliefs, and believes that causes follow a
certain function in generating their effects, then some
pattern of rational causal judgments follows. The four
Bayesian models we have considered here differ in their
underlying theoretical premises, and hence in their empirical
predictions. The Bayesian framework provides a natural
formalism for deriving and comparing the quantitative
predictions of alternative “rational” models.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by a grant from the
W. H. Keck Foundation to AY, NIH grant MH64810 to PC,
and NSF grant SES-0350920 to KH.

References
Buehner, M. J., Cheng, P. W., & Clifford, D. (2003). From
covariation to causation: A test of the assumption of
causal power. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 1119-1140.
Chater, N., & Vitányi, P. (2003). Simplicity: A unifying

2

NS priors would appear to be weaker for judgments of strength
(α = 5) than for structure (α = 30; see Lu et al., 2006). We have
since reformulated our structure model to hold NS priors constant
across structure and strength judgments, while adding an additional
component of priors specific to structure judgments.

principle in cognitive science? Trends in Cognitive
Science, 7, 19-22.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Danks, D. (2003). Equilibria of the Rescorla-Wagner model.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 47, 109-121.
Danks, D., Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2003).
Dynamical causal learning. In S. Becker, S. Thrun, & K.
Obermayer (Eds.), Advances in neural information
processing systems (Vol. 15, pp. 67-74). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Glymour, C. (2001). The mind’s arrows: Bayes nets and
graphical causal models in psychology. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Jaynes, E. T. (2003). Probability theory: The logic of
science. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jenkins, H. M., & Ward, W. C. (1965) Judgment of
contingency between responses and outcomes.
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 79
(1, Whole No. 594).
Liljeholm, M., & Cheng, P. W. (in press). When is a cause
the “same”? Coherent generalization across contexts.
Psychological Science.
Liljeholm, M., & Cheng, P. W. (2007). The influence of
actual and virtual sample size on confidence and causal
strength judgments. UCLA Department of Psychology.
Lombrozo, T. (2007). Simplicity and probability in causal
explanation. Cognitive Psychology.
Lu, H., & Yuille, A. (2006). Ideal observers for detecting
motion: Correspondence noise. In B. Schölkopf, J. Platt,
& T. Hofmann (Eds.), Advances in neural information
processing systems,Vol.18. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lu, H., Yuille, A., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak,
K. J. (2006). Modeling causal learning using Bayesian
generic priors on generative and preventive powers. In
R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twentyeighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 519-524). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mamassian, P., & Landy, M. S. (1998). Observer biases in
the 3D interpretation of line drawings. Vision Research,
38, 2817-2832.
Novick, L. R., & Cheng, P. W. (2004). Assessing interactive
causal influence. Psychological Review, 111, 455-485.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Schultz, L. E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism and preschoolers’ causal
inferences. Child Development, 77, 427-442.
Shanks, D. R., & Dickinson, A. (1987). Associative
accounts of causality judgment. In G. H. Bower (Ed.),
The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 21, pp.
229-261). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

1246

