UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Behaviorism Reborn? Statistical Learning as Simple Conditioning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/66f7d1qc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Gureckis, Todd M.
Love, Bradley C.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Behaviorism Reborn? Statistical Learning as Simple Conditioning
Todd M. Gureckis (tgurecki@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology, Indiana University, 1101 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Bradley C. Love (brad love@mail.utexas.edu)
Consortium for Cognition and Computation, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA
Abstract

behaviorist tradition (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). Central to our analysis is a detailed comparison between
human learning and two computational models of statistical sequence learning. While closely related, these
models differ in the types of associative learning processes they utilize. The first model we consider, the simple recurrent network (SRN, Elman, 1990), is a recurrent
network architecture which learns via back-propagation
to predict successive sequence elements on the basis of
the last known element and a representation of the current context. This mechanism has been shown to posses
a number of powerful computational properties. For example, the SRN can act as a “universal approximator”
of arbitrary finite state machines (Cleeremans, ServanSchreiber, & McClelland, 1989).
We compare the SRN to a simple conditioning model
based on direct stimulus-response mappings: the linear associative-shift register (LASR) model of sequence
learning (Gureckis & Love, 2005). Like the SRN, LASR
is an associative model of sequential processing. However, instead of relying on recurrent patterns of activation, memory in the model takes the form of a simple
shift-register memory (similar to the Buffer network of
Cleeremans, 1993). Unlike the SRN or the Buffer network, this memory is directly associated with output responses without mediation by an internal abstraction or
recoding using hidden units. In this way LASR represents a variant of Rescorla-Wagner which learns statistical relationships through time. Due to limited space
we refer the reader to Gureckis & Love (2005) for the
mathematical details of the model. A critical difference
between these two models concerns their assumptions
about the stages of processing that mediate stimulus and
response. In LASR, sequence learning is driven through
direct stimulus-stimulus or stimulus-response associations while the SRN includes a set of internal “transformative” representations which mediate behavior.
In this paper, we focus our analysis on two empirical
studies of SL behavior in a standard serial reaction time
(SRT) task. On each trial of our experiments, subjects
were presented with a set of six response options, one
of these options was cued, and subjects were instructed
to quickly and accurately press a corresponding button.
Unknown to the subject, the pattern of cued-responses
followed simple sequential patterns which we manipulated. The primary variable of interest was the time between presentation of the cued stimulus and the subject’s

In recent years, statistical learning (SL) has emerged as
a compelling alternative to nativist theories of language
acquisition (i.e., Chomsky, 1980). However, in many
ways the framework of statistical learning echoes aspects
of classic behaviorism by stressing the role of associative
learning processes and the environment in shaping behavior. How far backwards has the needle swung? In
this paper, we show how a subset of behaviors studied
under the rubric of SL are in fact entirely consistent with
a simple form of conditioned priming inspired by models
from the behaviorist tradition (i.e. a variant of RescolaWagner which learns associative relationships through
time). Keywords: Statistical Learning; Simple Recurrent Network; Behaviorism; Language; Serial-Reaction
Time Task

In recent years, statistical learning (SL) has emerged
as a compelling alternative to nativist theories of language acquisition (e.g., Chomsky, 1980). For example,
young infants are able to learn the statistical patterns
in short segments of artificial speech and to use these
dependencies to isolate word-like units (Saffran, Aslin,
& Newport, 1996). Results such as these appear to challenge arguments concerning the “poverty of the stimulus” by demonstrating how the environment may provide
subtle sources of structure which language learners can
use to bootstrap into adult capabilities.
The implications of this work revisit the tension in
Chomsky’s (1959) attack on the behaviorist research program. Much like current SL research, Skinner’s (1957)
research program placed a strong emphasis on the role
of the environment and associative learning processes in
shaping behavior. Interestingly, many experimental inquiries into SL have relied on simple tasks which share
much in common with stimulus-response or stimulusstimulus conditioning. For example, in tasks such as
the serial reaction time (SRT) task (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987), the syllable task (Saffran et al., 1996), and
artificial grammar learning (A. Reber, 1967) subjects
are presented with cued response sequences, auditory
sequences, or letter strings with the goal of assessing
learned associations between stimulus elements. Given
these aspects of common theoretical alignment between
SL literature and classic behaviorism, we reasonably
might wonder the degree to which SL research reflects
a return to behaviorist principles.
In this paper, we will argue that an important subset of the learning behaviors studied under the rubric of
SL are, in fact, consistent with a simple form of conditioned priming well captured by models inheriting from

335

sponses are driven primarily by the lag between repeated
cues. In order to examine more closely the early blocks
of learning and to collect our own data against which
to compare models we ran a conceptual replication of
Boyer, et al (Exp. 1) using the same sequence and procedure.
Design and Procedure Forty-six Indiana University
undergraduates participated and were paid $8 for their
time. Each block consisted of 180 trials using the sequence structure described above and in Boyer, et al.
(2004).
Figure 1: Panel A: Reaction time as a function of the lag
between two repeated stimuli (Exp. 1). Reaction time
is faster as lag increases. Panel B : The evolution of the
lag effect over the course of six blocks the experiment.

Results Data was analyzed by finding the median RT
for each subject for each block of learning. Any trial
in which subjects responded incorrectly were dropped
from the analysis (mean accuracy was 96.9%). The basic results are shown in Figure 1. Panel A replicates
the lag effect first reported by Boyer, et al. averaged
over all subjects. Participants were faster to respond
to an item the longer it had been since it was last visited, F (9, 396) = 13.477, MSe = 3983, p < .0.001. A
trend analysis on lag revealed a significant linear effect
(t(44) = 4.99, p < .001) and a smaller but significant
quadratic effect (t(44) = 3.241, p < .003). Like the original study, our subjects showed evidence of learning with
little training (only six blocks).
However, looking closer at the evolution of the lag effect over the course of the experiment (Figure 1B) reveals that the difference in RT between recently repeated
events and events separated by many intervening elements increases consistently over the course of the experiment. Early in learning (blocks 1 and 2), subject
show about a 10ms facilitation for lag-9 or lag-10 items
over lag-1 responses while by the end of the experiment
(blocks 5 and 6), this facilitation increases to about
45ms. These observations were confirmed via a twoway repeated measures ANOVA with lag (10 levels) and
block (6 levels) which revealed a significant effect of lag
(F (9, 387) = 11.496, MSe = 19992.2, p < .001), block
(F (5, 215) = 11.167, MSe = 52464.2, p < .001), and
a significant interaction (F (45, 1935) = 1.494, MSe =
1726.9, p < .02).

response under the assumption that faster RTs reflect a
learned anticipation of the next sequence element.
In Experiment 1, the pattern of cues followed a simple pattern defined by a negative recency relationship.
In Experiment 2, we created a sequence which required
the computation of higher-order statistical relationships
(such as the second order conditional probability). Both
tasks were otherwise identical. Our goal was to evaluate the speed at which learning unfolds for each type of
sequence relative to the predictions of our benchmark
models. To foreshadow, in Exp. 1 we find that human
subjects quickly adapt to the structure of the sequence.
In contrast, learning of higher-order statistical relationships (Exp. 2) is found to be considerably slower.

Experiment 1
In our first study, the pattern of cues in a standard SRT
task was determined by a simple rule: each of the six
choice options had to be visited once in a group of six
trials in a random order (with the additional constraint
that the last element of one group could not be first element of the next to prevent direct repetitions) (Lee,
1997; Boyer, Destrebecqz, & Cleeremans, 2004). Examples of legal six-element sequence groups are 132546,
432615, and 246153 which were concatenated into a
continuously presented series. Beside these six-element
groups, there is another subtle source of structure. Since
the same cued response cannot repeat on successive trials, repeated cues were separated by a minimum of 1
trial. The longest possible lag separating two repeating
cues is 10 which occurs when the first item of one sixelement sequence group is repeated as the last item of
the following six-element group. Overall, the probability of encountering any particular cue is an increasing
function of how many trials since it was last encountered. In other words, if you haven’t been cued to press
a particular button in a few trials, it becomes increasingly likely that you will soon. Boyer, et al. found that
when engaged with this particular sequence subjects re-

Simulation Results
In order to evaluate the ability of both the SRN and
LASR to account for the results of Experiment 1 we
tested each model under conditions similar to those of
human subjects. Each model was initialized with 6 input
units and 6 output units which corresponded to the six
choice options in the task. On each trial, the activation
of one of the six input units was set to 1.0 (corresponding
to the cued response shown to subjects) and the model’s
task was to predict the next sequence element. The resulting pattern of activation across the six output units
in response to this input pattern was converted into a
choice probability. Human reaction time in the experi-

336

RT and Model Response z-score

SRN (more training)
Human Data

2

1

0

-1

-2
1

2

2

Model Response z-score

by Block

3

4

5 6
Lag

7

8

9

10
1

SRN (more training) by Block

Figure 3: Explorations of the parameter space for LASR
and the SRN in Experiment 1. Each model’s average response for lag-1 are plotted against the average response
lag-10. The division between the grey and white regions
represent the line y=x. Each point in the plot represents
the performance of the respective model with a particular setting of the parameters. If the point appears below
the y=x line in the grey area, it means the model predicts faster responding to lag-10 events than to lag-1 (the
correct pattern).

5

1

10

0
15
20

-1

25
30
35

-2

40

c

d
1

2

3

4

5 6
Lag

7

8

9

10

Figure 2: Panel A&C : Average results from best fit parameters for LASR. Panel B&D: The results for the SRN
after extensive training (number of blocks is shown on
the right in panel D).

the mean RMSE was 0.181 (SD = 0.0026).
However, the overall pattern of results was not specific
to this particular setting of the parameters. In the
left panel of Figure 3, we show the model’s predicted
relationship between lag-10 and lag-1 responses over a
large number of parameter combinations. Each point in
the plot represents the performance of the LASR with
a particular setting of the parameters (simulations were
averaged over a smaller set of 90 independent runs of
the model due to the size of the parameter space). Also
plotted is the y < x region. If a point appears below the
y = x line (in the gray region of the graph), it means
the model predicts faster responding to lag-10 events
than to lag-1 (the correct pattern). The left panel of
Figure 3 shows that over the majority of parameter
combinations LASR predict faster responding to lag-10
events (67% of the parameter combinations we tried
captured the correct qualitative pattern).

ment was assumed to inversely relate model’s response
probability for the correct response on that trial (reflecting correct anticipation). Each simulation consisted of
running each model 200 times over each of the same
sequences given to subject, each time with a different
random initial setting of the weights (sampled from a
uniform distribution between -1.0 and 1.0).
LASR Figure 2A&C shows LASR’s response at each
of the 10 levels of lag along with the evolution of this
lag effect over the course of learning. Data in panel C
was recoded in terms of the amount of RT facilitation
over lag-1 responding, thus RT to stimuli at lag-1 was
always scored as 0 ms with increasingly negative values
for longer lags. This allows us to measure the changes in
learning to respond to stimuli with greater lag independent of unspecific practice effect over the course of learning blocks. In addition, all human and model responses
have been converted to average z-scores for comparison.

SRN The SRN describes learning in a much different
way. Despite extensive search, under no circumstances
could we find parameters which allowed the SRN to learn
the negative recency effect in the same number of trials
as human subjects. A similar exploration of the parameter space as was conducted for LASR is shown in the
right panel of Figure 3. As shown in the figure, very
few parameter combinations predict the correct ordering of lag-1 and lag-10 responses (i.e., very few points
appear below the y=x line). In fact, of all the combinations evaluated only 8% predicted the correct qualitative pattern. However, manual examination of these rare
cases revealed that in these situations the model failed

Starting from a random initial setting of its weights
the model very quickly adapts to the lag structure of the
stimuli. Like the human data, LASR shows a strong lag
effect even in the first block of training. Furthermore,
the strength of this learning effect continues to increase
until the end of the experiment. Indeed, the model provides a very close quantitative fit of the data (the average
correlation between the model and human data shown in
the left panel of Figure 2 was 0.981 (SD = 0.005) and

337

to capture the overall pattern of successively faster responses across all 10 lags demonstrated by human subjects in Figure 1B. In contrast, following Boyer, et al.
(1998), when the SRN is given more extensive exposure
to the material such that training lasts for 30,240 trials
(30 times the training that subjects in Experiment 1 experienced) the model is able to eventually adapt to the
lag structure of the material, although it does so in a
more uniform way than do human subjects. For example, notice in Figure 2D how the lag effect predicted by
the SRN with extensive training is almost linear.
Discussion The results of Experiment 1 show that
even when faced with a complex and highly variable
environment, subjects are able to quickly pick up on
inhibitory relationships between their own actions and
presented stimuli. This agility contrasts with the predictions of the SRN, which requires considerable training in
order to elaborate its representation of the task. In Experiment 2 we examine learning in a similar task which
stresses a different type of learning. In particular, we
consider learning of sequences where prediction-relevant
information is composed entirely of second-order conditional (SOC) relationships. The critical question is how
readily human subjects learn about these sequence patterns compared to those used in Experiment 1 and how
these differences are captured by existing models.

a small cash bonus tied to accuracy. Subjects were
evenly divided between one of two conditions: a secondorder conditional (SOC) or a first-order conditional
(FOC). The training sequence was the same for both
groups and was constructed by randomly sampling sequence elements from the following list of triplets [0, 2,
4], [0, 3, 5], [1, 2, 5], and [1, 3, 4] and presenting each
element one at a time in a continuous stream. This sequence is similar to the XOR task because every third
element (either 4 or 5) is uniquely predicted based on
the previous two elements. After completing 10 training
blocks (consisting of 90 trials each), participants were
given two transfer blocks (180 trials total). After the
two transfer blocks in each condition, the sequence returned to the original training sequence for an additional
3 blocks for a total of 15 blocks in the experiment (or
1350 trials).
The structure of the transfer blocks depended on
which condition the subject was assigned to. In the
SOC condition, participants were transfered to a new
sequence which (in addition to the triplets from the
training sequence described above) included the following triplets [0, 2, 5], [0,3,4], [1,2,4], and [1,3,5]. Notice
that in these new items the third element of each subsequence is flipped (thus, the transfer set includes both 134
and 135). Thus, only the critical predictable sequence
element (position 3) is changed during transfer. In the
FOC condition, participants were transferred to a different sequence which included the triplets [0,4,2], [1,4,3],
[0,5,3], and [1,5,2] (in addition to the triplets used in
training). These 4 new items shuffle two of the columns
(i.e. positions 2 and 3). This transfer condition tests
for learning of first-order information such as the fact
that 5 always followed either a 2 or a 3 but never a 0
or 1 in the training set. In contrast the SOC transfer
sequence isolates learning to the higher-order non-linear
component.
Results For each subject, the median RT was computed for every block of learning. Any trial in which
subjects responded incorrectly were dropped from the
analysis. Overall accuracy was 97.8% in the SOC condition, and 96.4% in the FOC condition. Figure 4 shows
the mean of median RT for each block of learning. One
way to assess learning in this task to examine if RT increased during the transfer blocks (blocks 11 and 12,
where the sequence structure changes) relative to the
surrounding sequence blocks. In order to assess this
effect, we computed a pre-transfer, transfer, and posttransfer score for each subject by averaging over blocks
9 and 10 (pre-transfer), 11 and 12 (transfer), and 13 and
14 (post-transfer).

Experiment 2
In the original paper on the SRN, Elman (1990)
demonstrated how the network can learn to predict
elements of a binary sequence defined by the following
rule: every first and second element of the sequence was
generated at random, while every third element was a
logical XOR of the previous two. In this sequence the
outcome on every 2nd trial is paired an equal number
of times with each successor outcome on every 3rd
trial (i.e. 1 is equally likely to be followed by a 0 or a
1). Likewise, each outcome on every 1st trial is also
paired an equal number of times with each outcome on
every 3rd trial, and so on. Thus, unlike the sequence in
Exp 1, no predictive information can be obtained using
first-order transition probabilities alone. Indeed, the
only predictable component of this sequence requires
learners to integrate information from both time step
t − 2 and t − 1 simultaneously to represent the rule (or
higher-order conditional probability) “if the last two
events are the same the next response will be 0, otherwise it will be 1.” In Experiment 2, we consider human
learning in a similar task where the prediction-relevant
aspects of the sequence were restricted to higher-order
conditional relationship.

In the SOC condition, we found no significant difference between the pre-transfer and post-transfer RT compared with RT during the transfer phase, t(25) = 1.62,
p > .1. Reaction time values between the pre-transfer

Design and Procedure Fifty-two University of
Texas undergraduates participated for course credit and

338

Reaction Time (ms)

600

575

550

525

SOC Condition
FOC Condition

500
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11 12 13

14 15

Block

Figure 4: Mean of median reaction times for Experiment 2 as a function of training block. Error bars are
standard errors of the mean. Transfer blocks are highlighted by the grey strip covering blocks 11 and 12.

and transfer block scores also did not reach significance,
t(25) = 1.26, p > .2 (M = 514 ms, 510 ms, and 499
ms, respectively). We found a significant linear trend
across the three phases, t(25) = 3.60, p < 0.002, while
the quadratic relationship failed to reach significance,
t(25) = 1.62, p > 0.1. Thus, we failed to find evidence
that subjects slow their responses during the transfer
blocks relative to the surrounding blocks.
However in the FOC condition, we found a highly significant difference between the pre-transfer and posttransfer RT compared with RT during the transfer
phase, t(25) = 7.16, p < .001 and between the pretransfer and transfer score, t(25) = 4.28, p < .001 (M =
510 ms, 532 ms, and 491 ms, respectively). Both the linear and quadratic trends were significant (t(25) = 4.51,
p < 0.001 and t(25) = 7.16, p < 0.001, respectively).
Subjects in this condition did slow down during the
transfer blocks relative to the surrounding blocks (by
about 22 ms on average).

Figure 5: Explorations of the parameter space of the
LASR and SRN in Experiment 2. Each point in the plot
represents the performance of the LASR with a particular setting of the parameters. If the point appears below
the y=x line (in the grey region), it means the model predicts slower responding during the transfer blocks (and
thus a learning effect).
Despite the fact that few, if any, of our subjects
demonstrated any evidence of learning the structure of
the XOR task within the 1350 trials of the experiment,
our conclusion is not that human subjects cannot such
sequences. Instead, we think that our results simply
show that learning of these relationships in isolation is
considerably slower than learning for other types of information. In fact, in other experiments (not reported)
here, under longer, multi-day training regimes our subject eventually showed strong evidence of learning.

Discussion The results of Experiment 2A failed to
find strong evidence that subjects learn the higher-order
statistical patterns in the sequence. For example, we
found no evidence of differentially faster responses to
predictable versus unpredictable sequence elements
in the transfer block after 900 trials of learning, and
subjects show no evidence for differential RT to the
SOC transfer blocks. This result was surprising given
previously published results showing that subjects can
learn higher order sequence structures (P. Reber &
Squire, 1994; Remillard & Clark, 2001; Fiser & Aslin,
2002). However, unlike at least some of these previous
reports, the task we utilized carefully restricts the statistical information available to subjects. In addition,
many previous studies used extensive training regimes
which took place over a number of days (Cleeremans &
McClelland, 1991; Remillard & Clark, 2001).

Simulations
Our goal in the following simulations was to evaluate the
overall ability of each model to learn the sequential XOR
tasks rather than to precisely fit the results of Experiment 2 which showed little evidence of SOC learning.
Thus, we simulated both models over a large range of
their parameters and considered what each set qualitative predicted. Of particular interest was a comparison
between this analysis and the parameter space analysis
reported for Experiment 1.
LASR LASR predicts that subjects will only slow
their responses during transfer blocks in the 6Cb condition. This is because LASR, lacking hidden units, is
unable to learn the higher-order statistical component of
the sequence. Instead, it is limited to learning sequences
with first order relationships. The results of a parame-

339

ter space analysis with LASR for Exp. 2 confirms these
intuitions. The model was evaluated on the same ranges
of parameters used in Experiment 1. Figure 5 plots the
average model responses during the transfer blocks (11
& 12) versus the surrounding training blocks (9, 10, 13,
& 14) for each parameter combination. As is clearly
visible, LASR predicts a strong difference between the
transfer and surrounding block only in the FOC condition. Interestingly, this is exactly the pattern which our
subjects showed.

life, learning appears largely consistent with a simple,
limited processes based on Rescorla-Wagner (1972). On
the other hand, given a lifetime of exposure to the structure of our native language, more complex processes unfold such as those embodied by the SRN. Many of the
impressive applications of the SRN arise from the unique
computational properties of this system which make it
well suited for the domain of language. However, a more
careful delineation maybe necessary between certain results in the SL literature and their broader implications
for learning.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by NIH-

SRN In contrast to LASR, the SRN predicts that subjects will slow their responses during the transfer blocks
in both experimental conditions. This is confirmed in
Figure 5. Overall, 83% of the parameter combinations
show learning in the SOC condition. The magnitude
of the effect was on average significantly different from
zero, M=.01, SD=.02, t(649)=20.82, p < .001. Finally,
like LASR the SRN predicts that virtually all parameter
combinations (99%) show learning in the FOC condition
(M=.2, SD=.07, t(649)=20.82, p < .001). In contrast to
the SRN simulations of Experiment 1, it was much easier
to find parameters which allowed the SRN to learn in all
three conditions of Experiment 2.

NIMH training grant #:T32 MH019879-12 to T.M. Gureckis
and AFOSR grant FA9550-04-1-0226 and NSF CAREER
grant #0349101 to B.C. Love.

References
Boyer, M., Destrebecqz, A., & Cleeremans, A. (2004). Processing abstract sequence structure: Learning without
knowing, or knowing without learning? Psychological
Research.
Chomsky, N. (1959). A review of b.f. skinner’s verbal behavior. Language, 35 (1), 26-58.
Cleeremans, A., & McClelland, J. L. (1991). Learning the
structure of event sequences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 120 (3), 235-253.
Cleeremans, A., Servan-Schreiber, D., & McClelland, J.
(1989). Finite state automata and simple recurrent
networks. Neural Computation, 1, 372-381.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R. (2002). Statistical learning of higherorder temporal structure from visual shape sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28 (3), 458-467.
Gureckis, T., & Love, B. (2005). A critical look at the mechanisms underlying implicit sequence learning. In Proceedings of the 27th annual conference of the cognitive
science society. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lee, Y. (1997). Learing and awareness in the serial reaction
time task. In Proceedings of the 19th annual conference
of the cognitive science society (p. 119-124). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Nissen, M., & Bullemer, P. (1987). Attentional requirements of learning: Evidence from performance measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 1-32.
Reber, A. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 77,
317-327.
Reber, P., & Squire, L. (1994). Parallel brain systems for
learning with and without awareness. Learning and
Memory(217-229).
Remillard, G., & Clark, J. (2001). Implicit learning of
first-, second-, and third-order transitional probabilities. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27 (2), 483-498.
Rescorla, R., & Wagner, A. (1972). A theory of pavolvian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and non-reinforcement. In A. Black &
W. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical conditioning ii: Current
research and theory (p. 64-99). New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Saffran, J., Aslin, R., & Newport, E. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 19261928.

General Discussion
These results place the SRN in a difficult position. In
Experiment 1, the model fails to learn the material at the
rate that human subjects do while predicting that learning in Experiment 2 should actually be more robust. In
contrast, human learning follows the opposite pattern.
Learning to inhibit recent actions is quite easy for subjects, while learning sequences composed of higher-order
relationships is more difficult. Our analysis shows that
at least a subset of results in the SL literature may be
better accounted for with these direct stimulus-response
associations without the need for internally mediated
representations such as those used in the SRN. In fact,
the transformative representational processes in the SRN
appear too complex for these types of learning behavior.
Instead, a simple more limited process like LASR is at
an advantage, as it is able to rapidly adapt to the structure of the environment. Overall our results suggests
that some of the methodologies and results in the SL literature may have more in common with the behaviorist
research tradition than has been previously recognized.
The success of the SRN across so many domains of cognitive behavior has either tacitly or explicitly led many
authors to suggest that a single, domain general learning process may govern sequential processing throughout
cognition. In light of our results we suggest that sequential learning behavior is better conceptualized as being
organized at many overlapping time scales which differ
in complexity. At the lowest level of complexity, such as
the kind of behavior we might engage in the course of
single experimental session or in many aspects of daily

340

