UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Blocking and Learned Attention in Language Acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7xk0g6n4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Ellis, Nick C.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Blocking and Learned Attention in Language Acquisition
Nick C. Ellis (NCELLIS@Umich.Edu)
Department of Psychology and English Language Institute, University of Michigan
401 E. Liberty St., Ste. 350, Ann Arbor, MI 48104 USA

Abstract

devices such as temporal adverbials, prepositional phrases,
serialization, and calendric reference, with the grammatical
expression of tense and aspect emerging only slowly
thereafter, if at all (Bardovi-Harlig, 2000).
One likely explanation for this is the salience of the
formal cues. Prepositional phrases, temporal adverbs, and
other lexical cues to time are quite pronounced in the speech
stream. Verbal inflections are not (consider yesterday I
walked). Zipf’s (1949) principle of least effort describes
how frequent words become shorter with use. Speakers want
to minimize articulatory effort and hence encourage brevity
and phonological reduction. The more they use the more
frequent words, automatization of production causes
shortening. The most frequent items of language are the
closed class words and grammatical morphemes, hence it is
these items that are the least salient in the speech stream
and, because shorter words tend to be more homophonous,
they are also more ambiguous in their interpretations. The
low salience and low reliability of grammatical cues tends to
make them less learnable (Ellis, 2006).
But salience and reliability affect L1A and L2A alike.
There has to be something else which explains the limited
endstate of L2A. The classic explanations center upon a
critical period for language acquisition, with adult brains
being less capable of language learning (perhaps because
they no longer have access to universal grammar), or upon
social interactional factors (adults are less immersed in the
L2, their language development is less scaffolded by their
interlocutors). This paper describes experiments exploring a
competing line of explanation in terms of standard
associative learning effects of ‘learned attention’: blocking,
overshadowing, and other effects of transfer and inhibition
that shift learners’ attention to language as a result of
language experience.
Kruschke and Blair (2000) describe the associative
learning phenomenon of blocking. Learning that a particular
stimulus (A) is associated with a particular outcome (X),
makes it harder to learn that another cue (B), subsequently
paired with that same outcome, is also a good predictor of it,
as schematized in Figure 1. Thus, for example, someone
who knows that the rooster’s crowing signals dawn may be
less likely to notice that increasing traffic noise can reliably
be used as a sign of wake-up-time than is someone who
hasn’t been exposed to the animal’s alarm.
Blocking is an effect of learned attention. For those who
previously learned that "A" predicts "X", "B" is merely
distracting them from a perfectly predictive symptom. To
avoid this error-inducing distraction, they shift their
attention away from cue "B" to cue "A", and consequently

Adult language acquisition typically falls far short of nativelike
competence. Various explanations have been proposed for this
limited attainment of adults compared to children, including
critical periods for language acquisition, sociocultural differences,
motivational differences, and restricted input. This paper considers
an alternative explanation in terms of the associative learning
phenomenon of the attentional blocking of later experienced cues
by earlier learned ones. It illustrates this phenomenon in
investigations of learned attention in the acquisition of temporal
reference in a small subset of Latin under experimental conditions.
Within the experiment, early experience of adverbial cues blocked
the acquisition of verbal tense morphology, and, contrariwise,
early experience of tense blocked later learning of adverbs. There
were also long-term language transfer effects: first language
speakers of Chinese languages, which do not exhibit verb tense
morphology, failed to acquire inflectional cues when adverbial and
verbal cues were equally available.
Keywords: Second language acquisition; attention; blocking;
language learning; transfer; tense morphology; time reference.
.Cues

in First and Second Language
Acquisition

Languages allow the same idea to be expressed in a variety
of ways. Consider time, a concept fundamental to human
cognition and action. All languages have rich means to
express the position of events in a time line; they variously
utilize tense (verbal inflectional morphology, e.g. walked vs.
walk), lexical adverbs (e.g. now, next, yesterday, tomorrow),
prepositional phrases (in the morning, in the future),
serialization (presenting events in their order of occurrence),
and calendric reference (May 12, Monday). Any stretch of
discourse typically uses a variety of these cues in
combination (e.g. yesterday I walked to the university but
next Tuesday I’ll ride the bus).
Children acquiring their first language (L1) eventually
learn all of these constructions for expressing time. Adults
learning a second language (L2) naturalistically typically do
not. Uninstructed L2A from usage is limited in its end-state,
with naturalistic or communicatively-based L2A stabilizing
at levels far short of nativelike ability at a ‘Basic Variety’ of
interlanguage which, although sufficient for everyday
communicative purposes, predominantly comprises just
nouns, verbs and adverbs, with closed-class items, in
particular grammatical morphemes and prepositions, being
rare, if present at all. There is typically no functional
inflection: no tense, no aspect, no mood, no agreement, no
casemarking, no gender assignment (Klein, 1998). L2
temporal reference is initially made exclusively by use of
965

learn only a weak association from "B" to "X". They also
learn that when symptoms "B" and "A" appear together, "B"
should be ignored and "A" should be attended to, i.e.,
symptom "B" should be attentionally blocked.
Learning Phase
Early training
Late training
Test

investigates the effects of successive learning of different
types of cue for temporal reference, adverbs (hodie, today;
heri, yesterday; cras; tomorrow) and verbal inflections
(cogito, I think; cogitavi, I thought; cogitabo, I will think). It
determines if the acquisition of one set of cues is impaired if
another is already known as a reliable indicator of event
time.

Cue! Outcome
A!X
A&B!X
C&D!Y
B&D!?
(preferred response is Y)

Participants
Participants were students from the University of Michigan.
They were volunteers and were paid $10 for their
participation in the experiment. None had learned Latin
before. They were randomly allocated to one of three
conditions. The Adverb Pretraining group comprised 10
males and 12 females of age range 19-35 (mean 21.7 years),
native languages 19 English, 2 Chinese, 1 Korean. The Verb
Pretraining group comprised 8 males and 13 females of age
range 18-33 (mean 21.8 years), native languages 18 English,
3 Chinese, 1 Russian. The No Pretraining control group
comprised 10 males and 12 females of age range 18-33
(mean 21.0 years), native languages 18 English, 4 Chinese.

Figure 1: Blocking
When children are learning their native language they are
at the same time learning about the world and about various
discourse strategies. Young children do not yet know about
the custom of recounting events in their usual script order of
occurrence nor do they clearly understand the meaning of
temporal adverbs. Adults however, as a result of their L1
experience, do know these things; they know there are
reliable and salient means of expressing past time (e.g.
yesterday) that are far simpler than the non-salient and
ambiguous morphological means which vary in complex
ways by person and number, etc. Perhaps these already
known cues block the acquisition of temporal morphology.
On hearing yesterday I walked, the morphological tense
marker is redundant; successful interpretation of the
message does not require its processing, and lack of
processing entails lack of acquisition. Similarly, if a learner
knows the French word for yesterday, then in the utterance
Hier nous sommes allés au cinéma (Yesterday we went to
the movies) both the auxiliary and past participle are
redundant past markers.
It is not just tense that is subject to such effects. Inflexions
for number are often overshadowed by the more obvious
plurality of the clear subject of the verb (seven cats run0
down the road, the black cat0 runs down the road.
Naturalistic L2 learners, but not instructed learners, tend to
omit plural –s endings on nouns that are premodified by
quantifiers. This nonredundant marking of plurality is
characteristic of L2 learners and pidgin speakers alike.
There are many such examples. Thus second language
acquisition seems a problem space that is particularly
susceptible to effects of blocking and overshadowing. This
paper explores these phenomena in two language learning
experiments. The first investigates short-term instructional
sequence effects in adults learning temporal reference in
Latin. The second explores long term language transfer
effects whereby the nature of the learners’ L1 (+/- verb
tense morphology) biases the acquisition of verbal
inflectional vs. lexical cues to temporal reference in Latin.

Procedure
The experiment was programmed in E-Prime. It took less
than one hour. It comprised three phases, Phase 1 –
Pretraining, Phase 2 – Sentence decoding, Phase 3 –
Reception testing. The procedure is schematized in Figure 2.
Participants in the Adverb Pretraining condition in Phase
1 had 36 randomized trials where they saw either the adverb
hodie or the adverb heri. Note that Phase 1 involved only
present and past temporal reference, no future. The
participants had to choose whether today or yesterday was
the correct translation by clicking the appropriate alternative
with the mouse. These alternatives appeared in
counterbalanced positions on the screen. A correct choice
returned the feedback ‘Correct’, an incorrect one ‘Wrong –
the meaning of [Latin] is [English]’ with these slots filled
appropriately. After this, in Phase 2 they were exposed to 6
sentences which appropriately combined the adverb with a
verb, three in adverb-verb word order and three in verbadverb, and had to choose whether these sentences referred
to the present, the past, or the future. There were six blocks
of these trials to consolidate learning. Again, they were
given feedback if incorrect. Following the lead of
Competition Model studies of cue use (MacWhinney,
1987), in the Reception test, Phase 3, all combinations of
adverb (hodie, heri, cras) and verb tense marking (cogito,
cogitavi, cogitabo) were combined and the participants were
asked to judge whether each sentence referred to the past,
present, or future on a 5 point scale ranging from extreme
past 1, through present 3, to extreme future 5. The ideal
responses which averaged over the cues present in the
sentence are shown on the right hand side of the Phase 3
panel of Figure 2.
There was no feedback in Phase 3. Both permissible word
orders were tested and the block was repeated twice to allow
reliable assessment of the relative weight that learners put
on interpreting adverbial and inflectional cues to temporal

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 involves the learning of a small number of
Latin expressions and their English translations. It
966

CONDITION
ntrials
Adverb
Pretraining
condition
Verb
Pretraining
condition

Control

PHASE 1
Pretraining
(+ feedback)
36
randomised

PHASE 2
Sentence Decoding
(+ feedback)
36 (these x 6 = 3 x 12)
randomised in blocks

hodie today
heri
yesterday

cogito
cogitavi

I think
I thought

hodie cogito
cogito hodie

present
present

heri cogitavi
cogitavi heri

past
past

cras cogitabo
cogitabo cras

future
future

No phase 1

PHASE 3
Reception testing
(- feedback)
48 (24 x 2)
randomised in blocks
Test with
Test with
Past….Present….Future Past….Present….Future
1….2…..3…..4…..5
1….2…..3…..4…..5
hodie
3
cras cogito
4
heri
1
cras cogitavi
3
cras
5
cras cogitabo
5
cogito
3
cogito hodie
3
cogitavi
1
cogitavi hodie 2
cogitabo
5
cogitabo hodie 4
hodie cogito
3
cogito heri
2
hodie cogitavi 2
cogitavi heri
1
hodie cogitabo 4
cogitabo heri
3
heri cogito
2
cogito cras
4
heri cogitavi
1
cogitavi cras
3
heri cogitabo
3
cogitabo cras
5

Figure 2: The design of Experiment 1

Verb Pretraining groups. By the second half of Phase 2,
Control performance was 87% correct compared to 97%
for both the Adverb and Verb Pretraining conditions.
However, participants in these three groups were very
different in the particular cues they used in understanding
the sentences of Phase 2, and from this usage, learned to
attend subsequently as important communicators of
temporal information. The key to their cue use is their
performance in Phase 3. Figure 3 illustrates the average
group understanding of the time referred to by each of the
constructions of Phase 3 in terms of the deviations from
ideal interpretation shown in the right column of Phase 3
Figure 2. The sentences are ordered from extreme past on
the left to extreme future on the right. It can be seen in
Figure 3 that the three groups react to the cues present in
the sentences of Phase 3 in very different ways. In two
word sentences, where there is temporal information cued
by both an adverb and a verbal inflection, when these
cues deviate, the Verb pretraining group follows the
verbal cue and the Adverb pretraining group follows the
adverbial cue, so that these two groups move in opposite
directions, as one leans to the future so the other leans to
the past. In these cases of cue conflict, the Control group
lies in between, seemingly attending to both cues equally.
These impressions are confirmed by three multiple
regression analyses, one for each group, where the
dependent variable is group mean temporal interpretation
for each of the 24 sentences and the independent variables
are the interpretation cued by the adverbial cue and that
predicted by the verbal inflection. The differential cue use
by each of the three groups, in standardized "
coefficients, are as follows:

reference. The accuracy of learner responses on the
adverbs and verbs reflected the relative degree of their
learning of these temporal reference cues from their
language experiences in the earlier phases. In this Adverb
Pretraining condition, any blocking would evidence itself
as a detrimental effect of prior learning of lexical cues to
time upon later learning of inflectional cues.
Participants in the Verb Pretraining condition
underwent identical Phase 2 – Sentence decoding, Phase 3
– Reception testing to the above. The only difference
concerned Phase 1 where instead of the adverbial cues to
tense, they were exposed to the inflectional cues. For
these participants, blocking would show itself as
detrimental effects of early exposure to the inflectional
cues reducing learning from later experience of the
adverbial cues.
Participants in the No Pretraining condition had no
Phase 1, and so they first met the adverbial and
inflectional cues to tense simultaneously in Phase 2 and
had to induce their meanings. They underwent identical
Phase 3 – Reception testing to the above.
The dependent variables were accuracy and latency of
responding. Comparisons between and across the learners
in the three conditions illustrate whether first learned cues
block those experienced subsequently and also the degree
to which more salient lexical cues overshadow less
obvious morphological ones.

Results
Despite having no pretraining, Control condition learning
of the temporal reference of the sentences as a whole in
Phase 2 was much the same as it was in the Adverb and

967

Figure 3: Group mean deviations from ideal temporal interpretations in Phase 3. The solid bias symbols mark the
interpretation that would be made for the Adverbial cues only (circles) and Verb inflection cues only (diamonds)
Adverb Group:
Time = 0.98 Adverb + 0.19 Verb
R2 = 0.99
responses explain 66% of ideal
Verb Group:
Time = 0.97 Verb + 0.21 Adverb
R2 = 0.98
responses explain 67% of ideal
Control Group:
Time = 0.69 Verb + 0.67 Adverb
R2 = 0.91
responses explain 85% of ideal
Participants who first learned adverbial cues to
temporal reference continued to use those cues to the
exclusion of others. In subsequent sentences that
contained both adverbial and inflectional cues to event
time, verbal morphology accounted for less than 4% of
their performance, whilst adverbial cues determined 96%.
Likewise, participants who first learned inflectional
cues to temporal reference continued to use those cues to
the exclusion of others. In subsequent sentences that
contained both adverbial and inflectional cues to event
time, adverbial cues accounted for 4.4% of their
performance, verbal morphology determined 94%.
Control participants, however, who had no prior
experience of Latin adverbial morphological cues to time
before they were exposed to sentences containing both
cues learned to attend to both cues, with 48% of the
variance in their judgments being accounted for by the
verbal cues and 45% by the adverbs. The control group’s
performance is thus much closer to the ideal, explaining

85% of the correct averaged interpretations, compared to
just 66% for the Adverb Pretraining and 67% for the Verb
Pretraining groups respectively.
The matched attention to verbal and adverbial cues in
the control participants here, however clearly it
differentiates them from those pretrained with verbal or
adverbial cues, is unlikely reflective of natural language
learning. The stimuli in the present experiment were a
meager subset of Latin, a minilanguage which by chance
allowed the three adverbs to differ from each other in
relatively slight ways (hodie, heri, cras) approximating
the similarity in here of the verbal inflections (cogito,
cogitavi, cogitabo). In natural languages this is not the
typical case. Verbal morphology, due to its high
frequency, is typically of low salience in its surface
manifestations compared to lexical cues (yesterday, today,
tomorrow vs. I walked, I walk0, I’ll walk), and hence
inflections are typically overshadowed and adumbrated by
more salient lexical and discourse cues (Ellis, in press).
These quantitative results illustrate large and significant
effects of blocking in the early acquisition of language.
Note that these effects reflect attentional biases to
particular dimensions of cue (adverb vs. verbal inflection)
rather than to particular words. These are not merely
proactive interference effects where, in paired associate
learning experiments, memory for association A-B is
worse after prior learning of A-C in comparison with a
control condition involving prior learning of unrelated
968

material D-E (Baddeley, 1976, chapter 5). That this is the
case is clearly demonstrated by the participants’
performance on judging future time reference in Phase 3.
In Phase 1, participants in the Adverb and Verb
pretraining conditions learned particular constructions
relating to the present and the past. There was no
reference to future at this stage. Thus, while subsequent
responses relating to past and present judgments could
reflect interference from these specific prior-learned
associations, responses relating to future judgments could
not. Any bias in interpretation of adverb or inflectional
cues to future time must have come from generalized
attention to these cues, not from particular memories of
specific items. Figure 3 demonstrates that the Adverb and
Verb Pretraining groups are as unalike and dissociated in
their performance on cras and cogitabo items referring to
the future as they are on the other past and present
reference ones.
As with all learning experiments, it is appropriate to ask
whether the group performance means are truly reflective
of the individuals within that group or whether they
provide a central tendency that blurs individual withingroup differences. As in the multiple regression analyses
reported for each group above, it is possible to take each
individual’s responses in Phase 3 and assess the degree to
which their temporal rating on each construction reflected
the information provided by the verb cue and that
separately provided by the adverbial cue. Figure 4, which
plots each individual in the space defined in this way,
shows the large majority of Verb Pretrained individuals
heavily influenced by the verb cue and hardly at all by the
adverbs, and, conversely, the large majority of the Adverb
pretraining participants strongly influenced by the
adverbial cues to the exclusion of any information
provided by the verb inflections. The control group
participants, in contrast, do not lie along the 45%
diagonal, equally affected by these two cues as the group
mean suggests. Instead their distribution is rather more
bimodal, with some individuals picking up more on the
adverbial cues and others on the inflections. This finding
is in line with others demonstrating that in the early stages
of acquisition from a problem space comprising multiple
cues to interpretation, participants typically focus upon
one cue at a time, exploring its utility and only
introducing others later, one-by-one, as they reduce error
of estimation (Cheng & Holyoak, 1995; MacWhinney,
1987; Matessa & Anderson, 2000).
Thus, as in the case of associative learning of other
cue-outcome interpretations in medical diagnosis or in
stock market prediction (Kruschke & Blair, 2000; Shanks,
1995), these data demonstrate that for linguistic
constructions too, early learning of one cue blocks the
later acquisition of other cues, however reliable they are
as predictors in their own right.

1.1

r temporal rating VERB cue

.9

.7

.5

.3

.1

Group
Verb pre exposed

-.1

No pretraining
-.3
-.5

Adverb pre exposed
-.3

-.1

.1

.3

.5

.7

.9

1.1

r temporal rating ADVERB cue

Figure 4: Individual participants from the three training
groups as they are affected by adverbial and verbal
inflectional cues to temporal reference in Phase 3

Experiment 2
Usage-based views of language acquisition hold that
short-term effects sum to long-term effects (Barlow &
Kemmer, 2000), as the individual increments of learning
integrate over time to form the processes, representations,
and attentional biases that fill our minds. Thus experience
of how our native language maps on to experience colors
our expectations and learning of second language – there
are large effects of cross-linguistic transfer upon L2A
(MacWhinney, 1997; Robinson & Ellis, to appear). By
these accounts, limited adult language attainment is
grounded in L1 entrenchment and transfer, rather than in
age or biology per se.
Experiment 2 investigated whether long-term learned
attention affects that stem from L1 experience also bias
cue acquisition in this experimental paradigm. The
impetus for assessing this came from observations of the
few Chinese first language participants who participated
in Experiment 1 and who, especially in the Control
condition, seems more to behave like those from the
Adverb pretraining group. There are no tenses in Chinese
languages and instead temporal information is typically
conveyed using direct time reference in the form of
temporal adverbs or prepositional phrases. One would
expect, therefore, that L1 experience would sum to longterm biases towards these types of cue, with consequent
blocking of verbal inflectional cues.

Participants
Participants were 15 Chinese native-language students
from the University of Michigan. All students were, of
course, bilingual with quite an advanced English language
proficiency sufficient – one assessed to be sufficient to
allow their study through the medium of English. They
were volunteers and were paid $10 for their participation
in the experiment.

969

Procedure

learner’s inference (MacWhinney, 1987)? Does the
relative salience of these cues affect their relative use?
Meanwhile, the findings of these experiments reinforce
the possibility that understanding the limited attainment
of adult second and foreign language learning needs posit
no critical periods or language acquisition devices, but
instead falls within the remit of the cognitive science of
the associative learning of linguistic constructions.

The participants partook in an exact replication of the No
Pretraining control group condition of Experiment 1. It
comprised Phase 2 – Sentence decoding, Phase 3 –
Reception testing.

Results
The performance of the Chinese native individuals in
terms of deviation from ideal judgment in Phase 3 of the
experiment is shown in Figure 3 as the starred line. It can
be seen that their performance lies to the Adverb side of
the prior Control group line, tracking the information
given by the adverbial cue much more than by that from
the verbal morphology. This is confirmed by the results of
the multiple regression analyses for the whole group:
Control Group (Native Chinese)
Time = 0.93 Adverb + 0.30 Verb
R2 = 0.96
responses explain 72% of ideal
Comparing these results with those from Experiment 1,
it can be seen that they lie closer to those of the original
Adverb group rather than the original Control group:
Control Group (Expt 1. Predominantly L1 English):
Time = 0.69 Verb + 0.67 Adverb
R2 = 0.91
Adverb Group:
Time = 0.98 Adverb + 0.19 Verb
R2 = 0.99
These findings confirm a long-term influence of
attention to language, a processing bias and subsequent
blocking of cue learning that comes from a lifetime of
prior L1 usage. It is perhaps especially compelling in that
these participants had been exposed to a subsequent
second language prior to the Latin learning experiment,
the English in which they had become quite proficient and
which, as a second language learning experience, must
have brought to their awareness the potential productivity
of inflectional cues in tense marking.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1976). The psychology of memory. New
York: Harper and Row.
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2000). Tense and aspect in second
language acquisition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Barlow, M., & Kemmer, S. (Eds.). (2000). Usage based
models of language. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Cheng, P. W., & Holyoak, K. J. (1995). Adaptive systems
as intuitive statisticians: causality, contingency, and
prediction. In J.-A. Meyer & H. Roitblat (Eds.),
Comparative approaches to cognition (pp. 271-302).
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Ellis, N. C. (2006). Selective attention and transfer
phenomena in SLA: Contingency, cue competition,
salience, interference, overshadowing, blocking, and
perceptual learning. Applied Linguistics, 27(2), 1-31.
Ellis, N. C. (in press). The dynamics of language use,
language change, and first and second language
acquisition. Modern Language Journal.
Klein, W. (1998). The contribution of second language
acquisition research. Language Learning, 48, 527-550.
Kruschke, J. K., & Blair, N. J. (2000). Blocking and
backward blocking involve learned inattention.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 636-645.
Kruschke, J. K., Kappenman, E. S., & Hetrick, W. P.
(2005). Eye gaze and individual differences consistent
with learned attention in associative blocking and
highlighting. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 31(5), 830-845.
MacWhinney, B. (1987). The Competition Model. In B.
MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of language
acquisition (pp. 249-308).
MacWhinney, B. (1997). Second language acquisition
and the Competition Model. In A. M. B. De Groot & J.
F. Kroll (Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism:
Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 113-142). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Matessa, M., & Anderson, J. R. (2000). Modeling focused
learning in role assignment. Language & Cognitive
Processes, 15(3), 263-292.
Robinson, P., & Ellis, N. C. (Eds.). (to appear). A
handbook of cognitive linguistics and SLA. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Shanks, D. R. (1995). The psychology of associative
learning. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Zipf, G. K. (1949). Human behaviour and the principle of
least effort: An introduction to human ecology.
Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Conclusions
These experiments demonstrate clear effects of
attentional bias and subsequent blocking of cue
acquisition that stem from both short-term and long-term
learning sequence effects. Early learned language cues
block the acquisition of later ones. It is possible then that
L2 learners’ use of adverbs and other devices for
expressing time blocks their acquisition of less salient and
less reliable verb morphology, thus resulting in the ‘Basic
Variety’ of limited L2 endstate (Ellis, 2006).
There are many questions still to be answered. Can
these effects be shown in the classroom learning of a
more naturalistic sample of language where a wide range
of cues conspire and compete for attention? To what
extent are these attentional biases overt or covert – there
is scope for extending these experiments using eye
movements (Kruschke, Kappenman, & Hetrick, 2005).
Given that proficient language users do use cues in
combination, and that multiple cues in interaction provide
highly constraining solutions unattainable from individual
cues alone, how do other cues become integrated into the
970

