UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Interactive Activation Models Accommodate Neighborhood Distribution Effects in Visual
Word Recognition?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5pt8s1v0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Illera, Victor
Sainz, Javier S.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Interactive Activation Models Accommodate
Neighborhood Distribution Effects in Visual Word Recognition?
Víctor Illera (VILLERA@Psi.Ucm.Es) & Javier S. Sainz (JSAINZ@Psi.Ucm.Es)
Psycholinguistic Research Unit
Departamento de Procesos Cognitivos
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Summary
The effects of neighborhood distributions on word
recognition were investigated by manipulating the position of
the highest frequency neighbor. In the Twin condition, a word
had two higher frequency neighbors with a letter change in
the same position. In the Single condition a word also had
two higher frequency neighbors, but the letter change was
made in a different position for each neighbor. The letter
position involved could be internal or external, depending on
whether the change took place in an intermediate or start/end
position. Participants made lexical decisions about
postmasked letter strings, while response times and evokedrelated potentials were recorded. Results show a significant
effect of the Single vs Twin manipulation with Twin targets
RTs slower than Single RTs. Furthermore, ERP data reveal
that in the parietal area of both hemispheres, words with Twin
targets result in less brain activity than words with Single
targets, specifically in later decisional stages (P400). An
analysis by position reveals how this Twin / Single contrast
stems from the effects of interaction between the type of
distribution (Twin / Single) and the position of the highest
frequency neighbor (Internal / External). The results obtained
are not easily reconciled with a theoretical framework that
proposes a “Gang Effect” as part of a model including
intralexical inhibition mechanisms (McClelland & Rumelhart,
1981; Grainger & Jacobs, 1996).
Keywords: lexical similarity; letter position coding;
neighborhood distribution effects; interactive activation
model; evoked-related potentials; visual word recognition.

Measuring Lexical Similarity
The decisions which lead to the identification of a word
entry are the result of a forced selection process, which
assigns as default the entry which best matches the available
cues. This probabilistic approach means that the lexical
selection of an entry depends on cues which distinguish it
from any other lexical entries competing for selection,
subject to lexical activation and attention according to task
demands. The selection of a lexical pattern is the result of
word recognition processes that evaluate pattern similarity
of word candidates. To operationalize this variable a
measure known as the “N-metric” or neighborhood density
(Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson & Besner, 1977) was
introduced, where the N value of a word is calculated as the
number of orthographic neighbors a word has. An
orthographic neighbor is a lexical entry which differs from
the target in just one letter in a particular position.

1109

Since it was first introduced, numerous studies have
shown the importance of the N measure in the word
recognition process, largely studied using the standard
lexical decision task (Andrews, 1997) where participants
make a decision as to whether the letter string presented is a
word or not. Nonetheless, studies of the effect of
neighborhood density on word recognition have produced
some contradictory results (Andrews, 1997). First, for low
frequency words N has been found to facilitate word
recognition: the greater the value of N, the lower the
response latency. The effect has been replicated in English,
French and Spanish (Andrews, 1997; Carreiras, Perea &
Grainger, 1997; Forster & Shen, 1996). In contrast, using
progressive unmasking techniques, Snodgrass and Mintzer
(1993) show how it is possible to provoke both facilitatory
and inhibitory effects of N in word recognition, depending
on the deductive possibilities offered by the task stimuli. On
the other hand, manipulating the relationship between N for
words and N for pseudowords, Johnson and Pugh (1994)
obtain effects in both directions. The empirical anomalies of
the N-metric provided an incentive for new studies.
When neighborhood density was controlled for, Grainger,
O'Reagan, Jacobs and Segui (1992) observed the role played
by the relative frequency of lexical neighbors (NF) of a
target word: in French the recognition of words with at least
one higher frequency neighbor requires RTs greater than
those without higher frequency neighbors. The inhibitory
effect of the NF has been replicated in different languages
(Carreiras, Perea & Grainger, 1997; Mathey & Zagar,
2000). It has been claimed that the inhibitory effect of NF is
restricted to low frequency words, but there are studies that
detail facilitatory effects of the higher frequency neighbor
(Sears, Hino, & Lupker, 1995).
N and NF are measures that refer to the relationship
between target and candidates, whilst the relationship
between candidates -including the target- is neglected. Pugh
and colleagues (Johnson & Pugh, 1994; Pugh, Rexer, Peter
& Katz, 1994) introduced the NP measure (the number of
letter positions with at least one neighbor) after discovering
that two words with the same N might differ in the position
of the neighbors within the letter string. The NP measure
was a better predictor of response times than N in word
recognition; Pugh and his colleagues found inhibitory
effects of the higher frequency position in word recognition
when the participants could not base their responses on the
global activation of the lexicon, and had to resolve the
cohort: the greater the NP with neighbors of higher

frequency than the target, the greater the response latency in
lexical decision tasks. When NP is controlled and N is
manipulated, an increase in the latter actually facilitated the
response latency for words. Johnson and Pugh (1994)
conclude that a high N reveals the lexical status of the word.
In comparison, the effect of NP would be fundamentally
inhibitory.
Although all these measures have proved to be reliable
predictors of word recognition, empirical evidence suggests
that there is more to pattern similarity and word recognition
than a simple computation of number of neighbors of a
word target (N), relative frequency of competing candidates
(NF) and number of positions with at least one neighbor
(NP). These measures cannot account for the full diversity
of empirical findings involving word pattern recognition,
and here lies the main concern of this article.
An illustration of these problems concerns word pattern
similarity. Studies using the priming technique have shown
how an entry such as JUGDE primes JUDGE, a case that
illustrates the transposition effect (Perea & Lupker, 2004).
Transposed letter patterns such as LEAK, or TEAM are
excluded from the N measure of the base targets LAKE and
MEAT, on the grounds that they do not conform to the
definition. However, letter migration between these lexical
entries can occur under specific conditions (Prinzmetal, &
Lyon, 1996). A pattern such as LAEK seems to be closer to
LAKE than LEAK is to LAKE despite the fact that both
letter patterns are cases of letter transposition. BRANE can
be a prime for BRAIN despite the fact it certainly does not
pertain to its neighborhood; this phenomenon illustrates the
pseudohomophone effect. Moreover, in word recognition
and naming tasks, neighborhood density effects seem to
arise from phonological rather than orthographic neighbors
(Mulatti, Reynolds & Besner, 2006; Yates, 2005). No matter
how indisputable behavioral evidence can be, some studies
have shown no difference in brain activity for variations in
neighborhood (Binder, McKiernan, Parsons, Westbury,
Possing, Kaufman, Buchanan, 2003). The problematic status
of neighborhood density confronts us whatever our
approach to measuring pattern similarity.

Neighborhood Distribution Effects
To overcome some of these empirical anomalies, as well as
some theoretical issues, Mathey and Zagar (2000)
introduced the notion of neighborhood distribution (ND).
ND refers to the way higher frequency neighbors are
distributed across positions of a target word.
Mathey and Zagar (2000) manipulated the stimuli so that
the targets for lexical decision were words with two higher
frequency neighbors distributed within the letter string in
different ways, making a distinction between two kinds that
they called Single and Twin. Two low frequency word
patterns, similar in other respects, may differ in the way
high frequency neighbors are distributed across their
positions: in Spanish, for instance, the word ACRE (i.e.
acre) has two neighbors of higher frequency, AIRE (i.e. air)

1110

and OCRE (i.e. ocher); yet, the position involved for each
neighbor is different. Similarly, the word ASCO (i.e.
nausea) has two neighbors of higher frequency, ASEO (i.e.
bathroom) and ASNO (i.e. ass), but both involve the same
position. According to Mathey and Zagar’s classification,
the first case expresses a single (S) condition, whereas the
second represents a twin (T) condition.
When N, NF and NP are rigorously controlled, Mathey
and Zagar (2000) obtain a facilitatory neighborhood
distribution effect (ND) for words in French. The analysis of
participant response times showed how words with Single
type neighbors received quicker responses than targets with
Twin type neighbors (Mathey & Zagar, 2000). Whilst the
neighbors of the Twin type words share all but one of the
letters of a 4-letter word, the neighbors of the Single type
words share only two in the case of 4-letter words; lower
similarity means greater mutual inhibition. This series of
experiments and the simulation Mathey and Zagar ran are
used to test the multiple read-out model, an extension of
McClelland and Rumelhart's (1981) interactive activation
model proposed by Grainger and Jacobs (1996). Mathey and
Zagar’s results seem to corroborate the predictions of the
interactive activation models.
Interactive activation models which assume lexical entries
are activated after the local computation of lexical cues
resulting from segmental analysis, and word nodes active in
the lexicon as a result of this analysis, can easily
accommodate the usual N, NF and NP effects. The
activation of a unitary pattern depends on the local
activation that reverberates between any segmental units and
the lexical entries responsible for facilitatory effects of high
N. As for the size of these segmental units, a subsidiary
assumption of the interactive activation models is that they
are simply letters.
The inhibitory strength of a lexical representation is a
function of its level of activation, such that words with
higher frequency neighbors receive greater inhibition than
others that do not have this neighbor type. It is this kind of
inhibitory activity between lexical representations which
accounts for the inhibitory effects of neighborhood
frequency, number of positions with a neighbor and
neighborhood density. One crucial assumption of the
interactive activation models underlies all of these effects:
all activated lexical entries inhibit one another. Do active
lexical entries constrain comparison between neighbor word
candidates and the actual target in some way? Do these
inhibitory processes have homogeneous effects across all
competing lexical candidates?
The interactive activation models’ prediction is that the
Twin type neighbors would be more strongly activated, and
would generate greater competition among themselves than
the Single type neighbors, as the former act together to
increase their activation based on letter-level activation.
This effect was dubbed the “Gang Effect” (McClelland &
Rumelhart, 1981; 1982): the activated words that share all
letters but one are members of the “gang”. They observed
that when a pseudoword like mave was presented to the

model, the words move and save were activated. Of the two,
save, a word of lower frequency than move, reached high
levels of activation more quickly. The explanation for this
phenomenon was that save received additional activation
from the five neighbors that had the three letters “—ave”,
while there were no other neighboring words with the letters
“m - ve” with which move could receive further activation. It
follows that Twin neighbors are more strongly activated as
they share more letters, and thus are more difficult to reject
from the cohort of candidates. As a result, word recognition
with Twin neighbors is inhibited more powerfully.
Inhibitory effects for pseudowords, and the results of the
simulation in French confirm expected results (Mathey,
Robert, & Zagar, 2004; Mathey & Zagar, 2000). Their
results endorsed the multiple read-out model (Grainger and
Jacobs, 1996), an extension of McClelland and Rumelhart's
(1981) interactive activation model.

Comparing Neighborhood Distribution Effects
In contrast with the mixed effects (both facilitatory and
inhibitory) found by Grainger and Jacobs (1996)
manipulating neighborhood distribution, Pugh’s pioneering
studies (Johnson & Pugh, 1994; Pugh, Rexer, Peter, &
Katz, 1994) uncovered only inhibitory effects of ND related
to letter position. Even though Pugh and his colleagues did
not control the number of higher frequency neighbors, their
results partially contradict those observed by Grainger and
Jacobs (1996) and Mathey et al. (2000, 2004). The problem
is informational: How can a lexical neighbor contribute to
the recognition of an actual target?
Any lexical neighbor can, in principle, increase or reduce
uncertainty about which lexical entry best matches incoming
cues. If a single position is involved in Twin targets,
compared with two positions for Single targets, Twin targets
should be processed more quickly, as found by Mathey and
Zagar (2000). A reduction in uncertainty, though, depends
on the structural cues of the active neighbors in each
position, and the way these neighbors reflect structural
properties of the lexicon. In particular, it is the way these
neighbors actually represent letter transition probabilities in
the lexicon, after segmental analysis of the lexical
candidates, which reduces uncertainty. The pseudoword
MAVE is a better cue for SAVE than MOVE because there
are many neighbors that share three out of four letters with
the target in a single contiguous letter string –AVE. Here,
M_VE requires the resolution of two broken letter strings
instead of just one - in other words two letter transition
probabilities. Both the number of neighbors containing the
string –AVE and the number of broken strings to be restored
favor the activation of SAVE rather than MOVE. There is
one further reason to suspect that SAVE will be activated
rather than MOVE. The phonological realization of SAVE
is favored by the rhyme –AVE. Were this explanation
correct under certain conditions, a decision on Twin targets
should be easier than on Single targets, just the opposite of
what Mathey and Zagar (2000) and Grainger and Jacobs’

1111

model would predict. Subjects have to restore the letter
string of Twin targets twice instead of once for Single
targets. This alternative explanation could account for
results contradicting the findings of Mathey and Zagar
(2000), but it certainly does not account for their results. In
the absence of a thorough analysis of their stimuli, indirect
evidence can be provided by using well-controlled stimuli in
Spanish. A new variable was introduced into the design to
control for position effects: Twin and Single targets were
used where the position could be external or internal –
letters at the start or end of a word versus intermediate
letters. Given the Twin target ASCO (i.e. nausea), the higher
frequency neighbors ASEO (i.e. bathroom) and ASNO (i.e.
ass) involve an internal position; given the Twin target
CENSO (i.e. census) the higher frequency neighbors
DENSO (i.e. dense) and TENSO (i.e. tense) involve an
external position. A corollary of this prediction is that letter
position must be explicitly coded and not implicitly as
assumed by interactive activation models. As a
consequence, we predict that ND will not have a
homogeneous effect regardless of the letter positions
involved. According to Pugh and colleagues (Johnson &
Pugh, 1994; Pugh, Rexer, Peter & Katz, 1994), position
plays a major role in the expression of neighborhood
distribution effects. We therefore predict opposite results to
those obtained by Mathey and Zagar (2000) in French:
Single targets should be more difficult to process than Twin
targets, since (again according to Pugh and colleagues) they
involve the distribution of neighbors across two different
positions.
It is important to remember that Spanish (and some other
languages with a transparent orthography such as Italian,
Finnish and Serbo-Croatian) can be easily read by simply
assembling phonological syllables. This configurational
property lends support to the idea that Single targets should
break up the word more easily than Twin targets in Spanish.
If this is true, response latencies to Twin targets should be
lower than to Single targets - again the effect is in the
opposite direction to that observed by Grainger and Jacobs
(1996) and Mathey and Zagar (2000) in French.
Last but not least, the predicted neighborhood distribution
effect should be observed in temporal stages and brain areas
according to the lexical decision to be made: more brain
activity should be observed in Single than Twin targets. It is
expected that the process itself is taking place at the point
when word nodes are active and are actively compared, and
activity will take place in the temporo-parietal circuit. The
object of this study is to test the above predictions.

Methodology
Using SuperLab 4.0 software (Cedrus Corporation, 2006),
22 right-handed native Spanish readers, (18 women; 4 men
of average age 20.4 years) were serially presented with a
postmasked letter string and asked to make a lexical
decision. ND was controlled for both pseudowords and
words. A total of 160 Low-Frequency Single and Twin
lexical patterns selected from LEXESP (Sebastián, Cuetos,

Martí & Carreiras, 2000), were randomly presented, for
which N, NF and NP had been controlled.
A 2 (Lexical Status: Word vs. Pseudoword) ×2
(Neighborhood Distribution: Twin vs. Single) ×2 (Letter
string length, 4-letter string vs. 5-letter string) ×2 (Higher
frequency neighbor position: Internal vs. External) factorial
design was used. In order to mimic Mathey and Zagar’s
(2000) design, two further conditions were introduced:
Hermit (words and pseudowords with no higher frequency
neighbor) and One (just one higher frequency neighbor).
These last conditions, introduced only as controls, are not
included in the analysis since they do not represent ND. The
stimulus selection and procedure were identical to that
followed by Mathey and Zagar (2000). Table 1 shows the
descriptive statistics of ND variables controlled for words.
Due to stimuli constraints, no other variables are controlled.

Results and Discussion
ERs. The analyses conducted on error rates do not reach
significance concerning either Neighborhood Distribution
(F(1,20)= 0.59, MSe=0.102, p= 0.45), or the Neighborhood
Distribution (ND) × Higher Frequency Neighbor Position
(HFN) interaction, (F(1,20)= 0.017, MSe= 0.172, p= 0.897).
However, the overall trend is in line with predictions (Twin:
5.36; Single: 6.43; External Twin: 4.52; External Single:
5.48; Internal Twin: 6.19; Internal Single: 7.38).
Table 2: Mean RTs in ms for the ND x HFN interaction

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of ND variables

F (Mean)
F (SD)
ND (Mean)
ND (SD)

because of her error rate (> 30%). Overall error rate was
kept below 10% for every accepted subject. Non-responses
and errors were substituted in each cell for the calculated
cross-average for their corresponding conditions.

ND x Higher Frequency Neighbor Position (HFN)
External Position
Internal Position
Twin
Single
Twin
Single
RT
659
662
657
706

Neighborhood Distribution (ND)
Hermit
One
Twin
Single
1.03
1.45
2.68
2.45
0.79
0.86
1.39
1.22
0.00
4.40
5.40
6.15
0.00
2.39
2.01
2.18

Readers were asked to make a lexical decision while their
brain activity was recorded using a 32-electrode cap and a
BrainVision Recording System. Response times (RTs);
error rates (ER) and Evoked-related Potentials (ERP) were
taken as dependent measures. RTs were registered from the
stimulus onset until subjects made a response.
Cross-trial average ERPs elicited by the stimuli were
computed for each participant, and then averaged across
subjects for every combination of Lexical Status (LS),
Neighborhood Distribution (ND), Letter-string length (LL)
and Higher frequency neighbor position (HFN). Following
Mathey and Zagar’s design, N, NF and NP were also
controlled. The average amplitude in the 300 ms preprobe
interval (when no stimulus is being presented before a new
trial) was taken as the baseline, using the average brain
activity across all electrodes. The time epoch extended from
300 ms prior to the probe onset, until the end of the
response interval, 600 ms after. ERPs elicited by the probes
were computed for each of 6 latency peaks (70, 100, 150,
200, 250, 300, 400) by averaging amplitudes over the
latency interval peak (-25, +25 ms), once DC and ocular
artifacts were removed. Since error rate was very low, all
trials were used. Impedances were kept below 2k ohms.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs for behavioral and ERP
measures were performed separately. ERP measures were
obtained for each time interval and for every major brain
area in the relevant variables by averaging amplitudes of all
electrodes in the area, for each hemisphere (RO, LO, LP,
RP, LT, RT, LF, RF). Only RTs and ERPs of correct
responses less than 2,5 standard deviations from the average
were used in statistical analyses. One subject was excluded

1112

RTs. An ND effect found to be significant (F(1,20)=
9.026, MSe=384.58, p<0.01; 662 ms. for Twin vs. 686 ms.
for Single). The Neighborhood Distribution (ND) × Higher
Frequency Neighbor Position (HFN) interaction reaches
significance (F((1,20)= 5.373, MSe= 509.8, p< 0.05).
Bonferroni pair comparison confirms a significant
difference between Internal and External positions (F(p<
0.01)). The average RTs are shown in Table 2.
Table 3: Mean P400 amplitudes for ND

µv

Neighborhood Distribution (ND)
Left Hemisphere
Right Hemisphere
Twin
Single
Twin
Single
1.60
1.93
1.70
2.09

Table 4: Mean P400 amplitudes for ND x HFN Position

µv

µv

Neighborhood Distribution (ND) x
Higher Frequency Neighbor Position (HFN)
Right Hemisphere
External Position
Internal Position
Twin
Single
Twin
Single
1.88
2.11
1.53
2.07
Left Hemisphere
External Position
Internal Position
Twin
Single
Twin
Single
1.74
1.86
1.46
2.00

ERPs. ANOVAs conducted in the 400 ms. peak interval
on mean voltage amplitudes show a significant main effect
of Neighborhood Distribution for both RH and LH
(F(1,42)=16.509, MSe= 0.341, p< 0.001, Power= 0.978);

Bonferroni pair tests show significant differences between
both levels of the ND conditions (F(1,42)= 6.982), with
significantly more brain activity for Single targets than for
the Twin Targets in the parietal sites of the LH (p< 0.05)
and RH (p< 0.01), a result that replicates those observed
with behavioral measures. These results are shown in Table
3. Both interactions, the double Lexical Status (LS) ×
Higher Frequency Neighbor Position (HFN) interaction and
the triple interaction LS × ND × HFN reach significance
(F(1,42)= 8.286, MSe= 1.651, p< 0.01; F(1,42)= 8.266,
MSe= 8.218, p< 0.01, respectively). Bonferroni pair tests
show significant differences between both levels of the HFN
Position conditions in the parietal sites of the LH (p< 0.01)
and RH (p< 0.01). Table 4 shows the relevant data.
The results show how the neighborhood distribution of
the targets makes a significant difference to brain activity:
Single targets require more processing time than Twin
targets, and this processing takes place, fundamentally, in
the parietal area of the RH (P400). For the three measures
taken, the direction of the ND effect is the same: greater
response latencies, greater error rates, and greater brain
activity for Single targets than for Twin targets.
As for the interactions that involve Higher Frequency
Neighbor Position, despite the fact that both ERP and RT
measures coincide in a significant difference between Single
targets and Twin targets, the discrepancy between latencies
and ERPs seems incongruent: External positions cause a
small but significant difference, while there is a large
difference between Internal positions for ND conditions.
The direction of the effect for Internal positions is again
increased processing time for Single targets compared to
Twin targets. However, as Table 4 indicates, whilst the time
measurements for Internal / Single targets show later
responses compared to the three remaining conditions all
with virtually identical response times, the ERP show how
the Internal / Twin condition leads to a lower activation
level in P400 while the remaining conditions all present
similar brain activity. These P400 effects are congruent with
top-down activation of fronto-parietal circuits involved in
attention and decision taking. At the time subjects have to
make a lexical decision, Twin targets are resolved when an
internal position is involved, while Single targets still
require additional attentional resources. Holcomb, Grainger
and O’Rourke (2002) report N400 effects larger for high N
words than for low N words. The effect is compatible with
both Single and Twin targets being assessed in terms of N,
although they differ not in terms of N but in terms of ND.
As Holcomb et al. suggest, a positive 400 effect can be
observed when a lexical decision task is being made.

General Discussion
The results obtained in this experiment sit uneasily within
an interactive activation model framework. Presumably a
simulation of these results with a new set of appropriate
parameters would match our findings. Our results do dispute

1113

the functional description of intralexical inhibition
mechanisms in terms of Gang Effects, however.
The results obtained using ND effects in French by
Mathey et al. (2000, 2004) are explained in a partially
satisfactory manner by IA models - facilitatory effects for
Single type targets and inhibitory effects for Twin type
targets - based on intralexical inhibition and interactive
activation mechanisms between nodes of letters and words.
Nonetheless, our results show that the neighborhood
distribution effect is in fact inhibitory. The interactive
activation models’ prediction is that the Twin type
neighbors would be more strongly activated, and would
generate greater competition among themselves than the
Single type neighbors due to the so-called “Gang Effect”.
The models’ prediction for the Single condition is that these
neighbor types should inhibit one another more consistently,
since they share fewer letters than Twin type neighbors.
Since our procedures mimic those followed in French by
Mathey et al (2000, 2004), the discrepancy cannot be
attributed to differences in the desing, but rather is an
indicator of crosslinguistic differences (Andrews, 1997).
The bimodal interactive activation model explains the
direction of neighborhood density effects in visual word
recognition according to grapheme-phoneme consistency
(Grainger, Muneaux, Farioli, & Ziegler, 2005). The
congruence between orthographic and phonological
densities determines the direction of the effect. Yates (2005)
observes that this congruence might be relative, but even so
in Spanish the inconsistency between orthography and
phonology is negligible. Thus, the bimodal IA model cannot
account for distribution density effects in Spanish unless we
use different lexical similarity measures from those
proposed by Coltheart (1977) and distinguish between
orthography and phonology. Whilst there are experimental
procedures to tease apart phonology and orthography, such
manipulation would significantly depart from Mathey and
Zagar's (2000) original approach.
The differences between positions may well be due to the
fact that the Single neighbors, when the higher frequency of
the two is in an internal position, provide a “powerful”
break in the syllabic structure - both among the neighbors
themselves, and between neighbors and target. This
incongruence (which in the Twin condition is always in fact
lower) may cause the rise in response times mentioned
earlier. This is precisely the opposite of what the intralexical
inhibition mechanisms of the interactive models would lead
us to predict. Congruence facilitates the response, because it
facilitates the synthesis of cues during recognition, whereas
incongruence inhibits the response by complicating this
synthesis of cues. The greater ease of recognition in the
Twin condition could be due to the fact that this
neighborhood distribution implies a lesser break in the
phono-orthographic structure of the target stimulus pattern
(Mulatti, Reynolds & Besner, 2006), an interpretation that is
compatible with the involvement of parietal sites.
Johnson and Pugh (1994) claim that the accumulated
presence of neighbors in letter positions is a word indicator.

If this is the case, it may also be that in Spanish the system
has developed mutual inhibition mechanisms that favor
inhibition between candidates. Mathey et al. (2000) attribute
the inhibitory effects obtained by Johnson and Pugh (1994)
to a failure to control the number of neighbors by letter
position, while Johnson and Pugh attribute them to the
greater processing burden imposed by having to resolve
similarity conflicts in several letter positions. It could be
argued, though, based on similar results obtained in
Spanish, that in English there is more probability of a word
when there are more neighbors in the same letter positions.
We could also postulate that as the distribution increases,
the number of words from the linguistic corpus that meet
this condition seem to become fewer, as suggested by
Johnson and Pugh (1994) when they found facilitatory
effects of N when ND is controlled in English. The
inhibitory effects obtained cannot be blamed purely on
intralexical inhibition mechanisms as the IA models
suggest, but rather on the fact that the probability of the
lexical status of a word based on its neighborhood
distribution results in a combination of similarity cues that
favors the inhibition of targets with a greater accumulated
number of neighbors in the same letter positions.

References
Andrews, S. (1997).The effect of orthographic similarity on
lexical retrieval: Resolving neighbourhood conflicts.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 4, 439 – 461.
Binder, J.R., McKiernan, M.E., Parsons, M.E., Westbury, C.F.,
Possing, E.T., Kaufman, J.N., Buchanan, L. (2003) Neural
correlates of lexical access during visual word recognition.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 3, 372 – 393.
Carreiras, M., Perea, M., & Grainger, J. (1997). Effects of
orthographic neighbourhood in visual word recognition:
Cross-task comparisons. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 857 –
871.
Cedrus Corporation (2006). Stimulus Presentation Software
SuperLab 4.0. Pedro, CA: Cedrus Corporation
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J.T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.),
Attention and performance: Vol VI. Proceedings of the sixth
international symposium on attention and performance (pp.
535 - 555). London: Academic Press
Forster, K.I., & Shen, D. (1996). No enemies in the
neighbourhood: Absence of inhibitory neighbourhood
effects in lexical decision and semantic categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 22, 696 - 713
Grainger, J., & Jacobs, A. M. (1996). Orthographic processing
in visual word recognition: A multiple read-out model.
Psychological Review, 103, 518 – 565
Grainger, J., Muneaux, M., Farioli, F., & Ziegler, J.C. (2005).
Effects of phonological and orthographic neighbourhood
density interact in visual word recognition. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 981-998.

1114

Grainger, J., O´Reagan, J.K., Jacobs, A.M., & Segui, J. (1992).
Neighbourhood frequency effects and letter visibility in
visual word recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 51,
49 - 56
Holcomb, P.J., Grainger, J., and O'Rourke, T. (2002). An
electrophysiological study of the effects of orthographic
neighborhood size on printed word perception. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience ,14, 938-950.
Johnson, N.F., & Pugh, K.R. (1994). A cohort model of visual
word recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 26, 240 – 346
Mathey, S., & Zagar, D. (2000). The neighbourhood
distribution effect in visual word recognition: Words with
twin and single neighbours. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 20, 1129
- 1157
Mathey, S., Robert, C., & Zagar, D. (2004). Neighbourhood
distribution interacts with orthographic priming in the
lexical decision task. Language and Cognitive Processes,
19 (4), 533 - 559
McClelland, J.L.., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An interactive
activation model of context effects in letter perception: 1.
An account of basic findings. Psychological Review, 88,
375 – 407.
McClelland, J.L.., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1982). An interactive
activation model of context effects in letter perception: 2
The Contextual Enhancement Effect and Some Tests and
Extensions of the Model. Psychological Review, 89, 1, 60 –
94
Mulatti, C., Reynolds, G.R., & Besner, D. (2006)
Neighbourhood effects in reading aloud: new findings and
new challenges for computational models. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 32, 4, 799-810
Perea, M. y Lupker, S.J. (2004). Can CANISO activate
CASINO? Transposed-letter similarity effects with
nonadjacent letter positions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 231–246
Prinzmetal, W., and Lyon, Ch.E. (1996). The word-detection
effect: Sophisticated guessing or perceptual enhancement?.
Memory and Cognition, 24(3), 331-341.
Pugh, K.R., Rexer, K., Peter, M., & Katz, L. (1994).
Neighbourhood effects in visual word recognition: Effects
of letter delay and nonword context difficulty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 20, 639 - 648
Sears, C.R., Hino, Y., & Lupker, J. (1995). Neighbourhood size
and neighbourhood frequency effect in word recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 21, 876 - 900
Sebastián, N., Cuetos, F., Martí, M. A., & Carreiras, M. (2000).
LEXESP. Léxico informatizado del español [Lexesp: A
Spanish Computerized Lexical DataBase] Barcelona: UB.
Snodgrass, J.G., & Mintzer, M. (1993). Neighbourhood effects
in visual word recognition: Facilitatory or inhibitory?
Memory and Cognition, 21, 247 – 266
Yates, M. (2005). Phonological neighbors speed visual word
processing: Evidence from multiple tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 31, 1385-1397.

