UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Language be Replaced? Physical Representations of Relations Instead of Language
Labels in Relational Mapping: Do They Help Young Children?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7pb8m789

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Mutafchieva, Milena
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Language be Replaced?
Physical Representations of Relations Instead of Language Labels in Relational
Mapping: Do They Help Young Children?
Milena Mutafchieva (mmutafchieva@nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
This paper is trying to explore whether language has a very
specific role in analogy-making as claimed by many
researchers, or it is just one very effective way of building
mental representations of the relational structure of the task. If
the latter is true there must be also alternative ways of aiding
mental representations of relations by young children. In the
experiments described in this paper we use physical objects as
representing the relations within the task and it turns out that
this is an effective way of helping children to build relational
representations and use them successfully in an analogical
mapping task.
Keywords: analogy; cognitive development; relational
mapping; language; psychological experimentation.

Introduction
There is an extensive debate about the role language plays
in analogy-making. This debate is especially hot in the
animal cognition and cognitive development literature.
When Gillan, Premack and Woodruff (1981) first
demonstrated that the chimpanzee Sarah can make analogies
this has produced a real revolution, since it was believed
that such reasoning capabilities are uniquely possessed by
humans (and even only by adults). However, Sarah was a
special chimp – she was language trained and therefore she
had developed and used a sophisticated symbol system.
Moreover, she was explicitly trained to use certain symbols
(geometric figures) for the “same” and “different” relations.
Thus Sarah had the “same” and “different” concepts ready
in her mind before starting the experiment. In addition, the
experimental setting involved the use of the “same” and
“different” relations explicitly, i.e. the corresponding signs
were physically present on the table as physical objects and
Sarah could perceive them and use the perceived image as a
representation of the abstract relations. All these aspects
seem to be crucial for the success Sarah has demonstrated
repeatedly in consecutive experiments (Oden, Thompson,
Premack, 2001). It was demonstrated that chimpanzees
which are not language trained could not do the analogy
task and that other monkeys cannot be trained to do the task
as well. It was shown that there are other important
differences among the animals that make the difference, e.g.
their ability to perceive the relations (Oden, Thompson, &
Premack, 1990; Thompson & Oden, 1998, 2000). Thus the

importance of language was clearly demonstrated, but it
might be at least two fold: language might be a necessity
because analogy-making needs the presence and usage of an
abstract symbolic system, and/or the specific language signs
(in this case, the signs for “same” and “different”) might be
important for the mental representation of the specific
relations to be used in the analogy. The two issues are a bit
mixed up in the experiments described above since in all of
them Sarah had both abstract language ability and the
specific physical signs for the relations used in the task.
Recently the role of language for analogy-making has also
been studied in the developmental literature (Gentner, &
Rattermann, 1991; Rattermann, & Gentner, 1998; Gentner,
& Loewenstein, 2002; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005).
Gentner and her colleagues have demonstrated that the use
of relational words (labels) during the analogical task
facilitates children’s success in relational mapping. The
authors are very careful when interpreting their results: they
do not claim that the mapping cannot be performed without
language. Taking into account that all children are at least 3
years olds and they are all capable of using language in
general, their experiments concentrate on whether the use of
the specific relational words for explicit representation of
the relations in the task can help children to make the
analogy. And the results are really positive, i.e. the use of
explicit relational terms such as “Daddy”, “Mommy”, and
“Baby” facilitates significantly the mapping process.
The question we pose in this article is whether we can aid
children in building representations of the relations in a way
that is not language-based. If that turns out to be possible
this will open the issue whether language is necessary at all.
It may turn out that language is simply the most often used
and most convenient way to build and hold such
representations in memory, but at least in some cases other
possibilities will be open. This may even make it possible to
study animal relational mapping in new ways without
involving language and thus further test the hypothesis that
language is a prerequisite for analogy-making.

Previous Experimental Studies
The experiments described in this paper are a continuation
of the work of Gentner and her colleagues (Rattermann &
Gentner, 1991, Gentner & Rattermann, 1998, Loewenstein
& Gentner, 2005). That is why a brief review of these
experiments is necessary.

509

Gentner and Rattermann (1991, 1998) presented young
children (3, 4, and 5 years old) with an implicit analogical
mapping task. The child and the experimenter had each
three different sized objects (big, medium, small). The
experimented hid her sticker under one of her objects (say
the middle one) and said “I'm going to hide my sticker
underneath one of my toys while you watch me. If you
watch me carefully, and think about where I hid my sticker,
you'll be able to find your sticker underneath one of your
toys. If I put my sticker under this toy, where do you think
yours is?”. The child had to find out that this means under
the object of the same relative size and search under her/his
middle sized object. At the same time within the child’s set
of objects there was an object which was of the exact same
size as the object pointed by the experimenter, but which
was of different relative size (e.g. was the smallest in the
child’s set). Pitted against each other the absolute and
relative size made the task quite difficult for the children.
There are other ways to interpret the instruction, e.g. to use
the same relative position (left, center, right), which may
make the task even more difficult or easier depending on
whether there is a correlation between the corresponding
spatial position and the corresponding relative size. In these
experiments Gentner and Rattermann always arranged the
objects in a linear monotonically increasing or decreasing
order and thus the correlation or anti-correlation between
relative position and relative size is high. The results were
that 3 years old children picked up in about 50-54 % of the
trials the “correct” relative size object, and 4 years old
children picked up the relational response in about 62% of
the trial. In another condition the following instruction was
given “These bears and these penguins are each a family. In
your bear family, this is the Daddy (pointing to the larger
bear) and this is the Mommy (pointing to the smaller bear).
In my penguin family this is the Daddy and this is the
Mommy (again pointing appropriately). If I put my sticker
under my Daddy penguin, your sticker is under your Daddy
bear. Look, my sticker is under my Daddy. Where do you
think your sticker is?” When language labels were involved
the 3 years old children were 87-89% of the trials correct.
This is a rather significant improvement which was
attributed to the use of language relational labels which
focus the child’s attention towards the relations and they
encode and use them.
Later on, Gentner and Loewenstein performed various
experiments (2002, 2005) to test the effect of other
relational labels such as “On, in, under” or “top, middle,
bottom”. These labels also produced a significant
improvement but it was not that strong as in the “Daddy,
Mommy, Baby” condition.
Goswami (1995) replicated the original (Rattermann &
Gentner, 1991) experiment while controlling for the spatial
positions of the objects and she still obtained the relational
labels effect. In addition she tried to see the effect of the
family analogy on the relational mapping task but obtained
no support for this hypothesis. Finally, Mutafchieva and
Kokinov (2007) demonstrated a significant difference
between the “big, middle, small” relational terms and the
“Daddy, Mommy, Baby” terms arguing that the family
analogy is used in the latter case.

The current study aims at further exploring the reason
why relational terms are helpful for children. The main idea
of Gentner and her colleagues is that children often fail to
pay attention to the relations, so they either do not encode
them in the representation of the task or simply do not use
the formed representations while solving the task. Thus the
language labels help children to focus their attention on the
relations. If this is the case, we should be able to help
children focus on the relations using also in other means.
One way is to make it clear to the children that we expect a
relational answer, for example, by giving them a more
explicit initial instruction or by training them in a less
ambiguous way.
In this paper we are using physical objects to represent the
relationships between the basic objects in the scene. This
might sound strange since relations are abstract and cannot
be directly pointed to in the real world. However, this is
exactly the point. Children may have difficulties noticing
and encoding the relations simply because relations are not
that salient and they require a greater cognitive effort to
compute them from the scene. Thus objects correspond to a
specific blob in the scene, which has some specific
characteristics, while relations typically require comparing
and relating certain properties of two different blobs. In
addition, in order to mentally represent the object, we can
use its mental image, while in order to represent a relation
we typically cannot use a mental image, and that is why we
need a word (which will replace the mental image).
The main idea of this paper is to use physical objects as
representations of the relationships. In that way children will
be able to use their mental image as a representation and
memory device for the relations. In addition since the object
will be always present, this mental image will be refreshed
all the time and thus hold active in memory. Initially we
tried with an object that will symbolize the relation (like in
the Sarah experiment) – we used a toy-man pointing in one
direction to represent “this is bigger than that”. However, it
did not work, mainly because actually this brought even
more complication to children: they had to remember and
hold active in memory not only the relations but also what
the “pointing man” symbolises. Unlike the case of Sarah,
where she studied the relational symbol for years before
being engaged in the analogy task, children were introduced
to the new symbol and its meaning immediately before the
mapping task and they simply forgot its meaning during the
subsequent task. Then the next step was to find an object
that will “naturally” represent the relationship rather than
symbolize it. That means an object that will really
physically connect the related objects and will have a causal
meaning in the domain. Thus we came to the idea of using
“draw-bars” that connect to objects and cause the movement
of one of them when the other one is being moved. To make
the relation directed and even more natural we explained to
the children that if the two animals (on platforms) are
connected with a draw-bar the stronger animal will be able
to pull the weaker one. In this way the draw-bar became
oriented and we physically made it as an arrow with a red
heading. The draw-bar was also causally related to the
movement of the two connected objects. Thus we assumed
that children will be able to easily notice the draw-bar

510

objects and represent them together with the objects they
connect. In this way the relation “stronger than” will be
easily represented and hold in memory.

Experiment 1
The goal of our first experiment is to find out whether
physical representation of relations could help young
children to make relational mapping. This will be tested
under an extremely difficult condition – the objects in the
two sets are placed in a triangle configuration in contrast
with all experiments described above which use linear
configurations. We asked the children to connect the objects
with two draw-bars and explained them that this
configuration may be considered as a “train that is making a
turn” (see Figure 1).

as one of the animals in the experimenter’s set. The stimuli
were presented in a triangle and different sets of stimuli
with different sizes and spatial positions as well as different
animals were presented at every trial (See Figure 2b). In the
Draw-bar condition four draw-bars of the same size and
colour were used to mark the object relations - two for the
experimenter’s set and two for the child’s set (Figure 2a).
Five transitive relational mapping tasks were presented to
every child plus two in the training session. The five
transitive relational trials were designed to fulfil some
criteria: 1) to vary the spatial configuration of the stimuli
sets (e.g. the Biggest – left, vs. right, vs. middle); 2) to vary
the spatial position of the relational response and the object
with the same absolute size (surface similarity) in every trial
and in the two sets.

Hypothesis
Our hypothesis is that 4 years old children will succeed in
transitive relational mapping significantly better when there
is a physical representation of the relation (the “draw-bars”)
than if there is no such representation.

Design
The experiment has a between group design and the
manipulated variable is presence or absence of physical
representations of the relations between objects:
• Draw-bar condition: the animals are connected via
draw-bars in order to make a “train”.
• Control condition: the animals are not physically
connected and the concept of “train” is not introduced.
The dependent variable is the number of relational

responses.
Figure 1. An example of the stimulus material in a trial.
The arrows between the owls depict the draw-bars fixed
between the animals, and the vertical arrows show which
animals have been picked up at this trial.

Stimuli
In each trial one set of 6 animals was used: 6 foxes, 6 bears,
6 owls, etc. All animals in the same set were of different
size, except two who were the same size. Three of the
animals formed the experimenter’s set, and three – the
child’s set. In every set there was big, middle and small
animal and there was a difference in the absolute size of the
corresponding animals in the experimenter’s and the child’s
set. One element of the child’s set was exactly the same size

Figure 2. a) A picture of a draw-bar trial in which the
tabletop is seen from above. From that perspective one can
see the platforms and the connecting drawbars. b) A picture
of a control group trial, the animals are placed the same why
but are not connected by draw-bars and the concept of a
train is not introduced.

Procedure
In each trial the child saw two triads of objects, both
arranged in a triangle way. The child watched the
experimenter to hide a sticker under one of the objects in the
experimenter’s set. The child was told that he/she could find
his/her own sticker “in the same place” in the child’s triad.
The correct response was arranged always to be at the

511

relational similarity place: thus, in order to pick it up, the
child had to choose the object with the same relative size,
but not the same absolute size (object similarity). The
children were always given a feedback by showing the
correct response (by receiving the sticker).
Each child participated in a single experimental session.
The experiment included two training trials and five test
trials as described above. In the training trials the
experimenter gave the child an explanation about the
instruction and the question that she or he had to answer.
The test trial began with the following instruction for the
Control Group (in Bulgarian language):
“We are going to play a game of hiding and finding
stickers. I have three owls and you have three owls. From
my two owls this owl is stronger than this owl (pointing e.g.
to the biggest and the medium owl from the experimenter’s
set), and this owl is stronger that this owl (pointing e.g. to
the medium and the smallest owl). Please, tell me from
these two of your animals, who is the stronger one? And
from these two of your owls who is the stronger one? Now, I
am going to hide my sticker under this owl, where do you
think your sticker is hidden?”
The corresponding instruction for the Draw-bar Group
was the following:
“We are going to play a game of hiding and finding
stickers. I have three owls and you have three owls. From
my two owls (pointing e.g. to the biggest and the medium
owl in the experimenter’s set) this one is stronger than this
one and I will put this draw-bar in such a way that the
stronger owl could pull the weaker one. From these two of
your animals which one is the stronger one? Please, put this
draw-bar in such a way that the stronger owl could pull the
weaker owl. Now, from these two of my owls (pointing e.g.
to the medium and the smallest owl from the experimenter’s
set) this one is stronger than this one and I will put the
draw-bar in such a way that the stronger owl could pull the
weaker one. From these two of your animals which one is
the stronger one? Please, put this draw-bar in such a way
that the stronger owl could pull the weaker one. Now look,
my owls look like a train and your owls look like a train. I
am going to hide my sticker under this owl, where do you
think your sticker is hidden?”

Participants
38 children were studied in this experiment; the average age
of children was 4 years and 5 months, ranging from 4 years
to 5 years. 18 children formed the Control Group, and 20
formed the Draw-bar Group.

Results and discussion
The results can be seen in Figure 4. The mean for the
Control Group is 1,44 relational responses out of 5 (around
the chance level of 1,66), and the mean for the Draw-bar
Group is 3,65 relational responses. The difference is
statistically significant at the level p<0.001 (T(36)= 6,697).

5
4,5
4

3,65

3,5
3
2,5
2

1,44

1,5
1
0,5
0

control

draw-bar

Figure 4. Score means for the two groups.
T(36)=6,697, p<0.001
Our hypothesis was confirmed: the draw-bar physical
representation of the relation “stronger than” seems very
effective. Now the question is how this compares to the
usage of language labels. This is tested in the next
experiment.

Experiment 2
The goal of this second experiment is to find out whether
language labels used for the objects will make it much better
than the simple physical representation of the relations.
Maybe the draw-bars were effective, but the use of language
labels will be much better. Take into account that when
language labels are used such as “Daddy, Mommy, Baby”
or “Big, Small, Tiny”, these labels are not only relational,
since they do not only represent the binary relation between
two objects, but in addition they are labels of one unique
object from the triple. Thus children could potentially use
this additional information and pick up the object with the
same label on their side.

Hypothesis
Our hypothesis was that language labels should further
improve the performance of the children.
Figure 3. A picture of a trial in which the middle-sized
animal has been picked up both by the experimenter and the
child.

512

Design
The experiment is an extension of Experiment 1 adding two
more groups where language labels pointing to the objects
will be used:
• Control condition: no draw-bars and no labels are
used (the same data from Experiment 1).
• Draw-bar condition: no labels are used for the
objects, only the draw-bars represent the relations
between them (the same data from Experiment 1).
• Draw-bar + label condition: the objects are called the
“Locomotive”, the “Middle wagon”, and the “Last
wagon” in addition to the draw-bars placed between
the objects.
• Daddy condition: the objects are called “Daddy”,
“Mommy”, “Baby”, and no draw-bars are presented.
The Draw-bar + label condition is testing whether adding a
label will further improve the performance of children
compared to the draw-bar condition. And since one can
wonder whether the labels were adequately picked up, we
added a classic Daddy condition, which has been proved to
be the most effective under various conditions (Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991, 1998, Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005,
Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007).
The dependent variable was the number of relational
responses.

Stimuli
Stimuli were the same as the ones used in Experiment 1.

Procedure
The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1 except the
instructions for the Draw-bar + label and Daddy Groups.
The instruction for the Draw-bar + label condition
extends the one for the Draw-bar condition with the
following:
“From my train this is the locomotive, this is the
medium wagon, and this is the last wagon. Now, tell me
from your train which one is the locomotive? Which one is
the medium wagon? And which one is the last wagon? I
am going to hide my sticker under this owl, which is the
locomotive of my train. Where do you think your sticker is
hidden?”
The corresponding instruction for the Daddy condition is
“From my animals this is the Daddy, this is the Mommy,
and this is the Baby. Now, tell me from your animals
which one is Daddy, which one is Mommy, and which one
is the Baby. I am going to hide my sticker under this owl,
which is the Mommy among my animals. Where do you
think your sticker is hidden?”

Participants
Seventy seven children were studied in this experiment; the
average age of children was 4 years and 5 months, ranging
from 4 years to 5 years.

significantly different from the rest in the post-hoc analysis
turns out to be the control group. Thus there is no evidence
that the language labels can further improve the
performance of the Draw-bar group (Figure 5). This may
simply mean that the physical object representation of the
relations is strong enough and comparable to the language
labels used in previous experiments.
4,5
4

3,65

3,8

3,84

3,5
3
2,5
2
1,5

1,44

1
0,5
0
controlstronger

draw-bar draw-bar +
label

Daddy

Figure 5. Mean scores for the various groups.
Main effect is significant (F(3,73)=18.370, p<0.001), but
there are no significant differences between the
experimental groups and in particular, between the draw-bar
condition and any of the labelling conditions.

General Discussion
The results are coherent with the findings obtained by
Gentner and Rattermann (1991, 1998), Gentner and
Loewenstein (2002, 2005), and Goswami (1995), but they
go well beyond them. They show that the use of language
labels is not necessary for successful performance of 4 years
old children in the mapping task and that the use of physical
object representation of the relations is as useful as the
language labels.
These findings open the door for further speculation and
extensive experimental work. The speculation is that maybe
analogical mapping can be performed also by primates or
even monkeys who have not received language training, if a
relevant physical representation of the relations can be
designed, i.e. to find objects that connect other objects in a
causal way which is understood by the corresponding
animal. If this could be demonstrated, we could claim that
language is not necessary for analogy-making, but only
served as a universal and very effective way of representing
the relations. It will still give advantage to humans since one
can only rarely find a good way to represent physically the
relations, but we will be closer to an understanding of the
evolution of analogy-making.

Results and discussion
The main effect of the type of presentation of the relations
on the number of relational mappings is significant
(F(3,73)=18.370, p<0.001). However, the only group that is

513

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the ANALOGY
project (NEST program, contract 29088) funded by the EC.
We would like to thank Elisaveta, Margarita, Irina, and
Olimpia for their help in collecting the data.

References
Bryant, P.E., & Trabasso, T. (1971). Transitive inferences and
memory in young children. Nature, 232, 456-458.
DeLoache, J. S. (1989). Young children's understanding of the
correspondence between a scale model and a larger space.
Cognitive Development, 4, 121-139.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure–mapping: A theoretical framework
for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive Science,
10, 277-300.
Gentner, D. (1989). Mechanisms of analogical learning. In S.
Vosniadou and A. Ortony, (Eds.), Similarity and Analogical
Reasoning, 199-241. London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman &. J. P. Byrnes (Eds.),
Perspectives on thought and language: Interrelations in
development (pp. 225-277). London: Cambridge University
Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M.J., Markman, A., & Kotovsky, L.
(1995). Two forces in the development of relational similarity.
In G. Halford & T.Simon, Developing Cognitive Competence:
New Approaches to Process Modeling (Eds.). Hillsdale:
Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2002). Relational language and
relational thought. In Amsel, E. (Ed); Byrnes, J.P. (Ed).
Language, literacy, and cognitive development. The
development and consequences of symbolic communication,
pp. 87-120.
Gillan, D. J., Premack, D., & Woodruff, G. (1981). Reasoning in
the chimpanzee: I. Analogical reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 7, 117.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A.L. (1990). Higher-order structure and
relational reasoning: Contrasting analogical and thematic
relations. Cognition, 36, 207-226.
Goswami, U. (1991). Analogical reasoning: What develops? A
Review of Research and Theory. Child Development, 62, 1-22.
Goswami, U. (1995). Transitive relational mappings in 3- and 4year-olds: The analogy of Goldilocks and the Three Bears.
Child Development, 66, 877-892.
Goswami, U. (1996). Analogical reasoning and cognitive
development. In H.Reese (Ed.). Advances in Child
Development and Behavior, 92-135. San Diego. CA:
Academic Press.
Goswami, U., Pauen, S. (2005). The effects of family analogy on
class inclusion reasoning in young children. Swiss Journal of
Psychology, vol. 64, n 2, pp. 115-124
Halford, G.S. (1984). Can young children integrate premises in
transitivity and serial order tasks? Cognitive Psychology, 16,
65-93

Halford, G. (1993). Children’s understanding: The development
of mental models. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers,
Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Halford, G. (1998). Relational processing in higher cognition:
Implications for analogy, capacity and cognitive development.
In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, B. Kokinov (Eds.) Advances in
Analogy Research: Integration of Theory and Data form the
Cognitive, Computational, and Neural Sciences. New
Bulgarian University, Sofia.
Halford, G. (1998). Processing capacity defined by relational
complexity: Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21,
803-864.
Inhelder, B. and J. Piaget (1958). The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York: Basic
Books.
Inhelder, B. and Piaget, J. (1964). The Early Growth of Logic in
the Child: Classification and Seriation. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D., (2005). Relational language and
the development of relational mapping. Cognitive Psychology,
vol. 50, pp. 315-353.
Mutafchieva, M. & Kokinov, B. (2007). Does the Family
Analogy Help Young Children To Do Relational Mapping? In:
Proceedings of the European Cognitive Science Conference.
Oden, D, Thompson, R., Premack, D. (1990). Infant
Chimpanzees Spontaneously Perceive Both Concrete and
Abstract Same/Different Relations. Child Development, Vol.
61, No. 3, pp. 621-631
Oden, D, Thompson, R., Premack, D. (2001). Can an Ape
Reason Analogically? Comprehension and Production of
Analogical Problems by Sarah, a Chimpanzee (Pan
troglodytes). In: Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B. (eds.)
The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 471-497.
Pears, R., & Bryant, P. E. (1990). Transitive inferences by young
children about spatial position. British Journal of Psychology,
81, 497-510.
Piaget, J. (1971). Biology and knowledge. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press
Rattermann, M.J., & Gentner, D. (1998). The effect of language
in similarity: The use of relational labels improves young
children’s performance in a mapping task. In K. Holyoak, D.
Gentner, & B. Kokinov. Advances in Analogy Research:
Integration of Theory and Data from the Cognitive,
Computational, and Neural Sciences. New Bulgarian
University, Sofia.
Thompson, R., Oden, D. (1998). Why Monkeys and Pigeons,
Unlike Certain Apes, Cannot Reason Analogically. , In K.
Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B. Kokinov. Advances in Analogy
Research: Integration of Theory and Data from the Cognitive,
Computational, and Neural Sciences. New Bulgarian
University, Sofia, pp. 269-273
Thompson, R., Oden, D. (2000). Categorical Perception and
Conceptual Judgments by Nonhuman Primates: The
Paleological Monkey and the Analogical Ape, Cognitive
Science, Vol. 24, No. 3, Pages 363-396

514

