UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Changing Explanations in the Face of Anomalous Data in Abductive Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zm7n9sq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Baumann, Martin R.K.
Bocklisch, Franziska
Mehlhorn, Katja
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Changing Explanations in the Face of Anomalous Data in Abductive Reasoning
Martin R. K. Baumann (martin.baumann@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Franziska Bocklisch (franziska.bocklisch@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Katja Mehlhorn (katja.mehlhorn@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Josef F. Krems (krems@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology,
Wilhelm-Raabe-Str. 43, 09107 Chemnitz, Germany
might happen that a new symptom contradicts this initial
hypothesis. Such a situation is called an anomaly (Krems &
Johnson, 1995). In this situation the physician has to change
the current hypothesis to be able to integrate the
contradicting symptom into a coherent explanation of all
symptoms. There are two ways to do this. The physician can
either modify the current explanation so that it explains both
the new symptom and the previous ones, or select an
alternative explanation for the new symptom that is
compatible with the explanation for the previous
observations. In our experiment we focused on situations
where new observations enforce the reasoner to modify the
current explanatory hypothesis as the new contradicting
symptom could not be interpreted in a way compatible with
the current explanation.
The process of changing from an existing hypothesis to a
new one is affected by several factors, such as the
availability of alternative hypotheses (e.g., Burbules &
Linn, 1988; Johnson & Krems, 2001; Krems & Johnson,
1995) or the entrenchment of the current explanation or the
anomalous observation (Keinath & Krems, 1998).
Given the importance of knowledge for real world
abductive reasoning tasks, such as medical diagnosis, the
structure of the domain knowledge should also affect the
process of changing hypotheses. This knowledge is often
organized into different levels of abstraction such that
higher order concepts form categories under which lower
level explanatory hypotheses are subsumed (e.g., Arocha &
Patel, 1995). Previous studies on the generation of
explanatory hypotheses in the domain of scientific
discovery indicate that people need to encounter substantial
negative outcomes of their hypothesis evaluations before
they start to consider hypotheses from a different category
as relevant explanations (Klahr & Dunbar, 1988). Hence,
given these results it can be assumed that solving an
anomaly is more difficult if it requires to change to a new
category of explanatory hypotheses than to switch to a new
hypothesis within the same category.
Additionally, the relation of the contradicting observation
to the current explanation’s category should also be
relevant. The observation could be specific and linked
specifically to the hypotheses of one category or it could be
unspecific and linked to hypotheses of different categories.
If an anomaly is caused by a specific observation that
contradicts the current category of explanations it should
facilitate solving the anomaly. This observation could be
used to exclude all hypotheses of the current category from

Abstract
The integration of anomalous data is an essential subprocess
of abductive reasoning. Abductive reasoning is viewed as a
comprehension process by which observations are
sequentially interpreted and explained in relation to existing
knowledge. This emphasizes the importance of the reasoner’s
knowledge structure also for the reaction to anomalous data.
In this paper we investigated the effect of the specificity of
anomalous data, that is whether they are related to only one
category of causes or to different categories, on how
hypotheses are changed to solve an anomaly. The results
show that the specificity of observations facilitates the
abductive reasoning process, especially in cases where the
category of hypotheses must be changed.
Keywords: abductive reasoning; anomaly; fuzzy pattern
classification; changing explanations.

Introduction
Abductive reasoning is the process of finding the best
explanation for a set of observations. In its simplest form
this kind of reasoning can be described as follows: Given
knowledge that A causes B, and B is observed, then A is
hypothesized as the explanation for B (Josephson &
Josephson, 1994). This kind of reasoning is part of many
real world tasks such as scientific discovery, medical
diagnosis, or software debugging. In these real world tasks
there is often not only one observation that has to be
explained but a whole set of observations and each of these
observations is associated with different possible causes.
For example, when a patient complains about headache the
physician faces the problem that headache is a common
symptom of many diseases. Furthermore, the patient often
shows not only one symptom but a set of symptoms that all
are associated with different causes and that become known
to the physician sequentially. The physician’s task is to
decide between the different possible causes of the
symptoms during the reasoning process and to find the
combination of causes that explains all the symptoms best.
The generation of this explanation is in many cases a
sequential process that can be viewed as a comprehension
process by which observations are sequentially interpreted
and integrated into the current explanation (Johnson &
Krems, 2001). Hence, after recognizing the initially
presented symptoms, the physician will generate an initial
explanatory hypothesis that will be used as a context for the
interpretation of following symptoms (Johnson & Krems,
2001). Because of the sequential nature of this process it

797

three or four typical symptoms. In total there were seven
different symptoms. Each chemical could be identified
unambiguously only when all its symptoms were presented.
This artificial task with a small number of possible
hypotheses was used a) to be able to train participants to a
high degree of familiarity with the material, b) to
simultaneously avoid potential effects of interindividual
differences in knowledge with the use of more realistic
abductive reasoning task, and c) to be able to measure the
plausibility of all possible hypotheses repeatedly during the
abductive reasoning process.
Figure 1 presents the general procedure of a trial. On each
trial the symptoms for one hypothetical patient were
presented sequentially. These could be either three or four
symptoms. After the presentation of each symptom the
participant had to rate the plausibility of each of the six
chemicals as being the explanation for the symptoms
presented so far. This was done on a scale ranging from 1
meaning “very implausible” to 7 meaning “very plausible”.
The order of the chemicals was randomized in this rating
procedure to avoid any order effects in the ratings. After the
last symptom the participants had to indicate their decision
which chemical caused the symptoms.

further consideration at once and to focus on those
explanatory hypotheses of that category compatible with the
observation. On the other hand, if the anomalous
observation is unspecific it is not possible to exclude a
category from further consideration as a whole and the
participants should show more difficulties in solving the
anomaly. Therefore the specificity of the anomalous
observation should facilitate the change of hypotheses
between categories.
The goal of our experiment was to evaluate the role the
specificity of contradicting observations and the
requirement to change the category of hypotheses play in
solving anomalies in abductive reasoning tasks.

Experiment
The abductive reasoning task
To explore the abductive reasoning process we used an
experimental task called “chemical accident”. Participants
were told the following cover story: “Imagine you are a
physician at a chemical plant. After a chemical accident an
employee comes to see you as he suffers from several
symptoms that are caused by a chemical the employee came
in contact with. It is your task to identify the chemical
causing the symptoms.”

Diagnosis
?
Rating 4

Table 1: Chemical categories, chemicals, and the symptoms
each chemical causes.

Symptom 4
Rating 3

category
Landin

chemical
B

T

W
Amid

Q

M

G

symptoms
breathlessness
cough
headache
eye irritation
breathlessness
cough
headache
itching
cough
eye irritation
itching
redness of the skin
chemical burn of the skin
eye irritation
itching
redness of the skin
chemical burn of the skin
headache
itching
chemical burn of the skin
eye irritation
headache

Symptom 3
Rating 2
Symptom 2
Rating 1
Symptom 1
Figure 1: Sequence of events in one trial.
There were specific symptoms that were only caused by the
chemicals of one category. For example “breathlessness”
and “cough” were characteristic for the “Landin” category
whereas “redness of the skin” and “chemical burn of the
skin” were specific to the “Amid” category. On the other
hand there were unspecific symptoms such as “headache”,
“eye irritation” and “itching” that could occur in both
categories.
The symptoms could appear in a strong form such as
“strong headache” or in a slight form such as “slight
headache”. When a symptom appeared in its strong form it
was always caused by a chemical. By contrast when the
symptom appeared in its slight form it could be caused by a
chemical or any other unrelated circumstance. If, for
example, the patient showed “strong redness of skin” this
symptom could only be caused by the chemicals Q or M,
whereas when the patient showed slight redness of skin this

As can be seen in Table 1 there were two categories of
chemicals called “Landin” and “Amid” each including three
chemicals: B, T, W and Q, M, G. Each chemical caused

798

assume that the “slight breathlessness” symptom is
unrelated to the chemical accident. The only relevant
symptoms are “itching” and “eye irritation”. Therefore T
cannot be the solution. After another specific symptom,
“strong cough” the chemical W from the same Landin
category can be identified as solution.
The bottom row of Table 2 illustrates an anomalous trial
with a hypothesis change between categories. As in the
within change trials, the anomaly occurs with the third
symptom. The important point here is that in these trials the
anomalous symptom had always to be a specific symptom,
such as “cough”. The anomaly can only be resolved by
disregarding the second symptom, in this example “slight
breathlessness”, and changing in this case from the Amid to
the Landin category. The last symptom identifies W from
the Landin category as the solution.

could be caused either by the chemicals Q and M or in some
rare cases by something else, such as a sunburn. The
introduction of this feature allowed us to generate trials with
anomalous symptoms. Slight symptoms at the beginning
could be used to induce a certain hypothesis or group of
hypotheses about the chemical probably causing the
symptoms. Later in the trial a strong symptom was
presented that contradicted the current hypothesis. To solve
this anomaly the participant had to disregard the slight
symptom presented at the beginning. A new hypothesis had
to be generated that could explain both the new symptom
and the previous ones except the slight symptom. Slight
symptoms were also presented very frequently in consistent
trials with no contradicting symptoms where they had to be
considered to identify the chemical in the same way as
strong symptoms. This should prevent participants from
always disregarding slight symptoms.
There were two types of anomalous trials. In one type the
anomaly could be solved by switching to a new hypothesis
within the same category, for example from chemical T to
chemical W of the Amid category. In the other type the
anomaly had to be solved by switching between categories,
for example from the chemicals B and T of the Landin
category to the chemical G of the Amid category.
Table 2 shows the basic structure of each trial type by
means of an example for each trial. The abstract structure of
the anomalous trials, that is the sequence of specific and
unspecific symptoms and the sequence of strong and slight
symptoms was the same for all anomalous trials of the
respective type.
The top row of Table 2 is an example of a consistent trial
without contradictions. The basic principle of this kind of
trials is that with each new symptom some of the hypotheses
can be rejected until one remains that represents the
solution. In this example, after the first presented symptom
“strong headache” the chemicals B, T, M and G are
plausible hypotheses. The following second symptom
“slight breathlessness” allows rejecting two chemicals from
the set of possible explanations. This specific symptom
points directly to the chemical group “Landin” and only B
and T remain as plausible explanations. The third symptom
“strong cough” does not yet differentiate between B and T,
but after “strong eye irritation” occurring as the last
symptom, T can be identified unambiguously as the
solution.
The medium row shows an example of an anomalous trial
with a hypothesis switch within the category. In this
example the specific symptom “slight breathlessness” is
presented after the unspecific symptom “strong itching”.
These two symptoms indicate that the chemical T of the
Landin category might have caused the symptoms. With the
next symptom “strong eye irritation”, the anomaly occurs as
this symptom must be caused by a chemical (as it is in its
strong form). For this kind of trials the anomalous symptom
is always unspecific, such as “eye irritation”. Because there
is no chemical that causes itching, shortness of breath, and
eye irritation, the only way to solve this anomaly is to

Table 2: Example trials
trial type

symptom
1
strong
headache

symptom
2
slight
breathlessness

symptom
3
strong
cough

symptom
4
strong
eye
irritation

plausible
hypotheses
anomalous
within

BTMG

BT

BT

T

strong
itching

slight
breathlessness

strong
eye
irritation

strong
cough

specificity
plausible
hypotheses
anomalous
between

unspecific
TWQM

specific
T

unspecific
WQ

specific
W

strong
itching

strong
cough

strong
eye
irritation

specificity
plausible
hypotheses

unspecific
TWQM

slight
chemical
burn of
the skin
specific
QM

specific
TW

unspecific
W

consistent

Fuzzy pattern classification
For the analysis of the ratings after each symptom
presentation the method of fuzzy pattern classification was
used (Bocklisch, 1987). This multivariate method is based
on Zadeh`s fuzzy set theory (Zadeh, 1965). It is suitable for
the analysis and modeling of empirical data. According to
the fuzzy pattern classification method, classes are
represented by patterns defined in a multidimensional
feature space given by a set of relevant features derived
from the measured variables. A special potential of this
method is also the possibility of parallel processing of
several features, e.g. using the plausibility ratings for all
chemicals as a vector with six dimensions. The class

799

specific ranges for the features are described in a fuzzy way.
That means that at each point of the feature space a
membership value to each class is defined. This value
represents the value of truth that an object or observation
belongs to the specific class. A class membership function
can be built with expert knowledge given rules based on
linguistic expressions, e.g. small, medium or big intensity of
a phenomenon. A second way is the calculation of a class
membership function based on a large or small sample of
data. Each data point is described by a membership
function. These membership functions are used instead of
probability functions.
The result of the classification of an unknown object is a
standardized membership value gradually varying between
0 and 1. 0 means that the classified object is not a member
of the class. 1 means that the object is a prototypical
representative of the class. We used this method to calculate
the similarity of each participant’s plausibility ratings with
an ideal rating behavior. These ideal ratings were defined
using the poles of the rating scale. High plausibility of a
hypothesis was coded with “7” meaning “very plausible”,
low plausibility with “1” for “very implausible”. Hence, if a
chemical could cause the symptoms presented so far in the
current trial it was rated with “7”, otherwise with “1”.
Between these two extremes a nonlinear transition is
defined by a generalized Aizerman`s potential function
(Bocklisch, 1987).
The correspondence of the participants’ ratings with the
defined ideal rating behaviour was then computed using
fuzzy pattern classification. The results of this computation
were calculated membership values for each chemical, on
each rating point in time and for each single trial. These
membership values express the degree of correspondence
between the ideal rating classifier and the participants’
ratings. High membership values (0.75 to 1) show high
correspondence, medium membership values (0.5 to 0.75)
show uncertainty and values lower than 0.5 mark low
agreement.

Results and Discussion
We will first report the results regarding the accuracy in the
diagnosis task. The rate of correct diagnoses for the
consistent trials was rather high (91.6%) indicating that the
participants were able to solve these trials in nearly all
cases. In comparison with the consistent trials, the
anomalous trials were solved correctly clearly less
frequently, as expected. The percentage of correct diagnoses
was 47.8% in these trials demonstrating the participants’
difficulties to solve the anomalies. This is similar to
previous results on anomalous data in abductive reasoning
(e.g., Keinath & Krems, 1998; Krems & Johnson, 1995).
% correct
100
75

64

50

31.5

25
0
change between
categories

change within
category

Anomalous trial type

Figure 2: Percentages of correct diagnoses in
anomalous trials with within and between category change
of hypothesis.
Considering the diagnosis performance in the two types of
anomalous trials, the results are contrary to our expectation.
Based on the results of Klahr & Dunbar (1988) it was
expected that anomalies requiring a change of the
hypothesis within the same category should be easier to
solve than anomalies requiring a change between categories.
But as can be seen in Figure 2, participants identified the
correct chemical much more frequently when they had to
change the hypothesis between categories of chemicals to
solve the anomaly than when they had to change the
hypothesis within a category. The percentage of correct
diagnoses in the “change between categories” trials is with
64% twice as high as in the “change within category” trials.
The fuzzy pattern classification analysis of the ratings
after each symptom sheds some light on the possible reason
for this unexpected result. Figure 3 shows the mean
membership values of those hypotheses that should be rated
as “very plausible” according to the definition of the ideal
rating behavior in the two types of anomalous trials after
each symptom presentation. The critical membership values
are those after the second and the third symptom
presentation. These represent the membership values of
possible explanations before and after the anomaly.

Participants, Procedure, Design
11 participants, all undergraduate students at Chemnitz
University of Technology took part in this experiment. The
abductive reasoning task was presented on a computer. The
experiment started with the learning phase where
participants acquired the task knowledge displayed in Table
1 followed by a practice phase where the participants
performed at least 24 practice trials. This practice phase was
repeated until the participants achieved a level of 84%
correctly solved practice trials. The data collection phase
comprised 36 trials that were presented in random order.
Four of the 36 trials were anomalous trials, two requiring a
within category change of the hypothesis, two requiring a
between change. The dependent variables were percentage
of correct chemical identifications at the end of each trial
and the plausibility ratings on a seven point scale after each
presented symptom.

800

membership value

change between groups
change within group

1
0,75

0.777
0.758

0,5

0.845

0.774

0.766

T
W
¾

0.751

0.75

¾

¾

¾

Q
M

0.544

0.608

0.5

0,25

0.25

0

0

1

B

membership value
1

G

2

2
3
4
Number of presented symptoms

3

Number of presented symptoms

Figure 3: Mean membership values for the ratings of
ideally very plausible rated chemicals after each symptom
for anomalous trials with hypothesis change between and
within category.

Figure 4: Anomalous trial requiring hypothesis change
between categories (dashed bars: Landin, solid bars: Amid;
asterisks mark plausible hypotheses).

Before the anomaly occurred, participants followed the
ideal rating behavior in both types of anomalous trials quite
well. But after the anomaly, membership values for ratings
of ideally very plausible hypotheses clearly dropped in those
anomalous trials requiring a hypothesis change within the
category. This drop was not observed for anomalous trials
requiring a hypothesis change between categories. In these
trials the membership values for plausible hypotheses
remained constant after the anomaly. This indicates that
participants switched to the correct hypothesis to a much
lesser extent after the anomaly when the new hypothesis
was in the same category than when it was in the other
category. Even an additional symptom after the anomaly,
the fourth symptom in the trial, did not help the participants
to identify the correct hypothesis within the category. This
resulted in the low diagnosis performance for these trials .
Figures 4 and 5 present these averaged data in more detail as
they represent the individual membership values for the
different hypotheses ratings before and after the anomalous
symptom in two single anomalous trials. Figure 4 presents
the data for the anomalous trial requiring the change of
hypothesis between categories that was presented also in the
bottom row of Table 2. Figure 5 shows the membership
values of the ratings of the anomalous trial requiring a
hypothesis change within a category that was also presented
in the middle row of Table 2. Dashed bars represent the
Landin category, solid bars represent the Amid category.
Asterisks mark those chemicals that represent plausible
hypotheses. As we found the same pattern of membership
values for the other anomalous trials of the respective types
only the membership values for these trials are presented.
Two features of these data shall be emphasized.

B

membership value
1

T
W

¾

0,75

Q

¾

M

0,5

¾

G

0,25
0
2

3

Number of presented symptoms

Figure 5: Anomalous trial requiring change within
category (dashed bars: Landin, solid bars: Amid; asterisks
mark plausible hypotheses).
First, in the trial that required a hypothesis change
between categories participants correctly recognized that the
current category Amid became irrelevant after the
anomalous symptom “strong cough”. Participants correctly
rejected the Amid group and rated all chemicals of this
category as implausible consistent with the ideal rating
behavior (high membership values for the ratings of
chemicals in this category). This indicates that participants
recognized the anomalous symptom as a specific feature for
the Landin category and were able to use it to reject that
category that was not associated with it (Amid). But they
were rather unsure which chemical to adopt from the new
category as new hypothesis. Both the two plausible (T and
W) and the one implausible hypothesis (B) show lower

801

switch from the current hypothesis to a different
hypothesis within the same category of related hypotheses
to explain all observations. In the other half of the trials the
participants had to switch to a hypothesis from a different
category of hypotheses. To test the above predictions, the
switch within the category involved an unspecific
anomalous observation, whereas the switch between groups
involved a specific anomalous observation.
The results indicate that the specificity of an anomalous
observation is much more important for finding an
explanation for the anomaly than whether it is necessary to
switch to new categories of explanations to find an
explanation for the anomaly. Specific anomalous
observations were used to exclude the incompatible
category that was not linked to the observation thus
facilitating the reasoning process. This was not possible
with the unspecific anomalous observation. But both kinds
of observations did not facilitate the activation of the
relevant explanatory hypotheses in the remaining category.

membership values than the hypotheses in the irrelevant
Amid category.
Second, considering the trials that required a hypothesis
change within the current category Figure 5 shows that the
membership values for all but one hypothesis dropped
clearly after the anomalous symptom occurred leading to the
low average membership value after symptom three for this
kind of trials as presented in Figure 3. For this kind of trials
the anomalous symptom was an unspecific symptom, such
as “eye irritation” (see middle row in Table 2). It seems that
participants were not able to use this symptom as efficiently
as the specific symptom in the trials with a hypothesis
change between trials. They were not able to reject
implausible or to identify the plausible hypotheses after the
anomaly.
The importance of the specificity feature of the symptoms
is not only evident regarding the reaction to anomalous data.
The membership values for the ratings after the second
symptom of the within category change trials also indicate
the importance of this symptom feature. Even though the
specific symptom at the second position in the trial
sequence was only presented in its slight form, it lead to the
correct rejection of all chemicals of the category that were
not associated with this symptom (for the data in Figure 5 it
was “breathlessness” as can be seen in the middle row of
Table 2). As for the specific symptom in the between
category change trials that caused the anomaly, the specific
symptom was efficiently used to reject one category but it
did not help the participants to identify plausible
hypotheses. The membership values for the plausible
hypotheses after the second symptom are quite low.

Acknowlegements
We thank Georg Jahn and three anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Arocha, J.A., & Patel, V.L. (1995). Novice diagnostic
reasoning in medicine: accounting for clinical evidence.
Journal of Learning Sciences, 4, 355-384.
Bocklisch, S.F. (1987). Prozeßanalyse mit unscharfen
Verfahren. VEB Verlag Technik Berlin.
Burbules, N.C. & Linn, M.C. (1988). Response to
contradiction:Scientific reasoning during adolescence.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 67-75.
Johnson, T. R., & Krems, J. F. (2001). Use of current
explanations in multicausal abductive reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25, 903-939.
Josephson, J. R., & Josephson, S. G. (1994). Abductive
inference:
computation,
philosophy,
technology.
Cambridge University Press.
Keinath, A., & Krems, J. F. (1998). The Influence of
Anomalous Data on Solving Human Abductive Tasks. In
L. Magnani, N. Neressian & P. Thagard (Hrsg.),
Philosophica, Abduction and Scientific Discovery
[Special Issue], 61(1), 39-50
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-48.
Krems, J.F. & Johnson, T.R. (1995). Integration of
Anomalous Data in Multicausal Explanations. In J.D.
Moore & J.F. Lehmann (Hrsg.), Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (S. 277-282). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy Sets. Information and Control,
8, 338-353.

Summary
We view abductive reasoning as a comprehension process
This view emphasizes the importance of the domain
knowledge structure for task performance, such as whether
observations are specifically associated with possible
explanations from a certain category or whether they are
associated with hypotheses from different categories. This
feature should also influence how people solve anomalies
encountered in abductive reasoning. The goal of our
experiment was to examine whether anomalous
observations that are specifically linked to a category of
explanatory hypotheses are easier explained than anomalous
observations that are linked to explanations from different
categories. This is especially important as previous results
on scientific discovery indicate that it should be more
difficult to solve anomalies that require switching to a
hypothesis of a different category than to switch to a new
hypothesis within the same category independent of the
specificity of the anomalous observation.
To examine this question participants had to perform
several trials of an abductive reasoning task where they
encountered several observations sequentially. In half of the
critical trials with anomalous data the participants had to

802

