UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Children's Online Processing of Complex Sentences: New Evidence from a New Technique

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27s6630n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Cargill, Sarah A.
Farmer, Thomas A.
Schwade, Jennifer A.
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Children’s Online Processing of Complex Sentences: New Evidence from a New
Technique
Sarah A. Cargill (sec57@cornell.edu), Thomas A. Farmer (taf22@cornell.edu), Jennifer A. Schwade
(jas335@cornell.edu), Michael H. Goldstein (mhg26@cornell.edu),
and Michael J. Spivey (mjs41@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Abstract
A lack of straightforward, child-appropriate methodologies has
hindered the study of on-line syntactic processing in young
children. Here, we exploited the continuous and non-ballistic
properties of computer mouse movements,,, identified by
recording streaming x, y coordinates, to test how young
children integrate multiple sources of information on-line in
order to extract meaning. Participants heard structurally
ambiguous sentences while viewing scenes with properties that
did or did not support the difficult noun phrase modifier
interpretation. As previously reported, children have difficulty
accessing and utilizing the scene-based context cue. This
difficulty, however, was significantly more pronounced in
children with less language exposure.
Keywords: Sentence Processing; Language Comprehension;
Mouse-Tracking; Language Development; Multiple Cues

Over the past 15-20 years, a large amount of evidence has
accrued in support of the notion that when a sentence is heard
or read, the adult language comprehension system rapidly
accesses many different linguistic and/or non-linguistic
information sources to extract structure and meaning from
the signal (Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995; Snedeker & Trueswell,
2004). Until recently, however, a lack of child-appropriate
behavioral techniques has hindered the study of young
children’s on-line syntactic processing and development.
Here, we consider the degree to which multiple cues facilitate
the comprehension of syntactically ambiguous sentences in
children and adults, outline a new technique to facilitate the
study of on-line language processing in young children, and
present new data from that technique to support previous
findings in children’s sentence processing.
On-line language comprehension is commonly studied by
presenting syntactically ambiguous sentences and then
examining the sources of information that influence the
manner in which they are initially interpreted.
1a) Put the apple on the towel in the box.
1b) Put the apple that’s on the towel in the box.
In example (1), the prepositional phrase (PP) on the towel
creates a syntactic ambiguity in that it can be initially
interpreted as a destination (or Goal) for the referring
expression the apple, thus attaching to the verb phrase (VPAttachment), or alternatively, could be interpreted as a

modifier of the noun phrase (NP), such as Put [the apple on
the towel] in the box (NP-attachment).
The influence of both referential context and the lexicalbias of the verb are two information sources that have been
shown to interact in determining how adults initially attach
the ambiguous PP. When ambiguous sentences like (1a) are
heard in the presence of visual scenes where only one
referent is present (an apple already on a towel), along with
an incorrect destination (an empty towel), and a correct
destination (a box), adults often look to the incorrect
destination until the second disambiguating PP is heard, at
which time eye-movements tend to be re-directed to the
correct destination (Tanenhaus et al., 1995; Trueswell,
Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999). Looks to the incorrect
destination are indicative of “garden-pathing,” initially
incorrectly attaching the PP to the verb phrase, because they
do not occur when the instruction is unambiguous (1b).
The looking patterns are, however, markedly different
when the visual context contains two possible referents (say,
an apple on a towel and another apple on a napkin). When
hearing an ambiguous sentence like (1a) in a “two-referent”
visual context, adults tend to look at the correct referent (the
apple on the towel) and move it to the correct destination
with few looks to the incorrect destination. In accordance
with various instantiations of referential theory (Altmann &
Steedman, 1988; Spivey & Tanenhaus, 1998), when two
possible referents are present, an expectation is created that
the two similar entities will be discriminated, thereby forcing
a modifier interpretation of the initial PP (NP-attachment).
This context effect is modulated, however, by lexical
biases, such as the frequency with which the verb (like Put)
takes a prepositional object (such as on the towel) in naturally
occurring language. When the lexical bias of a verb strongly
supports VP-attachment, adults strongly prefer the VPattached interpretation of the PP (Britt, 1994; Snedeker &
Trueswell, 2004), especially when the context also supports
VP-attachement (when only one referent is present). If,
however, a verb often does not take a prepositional object at
all (such as drop), adults favor NP-attachment (Snedeker &
Trueswell, 2004), and this preference is especially strong
when the context also supports NP-attachment.
By examining young children’s eye-movement patterns in
similar scene-based experimental paradigms, Snedeker &
Trueswell (2004) revealed that, like adults, five-year-old
children tend to attach the ambiguous PP in sentences like

143

(1a) to the VP or the NP in accordance with the lexical-bias
of the verb. Unlike adults, however, the scene-based
referential context does not interact with the lexical-bias of
the verb in determining which interpretation is initially
entertained. That is, although children showed remarkable
sensitivity to the biases of the verbs, context could not, in an
additive sense, further facilitate children’s initial attachment
preference (although it did exert slight effects in later
processing stages).
When comparing children to adults, then, Snedeker and
Trueswell argued that children could access multiple sources
of information from very early on but that children prioritize
the amount of influence from each source based on the
overall reliability of that information source in typical input.
Children rely heavily on the lexical-biases of the verbs
because they are extremely reliable across the input. When a
PP follows Put in child-directed speech, for example, it
almost always denotes a destination for the “putting” action.
Salient cues from visual context, however, are more complex
and less frequent, and as such, less easy to track and learn. As
a result, context is less influential in children because it takes
a longer time to learn.
Such an argument is based strongly on experience with the
input. Indeed, Snedeker and Trueswell found that off-line
attachment preferences entailed by specific verbs aligned
very well with the behavior of those verbs in naturally
occurring child-directed speech. They concluded that lexicalbias was a strong cue for young children but that visual
context doesn’t become a reliable constraint on parsing until
slightly later in life.

Purpose
Recent research demonstrates that continuous nonlinear
trajectories recorded from the streaming x, y coordinates of
computer-mouse movements can serve as an informative
indicator of the cognitive processes underlying spoken word
recognition (Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005),
categorization (Dale, Kehoe, & Spivey, in press), and adult
syntactic processing (Farmer, Cargill, & Spivey, in press).
Unlike saccadic eye movements, mouse movements are
generally smooth and continuous, and can curve substantially
mid-flight. Additionally, although eye-movement data afford
approximately 2-4 data points (saccades) per second,
“mouse-tracking” yields somewhere between 30-60 data
points per second, depending on the sampling rate of the
software used. These properties of tracked mouse-movements
provide crucial benefits in that they allow a fine-grained and
graded response pattern to emerge within an individual trial.
Although evidence exists that children can click a
computer mouse at 3.5 years, on average, and that the onset
of autonomous computer use is approximately 3.7 years
(Calvert, Rideout, Woolard, Barr, and Strouse, 2005), the
degree to which this cheap, portable, and accessible
technique can be used to study complex cognitive
phenomena in young children remains to be seen. Here, we
exploit the continuous nature of mouse-movement

trajectories, in relation to the visual-world paradigm
(Tanenhaus et al., 1995), in order to determine whether the
relatively fragile effect of context would emerge when
examining the very sensitive and fine-grained properties of
mouse-movement trajectories.
In the present research, children moved objects around a
natural scene in response to ambiguous (1a) and
unambiguous spoken instructions (1b). To hold the lexicalbias variable constant, sentences contained only the verb Put,
which is strongly biased toward VP attachment. In the onereferent context, we predicted significant curvature toward
the ultimately incorrect destination for ambiguous sentences,
signaling some consideration of VP-attachment. In the tworeferent context, we tested competing hypotheses. If the
mouse-movement data can be expected to provide the same
result as the eye-movement data, we would predict
significant ambiguous-sentence trajectory curvature toward
the incorrect destination. If, however, children can in fact use
context to reduce the degree to which they consider the VPattachment alternative, but eye-movement data were not
sensitive enough to detect a subtle context effect in children,
we would predict no significant divergence between the
ambiguous- and unambiguous-sentence conditions in the
two-referent context.
Additionally, although Snedeker and Trueswell (2004)
made the claim that adults, given more exposure to more
reliable input (especially in relation to context), were more
able to use context than children, it might be the case that
other developmental changes, like an increase in working
memory, cognitive control, attention, etc., better account for
differences in adults’ use of context. Therefore, to begin to
investigate the role of individual differences in language
experience in sentence processing, we also included a
measure of language experience, vocabulary, with child
participants. If exposure to the input helps drive the
comprehension system toward adult-like behavior, children
with more language experience should have a more adult-like
use of context than children with less language experience. In
this experiment, the context cue should not completely
override the garden-path effect, because put has a strong
verb-based bias toward VP attached (and against the
ultimately correct modifier attachment). However, in the tworeferent condition, we predict that low language-experience
children will exhibit a more robust garden-path effect than
high-experience children.

Method
Participants Forty-three participants, 19 females and 24
males, between the ages of 56 and 70 months-old (M=63.38
months) participated in this experiment.
Materials and Procedure Sixteen experimental items, along
with 80 filler sentences, were adapted from Spivey et al.
(2002) and digitally recorded. Each item was made “childfriendly” by substituting potentially unfamiliar objects with
objects included in the MacArthur-Bates Communicative
Development Inventory, a widely used parental-report based

144

collection of productive vocabulary for children up to 30
months (Fenson et al., 1994). Ambiguous (1a) and
unambiguous instructions (1b) that corresponded to each of
16 experimental scenes were recorded (see Spivey et al.,
2002 for details). Each of the visual scenes corresponding to
the 16 experimental items was varied to produce a onereferent condition and a two-referent condition. The onereferent visual context (Figure 1, top) contained a target
referent (e.g., an apple on a towel), an incorrect destination
(e.g., a second towel), the correct destination (e.g., a box),
and a distracter object (e.g., a flower). In the two-referent
context (Figure 1, bottom), all items were the same except
that the distracter was replaced with a second possible
referent (such as an apple on a napkin). Sixteen distracter
scenes, designed to accompany filler sentences, were
constructed using different combinations of the objects from
the experimental trials and from a set of new and easily
recognizable objects.
Spoken instructions were recorded using a Mac-based
speech synthesizer program. The experimental screen with
the target referent, distracter or second referent, and the
incorrect and correct destinations appeared on the monitor.
For each scene, at the beginning of the sound-file participants
first heard “Place the arrow at the center of the cross.” Once
the child moved the cursor to the center of the cross, the
mouse was repositioned to the center of a small sticker on the
table, so that the cursor always started in the same place for
each trial. Sound-files accompanying experimental scenes
always played the experimental sentence first, followed by
two additional filler instructions. Thus, for experimental
items, participants viewed the appropriate scene while
hearing, for example:
1) Place the cursor at the center of the cross.
2) Put the apple on the towel in the box (experimental trial).
3) Now put the apple beside the flower (filler sentence).
4) Now put the flower in the box (filler sentence).
16 additional filler scenes were also created, and participants
heard three scene-appropriate unambiguous filler instructions
accompany these. In all cases, six seconds separated the
offset of one sentence from the onset of the next within each
trial. Between trials, children saw a large yellow star centered
on the screen and heard the enthusiastically spoken
instruction “Click on the star to go on!” This step was
included to keep the child motivated and to provide a natural
break in the experiment. All instructions were recorded in
age-appropriate child-directed speech by a female adult.
In both the one- and two-referent conditions, the target
referent always appeared in the top left corner of the screen,
the incorrect destination always appeared in the top right
corner, and the correct destination was always located at the
bottom right corner (as in Figure 1). The bottom left corner
of the screen showed either the distracter object in the onereferent trials or the second referent in the two-referent trials.
Filler sentences were constructed to prevent participants from
detecting the regularity created by the object placements in
the experimental trials. In addition to the movement used in
the experimental instructions, eleven distinct movements

were possible in the visual scene across trials, and an
approximately equal number of filler sentences (either eight
or ten) were assigned to each of these movements. Therefore,
ten sentences required an object in the upper left-hand corner
to be moved to the upper right corner of the display, eight
sentences required an object in the upper left-hand corner to
be moved to the bottom left-hand corner, and so on.
In each scene, participants saw four to six color images,
depending on the instructions. Images were constructed from
pictures of real objects taken by a digital camera and edited
in Adobe Photoshop. Visual stimuli subtended an average of
5.96 X 4.35 degrees of visual angle, and were 14.38 degrees
diagonally from the central cross. Mouse movements were
recorded at an average sampling rate of 40 Hz.
The experimental items were counterbalanced across four
presentation lists. Each list contained four instances of each
possible condition, but only one version of each sentence
frame and corresponding visual context. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the four presentation lists, and
the presentation order was randomized for each participant.
Three practice items were incorporated into the beginning of
each list, and participants were randomly assigned to one of
the four presentation lists.
Each child also completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test—Third Edition (PPVT-III), a widely-used and reliable
test of receptive vocabulary. Participants heard a spoken
word and were asked to choose the correct referent from a
display including four pictures. Half of the subjects received
the PPVT before the computer portion of the experiment and
the other half of the subjects received it after. Additionally,
parents completed a form, providing information about the
child’s computer use and their demographic information.
The session lasted approximately 30 minutes.

Results
Data Screening and Coding Mouse movements were
recorded during the grab-click, transferal, and drop-click of
the referent object in the experimental trials. As a result of
the large number of possible trajectory shapes, the x,y
coordinates for each trajectory from each experimental trial
were plotted in order to detect the presence of errors or
otherwise aberrant movements. A trajectory was considered
valid and submitted to further analyses if it was initiated at
the top left quadrant of the display and terminated in the
bottom right quadrant, signaling that the correct referent had
been picked-up and then placed at the correct destination.
Twelve children were excluded from all trajectory analyses
because they either produced more than six errors on the 16
experimental trials or committed errors on each of the four
trials in one condition. Although space constraints preclude a
complete discussion of error rates for all 43 children, the
error types, along with their frequency per condition, are
included in Table 1 (with the numbers in parentheses
indicating the error frequencies for only the children included
in the trajectory analyses). It should be noted, however, that
no significant differences existed between the included

145

versus the excluded children in age, vocabulary score, and unambiguous-sentence trajectories elicited p-values < .05
gender, or number of hours using the computer at home or at for at least eight consecutive time-steps.
school (computer familiarity), all p’s > .15. As such, we have
some evidence to suggest that both language and computer
Figure 1: Examples of one- and two-referent displays with
familiarity were not the cause of the processing difficulty.
averaged trajectories elicited in each context.
Table 1: Error types causing a trial to be excluded from all
analyses, per condition

All analyzable trajectories were time-normalized to 101
time-steps by a procedure originally described in Spivey et
al. (2005). All trajectories were aligned so that their first
observation point corresponded to (0, 0) and their last
recorded point to (1,1). Then, across 101 normalized timesteps, the corresponding x and y coordinates were computed
using simple linear interpolation.
Context and Garden-Path Effects The mean ambiguous
and unambiguous trajectories at each of the 101 time-steps in
the top panel of Figure 1 demonstrate that in the one-referent
context, like adults, the average ambiguous trajectory was
more curved toward the incorrect destination than the
average trajectory elicited by the unambiguous sentences.
Unlike adults, however, in the two-referent condition (Figure
1, bottom), there still appears to be noticeable attraction
toward the incorrect destination for the ambiguous-sentence
trajectories. Both of these trends support the notion that
participants were garden-pathed by the syntactic ambiguity
manipulation regardless of context.
In order to determine whether or not the divergences
observed across the ambiguous- and unambiguous-sentence
trajectories in the one-referent and two-referent contexts were
statistically reliable, we conducted a series of t-tests. Due to
the horizontally elongated shape of the overall display,
differences in x-coordinates of the mouse movements are
somewhat more indicative of velocity differences, and
differences in the y-coordinates are more indicative of
genuine spatial attraction toward the incorrect referent. As
such, analyses were conducted separately on the x- and the ycoordinates at each of the 101 time-steps. In order to avoid
the increased probability of a Type-1 error associated with
multiple t-tests, and in keeping with Bootstrap simulations of
such multiple t-tests on mouse trajectories (Dale, Kehoe, &
Spivey, 2007), an observed divergence was not considered
significant unless the coordinates between the ambiguous-

In the one-referent context, no significant divergence ever
occurred between the x-coordinates of the ambiguous- and
unambiguous-sentence trajectories indicating that, across
time, trajectories progressed toward the right side of the
screen at approximately the same speed in both sentence
conditions. For the y-coordinates, however, the ambiguousand unambiguous-sentence trajectories diverged significantly
from time-steps 43-78, all t’s > 2.08, all p’s < .05, with ycoordinates being higher (closer to zero, thus closer to the top
of the screen) in the ambiguous than in the unambiguous
condition. In the two-referent context, significant xcoordinate divergence between the ambiguous- and
unambiguous-sentence trajectories occurred from time-steps
9-50, all t’s > 2.07, all p’s < .05, with ambiguous-sentence
trajectories traveling more quickly toward the correct
destination. However, in the two-referent context, there was
no statistically reliable y-coordinate divergence at any of the
101 time-steps. The t-test analyses provide mixed support for
the expectation that the data obtained by tracking streaming
x,y coordinates would align with the saccadic eyemovements of children in the same paradigm (Trueswell et
al., 1999). In the one-referent context, as demonstrated by the
significant y-coordinate attraction toward the incorrect
destination (commensurate with the large number of looks to
the incorrect destination in this condition when examining

146

eye-movements), children do consider, at least temporarily,
the destination interpretation of the ambiguous PP. In the
two-referent condition, however, there appears to be no
statistically significant attraction toward the incorrect
destination in the presence of a syntactic ambiguity. This
result is puzzling given that on Figure 1 (bottom), there
appears to be a divergence between ambiguous- and
unambiguous-sentence trajectories and that, when examining
eye-movements, children look often to the incorrect
destination, even when two referents are present.
One explanation for the incongruence of the results in the
two-referent condition with the eye-movement data is that
there could exist so much variability in the y-coordinates of
the trajectories observed here that not enough power exists to
detect divergence, should it be present. In order to reduce the
variability surrounding each participant’s mean y-coordinate
movement in each condition, to avoid concerns associated
with multiple comparisons in the t-tests above, and to assess
directly the statistical reliability of the crucial Context X
Ambiguity interaction, we averaged the y-coordinates
recorded from time-steps 34-67 (the middle portion of the
movement where, on average, the ambiguous-unambiguous
divergences appear most extreme) and used the average ycoordinate response as the dependent measure in a 2 X 2
ANOVA. Average “middle-segment” y-coordinates were
closer to the incorrect destination in the one-referent context,
suggesting greater uncertainty in the one-referent than in the
two referent context, F(1, 30)=7.58, p=.01. They were also
closer to the incorrect destination for the ambiguous over the
unambiguous condition, F(1, 30)=8.26, p=.007. However, the
Context X Ambiguity interaction was not significant, F(1,
30)=1.83, n.s., suggesting that context was not able to
modulate the magnitude of the garden-path effect. Across
these two sets of analyses, then, the emerging picture is one
whereby the average five-year-old child does not employ
referential context to override the VP-attachment bias
associated with this manipulation. This observation, along
with the large number of errors made in the two-referent
ambiguous-sentence condition (Table 1) is in-line with the
eye-movement data reported in Trueswell et al. (1999) and
Snedeker and Trueswell (2004).
The Influence of Individual Differences in Linguistic
Experience on the Use of Referential Context
Using raw vocabulary scores as a proxy for linguistic
experience (as is frequently done in the adult processing
literature, see MacDonald & Christiansen, 2002, for a
discussion), we explored the degree to which those scores
could account for difficulty associated with the two-referent
context (focusing specifically on the two-referent context
here due to space constraints). Noteworthy first is the fact
that raw (non-transformed) vocabulary scores significantly
predicted the number of error trials in the two-referent
ambiguous-sentence condition, t(38)=-2.77, p=.009, ß=-.42,

R2=.17 1, but did not predict the number of errors made in the
other three conditions. The relationship is negative, such that
children with higher vocabularies had fewer error trials than
children with lower vocabularies in the two-referent
ambiguous condition. This significant relationship implicates
vocabulary, and thus language experience, as a strong
predictor of who could move the correct referent to the
correct destination in the critical two-referent, ambiguous
condition.
Figure 2: Averaged elicited trajectories for high and low
vocabulary children in one- and two-referent conditions.

In order to investigate the degree to which vocabulary
influenced on-line processing, we divided the 31 participants
who provided sufficient data for the trajectory analyses into
three groups based on their vocabulary scores. We excluded
children with vocabulary scores in the middle range in order
to make the two groups distinctly different on the vocabulary
dimension. No significant difference was found between the
high and low vocabulary children in age, gender, or number
of hours spent using the computer, either at home or at
school, all p’s n.s. A 2 (Vocabulary Group) X 2 (Context) X
2 (Ambiguity) ANOVA on the average y-coordinate (spatial
attraction index) at the middle segment revealed a marginally
significant 3-way interaction, F(1, 18)=3.10, p=.095. As
illustrated in Figure 2, it appears that in the one-referent
context, both groups of children garden-path, as evidenced by
the divergence between the ambiguous- and unambiguoussentence trajectories, although the effect is especially marked
1

This analysis included only the children who were able to
complete both tasks.

147

for the low vocabulary children. In the two-referent context,
it appears that more attraction occurs toward the incorrect
destination in the low vocabulary children. Although a
thorough follow-up to the omnibus ANOVA is perhaps not
warranted due to the marginal significance of the interaction
term, an interesting statistical trend occurs in the two-referent
context. The difference in y-coordinates between the
ambiguous- and unambiguous-sentence trajectories was
significantly larger for the low vocabulary than for the high
vocabulary children from time-steps 34-43, all t’s > 2.20, all
p’s < .05. These results suggest that, at least early in the
processing of ambiguous sentences in the two-referent
context, high vocabulary children might be more able to use
the context cue than low vocabulary children.

General Discussion
As this is the first study to utilize this mouse-tracking
paradigm with children, our key observation is that tracking
the x, y coordinates of goal directed arm movements does
appear to be an informative way to gather fine grained
information about the on-line language processing of
children. In the one-referent context, converging statistical
analyses reveal that the garden-path effect previously
observed in young children also manifests itself using this
paradigm. In the two-referent context, although no significant
divergence between the ambiguous and unambiguous
trajectories occurred, context did not reliably interact with
ambiguity status in order to modulate the strong VP
preference.
This study is also a first step in examining individual
differences in the linguistic experiences of young children in
relation to their on-line syntactic processing capabilities.
Consistent with Snedeker and Trueswell (2004), children
with high vocabulary scores, who presumably have more
exposure to the linguistic input, appear to be more adult-like
in their use of context in the face of a strong lexical bias
against NP attachment. The results suggest that children with
high vocabulary scores may be better able to use visual
context cues, thus reducing the magnitude or frequency of
their garden-paths in the two-referent context.
Low
vocabulary children, however, rely solely on lexical bias, as
evidenced by their substantial garden-pathing in both
conditions. Taken with the negative correlation between
vocabulary and number of errors in the two-referent
ambiguous condition, and with hints of vocabulary effects
on-line, the results seem to confirm the experience driven
proposals of Snedeker and Trueswell. However, more
analyses with more children are needed to increase statistical
power.
Additionally, these results appear to be commensurate with
results from Pearlmutter and Macdonald (1995), which
suggested that adults scoring high on verbal span tasks, now
thought to be a measure of language exposure as well (see
MacDonald & Christiansen, 2002), have better knowledge of
more cues than low span adults. The results of the current
study suggest that amount of language exposure (perhaps

along with other cognitive factors undergoing developmental
change, such as memory and attention) plays a role in the
development of context use in on-line sentence processing.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Steedman, M. J. (1988). Interaction
with context during human sentence processing. Cognition,
30, 191-238.
Britt, M. A. (1994). The interaction of referential ambiguity
and argument structure in the parsing of prepositional
phrases. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 251-283.
Calvert, S., Rideout, V., Woolard, J., Barr, R., & Strouse,
G. (2005). Age, ethnicity, and socioeconomic patterns in
early computer use: A national survey. American
Behavioral Scientist, 48, 590-607.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C., & Spivey, M. J. (2007). Graded
motor responses in the time course of categorizing
exemplars. Memory and Cognition, 35, 15-28.
Farmer, T. A., Cargill, S. A., Spivey, M.J. (in press).
Gradiency and visual context in syntactic garden-paths.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D., &
Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early communicative
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, 59, 1-173.
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002).
Reassessing working memory: Comments on Just and
Carpenter (1992) and Waters and Caplan (1996).
Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.
Pearlmutter, N. J., & MacDonald, M. C. (1995). Individual
differences and probabilistic constraints in syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Journal of Memory and Language,
34, 521-542.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The developing
constraints on parsing decisions: The role of lexical-biases
and referential scenes in child and adult sentence
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 49, 238-299.
Spivey, M. J., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998). Syntactic ambiguity
resolution in discourse: Modeling the effects of referential
context and lexical frequency. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 15211543.
Spivey, M. J., Tanenhaus, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J.
(2002). Eye movements and spoken language
comprehension: Effects of syntactic context on syntactic
ambiguity resolution. Cognitive Psychology, 45, 447-481.
Spivey, M. J., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors.
Proc. National Academy of Sciences, 29, 10393-10398.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line
sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89134.

148

