UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communicative Ability in Schizophrenic Patients: Executive Function, Theory of Mind and
Mental Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2dn2c5hs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Vallana, Marianna
Bosco, Francesca M.
Angeleri, Romina
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communicative Ability in Schizophrenic Patients:
Executive Function, Theory of Mind and Mental Representations
Marianna Vallana (vallana@psych.unito.it)1
Francesca M. Bosco (bosco@psych.unito.it)1
Romina Angeleri (angeleri@psych.unito.it)1
Katiuscia Sacco (sacco@psych.unito.it)1,2
Bruno G. Bara (bruno.bara@psych.unito.it)1
Livia Colle (colle@psych.unito.it)1
1

Center for Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, University and Polytechnic of Turin via Po 14, Turin, Italy
2
Ospedale Koelliker, corso Galileo Ferraris 251-255, Turin, Italy

articulated differentiation between different pragmatic
phenomena but, in our view, they underestimate the role of
specific mental cognitive processes, namely the complexity
of mental representations in explaining schizophrenic’s
communicative ability.
The present research is an exploratory investigation
aimed at clarifying how the ability to deal with sophisticated
mental representations can explain communicative deficits
in schizophrenic patients.
In our opinion, executive functions and ToM support
communicative ability but they are not sufficient to allow
for its realization. In order to fully comprehend human
communication it is necessary to consider the mental
cognitive processes at the basis of the different pragmatic
phenomena. In particular, we suggest that, in order to
further explain communicative deficits in schizophrenia, the
complexity of mental representations should be considered,
in addition to the other two components mentioned above,
i.e. executive function and ToM. Thus, we have developed
an
experimental
protocol
investigating
different
communicative phenomena with different degrees of
difficulty, which can be explained in terms of the increasing
complexity of the mental representations involved.
Furthermore, since studies within this area have typically
focused on mental cognitive processes underlying the
comprehension of a communication act, overlooked
linguistic production, our research focuses on the subject’s
ability to produce a communication act.
The paper is organised as follows. First, we examine how
deficits in the executive function and in the ToM abilities
could explain communicative deficits in neuropsychological
patients. Second, we present our theoretical framework with
the intent of specifying how mental representations of
increasing complexity can influence different levels of
ability in communicative tasks. Third, we present our
experiment to test whether the complexity of mental
representations involved in communication can help to
explain the communicative ability of schizophrenic patients.
The paper ends with a general discussion.

Abstract
Communication disorders are a typical problem in
schizophrenic patients. The aim of the present study is to
empirically investigate the role played by a possible deficit in
the theory of mind, in the executive function and in the ability
to handle sophisticated mental representations in order to
explain the poor communicative performance of a group of
schizophrenic patients. In particular, we suggest that
difficulties in mindreading and in executive functioning are
not sufficient to explain communicative deficits in
schizophrenia. Our results show the importance of
considering the increasing complexity of the mental
representations underlying different pragmatic phenomena, a
factor that is underestimated in the current literature.
Keywords:
Schizophrenia;
Communicative
ability;
Executive function; Theory of mind; Mental representations.

Introduction
Schizophrenia is a complex pathology, in which the
distinctive symptoms range from deliria and hallucinations
to catatonic behaviour and affectivity problems; in
particular a typical disturbance is language deficit (APA,
1994).
Some authors have suggested that this deficit has to be
considered as the patient’s inability to use language for
communicative purposes rather than being related to the
syntactic and semantic aspects of language (Andreasen,
Hoffman & Grove, 1985). Frith and Allen (1988) also
observed that patients’ syntactic and semantic abilities
remain intact whereas they showed deficits in a more
complex use of language. Thus, Frith (1992) concluded that
the language deficit typical of schizophrenic patients is
principally concerned with pragmatics, i.e., the
communicative use of language in a certain context.
According to the present literature, it is possible to
identify three principal cognitive components for explaining
the communicative deficits in schizophrenia: executive
functions, theory of mind (ToM) and inferential processes.
Theories based on the first two factors give a global
explanation of the deficit, without a fine-grain
differentiation between various pragmatic phenomena.
Theories based on inferential processes provide a more

Executive functions and communication
The executive function is a cognitive construct used to
describe the goal-directed behaviour mediated by the frontal

1593

empirical studies have shown that schizophrenic individuals
perform poorly in both ToM tasks (Doody, Götz, Johnstone,
Frith & Cunningham, 1998; Langdon, Davies & Coltheart,
2002) and in the comprehension of communication acts
such as indirect speech acts, (Corcoran, Mercer & Frith,
1995), irony and metaphors (Langdon et al., 2002). Some
authors have expressed doubts about this theoretical
explanation. They claim that the poor performance
displayed by schizophrenics in ToM tasks could be due not
to their inability to mindread but rather to their primary
deficits in executive functions such as planning (Sarfati,
Hardy-Bayle, Besche & Widlocher, 1997) and working
memory (Drury, Robinson & Birchwood, 1998). At the
present time no studies in the literature seem to share a final
conclusion about the primary role played by the ToM deficit
vs. the executive functioning, in order to explain the poor
communicative ability of schizophrenic patients.

lobes. The executive function system guides a person’s
actions enabling him/her to have an adaptive and flexible
behaviour. It includes cognitive abilities such as planning,
inhibiting dominant responses, flexibility and working
memory. From a neuropsychological perspective, frontal
lobes are critical to the normal functioning of these abilities.
Traumatic brain-injured patients often have damage to this
area, and some authors explain the pragmatic deficit
displayed by these individuals as being caused by executive
function impairment (McDonald & Pearce, 1998). In
particular, traumatic brain-injured patients show deficits in
the comprehension of conversational implicatures and
sarcasm (McDonald, 1992; 1999).
Some studies in the current literature show that
schizophrenic patients also show deficits in executive
function. For example, schizophrenic patients have an
important impairment in their planning ability (Goldberg,
Saint-Cyr and Weinberger, 1990) and in visual working
memory (Keefe, Lees-Roitman & Drupe, 1997). These
cognitive abilities are crucial during a communicative
interaction: working memory provides the resources to
make the necessary inferences during the comprehension of
a discourse while planning allows a person to produce a
communication act. These studies overall could suggest that
some aspects of the communicative deficits in schizophrenic
patients may be due to their principal impairments in
executive functioning (see also, Docherty et al., 2000).
Notwithstanding the above, we suggest that an
impairment at the executive function level is not sufficient
to explain communicative deficits in schizophrenic patients.
Indeed, communicative ability can not be reduced to
executive functioning. Attention, working, memory and
planning abilities support a communicative interaction but
more specific cognitive processes are responsible for
interpreting communicative exchanges (see the paragraph
on the Cognitive Pragmatics theory).

Inferential processes and communication
Most authors within the pragmatic domain (Airenti, Bara &
Colombetti, 1993; Bara 2007; Searle, 1975; Sperber &
Wilson, 1995) point out that communicative understanding
is about the expression and interpretation of the intended
rather than the literal meaning. Such authors highlight the
role of inferential processes underlying a communicative
interaction. From this description one can argue that
effective communication is achieved when both speaker and
listener employ a ToM to understand the ongoing
interaction. Nevertheless, we cannot state that the ToM is
the unique mechanism in explaining pragmatic performance
or that communication can be reduced to the ability to
mindread (see Sperber & Wilson, 2002). For instance, the
role of cognitive processes other than mindreading in
normal human communication was made particularly clear
by Sperber & Wilson’s Relevance theory (1995). They
argue that communication cannot be reduced to a
coding/decoding process but that it has to be considered as
an intentional behaviour guided by cognitive inferences
such as se due to the relevance of the utterance.
Within the general inferential domain, the Cognitive
Pragmatics theory identifies specific mental cognitive
processes, namely the complexity of mental representations,
which allow interlocutors to interpret communicative
exchanges. In the next section we briefly explain the theory
of Cognitive Pragmatics, which is the theoretical framework
we adopted for our study.

Theory of mind and communication
ToM is the ability to ascribe mental states to oneself and to
other people and to use such knowledge to interpret one’s
own as well as other people’s behaviours. Some authors
highlight the role of the ToM in human communication
(Happé & Loth, 2002; Tirassa, Bosco & Colle, 2006). A
developed and intact capacity to mindread is necessary to
comprehend a partner’s communicative intention.
The relation between ToM and communicative ability is
apparent in the autistic pathology. Baron-Cohen, Leslie and
Frith (1985) explained how the social and communicative
problems, typically demonstrated by these patients, are
caused by a ToM deficit. A great number of researchers
have found that autistic individuals perform poorly in ToM
tasks, starting from the simplest ones, such as the False
Belief (Baron-Cohen et al., 1985), to the more sophisticated
ones, such as the Strange Stories (Happé, 1994).
The possibility of explaining the typical symptoms of
people with autism in terms of mindblindness can also
apply, according to Firth (1992), to schizophrenia. Several

Cognitive Pragmatics theory
Cognitive Pragmatics (Airenti et al., 1993; Bara, 2007) is a
theory of the cognitive processes underlying human
communication that distinguishes between different kinds of
communicative phenomena – standard communication acts,
deceit, irony– on the basis of the mental representations
involved in their comprehension and production. In
particular the theory explains and predicts the difficulty in
the comprehension of different communication acts in
typical development (Bucciarelli, Colle and Bara, 2003) and

1594

autistic children (Bara, Bucciarelli & Colle 2001) and it
offers a plausible account for the decay of pragmatic
performance in brain-damaged patients (Bara, Tirassa &
Zettin, 1997).
A major assumption of the theory is that intentional
communication requires behavioural cooperation between
two people; this means that when two people communicate
they are acting on the basis of a plan that is at least partially
shared. Airenti et al. (1993) call this plan a behaviour game.
A behaviour game is a stereotypical pattern of interaction
between the participants in the dialogue. Consider, for
example, the communicative exchange:
[1] Alice: ‘Could you please lend me Pavarotti’s latest
CD?’
Bruno: ‘Sorry, I haven’t listened to it yet.’
In order to fully understand Alice’s communicative
intention Bruno has to recognise the behaviour game she
bids through the communication act. Thus, conversational
cooperation requires that Alice and Bruno share the
knowledge of the behaviour game at play. In our example:
[2] [LEND-OBJECT]:
• x gives the object to y;
• y returns the object to x.
Behaviour games have a fundamental role in
communication: the meaning of any communication act can
only be fully understood when the game the move is part of
has been clearly identified.
Within the framework of the Cognitive Pragmatics
theory, Bucciarelli et al. (2003) focus their attention on
factors that affect the differences in the difficulty of
comprehending communication acts pertaining to different
pragmatic categories, that is standard communication acts
(direct and indirect communication acts) and non-standard
communication acts (deceit and irony). Mental
representations of increasing complexity underlying human
communication are not on-off phenomena. Indeed the
authors found that children show a trend of increasing
difficulty in comprehending standard communication acts,
deceit and irony and they explain this result on the basis of
the complexity of the mental representations involved in
such different pragmatic tasks. Moreover, traumatically
brain-injured patients (Bara et al., 1997) and autistic
children (Bara, et al., 2001) find it easier to comprehend
standard communication acts than non-standard acts.
In the present study we propose, and empirically
investigate, that the same increase in the complexity of
mental representations involves the production of standard,
deceitful and ironic communication acts.
In standard communication, default rules of inference
are used to understand one another’s mental states. Default
rules are always valid unless their consequences are
explicitly denied (cf. Reiter, 1980). Indeed, in the
production of standard communication what the speaker
means is in line with his/her private beliefs. Directs speech
acts, conventional indirect speech acts and nonconventional indirect speech acts are all examples of
standard communication. In terms of mental

representations no conflict is involved: to generate a
standard communication act the speaker has merely to
produce an utterance that is in line with his private belief
and with the behaviour game he is sharing with the partner.
Thus, in terms of the complexity of mental representations
involved, this is the simplest case we analysed. The
following is an example of production of a standard
communication act:
[3] Davide is reading a book while sitting on a carpet
in his room. Anna arrives and asks: “Did you go running
yesterday evening?”
Davide answers: “I stayed at home”.
On the other hand, non-standard communication, such as
deceit and irony, involves the violation of default rules and
the occurrence of more sophisticated
mental
representations. In particular, the production of a nonstandard act involves a conflict between the speaker’s
private mental states and those he communicates to the
listener. It follows that non-standard phenomena are more
difficult to produce than standard ones. In particular, in the
case of production of a deceitful communication act, the
speaker has to take into consideration the difference
between the mental states that he privately entertains and
those he expresses to the partner. The following is an
example of production of a deceitful communication act:
[4] There is an highlighter on Carlo’s desk. Federica
sees it and, sneakily, puts it in her pocket. Carlo arrives,
looks on the desk and asks: “Have you seen my pen over
here?”
Federica answers: “I never saw it”.
In addition, along with the above mentioned difference,
a statement becomes ironic when the speaker also produces
a contrast between the expressed mental states and the
scenario provided by the knowledge he shares with the
partner. This make, in terms of the complexity of mental
representations involved, an ironic utterance the most
difficult phenomenon we investigated. The following is an
example of an ironic communication act:
[5] In a shop, Lara tries on a dress that is clearly too
tight and asks Simone: “Does this dress fit me?”
Simone answers: “It looks too big to me”.

Experiment
The present research aims to investigate the ability of
schizophrenic patients to produce different communicative
phenomena. We propose that executive functions and ToM
support communication but specific mental representations,
such as those pointed out by the Cognitive Pragmatics
theory, modulate communicative ability. Considering the
complexity of the mental representations, we expect that,
schizophrenic patients find it easier to produce
communicative standard acts than non-standard acts. We
expects schizophrenic patients to be comparable to normal
controls when producing standard communication acts, that
involves no conflict between the speaker’s private mental
states and those he expresses. In contrast, we predict that
patients perform worse than controls on non-standard acts,

1595

i.e. deceit and irony, that involve a conflict between the
speaker’s private mental states and those he expresses. In
particular, we predict a trend of difficulty for the
schizophrenic patients as regards the production of
communication acts, from the easiest to the most difficult:
standard communication acts, deceitful communication acts
and ironic communication acts.

(SD= ±11.2; ranging from 23 to 56 years) and a mean
education of 11 years (SD= ±2.4; ranging from 8 to 13
years). There were 12 males and 2 female in our sample. All
the patients were Italian native speakers; initial exclusion
criteria included leucotomy, neurological disability and a
history of drug/alcohol abuse. Fourteen normal controls
were matched to the patients group for age, sex and years of
formal education.
Psychotic symptoms were assessed by the PANSS (Kay,
Fiszbein & Opler, 1987). The mean (± SD) PANSS scores
for the sample were as follows: PANSS total 87 (± 39);
PANSS negative subscale 19 (± 10); PANSS positive
subscale 20 (± 10); PANSS general psychopathology
subscale 47 (± 22).
All the subjects had to pass a series of neuropsychological
tests to rule out the possibility of being too seriously
cognitively impaired. The screening battery included the
Mini-Mental State Examination, Raven’s Coloured
Progressive Matrices and the denomination scale of
Aachener Aphasie Test.

Material and Procedure
Communicative abilities. The Italian experimental material
comprised 12 videotaped scenes, each lasting 20-25
seconds. In each task two actors interacted each producing
the same number of words (i.e. 7 ± 2).
This protocol includes standard communication acts (4
items), deceitful communication acts (4 items) and ironic
communication acts (4 items). During the task the examiner
shows the patient short videotaped scenes where two agents
are engaged in a communicative interaction: the first agent
asks her interlocutor a question. The patient, assuming the
interlocutor’s perspective, is requested to produce a
communication act in reply.
Considering for example this request to produce a standard
communication act used in our experimental protocol:
[6] Mara and Fabio are in front of an ice-cream shop.
Mara asks Fabio: “Which flavour you like?”
At the end of the scene the experimenter asks the subject:
“What could the boy say to her?”.
All patients and controls were videotaped. The
participants’ responses were rated by 2 independent judges
blind to the aim of the research and blind to the subject’s
identity (schizophrenic vs. control). The judges assigned a
score of 0 (incorrect) or 1 (correct) to the subject’s answer
to each item on the basis of the adequacy of the answer
within the given context. Examples of correct answers given
by patients to this item are: “Strawberry and chocolate!” or
“You choose first!”. Examples of incorrect answers to the
same task are: ”You are wonderful today!” or “He’s licked
it! That’s disgusting!”. The inter-rater agreement was
calculated using Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC),
estimated on the means of the total scores for each
pragmatic phenomenon. The ICC was 0.71, indicating high
inter-raters agreement (Altman, 1991).
Executive functions. The subjects were administered the
Trial Making test and the Attentive Matrices for attention
abilities, the short version of the Card Sorting Test and the
Tower of London for planning abilities, the Verbal and the
Spatial Span for working memory and the Immediate and
Deferred Recall test for long-term verbal memory.
Theory of mind. The subjects were administrated the
Smartie’s Task, Sally-Ann Task and a selection (6 items) of
Strange Stories, excluding the ones that included
communication acts like metaphors, deceits and ironies.

Results
The results confirm our predictions (see figure 1). In
particular, there is no significant difference between patients
and controls in the production of standard communication
acts (Mann-Whitney test: z= 1.86; p= .19), whereas patients
showed greater difficulty than controls in the production of
deceitful communication acts (Mann-Whitney test: z= 2.84;
p= .02), and ironic communication acts (Mann-Whitney
test: z= 3.12; p= .001).
100
80
60

p> .05

40
20
0

standard

deceit

patients

irony

controls

Figure 1: Histogram of the mean percentages of correct
responses (patients vs. controls).
Focusing on patients data, and in line with our prediction,
we discovered the existence of a trend in difficulty for
producing different sort of communication acts, ranging
from the easiest to produce to the most difficult: standard,
deceitful, and ironic communication acts (Page’s L test: L=
186; p<.001). A detailed analysis reveals that standard
communication acts are easier to produce than deceitful
communication act (Wilcoxon test: z= 2.46; p =.014).
Moreover, standard communication act is easier to produce
than ironic communication acts (Wilcoxon test: z= 3.11; p
=.002). As regards a comparison between deceitful and

Participants
Fourteen paranoid schizophrenic patients (diagnosed by
DSM-IV criteria) were recruited from a local residential
mental health care. Patients had a mean age of 37 years

1596

ironic communication acts the results reveal that deceitful
are easier to produce than ironic communication acts
(Wilcoxon test: z= 2.85; p =.004).

our theoretical framework – the Cognitive Pragmatics
theory (Airenti et al., 1993) – the production of standard
communication acts, involves easier mental representations,
whereas other communication acts, such as deceitful and
ironic communication acts, involve more sophisticated
mental representations.
In line with our proposal, we found that schizophrenic
patients show a diversified communicative ability. They do
not differ from the control group in the production of
standard communication acts, whereas they differ
significantly from the normal controls in their ability to
produce deceitful and ironic communication acts. In
particular, focusing on schizophrenic performance, our data
reveal the existence of a trend of increasing difficulty in the
production of standard, deceitful and ironic communication
acts.
As far as executive functions are concerned, our results
show that schizophrenic patients perform as well as the
normal matched pairs in planning tasks. However, in line
with the literature showing deficit in schizophrenic’s
planning ability, the percentage of the correct answers show
a difference in the expected direction. It is possible that with
a greater number of subjects the difference between patients
and control could become statistically significant.
The patients show deficits in attention, long term memory
and working memory. However, such impairment, can not
explain our results, in particular the increasing difficulty
shown by schizophrenic patients’ in producing standard,
deceitful and ironic communication acts. Indeed, all our
communicative tasks were built in order to require the same
attention level and working memory. Furthermore, all our
communicative tasks had the same short duration and
therefore did not require long-term memory in order to be
solved. In addition, we did not find any significant
correlation between such deficitary cognitive abilities and
the ability to produce any of the communication acts
investigated. As regard planning abilities, we found a
statistically significant correlation between planning and the
production of standard and deceitful communication acts,
but not with the production of irony. However, such
correlation can not explain any of our results concerning the
different difficulty of the pragmatic phenomena
investigated.
As far as ToM is concerned, our results show that
schizophrenic patients perform worse than normal controls;
this factor helps to explain the difference between the
performance by patients and controls in non-standard
communicative tasks, i.e. deceit and irony. Indeed, studies
in the literature have shown that deceit and irony require
ToM (Happé 1993; Winner & Leekam, 1991). One might
suppose that the increasing trend of difficulty we observed
from standard communication act, to deceit and irony, is
exclusively due to the patients’ deficit of ToM. However,
such explanation, considered alone, is not completely
satisfactory. Indeed, neither production of deceitful
communication acts, nor production of ironic acts correlate
with performance in ToM tasks. To conclude, we do not

Table 1: Mean percentages of correct responses (patients
vs. controls). * p< 0.5.
Patients Controls
*Attention

53

95

Planning

85

99

* Working Memory

46

84

* Long-Term verbal Memory

47

59

* ToM

69

98

.
Table 1 shows the scores by both groups on executive
function and ToM tasks.
The differences we observed between the performances
by patients and controls were in their attention abilities
(Mann-Whitney test: z= 3.99; p< .001), in working memory
(Mann-Whitney test: z= 3.17; p= .001), in long-term
memory abilities (Mann-Whitney test: z= 2.3; p= .021), and
ToM (Mann-Whitney test: z= 4.59; p< .001). On the
contrary, we found no significant difference between the
two groups’ planning abilities (Mann-Whitney test: z= 2.24;
p= .094).
For the patient group we also calculated, the correlation
between the ability to produce standard, deceitful and ironic
communication acts on one side and executive function or
ToM on the other. The correlation was statistically
significant between the planning test and the production of
standard communication acts (Spearman's rho test: rho=.5;
p=.03) and deceitful communication acts (Spearman's rho
test: rho=.46; p=.04). In contrast, there was no significant
correlation between planning and irony (Spearman's rho
test: rho=.05; p=.43). No statistically significant correlations
were found between each communicative task (standard,
deceit or irony) tested and long term memory, working
memory and attention (Spearman's rho test: rho value
ranging from 3.83 to .35; p value ranging from =.9 to <.2).
We also obtained similar no significant results by analysing
the correlation between all ToM tasks and: standard acts
(Spearman's rho test: rho = 0.01; p =.75) or deceit
(Spearman's rho test: rho = 0.08; p =.95) or irony
(Spearman's rho test: rho = 0.49; p =.07).

Conclusions
Empirical studies highlight the role played by ToM and
executive function deficits to explain the poor
communicative ability of schizophrenic patients. According
to our theoretical proposal, in addition to the abovementioned components, we should consider the complexity
of the mental representations underlying different kinds of
communication acts in order to better explain patients’
unsatisfactory communicative ability. Indeed, according to

1597

wish to deny the role of the ToM in producing ironic or
deceitful communication acts but we argue that ToM is not
the unique cognitive factor involved in explaining the
diversified ability of schizophrenic patients’ to produce
different sort of pragmatic acts.
Our study highlights the importance of considering all the
contributing factors in order to explain communicative
deficits in schizophrenia. In particular, our results show the
role, in addition to the ToM, played by the complexity of
mental representations underlying the ability to produce
different communicative phenomena. To conclude, this
cognitive factor helps to explain the diversified
communicative ability of schizophrenic patients.

and following recovery. Psychological Medicine, 28,
1101-1112.
Frith, C.D. (1992). The Cognitive Neuropsychology of
Schizophrenia. Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Frith, C.D. & Allen, H. A. (1988). Language disorders in
schizophrenia and their implications for neuropsychology.
In Bebbibgton, P. McGuffin, P. (Eds). Schizophrenia.
Heinemman, Oxford.
Goldberg, T.E., Saint-Cyr, J.A. & Weinberger, R. (1990).
Assessment of procedural learning and problem solving in
Schizophrenic patients by Tower Hanoi type tasks. The
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
2, 165-173.
Happé, F. (1993). Communicative competence and theory
of mind in autism : A test of Relevance theory. Cognition,
48, 101-119.
Happé, F. (1994). An advanced test of Theory of Mind.
Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 24, 129154.
Happé, F. & Loth, E. (2002). Theory of Mind and tracking
Speaker’s Intentions. Mind and Language, 17, 24-36.
Keefe, R.S., Lees-Roitman, S.E. & Dupre, R. L. (1997).
Performance of patients with schizophrenia on a pen and
paper visuospatial working memory short delay.
Schizophrenia research, 26, 9-14.
Kay S.R., Fiszbein A. & Opler L.A. (1987). The Positive
and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bull, 13,261.
Langdon, R., Davies, M. & Coltheart, M. (2002).
Understanding minds and Understanding Communicated
meanings in Schizophrenia. Mind and Language, 17, 68104.
McDonald, S. (1992). Differential pragmatic language loss
following severe closed head injury. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 13, 295-321.
McDonald, S. (1999). Exploring the process on inference
generation in sarcasm. Brain and Language, 68, 486-506.
McDonald, S. & Pearce, S. (1998). Requests that overcome
listener reluctance. Brain and Language, 6, 88-104.
Reiter, R. (1980). A logic for default reasoning. Artificial
Intelligence, 13, 81-132.
Sarfati, Y., Hardy-Bayle, M.C., Besche, C. & Widlocher, D.
(1997). Attribution of intentions to others in people with
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 25, 199-209.
Searle, J.R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In P. Cole & J. L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech acts. New
York: Academic Press.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition. Basil Blackwell: Oxford.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (2002). Pragmatics, Modularity
and Mind-reading. Mind and Language, 17, 3-23.
Tirassa M, Bosco F.M. & Colle L. (2006). Sharedness and
privateness in human early social life, Cognitive Systems
Research, 7, 128-139.
Winner, E. & Leekam, S. (1991). Distinguishing irony from
deception. British journal of developmental psychology,
9, 257-270.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by Fondazione Cassa di
Risparmio di Torino, CRT Foundation, Italy.

References
Airenti, G., Bara, B.G. & Colombetti, M. (1993).
Conversation and behavior games in the pragmatics of
dialogue. Cognitive Science, 17, 197-256.
Altman, D.G. (1991). Practical Statistics for Medical
Research. Chapman & Hall, London.
American Psychiatric Association, (1994). Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Andreasen, N.C., Hoffman, R.E. & Grove, W.M. (1985).
Mapping abnormalities in Language and cognition. In
Alpert, A. (Eds.), Controversies in Schizophrenia. New
York: Guilford Press.
Bara, B.G. (2007). Cognitive Pragmatics. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Bara, B.G., Bucciarelli, M. & Colle, L. (2001).
Communicative abilities in autism. Brain and Language,
77, 216-240.
Bara, B.G., Tirassa, M. & Zettin, M. (1997).
Neuropsychological constraint on formal theories of
dialogue. Brain and Language, 59, 7-49.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. & Frith, U. (1985). Does the
autistic child have a Theory of Mind? Cognition, 21, 3746.
Bucciarelli, M., Colle, L. & Bara, B.G. (2003). How
children comprehend speech acts and communicative
gestures. Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 207-241.
Corcoran, R., Mercer, G. & Frith, C.D. (1995).
Schizophrenia, symptomatology and social inference.
Schizophrenia Research, 17, 5-13.
Docherty, N.M., Hall, M.J., Gordinier, S.W., & Cutting,
L.P. (2000). Conceptual sequencing and disordered
speech in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 723735.
Doody, G.A., Götz, M., Johnstone, E. C., Frith, C.D. &
Cunningham, O. (1998). Theory of Mind and psychoses.
Psychological Medicine, 28, 397-405.
Drury, V.M., Robinson, E. J. & Birchwood, M. (1998).
Theory of mind’ skills during acute episode of psychosis

1598

