UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Complex Acoustic Pattern Learning in Songbirds and Humans

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69x7p9s1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Fenn, Kimberly M.
Brawn, Timothy P.
Gentner, Timothy Q.
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Complex Acoustic Pattern Learning in Songbirds and Humans
Kimberly M. Fenn (kmfenn@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience, 5848 S. University Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Timothy P. Brawn (tbrawn@uchicago.edu)

Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, 1027 E. 57th St.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Timothy Q. Gentner (tgentner@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Daniel Margoliash (dan@bigbird.uchicago.edu)
Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience, 1027 E. 57th St.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Howard C. Nusbaum (h-nusbaum@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology, Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience, 5848 S. University Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637 USA

(e.g., Chomsky, 1965). Indeed, recently it has been claimed
that the computational capacity to process more complex,
recursive structures of natural language is a uniquely human
faculty (Fitch et al., 2005; Hauser et al., 2002). A recent
study reported that following familiarization trials, cottontop tamarins are able to discriminate a grammatical pattern
that follows a finite state grammar, of the form (AB)n
wherein a pair of elements (‘A-B’) is repeated a small
number of times, but are not able to discriminate a more
complex context-free structure of the form AnBn , in which a
number of ‘A’ elements is followed by an equal number of
‘B’ elements. The authors argue that tamarins do not have
the computational capacity to learn the more complex
structure (Fitch & Hauser, 2004).
In contrast, we demonstrated that European starlings are
able to learn to classify context-free patterns of the form
AnBn and reject nongrammatical strings (Gentner et al.,
2006) when the patterns are composed of starling song
motifs. It is unlikely that starlings exceed the general
computational capacity of tamarins, although as vocal
learners they may indeed have specialized computational
abilities more akin to humans than tamarins. Differences in
experimental design may have contributed to the contrasting
results. The starlings were trained in an operant procedure
on grammatical and nongrammatical strings whereas the
tamarins were simply exposed to positive examples. Also,
starlings were trained on patterns composed of starling
motifs whereas tamarins were exposed to patterns composed
of human speech syllables.
For starlings, motifs may not have any meaning on their
own but they are familiar sound categories. If the pattern
constituents were less familiar would starlings still be able
to learn these patterns? Starlings, as acoustic mimics

Abstract
European starlings have the ability to learn to classify
complex grammatical patterns that follow a context-free
grammar (CFG) composed of song motifs (Gentner, et al.,
2006) but cotton-top tamarins failed to show similar
discrimination when exposed to patterns composed of human
speech (Fitch & Hauser, 2004). Beyond differences in
species-specific cognitive ability, methodological differences
might account for the difference in findings. Here we show
that European starlings can learn context-free patterns
composed of human speech syllables. We further show that
when humans are exposed to the same patterns composed of
starling motifs, knowledge of the elements affects
classification. Thus, starlings’ grammatical ability does not
depend on any species-specific aspect of the patterns.
Conversely, humans may not have an innate endowment for
complex grammatical processing without the aid of explicit
training on the elements that compose the patterns.
Keywords: learning; language; syntax; recursion

Introduction
How we acquire knowledge of linguistic patterns has been
a controversial theoretical issue in research on language
development. One view is that human language cannot be
learned—the complexity of the necessary rules to be learned
is greater than could putatively be induced on the basis of
actual language input (e.g. Chomsky, 1965; Pinker, 1994).
The alternative view (e.g. Sokolov & Snow, 1994) is that
linguistic experience provides the experience and feedback
that is sufficient to learn even the most complex aspects of
linguistic structure.
In part, the syntactic complexity of natural language has
served as the basis for the argument against learnability

263

(Hindmarsh, 1984), will attend to a wide range of sounds in
order to reproduce them. However, if acoustic patterns are
composed of elements that have little or no intrinsic
meaning, it is entirely possible that starlings will not be able
to learn the more computationally challenging syntax
(CFG). On the other hand, their more general acoustic
sensitivity may make attention to arbitrary signals easier.
One way to test this is to assess whether starlings can learn
both FSG and CFG patterns with human speech syllables.
The failure to learn such patterns would indicate that the
nature of the constituent elements of these patterns is critical
to the process of learning complex syntax.
This raises a complementary question regarding the
human uniqueness of computational capacity to process
recursion. Fitch and Hauser (2004) demonstrated that
humans can discriminate both FSG and CFG patterns
following exposure to samples when those patterns are
composed of human speech syllables. However, it is not
clear how complex syntactic patterns might be learned when
the elements are complex and unfamiliar, for example
heterospecific sounds. Thus, we can ask if humans can
learn FSG and CFG patterns as easily when they are
composed of starling motifs as they can when the patterns
are composed of speech syllables.

stimuli (8 FSG and 8 CFG) were iterations of n=2, either
(AB)2 or A2B2. Additional stimuli that did not follow either
grammar were also created (AAAA, ABBA, BAAB, BBBB).

Behavioral apparatus
All training and testing was conducted in an operant training
apparatus that has been described in detail elsewhere
(Gentner et al., 2006; Gentner & Margoliash, 2003). An
operant panel with three circular response ‘buttons’ was
mounted inside a sound attenuated chamber. Each response
‘button’ was a PVC housed opening in the panel fitted with
an IR receiver and transmitter that detected when the bird
broke the plane of the opening with its beak. A remotely
controlled hopper moved the food into the subject’s reach
beneath the opening. Acoustic stimuli were presented to the
subject through a small audio speaker mounted out of the
subject’s view.

Procedure
Starlings were first familiarized with the apparatus through
a shaping procedure (Gentner & Margoliash, 2003). A gonogo operant procedure was used for training (Gentner et
al., 2006); subjects learned to respond to the sequences
defined by one grammar (S+ stimuli) and to withhold
responses to sequences defined by the other grammar (Sstimuli). Starlings pecked the center port to initiate the
presentation of a stimulus. For S+ stimuli, pecks to the
centre port elicited a food reward for 3 seconds. For Sstimuli, pecks to the centre port elicited a 10-second lightsout punishment during which new stimuli could not be
initiated. Sixteen unique stimuli were used during training;
eight followed the FSG and eight followed the PSG. The
same stimuli were used for all of the birds, but response
contingencies were dependent on training condition. The
CFG was the S+ and the FSG was the S- for two of the birds
and for the third bird, the FSG was the S+ and the CFG was
the S-. Trials proceeded until starlings reached stable
asymptotic performance.
After achieving asymptote on the baseline stimuli,
starlings were transferred to a new set of 16 stimuli (8 of
each grammar). If starlings were simply memorizing the
trained exemplars, we would not expect to see transfer to
novel exemplars. However, if they were learning pattern
information, then learning should transfer to new exemplars
of the same patterns.
The probe session was designed to test for alternate
strategies to solve the task. During training, all stimuli that
did not follow the trained grammar necessarily followed the
other grammar and the birds could have correctly solved the
problem based on a primacy or recency strategy, or by
detecting a transition between B/A elements. For example,
when trained on the FSG birds could simply respond based
on the first two or last two elements (both AB) as all other
stimuli began with AA or ended with BB. The transition
between elements could have likewise been used to solve
the task. A single B/A transition would be sufficient for
classification as the FSG contained one such transition but

Experiment 1
Humans can learn FSG and CFG patterns comprised of
speech syllables and starlings can learn FSG and CFG
patterns comprised of starling motifs. However, tamarins
can only master the simpler FSG patterns after exposure.
To what extent are the differences in results due to species
differences in computational capacity and to what extent are
the differences due to experience with the pattern
constituents or to differences in experience with the patterns
themselves?

Method
Participants
Three adult male European starlings were used for this
experiment. Prior to testing, subjects were housed in large
mixed-sex flight cages along with 15 – 20 conspecific birds.
Subjects were naive to the training and testing stimuli at the
start of behavioral training.

Materials
Sound patterns were created using recorded human
consonant-vowel (CV) speech stimuli. Different speakers
were used for ‘A’ and ‘B’ classes. All ‘A’ stimuli were
recorded by a female speaker and ‘B’ by a male speaker,
differing in pitch. Possible CV stimuli for each class were
also distinct (see Fitch and Hauser, 2004 for detailed
stimulus description). Patterns followed either a finite-state
grammar, (AB)n, or a context-free grammar, AnBn. Two sets
of training stimuli were created; one set followed the FSG
pattern and one set followed the PSG. The sixteen training

264

the CFG contained none. The following four probe stimuli
were used to test these strategies: AAAA, ABBA, BAAB,
BBBB. In addition, a new set of novel grammatical probe
stimuli were also used (8 novel stimuli of each grammar).

3
FSG bird
2.5

CFG birds

2
1.5

Results and Discussion

1
d'

Our initial question was whether starlings would be able to
learn the grammatical structures when the elements of the
grammars were human speech stimuli. We measured
performance using d’, (Macmillan & Creelman, 1991).
Learning was considered significant when the starlings
achieved 5 consecutive blocks (of 100 trials) with d’ > 1.0
and a lower bound of the 95% confidence interval above
zero. Each bird achieved criterion performance, although the
number of trials to achieve criterion varied by subject (239
and 311 blocks for the CFG birds, and 203 blocks for the
FSG bird). This rate of learning is comparable to that found
when starlings are trained on the grammars using starling
motifs (Gentner et al., 2006).
We were not interested in whether the starlings could
simply memorize the 8 patterns used during training, but
whether they could learn the grammatical structure. To
assess immediate transfer to novel pattern exemplars, we
looked at performance on the first block with the new
stimuli.
All three birds showed immediate transfer.
Average d’ during this block was 2.07 (lower CI: 1.19) and
1.48 (lower CI: 0.83) for the birds trained on the CFG and
2.65 (lower CI: 1.77) for the bird trained on the FSG. This
is comparable to the birds’ performance on the final block
of training: 1.46 (lower CI: 0.57), 1.62 (lower CI: 0.97),
and 3.07 (lower CI: 0.61), respectively.
The probe session investigated alternate strategies that the
birds may have used to perform reliably in this task. Four
agrammatical probe stimuli (AAAA, ABBA, BAAB, and
BBBB) were used to test for primacy, recency or B/A
transition strategies. Response rates to the agrammatical
probe stimuli suggest that the birds clearly discriminate
between the agrammatical stimuli and novel S+ stimuli;
individual analyses demonstrate that response rates were
higher to novel S+ stimuli than to agrammatical stimuli (χ2
(1) > 11.8, p < .001 for all birds).
We also tested each alternate strategy individually (Figure
1). The two birds trained on the CFG do not show any
evidence of using a primacy strategy. These birds had an
average d’ of 1.2 to the novel n=2 stimuli and only 0.58 to
the primacy probe stimuli. However, it appears that the
starling trained on the FSG may have been using a primacy
strategy. This bird had a d’ of 2.35 to the primacy probe
stimuli and only 1.05 to novel n=2 stimuli.
Analysis of the recency stimuli suggests that the birds
clearly do not treat these stimuli as grammatical. Average
d’ to recency stimuli is -.673 and all three birds showed
negative d’ to these stimuli. It is also unlikely that the birds
are distinguishing between the grammars by detecting a
transition from B to A elements. Average d’ to these stimuli
was only 0.25 (± .14).

0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

Novel n=2

Primacy

Recency

B/A transition

Figure 1: Performance on tests of alternate strategies for
the three birds.
Overall, these data provide strong evidence that starlings
are able to learn syntactic patterns when the elements of the
pattern are human speech syllables. Importantly, we have
shown that the birds are not using alternate strategies to
solve the more difficult CFG. This provides converging
evidence that starlings have the computational capacity to
process a complex grammatical structure. However, the
change in elements may reflect an increase in classification
difficulty for the birds. One of the three birds appears to be
using a primacy classification strategy at least some of the
time. This result is different than was observed with birds
trained on conspecific motifs, suggesting that the human
syllables may make learning somewhat more difficult.
Because this bird was trained on the simpler FSG, and the
two CFG-trained birds did learn the both the CFG and FSG
patterns (as reflected in their discrimination of these
patterns), we do not believe that the one FSG-trained bird’s
reliance on a primacy strategy reflects any fundamental
limitation in starlings’ ability to learn patterns composed of
unfamiliar elements, but likely reflects individual variation.
Because of the small sample size, we cannot make any
strong claims regarding this and future work should address
this issue.

Experiment 2
We have shown that European starlings are capable of
learning a context free grammatical pattern composed of
elements of human speech. Thus starlings and humans
(Fitch & Hauser, 2004) have the computational capacity for
processing relatively complex syntactic patterns. Is this
capacity sufficient to predict pattern classification ability for
patterns constructed from complex, unknown acoustic
elements? What is the role of perceptual sensitivity to the
pattern elements in this capacity? Although humans are
capable of classifying a broad range of sound patterns,
experience is important in determining those categories. .If
humans are presented with patterns composed of starling
motifs, can they also learn these grammatical structures?
Given that humans possess the computational capacity to
process recursive grammatical patterns, they should easily
learn the patterns. However, if knowledge of the elements

265

is important for complex pattern learning, than the ability to
learn the patterns may depend on pattern complexity.

that the sequences followed the same pattern and were
instructed to try to determine the nature of the pattern, but
were not given explicit information regarding the pattern.
After the familiarization phase, they were tested on their
knowledge of the grammar. During the test, 60 patterns
were played; half of these followed the FSG and the other
half followed the CFG. Participants were asked to classify
each sound as following the same pattern as the sounds they
heard during familiarization or following a different pattern.
All stimuli were unique to those encountered during
familiarization and no feedback was given.

Method
Participants
48 students or employees from The University of Chicago
volunteered for this study. All participants were native
speakers of English and reported no speech or hearing
disorders.

Materials

Results and Discussion

Sound patterns were created using recordings of an adult
male European starling. Starling song is composed of four
spectro-temporally distinct categories: whistles, warbles,
rattles, and high-frequency motifs (Eens, 1997). Eight
individual ‘rattles’ and eight ‘warbles’ from one starling
were used in the patterns. Patterns followed either a finitestate grammar (AB)n or context-free grammar AnBn, where A
refers to a rattle motif and B refers to a warble. All stimuli
contained only two iterations, either (AB)2 or A2B2. Detailed
description of stimulus creation has been previously
reported (Gentner et al., 2006).
For each grammar, 60 unique sequences were created.
The sequences used during training were not used during
testing so the expression of learning involved generalization
to new stimuli. Furthermore, the 16 individual rattle and
warble motifs that comprised the patterns were also used for
training and testing separate from the grammars.

Both groups performed reliably on the motif test (mean d’ =
3.2 ± 0.11 and 1.8 ± 0.18 for training and familiarization,
respectively), but the group that received training on the
motifs performed significantly better than the group that
was only exposed to the motifs (t46 = 6.6, p < 0.0001). This
suggests that reliable motif discrimination is possible
without training but that training produced significant
learning beyond this.
Therefore, any differences in
performance on the grammars may be explained by different
abilities in motif classification.
Data from the grammar test was analyzed as a 2-factor
ANOVA with motif experience and grammar type as
between subjects factors. As can be seen in Figure 2, the
group that received training on the motifs performed better
than the group that was only exposed to the motifs (F1,44 =
14.7, p < .001). Moreover, without training on the motifs,
grammar performance did not exceed zero for either the
FSG (t11= 1.1, p > 0.28) or the CFG (t11= 0.5, p > 0.6). Only
1 participant in the motif-exposure group achieved d’
greater than 1 on this test, whereas in the training group,
half of the participants (n=12) performed at this level.

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to either a motiftraining or motif-familiarization group. Pilot testing has
shown that without any motif experience, simple exposure
to the patterns does not produce learning. To investigate the
role of knowledge of constituent elements in pattern
classification, one group received explicit training on the
motifs.
During training, participants first heard one
example of a rattle and one example of a warble. They then
listened to individual motifs and classified each as being
either a rattle or a warble. After responding, feedback was
given in the form of a second auditory presentation,
accompanied by category information. The second group
was only familiarized with the motifs. Participants listened
to individual motifs and were told that the sounds would be
of two different types, but no feedback was given. For both
groups, each warble (n=8) and each rattle (n=8) was
presented 3 times, for a total of 48 motif trials. This was
followed by a test on the motifs. Participants in the training
group were asked to classify each sound as being either a
warble or rattle and participants in the familiarization group
were asked to classify the motifs into two categories.
Following the motif procedures, both groups were
familiarized with one of the two grammatical structures.
Thirty patterns were individually presented that followed
either the FSG or the CFG syntax. Participants were told

3

FSG
2.5

CFG

d'

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
M-Exposure

M-Training

Figure 2: Performance on the grammar test for the motif
exposure and motif training groups.
In addition to looking at how performance varied by motif
experience, we were also examined whether the amount of
learning would vary by syntax. Classification performance
did not differ significantly based on grammar (F1,44 = 0.18, p

266

> .6). Given that humans can learn both the FSG and CFG
reliably well when the elements are human speech and
therefore known elements, it may not be surprising that
there is no difference in performance after motif training as
the elements would be more informative than after motif
exposure. However, we might expect performance to be
better on the FSG than the CFG when the elements are not
known. It is possible that because performance did not
exceed chance for either grammar in this group that we are
simply seeing floor effects and are unable to detect
differences in performance based on grammar.
These results suggest that knowledge of the elements that
constitute a pattern significantly affects ability to classify
the pattern after exposure.
Grammar classification
performance was better when it followed training on the
starling motifs then when it followed mere exposure to the
motifs, even though participants were able to discriminate
between the motifs. Even though participants could reliably
discriminate between the sounds after familiarization, the
motifs were still relatively meaningless, compared to the
trained group. This increases the salience of our results;
participants are able to perceptually distinguish between the
elements, but are still unable to learn the patterns. Explicit
knowledge of the elements increases the ability to learn the
pattern structure.
When the elements of the pattern have been trained, both
the FSG and CFG can be competently learned but when the
elements remain relatively meaningless, neither pattern is
learned. This may help to explain recent evidence regarding
the failure of cotton-top tamarins to learn the CFG pattern
used in the present experiment (Fitch & Hauser, 2004).
Although we did not find differences in learning based on
grammar, it is possible that the tamarins would have
performed better on the CFG if the elements of the patterns
were more meaningful to them. Although the present data
cannot directly support this assertion, the data do suggest
that knowledge of the elements affects learning and this may
interact with computational complexity of the pattern.

Materials
Sound patterns from Experiment 2 were also used in this
experiment. Additional stimuli that did not follow either
grammar were also created (AAAA, ABBA, BAAB, BBBB).

Procedure
The motif-training procedure used in Experiment 2 was
also used in this experiment, with a few modifications. The
number of trials in motif-training and grammar exposure
was reduced to 32 and 20. Also, the grammar test contained
80 stimuli, 24 each of grammatical FSG and CFG patterns
and 32 agrammatical patterns (AAAA, ABBA, BAAB, BBBB,
n= 8 of each).

Results and Discussion
Performance on the motif test was again reliable (3.4 ± 1.3
and 3.4 ± 1.2, FSG and CFG, respectively) and did not
differ between groups (t22 = .27, p=.78). To assess
performance after grammar exposure, we treated responses
from the trained grammar as hits and responses to patterns
that followed the untrained pattern as false alarms. We did
not include responses to the agrammatical stimuli in the
initial assessment of learning. Performance was reliable
(1.9 ± 0.34 and 2.1 ± 0.22, FSG and CFG) and did not differ
between the groups (t22 = 0.61, p=0.5)
3

FSG
2.5

CFG

d'

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Experiment 3

Grammatical

We have shown that humans can learn syntactic patterns
that follow either an FSG or a CFG when the patterns are
composed of starling motifs. However, the humans were
not tested for alternate strategies. Here we replicate the
motif-trained group in Experiment 2 and use agrammatical
strings to test if performance can be explained through
strategies of primacy, recency, or B/A transition detection.

Primacy

Recency

B/A
Transition

Figure 3: Performance on the grammatical stimuli and
agrammatical probe stimuli after motif training and
grammar exposure.
We were most interested in assessing whether or not
grammar performance could be explained through strategies
of primacy, recency or B/A transition detection. Response
rates to agrammatical probe stimuli (14.6 ± 4 and 4.7 ± 2.6
percent for FSG-trained and CFG-trained, respectively)
were significantly lower than to grammatical stimuli (79.5 ±
5.2 and 82.3 ± 2.6 percent) (F1,22 = 247.5, p < 0.0001).
Analysis of the individual strategies demonstrates that
participants are probably not using alternate strategies in
this task (Figure 3). Using a repeated measures ANOVA
with stimulus category (grammatical, primacy, recency, B/A
transition) as a repeated measure and grammar (FSG or

Method
Participants
The participants were 24 students from The University of
Chicago who were native speakers of English and reported
no speech or hearing disorders.

267

CFG) as a between subjects factor, there was a significant
effect of stimulus category (F1,22 = 65.9, p < 0.001). Posthoc Sheffe’s tests suggest that performance on grammatical
stimuli was significantly better than on the primacy,
recency, and B/A transition stimuli (p < 0.0001 for all
comparisons) but performance between the agrammatical
stimuli did not differ (p > .6 for all). These data strongly
suggest that performance on the patterns cannot be
explained through the use of alternate strategies.

elements are not computationally independent. Syntactic
processing may not only require the computational capacity
to process the pattern, but the seemingly simple action of
processing the elements within the pattern may also be
computationally demanding. This may have important
implications for research on language acquisition and
second language acquisition. Learning the grammatical
structure of a language may require additional attentional or
memorial demands in processing the sounds or words that
compose the grammar.

General Discussion
Acknowledgments

Vocal patterns are structured sequences of sound elements
that are used for communication by songbirds and humans.
How is the knowledge of these patterns acquired? The
present results, taken together with previous studies, suggest
an interaction between the ability to learn a pattern, pattern
complexity, and training technique.
Operant training
produces learning on both simple and complex patterns,
despite familiarity with the elements, whereas pattern
exposure produces leaning on the more complex syntax only
when pattern elements are known.
Thus, category
information may affect learning in two different ways.
Knowledge of pattern elements results in a greater ability to
lean patterns from exposure. Without element knowledge,
patterns can be learned through operant training. Although
operant training does not give explicit category information,
reinforcement may help to direct attention to aspects of the
signal that are diagnostic for classification.
Linguists have argued that humans cannot learn complex
syntax (e.g., Chomsky, 1965; Pinker, 1994) because the
complexity of the information to be induced exceeds the
information presented in the environment.. The claim that
humans have a unique computational specialization for
processing recursion (Fitch et al., 2005; Hauser et al., 2002)
would seem to be an attempt to make a concrete statement
regarding this innate specialization.
The previous demonstration that European starlings share
this endowment (Gentner et al., 2006) calls into question the
strongest form of this claim regarding general computational
capacity for recursion. The present data reject even weaker
forms of this claim. First, we have demonstrated that the
endowment of recursive capacity does not depend on any
species specific aspect of patterns or their elements.
European starlings stand ready to learn recursive patterns of
human syllables. Their endowment for recursive processing
extends beyond a conspecific specialization for bird song.
These data demonstrate that starlings’ recursive ability goes
beyond the ability of a finite-state machine to compute, even
if more challenging forms of recursion are yet untested.
The present results also militate against the strongest form
of the claim that humans have a broad intellectual
endowment for general syntactic processing. While humans
have been held up as the paradigm of syntactic processing,
there are limits to this ability. When it comes to complex
acoustic patterns that are not familiar, humans do not have
an innate endowment that can be realized based only on
simple exposure to patterns. Furthermore, patterns and their

We would like to thank Tiffany Bloomfield for her help in
conducting some of these experiments. This work was
supported by a grant from NIH to DM and by the University
of Chicago Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience.

References
Chomsky, N. (1956). Three models for the description of
language. IRE Transactions on Information Theory(2),
113-124.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague:
Mouton.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of a Theory of Syntax.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Eens, M. (1997). Understanding the complex song of the
European Starling: an integrated ethological approach.
Advances in the study of Behavior, 26, 355-434.
Fitch, T. W., Hauser, M. D., & Chomsky, N. (2005). The
evolution of the language faculty: Clarifications and
implications. Cognition, 97, 179-210.
Fitch, W. T., & Hauser, M. D. (2004). Computational
constraints on syntactic processing in a nonhuman
primate. SCIENCE, 303, 377-380.
Gentner, T. Q., Fenn, K. M., Margoliash, D., & Nusbaum,
H. C. (2006). Recursive syntactic pattern learning by
songbirds. Nature 440, 1204-1207.
Gentner, T. Q., & Margoliash, D. (2003). Neuronal
populations and single cells representing learned auditory
objects. Nature 424, 669-674.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, T. W. (2002). The
faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how did it
evolve? SCIENCE 298, 1569-1579.
Hindmarsh, A. (1984). Vocal mimicry in starlings.
Behaviour, 90, 304-324.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, D. C. (1991). Detection
Theory: A user's guide. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York:
William Morrow.
Sokolov, J. L., & Snow, C. E. (1994). The changing role of
negative evidence in theories of language development. In
C. Gallaway & B. J. Richards (Eds.), Input and
interaction in language acquisition (pp. 38-55). New
York: Cambridge University Press.

268

