UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Continuous Versus Discrete Quantity in Infant Multiple Object Tracking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9m03q6m0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Chen, Marian L.
Leslie, Alan M.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Continuous Versus Discrete Quantity in Infant Multiple Object Tracking
Marian L. Chen (chenml@ruccs.rutgers.edu)
Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science
152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
Alan M. Leslie (aleslie@ruccs.rutgers.edu)
Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science
152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
Abstract

this issue with small sets of physical objects requires
controlling both total area and total perimeter of the objects
displayed.
Another issue, methodological in nature, is that infants
may prefer numerically unexpected but familiar displays
(Cohen and Marks, 2002). For example, in Wynn’s (1992)
study, infants looked longer at an impossible result of
1+1=1. Wynn interpreted these results as showing that
infants expected that 1+1=2 and looked longer when this
expectation was violated. Cohen and Marks (2002)
proposed an alternative explanation that infants prefer to
look at the unexpected outcome of 1, as they were
familiarized to displays of 1. Wynn’s test outcomes
confounded familiarity and expected number. Infants may
thus not be tracking the numerosity of a given set of objects
but rather responding in a more superficial way.
Two studies provide evidence that infants can represent
sets discretely where they might have represented the sets
continuously. The first, using a reaching task, found that
12-14 month-olds appear to represent up to three objects
hidden inside a box, even when objects retrieved are larger
than the objects that were concealed (Feigenson and Carey,
2003). Infants tracked how many objects came out of the
box, not a total amount of stuff. Familiarity could not have
played a role as it was not a looking time study.
The second study to show evidence for discrete
representation of small sets by infants found that 7-monthold infants detected changes in numerosity when habituated
to displays of objects that differed in both color and texture
(Feigenson, in press). These results contrasted with the
results of Feigenson, Carey and Spelke (2002), who found
that infants failed to track changes in number when objects
differed only in color.
To our knowledge, these are the only studies to date
that provide evidence of discrete quantity tracking for small
sets of occluded physical objects under controlled
conditions. The problem of controlling for continuous
variables when using real-world objects remains intractable.
Previous studies attempted to control for area and perimeter
by varying total extent while keeping number constant or
introducing texture information as a way to equate
perimeter. Bearing in mind that changes in area necessarily
result in changes of perimeter, we designed our studies so

Many studies have found that infants in the first year use only
continuous quantities to represent small sets of objects. We show
that 12-month-olds use discrete quantity representations even when
continuous quantity information is available. In three studies,
infants are required to track the changing locations of objects and
sets of objects on a trial-by-trial basis. In the first study, infants are
surprised to see two objects behind a screen when one was
expected. In the second study, infants were surprised to see both
one and three objects when two objects were expected, despite the
total surface area of the sets remaining constant. A final study
demonstrates that infants tracked the locations of a singleton and a
pair and were surprised when the sets unexpectedly swapped
positions. Infants can flexibly tailor their use of discrete and
continuous quantity information according to the nature of the task.
Keywords: infant development; number; object tracking; discrete
quantity; continuous quantity.

Young infants track multiple physical objects through
occlusion (Baillargeon, 1986; Spelke, 1990; Wynn, 1992;
Xu & Carey, 1996). What kind of representations do infants
generate for the objects they are tracking? Two broad
possibilities have been proposed. The first is that infants
sum across continuous properties of the objects, such as area
or perimeter, and store the resulting total in memory
(Clearfield & Mix, 1999, 2001; Feigenson, Carey and
Spelke, 2002; Feigenson, Carey and Hauser, 2002). The
second is that infants store a representation of the individual
objects, either by enumerating them non-verbally (Gallistel
and Gelman, 1992; Simon, Hespos and Rochat, 1995;
Wynn, 1992; Xu and Spelke, 2000) or by maintaining
attentional indexes to each of the objects (Leslie, Xu,
Tremoulet, and Scholl, 1998; Scholl & Leslie, 1999). In
contrast to summing continuous magnitudes, both counting
and indexing represent a set of individuals discretely.
One outstanding issue in multiple object tracking is
whether infants really track discrete quantity (Clearfield and
Mix, 1999, 2001). For example, Wynn’s findings (Wynn,
1992) can be re-interpreted as showing that infants simply
track the total amount of “Mickey Mouse stuff.” Almost all
the evidence for sensitivity to discrete quantity comes from
studies using large sets of texture elements (Lipton &
Spelke, 2003; Xu, 2003; Xu & Spelke, 2000). Addressing

161

that we could look separately at the effect of changes of
total number, total area, and total perimeter.
We used Káldy and Leslie’s (2003) two-screen
methodology to test whether infants track discrete or
continuous quantities through occlusion. To succeed, infants
had to attend to the locations of the objects as well as the
objects themselves. We pitted discrete number against area
in test displays. Either numerical outcome changed or total
area changed, but not both. If infants tracked based on
continuous quantities, they should have looked longer only
at outcomes where area or perimeter changed even when
number remained the same. If infants tracked based on
discrete variables, they should have looked longer only at
numerically different outcomes, even if area remained
constant. Because perimeter and area cannot be
simultaneously controlled, all non-control outcomes had
changes in total perimeter. However, in conditions where
number did not change, total perimeter change was always
equal to or less than perimeter change in number change
conditions. In this way, we were able to investigate the role
of perimeter change separately from that of area change.
This methodology also allows us to rigorously test for a
familiar-number preference Looking-time patterns will
show whether infants developed a familiarity preference for
the total number (three). In test trials, if we remove the
screen covering the pair, we can test for outcomes of one
(unexpected), two (expected), and three (unexpected, but
possibly ‘familiar’). If infants look longer only at the
outcome of three but not also at the outcome of one, this
would be consistent with a familiarity preference for total
number. We can also determine if infants develop a
familiarity preference for the pair. If so, then they will look
longer only at (expected) outcomes of two. However, if
infants have a novelty preference for number, they should
look longer at both of the unexpected outcomes, namely one
and three.

Figure 1: Experiment 1. Infants were familiarized to three
discs of radius 1.41", introduced individually and placed on
their edges in the center of the stage in a group of one and a
group of two. The group of one was always introduced first
and in trials 1 and 3 appeared to the infants’ left; in trials 2
and 4, to the infants’ right. The group of two was always on
the side opposite to the group of one. The sidedness of a
group reversed on alternate trials. Discs were tapped twice
on the floor of the stage to ensure that infants attended to the
discs’ placement. The discs were moved individually to the
far sides of the stage. In test trials, two screens were
first lowered simultaneously onto the stage. The three discs
were then introduced following the same protocol as
familiarization trials and moved behind the screens. The
screen occluding the group of two was lifted to reveal one of
four possible outcomes. The disks are depicted only roughly
to scale; see Table 1 for their dimensions.

Experiment 1
Design
The design is illustrated in Figure 1.

Apparatus
Infants sat on their caregiver’s lap about one meter away
from the display. Displays were shown on a white posterboard stage, 90 cm wide x 50 cm deep x 45 cm high. The
floor of the stage was covered with blue contact paper. The
back of the stage concealed two trap doors, which allowed
the experimenter to make surreptitious substitutions during
test trials. Two 40W light bulbs illuminated the stage. At the
end of trials, a yellow felt curtain was raised to cover the
display. A metronome ensured consistent timing between
subjects.

Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of two or three R1.15” discs, three
R1.41” discs, and one R2” disc. All discs were wooden and

162

conditions but not in the Area/Perimeter Change condition,
then we can rule out the possibility that infants reacted to
changes in total perimeter. If infants look longer in all noncontrol conditions, changes in total perimeter, rather than
changes in total area, would be the most likely cause.

painted red. All discs were presented on their edges. The
total areas and perimeters are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Dimensions of stimulus sets used in experiment 1
Total Area

Total Perimeter

1 x 2" disk

12.56 in2

12.56 in

2 x 1.41" disks

12.56 in2

17.76 in

3 x 1.41” disks

18.84 in2

26.64 in

2 x 1.15” disks

8.31 in2

14.46 in

3 x 1.15” disks

12.56 in2

21.7 in

Subjects
83 infants (40 girls, age 47-56 weeks, mean age 51 weeks)
were recruited as described in experiment 1. An additional
39 infants were tested but dropped due to
fussiness/sleepiness (18), experimenter error (9), equipment
failure (8), parental interference (3), and being a statistical
outlier (1). Subjects were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions, Control (n=20), Unfamiliar Number Change
(n=22), Familiar Number Change (n=20), or Area
/Perimeter Change (n=21).

Results

Procedure

Mean looking times on all three test trials were analyzed in
a repeated measures ANOVA with factors Trials (3) x
Condition (4). One infant was dropped from the analysis
because the third trial was not completed. There was no
significant main effect of Trials and no Trials interactions.
There was a significant main effect of Condition (F3, 78 =
3.45, p = .021, η² = .117).
The same pattern of results was found when only first
test trial looking times were analyzed (see Figure 2). Data
from all infants were analyzed. Again, a significant main
effect of Condition was found (F3, 79 = 3.04, p = .034, η² =
.104). Post-hoc Dunnett’s t revealed that infants in both the
Familiar Number Change (3) and Unfamiliar Number
Change (1) groups looked significantly longer than Controls
(t38 = −2.83, p = .015 and t40 = −2.246. p = .033,
respectively). Infants in the Area/Perimeter Change group
did not look significantly longer than Controls despite
changes in both area and perimeter (t39 = −0.98, p = .43).
Planned comparisons found no difference in first trial
looking to the Familiar and Unfamiliar Number Change
conditions (t40 = 0.3, p = 0.38, one-tailed). We therefore
collapsed data from these groups (mean 11.8 seconds) and
compared them with first trial looking in the Area/Perimeter
Change condition. Exploration of this data set indicated
severe departures from normality. We therefore examined
the data in two ways. First, we entered log transformed
looking times into a t-test which showed longer looking in
the Number Change condition (t61 = 2.37, p = 0.021, twotailed). Second, we entered the raw looking times into a
non-parametric analysis, which confirmed longer looking to
Number Change (Mann-Whitney U = 281.5, z = 2.33, p =
0.02, two-tailed).

Infants were familiarized to three discs in a group of one
and a group of two (all R1.41"), which were introduced and
then moved individually to the sides of the stage. Sidedness
of the presentation of the discs alternated trial by trial.
Infants saw four familiarization trials, in which they saw the
pair and singleton equally often on both sides. This side
alternation was continued through three test trials. Test trials
were identical to familiarization trials except at the
beginning of each test trial two screens were introduced on
either side of the stage. The discs were then presented in the
same way as during the familiarization. When moved to the
sides of the stage, they were placed behind their respective
screens. The screen occluding the pair was then lifted.
Infants saw only one of the four test outcomes in a
between-subjects design. In two of the outcomes, Control
and Area/Perimeter Change, the numerical outcome
remained the same. However, in the Area/Perimeter Change
condition, the total area of the resulting display was only
81% of the total area of the original two circles while total
perimeter decreased by 34%. In Number Change outcomes,
total area remained the same, but number changed either to
a familiar numerical outcome (3) or an unfamiliar numerical
outcome (1). We considered three to be the familiar
numerical outcome because infants were familiarized to a
total of three items. In the Familiar Number condition, total
perimeter increased by 22%; in the Unfamiliar Number
condition, total perimeter decreased by 30%. Crucially, the
total perimeter change in the Area/Perimeter Change
condition is larger than in either of the Number Change
conditions. As it is impossible to simultaneously equate area
and perimeter of the numerical outcomes, this allows us to
take into account infants’ reactions to changes of total
perimeter. If infants look longer in both Number Change

163

Figure 2: Experiment 1. First test-trial looking times to each
of four outcome conditions.

Discussion
Infants did not look significantly longer at a numericallyexpected outcome when area and perimeter both decreased.
They did look significantly longer at both unexpected
number outcomes even though the total area of both number
change displays was the same as in the Control condition.
The design of Experiment 1 also allows us to rule out
changes in perimeter as driving longer looking times. If
infants reacted to perimeter, they should have looked longer
at the Area/Perimeter Change condition, which had the
largest amount of perimeter change. They did not.
The results of Experiment 1 also cannot be accounted
for by familiarity preference. Familiarity would not account
for why infants preferred to look longer at displays of 1 and
3 objects, but not 2. Infants did not appear to adopt either a
global (3) or local (1 or 2) number preference. These results
indicate that unexpected number outcomes were indeed
unexpected, and are consistent with a novelty preference for
unexpected outcomes.
Neither changes in continuous quantity nor familiarity
preferences account for our results. Infants form a discrete
representation of numerosity; but do they use this
representation to track the sets?
Our design failed to rule out one possibility: infants are
not tracking the sets, but simply look longer at any
unfamiliar group of objects. We did not test with the
familiarized sets in the wrong location. If infants track sets
using discrete number, they should be surprised to see the
expected sets in unexpected locations.

Figure 3. The design of experiment 2 was the same as
experiment 1 except that in test trials both screens were
removed to reveal one of two outcomes, the disks in their
expected locations (control) or in swapped locations (swap).

Experiment 2
The previous experiment showed that babies are sensitive to
number. In this experiment, we repeated experiment 1, but
modified the test trials by removing both screens to show
both sets of discs. In the control condition, infants saw the
expected groups in their expected locations. In the swap
condition, the locations of the expected groups were
swapped (Fig. 3). Infants will be surprised to see the
expected groups swap locations only if they have a definite
expectation for both number and location of the items
behind the screens. This design also controls precisely for
continuous quantity, as infants see the exact same sets in
both conditions.

Design
The design is illustrated in Figure 3.

Apparatus
Same as Experiment 1.

164

discrepancies in the locations of object sets. This can only
be done via trial-by-trial tracking. Perhaps we found discrete
number effects because we made it critical for tracking set
identities.
Many number tasks require infants to extract number as
the common feature across several successive displays; our
two-screen method encourages infants to compare the
number of two concurrently displayed sets. Concurrent
displays are known to simplify other tasks (Xu & Carey,
1996). Although infants could have used either discrete or
continuous quantity information to track the sets in
experiment 2, they used only discrete. However, our
findings do not rule out the use of continuous quantities for
object tracking with larger differences in area totals
(Brannon, Lutz and Cordes, in press).
A further advantage of the two-screen methodology is
that it allowed us to test for familiarity preference. Dividing
the total number of objects in two groups enables us to vary
the number of objects within individual sets so that all
possible familiar numerical outcomes are tested. If the
preferred familiar number was the global total 3, infants
would prefer only the outcome of 3; if the preferred familiar
number was one of the local sets (1 or 2), then they would
prefer either the outcome of 1 or the outcome of 2. What we
found instead was a preference for both 1 and 3, a novel
number preference.
By 12 months of age, infants do not rely only on
continuous quantity judgments to track objects in the world,
but also have access to discrete quantity information.
Continuous and discrete quantity representations are not
mutually exclusive and infants may use both, with the most
appropriate information driving their behavior. For example,
infants interested in maximizing amount of food would
select one large cracker rather than two smaller crackers,
even though the numerical outcome is smaller (Feigenson,
Carey and Hauser, 2002), while infants may resort to
something like counting if the number of individuals to be
attended to exceeds parallel individuation (Xu and Spelke,
2000; Chiang and Wynn, 2000). Further work must be done
to clarify how infants track small sets by discrete
numerosity, when that provides the critical information.
There are at least three possibilities for how they do this: by
object files or indexes; by the specific set representations,
SINGLETON, PAIR; or by integer representations (Leslie &
Chen, in press; Leslie, Gallistel & Gelman, in press).
Whether this ability is truly numerical in nature remains to
be seen.

Stimuli
Same as Experiment 1.

Procedure
The familiarizations were the same as in experiment 1; two
test trials followed; these were also the same, except that
both screens were removed simultaneously to reveal either a
control outcome (Figure 3a) or a swap outcome (Figure 3b).

Subjects
24 infants (9 girls, 43.7 weeks to 56.7 weeks, mean age 50.7
weeks, sd 3.75 weeks) were tested, with 12 in each
condition. A further four infants were excluded for fussing.

Results
Infants in the swap condition looked significantly longer
than controls (15.54s vs 7.65s); ANOVA with Condition (2)
x Trials (2) showed only a significant effect of Condition
(F1, 22 = 6.68, p = .017, η² = .23, p-rep = .919).

Discussion
Infants not only encode the discrete numerosity of two sets,
they can also use number to track the locations of the sets.
The total continuous and discrete variables of the displays
are identical across conditions; only the location of the sets
changes. Infants not only track the total number of objects,
they also track the location of sets across trials and are
surprised when their expectations are violated.

General Discussion
Previous studies have largely failed to find unambiguous
evidence that infants attend to discrete as opposed to
continuous quantity in representing small sets of objects.
Our findings indicate that infants represented discrete
quantity, while ruling out total area, total perimeter, and
individual diameter (experiment 1). Adults readily extract
the average area from a set of disks (Ariely, 2001). In our
sets individual diameter was proportional to average area
but infants did not respond to diameter; looking times in the
Number Change (3) group were longer than in the
Area/Perimeter Change group, though both have the same
average area (t39 = 2.26, p = 0.03, two-tailed).
Why did we find for discrete quantity where others
have found for continuous? Our two-screen method requires
infants to track objects trial by trial (Káldy and Leslie, 2003,
2005). Infants have to keep track of objects or sets as they
change location. Over trials, each object or set is associated
with all locations equally. This may force infants to rely
upon a constantly updated working memory for object
location. Experiment 2 showed that infants notice

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Kali Lerner for help in collecting some of
the data reported here. We are also grateful to participants in

165

Gallistel, C.R., & Gelman, R. (1992). Preverbal and verbal
counting and computation. Cognition, 44.
Káldy, Z., & Leslie, A.M. (2003). The identification of
objects by 9-month-old infants: integrating ‘what’ and
‘where’ information. Developmental Science, 6.
Káldy, Z., & Leslie, A.M. (2005). A memory span of one?
Object identification in 6.5-month-old infants.
Cognition, 97.
Leslie, A.M., & Chen, M.L. (in press). Individuation of
pairs of objects in infancy. Developmental Science.
Leslie, A.M., Gallistel, C.R., & Gelman, R. (in press).
Where the integers come from. In P. Carruthers (Ed.),
The innate mind: Foundations and future. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Leslie, A.M., Xu, F., Tremoulet, P.D., & Scholl, B.J.
(1998). Indexing and the object concept: Developing
‘what’ and ‘where’ systems. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2.
Lipton, J.S., & Spelke, E.S. (2003). Origins of number
sense: Large-number discrimination in human infants.
Psychological Science, 14.
Scholl, B.J., & Leslie, A.M. (1999a). Explaining the infant’s
object concept: Beyond the perception/cognition
dichotomy. In (Eds.), E. Lepore & Z. Pylyshyn, What is
Cognitive Science? Oxford: Blackwell.
Simon, T.J., Hespos, S.J., & Rochat, P. (1995). Do infants
understand simple arithmetic? A replication of Wynn
(1992). Cognitive Development, 10.
Spelke, E.S. (1990). Principles of object perception. Cognitive Science, 14.
Wynn, K. (1992a). Addition and subtraction by human infants. Nature, 358.
Xu, F. (2003). Numerosity discrimination in infants:
Evidence for two systems of representations. Cognition,
89.
Xu, F., & Carey, S. (1996). Infants' metaphysics: The case
of numerical identity. Cognitive Psychology, 30.
Xu, F., & Spelke, E.S. (2000). Large number discrimination
in 6-month-old infants. Cognition, 74.

the Yale Object Symposium for helpful comments and
discussion, and especially to Liz Spelke. Parts of this work
were supported by NSF grant BCS-0079917 to AML.

References
Ariely, D. (2001). Seeing sets: Representation by statistical
properties. Psychological Science, 12.
Baillargeon, R. (1986). Representing the existence and the
location of hidden objects: Object permanence in 6and 8-month old infants. Cognition, 23.
Brannon, E.M., Lutz, D., & Cordes, S. (2006). The
development of area discrimination and its implications
for number representation in infancy. Developmental
Science, 9.
Chiang, W., & Wynn, K. (2000). Infants’ tracking of objects
and collections. Cognition, 77.
Clearfield, M.W., & Mix, K.S. (1999). Number versus
contour length in infants’ discrimination of small visual
sets. Psychological Science.
Clearfield, M.W., & Mix, K.S. (2001). Amount versus
number: Infants' use of area and contour length to
discriminate small sets. Journal of Cognition &
Development, 2.
Cohen, L.B., & Marks, K.S. (2002). How infants process
addition and subtraction events. Developmental
Science, 5.
Feigenson, L. (in press). A double-dissociation in infants’
representation of object arrays. Cognition.
Feigenson, L., & Carey, S. (2003). Tracking individuals via
object-files: evidence from infants' manual search.
Developmental Science, 6.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., & Hauser, M. (2002). The
representations underlying infants’ choice of more:
Object files versus analog magnitudes. Psychological
Science, 13.
Feigenson, L., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (2002). Infants’
discrimination of number vs. continuous extent.
Cognitive Psychology, 44.

166

