UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Deciding the Price of Fame

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4k577602

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Frosch, Caren A.
Bearman, C. Philip
McCloy, Rachel

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Deciding the Price of Fame
Caren A. Frosch
(c.frosch@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Reading
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL

C. Philip Beaman
(c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Reading
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL

Rachel McCloy
(r.a.mccloy@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Reading
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL
Abstract
Previous studies of ignorance-driven decision-making have
either analyzed when ignorance should prove advantageous
on theoretical grounds, or else they have examined whether
human behavior is consistent with an ignorance driven
inference strategy (e.g., the recognition heuristic). The current
study merges these research goals by examining whether –
under conditions where ignorance driven inference might be
expected – the type of advantages theoretical analyses predict
are evident in human performance data. A single experiment
shows that, when asked to make relative wealth judgments,
participants reliably use recognition as a basis for their
judgments. Their wealth judgments under these conditions are
reliably more accurate when some of the target names are
unknown than when participants recognize all the names (the
“less-is-more effect”). These data are robust against a number
of variations on the size of the pool from which participants
have to choose and the nature of the wealth judgment.
Keywords: Simple Heuristics; one-reason decision-making;
wealth judgments.

Introduction
As part of the research program into “simple heuristics that
make us smart” (Gigerenzer, Todd, & the ABC research
group, 1999) Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) reported the
results of studies showing that, in two-alternative forced
choice tasks (2-AFC), it was theoretically reasonable to
suppose that limited knowledge could produce superior
performance than more complete knowledge. The task they
examined was a magnitude inference task where the aim
was to indicate which of two target cities was the most
populous. They argued that a more populous city was likely
to be encountered more frequently (e.g., mentioned in
national and international media) and therefore more
frequently recognized, providing a correlation between
recognizability and city size. The size of this correlation
provides a cue with a certain level of validity (recognition
validity or RV) when attempting magnitude inferences.
Knowledge of the city also provides a cue to size with a

certain level of validity (knowledge validity or KV) when
confronted with relative magnitude judgments. Goldstein
and Gigerenzer (2002) showed that when RV > KV, the
proportion of correct magnitude judgments made should be
highest amongst groups who recognized only a limited
number of cities (the “less-is-more effect”).
Goldstein and Gigerenzer further showed that, in
experimental studies, participants were overwhelmingly
likely to infer that the recognized city of a pair had a larger
population than the unrecognized city, a strategy that they
referred to as “the recognition heuristic”. The recognition
heuristic as outlined by Goldstein & Gigerenzer (2002)
states simply that, given a choice of two options where only
one of the options is recognized, infer that option has the
greatest magnitude. However, since Goldstein &
Gigerenzer’s study, further empirical research has indicated
either that the applicability of the recognition heuristic is
more limited than previously supposed (Bröder & Eichler,
2006; Newell & Fernandez, 2006; Newell & Schanks, 2004;
Richter & Späth, 2006) or that the less-is-more effect
predicted by theoretical analysis was absent from empirical
results (Pachur & Biele, in press; Pohl, 2006). Despite
concluding that their findings are “in line with” the less-ismore effect, other studies (e.g., Snook & Cullen, 2006) have
been unable to formally test for less-is-more effects because
of methodological limitations.
Previous research into the recognition heuristic by the
current authors (Beaman, McCloy & Smith, 2006; McCloy,
Beaman & Goddard, 2006) has expanded the 2-AFC task
beyond the paired choices examined by Goldstein and
Gigerenzer (2002) and has also introduced the “wealth
judgment” dimension, requiring participants to indicate the
wealthiest or the poorest of a set of N choices (where N = 2
or 3). In two independent sets of studies we examined
experimentally whether choices were consistent with the use
of a recognition-based strategy for 2- or 3-AFC tasks where
recognition validity was self-evidently moderate or low and,
by simulation, whether the less-is-more effect was to be

1001

expected in N-AFC tasks where N > 2. The experimental
results indicated that the use of recognition as a guide to
inference was moderated by the type of question asked
(wealthiest or poorest) with the poorest question eliciting
fewer recognition-based judgments (McCloy & Beaman,
2004; McCloy et al., 2006. N.B., “poorest” judgments
required participants to reverse the direction of the inference
and hence to choose the unrecognized name). Simulation
studies also indicated that the range of situations or
parameter values for which a less-is-more effect would be
apparent would be smaller for poorest questions than for
richest (Beaman et al., 2006). However, because the
empirical studies – by design – used stimuli in which
recognition validity was both low and perceived to be low it
was not possible to directly relate the results of simulation
and empirical research, to examine whether the less-is-more
advantage was actually present in those situations where
participants were apparently making use of a recognitionbased inference strategy.
The current study aims to address this issue and examine
whether less-is-more effects can occur in a variety of
magnitude inference tasks (2-, 3- and 4-AFC with richest
and poorest questions) or whether, as some authors have
suggested they are absent from empirical data (Pachur &
Biele, in press; Pohl, 2006). The study also examines
whether the form and extent of the less-is-more effect is
predicted by a process model of the recognition heuristic
(Beaman et al., 2006).

Experiment
Method
Participants We tested 26 Psychology students who took
part for course credit. There were 23 women and 3 men with
a mean age of 22 (range 18-45 years).
Materials and Design Participants were presented with
between 2 and 4 names taken from the Sunday Times Rich
List 2006 (an annually produced list of the richest
individuals in the UK and estimates of their actual wealth)
and asked to identify either the poorest or the richest person.
The task was presented using E-Prime software on a PC
running Windows 2000. Previous research has demonstrated
that people frequently employ the recognition heuristic
when making judgments about these sorts of materials (e.g.,
McCloy et al., 2006). For this experiment we deliberately
chose materials with high recognition validity, that is, the
richest people in the set were generally recognized by
participants in previous experiments and the poorest people
in the set were generally not recognized.
Overall participants made 122 judgments; half of these
were in response to the question of who is poorest and the
other half to the question of who is richest. We used the
same combination of names for the richest and poorest
question, that is there were 61 unique name groupings and

each name combination appeared twice. The materials were
presented in a different random order to each participant.
The experiment was wholly within participants. The
independent variables were the frame of the question
(richest / poorest), the number of names presented in each
grouping (2, 3, or 4), and the number of names recognized
in each grouping (0, 1, 2, 3, or 4). The dependent variables
were the option chosen by participants (recognized /
unrecognized) and the accuracy of the option choice.
Procedure Participants were presented with four practice
trials, during which they were asked to identify the smallest
or the largest of four numbers. Participants were required to
respond within 5 seconds. If they failed to respond the
experiment moved on to the next slide. They also received
feedback during the practice trials of ‘correct’, ‘incorrect’ or
‘no response detected’ (if they did not respond within the
required time limit). For the main task participants were
presented with 122 trials during which they were asked to
identify the richest or the poorest of between 2 and 4
persons. On completion of the first part of the task,
participants were presented with the 27 names used in the
experiment individually and asked to indicate whether they
recognized each of these names from before participating in
the experiment, by pressing ‘y’ for yes and ‘n’ for no.

Results
Analysis of our stimuli indicated that the actual wealth of
the individuals presented to the participants correlated
moderately with the number of times they were recognized,
r = .343. However, this analysis included an outlier (James
Dyson, the vacuum cleaner manufacturer) who was seldom
recognized despite being one of the wealthiest individuals
on the list. Once he was removed from the analysis, the
correlation improved to r = .729 (p < .001) indicating that
the recognizability-wealth correlation was of sufficient size
to provide high recognition validity.
Analysis of participants’ performance was carried out by
number of options (2-, 3- & 4-AFC) and by type of
judgment (richest/poorest). In all cases where recognition
could be used, that is when 0 < number recognized < N, the
choice was consistent with the use of a recognition-based
inference, 1-sample t-test, p < .001 in all cases. For the
“richest” question, this involved testing against the
probability of choosing a recognized option by chance. For
the “poorest” question this involved testing against the
probability of choosing an unrecognized option by chance.
Having established that participants made use of the
recognition heuristic in order to complete the task we
examined the less-is-more effect by calculating the
proportion of correct inferences. The proportion of correct
inferences for 2-AFC tasks are shown in Figure 1. Paired
sample t-tests showed a significant less-is-more effect
(greater number correct where 1 is recognized than where
both are known) for the poorer question (t = 3.26, df = 25, p
= .003) but a non-significant less-is-more effect for the
richer question (t = 1.9, df = 25, p = .069), both tests 1-tailed

1002

and Bonferroni corrected. The values depicted in Figure 1
were taken as estimates of the recognition and knowledge
validities to use for performance predictions of 3-AFC and
4-AFC tasks. The recognition validity was estimated as the
average of the proportion of correct inferences where only
one item was recognized in 2-AFC richest and poorest
questions and the knowledge validity was estimated as the
average of the proportion of correct inferences where both
items were recognized in 2-AFC richest and poorest
questions. These estimates form the basis of the predicted
less-is-more effects shown in later figures. Estimated RV
was used directly to predict less-is-more effects in 3-AFC
and 4-AFC tasks and estimated KV was varied according to
the function KV’ = 2KV/n where n is the number of options
recognized. This function was built in to reflect the
assumption that correctly judging the richest of n known
individuals is likely to become more difficult as n increases.

80
Richer: accuracy for 3 names

60
80

40

70

20

Percentage Correct

Perecnetage Correct

Richer: accuracy for 2 names

As an example, for a 3-AFC “who is richest?” task where
two individuals were recognized, the two known individuals
would immediately be considered richer than the unknown
individual. An independent decision would then be taken,
on the basis of knowledge, as to which of those two known
individuals was the richest. Similarly, for a 3-AFC “who is
poorest?” task, two known individuals would be
immediately excluded from analysis, leaving only the single
unknown individual. However, if only one individual was
known the exclusion of this individual would leave two
unknown individuals and choice between these two would
be effectively random and performance levels at chance.
Thus, according to this model, the appearance of the less-ismore effect is a function of either RV and KV or RV and
chance, depending upon the number of options, the number
recognized and the nature of the question (richer or poorer;
see Beaman et al., 2006 for further details). The data
provided by the experimental study for 3-AFC richer and
poorer tasks is shown in Figure 2, together with the
predictions of the process model as outlined above.

0
0 recognized

1 recognized

2 recognized

Poorer: accuracy for 2 names

60
50

Observed

40

Predicted

30
20
10
0 recognized 1 recognized 2 recognized 3 recognized

80
60

Poorer: accuracy for 3 names

40

80

20

70
Percentage correct

Perecntage Correct

0

0
0 recognized

1 recognized

2 recognized

Figure 1. Percentage correct inference as a function of
number recognized and question type. Bars are standard
error.

3.

50

Observed

40

Predicted

30
20
10
0
0 recognized 1 recognized 2 recognized 3 recognized

The process model of the recognition heuristic makes the
following assumptions:
1.
2.

60

Decision-making is on the basis of one reason only.
A recognized person is always assumed to be
richer than an unrecognized person.
In N-AFC situations where N > 2, decisions are
made whether to further consider an individual on
the basis of knowledge only after, and
independently of, decisions to consider an
individual on the basis of recognition alone.

1003

Figure 2. Percentage correct inference as a function of
number recognized and question type. Bars are standard
error. Predicted values represent the calculated percent
correct given the recognition and knowledge validities
estimated from the 2-AFC task combined as indicated by the
process model of the recognition heuristic.
Statistical analysis of the less-is-more effect shows that,
relative to total recognition (i.e., recognizing all 3
individuals), there were reliable advantages for recognizing
only one name when asked the richer question, t = 2.99, df =

23, p = .014 and for recognizing two names when asked the
poorer question, t = 2.61, df = 23, p = .032. The remaining
two comparisons (recognizing two names when asked the
richer question and recognizing one name when asked the
poorer question) were not statistically reliable (both ps >
.05, all analyses were 1-tailed and Bonferroni corrected).
The same procedure was carried out for the 4-AFC task.
The data from this task are shown in Figure 3.

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Observed

ze
d

ze
d

re
co
gn
i
4

3

re
co
gn
i

re
co
gn
i
2

1

re
co
gn
i

re
co
gn
i
0

ze
d

ze
d

Predicted

ze
d

Percentage Correct

Richer: accuracy for 4 names

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Observed

ze
d

ze
d
4

re
co
gn
i

re
co
gn
i
3

ze
d

re
co
gn
i
2

re
co
gn
i
1

re
co
gn
i
0

ze
d

Predicted

ze
d

Percentage Correct

Poorer: accuracy for 4 names

Figure 3. Percentage correct inference as a function of
number recognized and question type. Bars are standard
error. Predicted values represent the calculated percent
correct given the recognition and knowledge validities
estimated from the 2-AFC task combined as indicated by the
process model of the recognition heuristic.
Statistical analysis of the results of the 4-AFC task
indicate that significant less-is-more effects occurred for the
richer task when only 1 or 2 individuals were recognized
(compared to when all 4 individuals were recognized), t =
4.57, df = 20, p < .002 and t = 4.3, df = 19, p < .002
respectively, but not when 3 individuals were recognized (p
> .05). For the poorer questions none of the key
comparisons showed reliable less-is-more effects (all ps >
.05, all tests are 1-tailed and Bonferroni corrected).

Discussion
The results of this experiment indicate that, contrary to
previous reports (Pachur & Biele, in press; Pohl, 2006) lessis-more effects are empirically verifiable. The experiment
also indicates that the less-is-more effect appears in multioption decision tasks and – to a limited extent – for “poorer”

tasks as well as for “richer” tasks. This finding is in line
with previous predictions (Beaman et al., 2006). The
process model of the recognition heuristic implemented here
also gains some support. Predicted performance levels for 3AFC tasks are generally accurate although the model is less
successful in predicting the performance of participants in
4-AFC tasks. There are two possible reasons for this, which
arise from limitations in the methodology employed.
The first possibility is that the usefulness of recognition
for decision judgments is underestimated because the
observed accuracy data include all participants’ responses
and not merely those responses that are identifiably
consistent with use of the recognition heuristic. For
example, the 4-AFC “richer” question data includes
responses from a minority of participants who did not
choose the single recognized item when only one item is
recognized. If this decision was incorrect it would obviously
drive down the performance levels for this data point.
Restricting the comparisons of the process model to those
whose outputs are consistent with using a recognitiondriven strategy may quite plausibly increase the accuracy of
the predictions. However, it is important to note that, within
the sample of names used in the experiment, the correlation
between wealth and chance of being recognized was not
perfect. Importantly, within the subset of names which were
highly recognized there was no strong correlation between
recognition and wealth.
The second possibility is that the estimated recognition
validity should be varied in a similar manner to the
estimates of knowledge validity. Knowledge validity was
varied as a function of n, the number or possibilities under
active consideration, under the assumption that judging the
richest of any 4 individuals would always be more difficult
than judging which was the richest of 2 individuals, even
when all individuals are known and cues to wealth can be
applied. Recognition validity remained invariant, however.
One could argue (Anderson, personal communication) that
RV should be varied as a function of the number of options
recognized and the number of options available. This
argument assumes that the “correct” target item is more
likely to be a member of a set of 999 recognized items (from
1000) than a member of a set of only 2 recognized items
(from 1000). The denominator also needs to be taken into
account as, by the same logic, a target is more likely to be a
member of the same set of 2 recognized items if there are
only 3 options available than if 1000 options are available.
For the current set of predictions, however, we made the
simplifying assumption that recognition validity would not
vary substantially when n, the number of recognized items,
is only free to vary between 1 and 3 and N, the number of
choices is similarly limited to a range of 2-4.
These caveats notwithstanding, the empirical work
reported here supports Goldstein and Gigerenzer’s (2002)
contention that less is (sometimes) more and shows how this
varies as a function of the number of options available and
the question type. Although the wealth judgment dimension
employed here was used because of its intrinsic, albeit

1004

casual, interest for our undergraduate participants rather
than for any real value nevertheless the results we have
obtained may potentially have some applied or “real-world”
significance. For example, the recognition heuristic is
currently under investigation for purposes of predicting the
results of sporting events (Andersson, Edman, & Ekman,
2005; Bennis & Pachur, 2006; Pachur & Biele, in press;
Snook & Cullen, 2006) and our results suggest that, by
obtaining prior estimates of the recognition validity of lay
people and the knowledge validity of experts, we can
estimate the future accuracy of both groups’ predictions of
the results of future sporting fixtures with a fair degree of
accuracy and, importantly, ascertain whether the opinions of
the general public or the professional pundits are the most
reliable guide.
The current results also speak to theoretical issues. The
basis of the “simple heuristics” research program is to
examine the efficacy of decision processes where the
number of cues investigated are limited and decisions are
frequently based upon one or more cues that are consulted
independently (i.e., that they are noncompensatory, see for
example, Take The Best or the Priority Heuristic,
Brandstätter, Gigerenzer & Hertwig, 2006; Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1999). This contrasts with another wellestablished research program that examines decisionmaking under the assumption that cues are weighted and
combined (i.e., that they are compensatory) and a number of
authors have been critical of the noncompensatory use of
recognition cues (Bröder & Eichler, 2006; Newell, 2004;
Newell & Fernandez, 2006; Pohl, 2006; Richter & Späth,
2006; but see Pachur & Hertwig, 2006). Whilst the current
data cannot completely resolve this debate, we note that our
implementation of a process model of the recognition
heuristic provides a reasonable prediction of human
competence by making a series of independent decisions in
a noncompensatory manner. This is consistent with the
suggestions made by some consumer marketing researchers
that product choice amongst consumers begins with the
independent formation of a “consideration set” that may be
based on recognition information (e.g., Coates, Butler &
Berry, 2004, 2006). The process also has the advantages of
parsimony and, in the absence of other evidence, is to be
preferred on these grounds.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Philip T. Smith for various useful discussions
concerning the mathematics of the less-is-more effect. This
research was supported by grant ref. F/00 239/U from The
Leverhulme Trust to the second and third authors.

References
Andersson, P., Edman, J., & Ekman, M. (2005). Predicting the
World Cup 2002 in soccer: Performance and confidence of
experts and non-experts. International Journal of Forecasting,
21, 565-576.
Beaman, C. P., McCloy, R. & Smith, P. T. (2006). When does
ignorance make us smart? Additional factors guiding heuristic

inference. In: R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds). Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Erlbaum: Hillsdale, N. J. pp 1801-1805.
Bennis, W. M., & Pachur, T. (2006). Fast and frugal heuristics in
sports. Psychology of Sport & Exercise, 7, 611-629.
Brandstätter, E., Gigerenzer, G. & Hertwig, R. (2006). The Priority
Heuristic: Making Choices Without Trade-Offs. Psychological
Review, 113(2), 409-432.
Bröder, A. & Eichler, A. (2006) The use of recognition
information and additional cues in inference from memory. Acta
Psychologica, 121, 275-284.
Coates, S. L., Butler, L. T., & Berry, D. C. (2004). Implicit
memory: A prime example for brand consideration and choice.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 18, 1195-1211.
Coates, S. L., Butler, L. T., & Berry, D. C. (2006). Implicit
memory and consumer choice: The mediating role of brand
familiarity. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 1101-1116.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D. G. (1999). Betting on one good
reason: The Take the Best heuristic. In: G. Gigerenzer, & P. M.
Todd, (Eds). Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC research group. (1999).
Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Goldstein, D, & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological
rationality: The recognition heuristic. Psychological Review,
103, 650-669.
McCloy, R. & Beaman, C. P. (2004). The recognition heuristic:
Fast and frugal but not as simple as it seems. In: K. Forbus, D.
Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds). Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
N. J.: Erlbaum. pp. 933-937.
McCloy, R., Beaman, C. P. & Goddard, K. (2006). Rich and
famous: Recognition based judgment in the Sunday Times rich
list. In: R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds). Proceedings of the TwentyEighth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum: Hillsdale, N. J. pp 1801-1805.
Newell, B. R. (2004) Re-visions of rationality? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 11-15.
Newell, B. R. & Fernandez, D. R. (2006). On the binary quality of
recognition and the inconsequentiality of further knowledge:
Two critical tests of the recognition heuristic. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 19(4), 333-346.
Newell, B. R. & Shanks, D. R. (2004). On the role of recognition
in decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 923-935.
Pachur, T. & Biele, G. (in press). Forecasting from ignorance: The
use and usefulness of recognition in lay predictions of sports
events. Acta Psychologica.
Pachur, T. & Hertwig, R. (2006). On the psychology of the
recognition heuristic: Retrieval primacy as a key determinant of
its use. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
& Cognition, 32(5), 983-1002.
Pohl, R. F. (2006). Empirical tests of the recognition heuristic.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 251-271.
Richter, T. & Späth, P. (2006). Recognition is used as one cue
among others in judgment and decision making. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 32,
150-162.
Snook, B. & Cullen, R. M. (2006). Recognizing National Hockey
League greatness with an ignorance-based heuristic. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 33-43.

1005

