UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Detecting and Resolving Informational Uncertainty in Complex Domains

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7kw1n9bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Schunn, Christian D.
Wong, Tsunhin
Manzoul, Waleed
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Detecting and Resolving Informational Uncertainty in Complex Domains
Christian D. Schunn (schunn@pitt.edu), Tsunhin Wong (tjw23@pitt.edu),
Waleed Manzoul (wam8@pitt.edu), Jamie Kamer (jrk17@pitt.edu)
LRDC, University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O’Hara St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Julie Harris (JHarris@Chatham.edu)
Department of Psychology, Chatham College
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

J. Greg Trafton (trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil), Susan B. Trickett (stricket@gmu.edu)
Naval Research Lab, Code 5515
Washington, DC 20375-5337 USA
Abstract

domains is primarily well-defined in the classic sense: the
start state is well understood, the set of typical operators are
well honed, and the goal state is usually clear (although
there may be more than one possible acceptable goal state).
And yet, even for experts, these domains included a very
high level of ambiguity. Problem solving in these domains
is more heuristic than algorithmic, even for experts.
A common feature across problem solving in all of these
domains that is an important source (and sometimes THE
important source) of ambiguity is informational uncertainty:
psychological uncertainty about the accuracy of information
about the current state of the world. That is, unlike in classic
well-defined problems, the information that defines the
current state is interpretable in many different ways, even by
experts. The sources of the informational ambiguity can
include physical factors (such as measurement error of a
device), computational factors (such as statistical artifacts of
smoothing or averaging algorithms), visual input factors
(such as graphical information displays including only some
of the relevant dimensions), and cognitive factors (such as
prior procedural errors or memory retrieval errors). In these
domains, a core element of expertise is being able to detect
states with high levels of informational uncertainty and
being able to resolve that informational uncertainty through
problem solving. Informational uncertainty is contrasted
with decision-making uncertainty, which adds uncertainty
about the consequences of following different choices.
In this paper, we explore in depth the particular indicators
of uncertainty that problem solvers tend use to detect
informational uncertainty and the particular strategies that
they tend use to resolve uncertainty. Is resolving uncertainty
primarily a mental reasoning task, using inductive and
deductive reasoning, as one believe from the focus of most
texts on higher-level cognition? If it is mental reasoning, is
the reasoning primarily verbal, or is spatial reasoning a core
component (Trafton et al., 2006)? Or is the problem solving
more heavily dependent upon external representations
(Hutchins, 1995), relying on epistemic markup of
visualizations (Kirsch & Maglio, 1994), and/or iterative
search through externally stored data?

A common feature of problem solving in real world complex
domains is detecting moments of high informational
uncertainty and trying to resolve this informational
uncertainty. Yet, relatively little is known about these
important aspects of real world cognition. Expert and novice
performance is contrasted for relative use of informational
uncertainty indicator strategies and problem solving strategies
across two very different complex domains: weather
forecasting and geoscience planning and data analysis. Strong
differences across domains were found for problem solving
but not indicator strategies. The differences between domains
were exaggerated in experts. Indicators strategies generally
appeared associated with spatial representations, whereas only
a few of the uncertainty problem solving strategies did so.
Keywords: Ill-defined problem
expertise; spatial reasoning

solving;

uncertainty;

Introduction
A well-worn path in cognitive science is the distinction
between well-defined and ill-defined problems (Newell &
Simon, 1972). And yet, a clear definition of "ill-defined"
remains an illusive anti-prototype definition: problems that
are NOT well-defined. Problems can be ill-defined in a
three classic ways: lacking a clear start, lacking a clear end,
and lacking a clear sense of allowable actions along the way
from start to goal. Yet, definitions by absence of features are
not very specific. Cognitive science of problem solving
could explore the endless variations of ways of NOT being
well-defined on each of those three dimensions. But to make
more rapid progress, one heuristic can be to turn to the
world around us, and explore what kinds of ill-defined tasks
regularly occur, to focus research attention on that range of
ill-defined tasks first.
We have been looking at experts in a variety of highly
ambiguous yet regularly solvable tasks: submariners trying
to localize another submarine with passive sonar, weather
forecasters making a weather forecast, scientists analyzing
data and planning experiments, and engineers designing
innovative new products (e.g., Trafton et al., 2006;
Christensen & Schunn, in press). For experts, each of these
1473

We use a mixture of verbal protocols and spatial gesture
analysis to examine whether the elements are primarily
involving verbal internal representations or spatial internal
representations. Although many complex domains have rich
visual-spatial external input, problem solvers can rerepresent information into a variety of forms. To understand
the nature of cognitive processing at a detailed level,
verbal/spatial is generally thought of as an important first
cut at unpacking processing.
We further use an expert/novice contrast to explore which
elements require more experience. One naïve assumption
might be that novices are just generally uncertain, and do
not have particular strategies for noting cases of
informational uncertainty. More likely is the possibility that
experts make more use of knowledge-rich methods of
detecting and resolving informational uncertainty. But it is
also possible that experts have discovered some domainspecific strategies (but not requiring much knowledge) for
resolving uncertainty that novices do not have at all, or do
not tend to use very often (Siegler, 1996).
Understanding problem solving in just one domain
requires a lot of effort. The result can be quite rich
descriptively, but the generality can also be suspect. Our
approach is to analyze data from two different domains. One
should not really think of this contrast between domains as a
single unconfounded variable contrast because any two
domains have many features that are different. Instead, the
two domains should be thought of as two cases for
exploring the generality of the obtained picture of problem
solving with informational uncertainty.

is high given that the participants have made such forecasts
in very similar locations many times before.

Participants
MER The participants were senior and junior scientists in
the domains of geology, geochemistry, soil science, and
atmospheric science. Some were employees of the Jet
Propulsion Lab, but others were visiting from various
universities and research centers for the duration of the
nominal 90-day mission. On any given day, approximately
20 scientists (divided into 5 thematic groups) worked on
analyzing data and planning the next day’s activities for a
given Rover. During the day, scientists attended three
planned full-group meetings, but primarily worked
informally in various subgroup sizes.
Expertise was coded into approximate expert/novice
categories on the basis of age appearance. Unlike some
other disciplines (e.g., education), researchers in this area
are rarely second career, and thus age is a reasonable proxy
of expertise here. Given the very large range (20s to 60s),
this coding was relatively easy to do. Those scientists in the
their 40s and older were considered experts, and those
scientists in the 30s and younger were considered novices.
METOC The 17 novice participants were 3rd and 4th year
weather forecasting students at a college that offered a
degree in weather forecasting. The 6 expert participants
were military weather forecasters each with over 10 years of
weather forecasting experience. Note that in both domains,
the expert groups are beyond the 10-year point associated
with high levels of expertise. Also note that in neither
domain are the novices uninformed initiates. Instead, the
novices understand the basics of the domain, have strong
identity with the domain, but simply have noticeably less
experience in the domain than the experts.

Methods
Domains
MER The first domain is remote planetary science.
Specifically, it involves data collected at JPL in Pasedena,
CA of scientists analyzing and planning during the first 90
days of the Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission, in
which two robots crawled around Mars on the basis of
commands sent daily, and sent back images and other
instrument data via satellite relay also on a daily basis. The
scientific goals of the mission roughly involved
characterizing the geology, geochemistry, and atmospheric
conditions now and in the past on Mars. In this domain, the
time pressure for resolving informational uncertainty is low
(can take months in some cases), and the overall strength of
prior expectations is low given that this level of detail of
data from another planet was not previously collected.
METOC The second domain is Meteorological and
Oceanographic forecasting (METOC). Specifically, it
involved weather forecasters making weather forecasts for a
particular point in time (typically 1 to 7 days in advance) at
a particular location (typically not the forecasters exact
location). In this domain, the time pressure for resolving
informational uncertainty is moderate (should be resolved in
an hour or so), and the overall strength of prior expectations

Data Collection
MER Video cameras were setup in various locations around
the room on a rotational basis, on tripods at a height of
approximate 2m, located slightly above 60in touch-screen
displays. The cameras were frequently in the space, and
were turned on before scientists entered the space in the
room according to a sampling schedule that covered early,
middle, and late days on the mission, producing
approximately 400 hours of video. Although the scientists
had signed informed consent forms and were generically
aware of the video recording, the location of the cameras
and their omnipresence in the space meant that participants
were generally unaware of the camera. Fourty snippets of 5
to 30 minutes of video were sampled to be coded on the
basis of: 1) two or more individuals having an informal
conversation about data analysis or mission planning; 2) the
conversation takes place on camera; and 3) no nearby
individuals were having another conversation that interfered
with the audio capture. The conversations were transcribed
verbatim and segmented at the level of complete thought,
producing 5878 segments of speech.

1474

METOC The participants were asked to produce weather
forecasts as they normally would, but while providing a
think aloud protocol (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). The
participants worked on a computer, accessing websites and
other weather products as they normally would, or using
equivalent printouts displayed on a wall—both modes are
common for weather forecasters. The camera was located
behind them, capturing work on the computer or with the
wall maps over the shoulder. The think-alouds were
transcribed verbatim and segmented at the level of complete
thought, producing 11,582 segments of speech.

Table 2: Taxonomy of problem solving strategies used by
participants to resolve informational uncertainty.
STRATEGY
DEFINITION
Mark uncertainty
Explicitly declaring a case
unresolvable for now
Check likely errors
Recheck steps for technology or
human error
Domain knowledge The use of domain-related
usage
knowledge to reason
Mental spatial
Reorienting / moving / molding
transformation
information mentally
Physical Spatial
Physical manipulation of real or
Transformation
computer objects
Detailed view /
Detailed examination of current or
more data
new data
Planning
All future-oriented outlines of
(non-immediate) actions, whether
they are definite, entertained, or
conditional
Focus on reliability Use a source among multiple
of sources
inconsistent sources—must give
explicit reasoning for picking one
source over another.
Discount data
Declare data as unreliable or
problematic—must give a reason
Adjust for known
Adjust current image for general
deviations
deviation/irregularity
Average across
Take the middle value between
sources
two or more data sources
Bound uncertainty
Declare that an instance of
uncertainty is within a finite range
in scale or within a finite set of
possibilities
Unsupported
Resolution made but no reason
resolution
given

Coding Details
From the verbal data, significant moments of uncertainty
were found. These significant moments were defined as
moments during which the problem solver explicitly
expressed some uncertainty about current information and
proceeded to do some external, mental, or social problem
solving to resolve it. This coding also noted when the
moment began, ended, and when the problem solver
digressed off-topic (those segments were excluded). A
primary indicator was coded for each significant moment
(i.e., what led to the detection of that bit of uncertainty?).
Each problem-solving step was separately coded for
problem solving strategy, because problem solving in a
significant moment typically involved many different
strategies to obtain resolution. There were 31 such moments
in MER and 82 in METOC.
Indicator Taxonomy Four indicators of informational
uncertainty were created in a bottom-up fashion from the
data. They are listed in Table 1.
Table 1: Taxonomy of indicators used by participants to
detect informational uncertainty.
Indicator
Definition
No Pattern
Speaker claims that they do not see a
pattern — no possible alternatives are
given.
Ambiguous
Speaker is unable to distinguish which
Pattern
pattern is present; particular alternatives
are listed
Atypical
Speaker claims that pattern present is not
Pattern
the normal pattern for a particular
situation
Inconsistent
Speaker claims that data from two
Pattern
different sources are contradictory

Spatial Gesture Coding In the METOC case, it was
impossible to observe participants’ gestures given the
location of the camera and the restricting effect of
interacting heavily with the computer. However, gestures in
the MER domain occurred frequently and were generally
visible to the camera. These gestures were coded for spatial
content, using a coding scheme developed and validated
elsewhere (Schunn et al, 2007). In brief, the scheme
removes non-spatial or ambiguously-spatial gestures such as
beating, deictic (pointing to an object), iconic (hands
represent a categorical physical object), and metaphorical
(hands use space to represent a non-spatial quantity like
time) gestures. The spatial gestures are coded for the broad
spatial nature, specifically whether they are 2D displaybased gestures, small 3D gestures, or large 3D gestures. In
this context, the great majority of gestures were small 3D
gestures, and thus we simply examine whether a spatial
gesture occurred or not.
Reliability All coders were trained to criterion for each
coding dimension. Two separate coders exhaustively coded

Uncertainty Problem Solving Taxonomy Thirteen codes
were developed in an iterative, bottom-up fashion from the
data to reflect the problem solving steps used by participants
to address informational uncertainty, as well as our ability to
reliably code distinctions. Participants would frequently use
several strategies in resolving a given moment of
uncertainty. The strategies listed below planning are ones
more tightly associated with the final resolution of the
uncertainty, whereas the ones above tend to occur earlier
during the problem solving.
1475

all data on all dimensions, and all discrepancies between
coders were resolved through discussion. All dimensions
had at least moderate Cohen’s Kappas (i.e., K>.4) for
interrater reliability. It was to increase the effective
reliability that each segment was double-coded.
Analyses We use X2 tests of independence between various
dimensions to measure the degree of associate between
variables (e.g., group and strategy), collapsing data across
individuals, and dropping rows with expected cell values
below 5. The significant moments do not occur often
enough per individual to establish reliable measures at the
per individual level. However, we have examined the data at
the individual level to make sure the phenomena are not
driven by the behavior of just a few participants. All figures
include SE bars to provide an approximate sense of which
pair-wise differences are statistically significant.

each strategy was used, at least over the range of expertise
examined here.

Results
Indicators of Informational Uncertainty
What indicators were commonly used in each of the two
domains? Figure 1 shows that: 1) all strategies were used in
both domains, 2) No Pattern is rarely used to identify
significant moments of uncertainty, and 3) that the two
contexts had considerable variability in strategy use,
X2(2)=8.84, p<.02. In the highly novel situation with a slow
data acquisition rate, ambiguity of information was the most
common source. In the more common situation with high
data acquisition from multiple sources, inconsistent
information was the most common source.

Figure 2: Expert/Novice relative use of informational
uncertainty indicator strategies within each domain.
To understand the role of spatial mental representations in
uncertainty detection, we examined the percentage of
indicator segments overlapped with spatial gestures in the
MER domain. Overall, indicator segments contained spatial
gestures (of any kind, although almost exclusively small, 3d
gestures) 26% of the time, well above the overall rate 11%
at which speech segments had spatial gestures (p<.01).
Moreover, the three regularly occurring indicators all had
approximately equally high rates of co-occurring spatial
gestures (varying between 20% to 33%).
Figure 1: Indicator strategy use by domain.

Problem Solving Strategies
Overall, all strategies did occur in the data. The most
common strategies were: More data, Domain knowledge
usage, Adjust for known deviations, Planning, Mental
spatial transformation, and Focus on reliability of sources.
Several strategies were used rarely (in less than 3% of
problem solving steps): Bound uncertainty, Average across
sources, Check likely errors, Discount data, Mark
uncertainty, Physical Spatial Transformation.

Figure 2 show expert/novice differences in the reliance on
particular uncertainty indicators within each domain. In both
domains, the distribution of indicator use between experts
and novices was quite similar (within the statistical
resolution of the data). In other words, expertise did not
influence how uncertainty was detected, either at the level
of which strategies were used at all, or roughly how often

1476

The relative use of all of the more common strategies did
differ by domain, X2(5)= 218.23, p<.0001. Figure 3 shows
the frequency of problem solving strategy use in each
domain for the six most common strategies. In METOC,
there was relatively more use of examining additional data,
adjusting for known deviations, using mental spatial
transformations, and focusing on the reliability of sources.
By contrast, in MER, there was relatively more use of
domain knowledge and planning. While the differences
might reflect the individual vs. group nature of the data
collection
methods,
the
differences
are
easily
understandable in terms of the nature of the two domains. In
METOC, many different data sources for a given problem
exist (e.g., different weather models, close time points,
related dimensions), making for easy examination of
additional data and allowing for the heuristic of using
reliability of different sources. In MER, data trickles in at a
slower rate, and thus working from first-principles domain
knowledge and planning additional data collection are more
relevant operators for resolving informational uncertainty.

Figure 4: Expert/Novice relative use of uncertainty problem
solving strategies in each domain.
While the common indicator strategies all had a clear
spatial component, the common problem solving strategies
varied significantly in terms of apparent degree of use of
spatial representations. Of the five strategies that occurred
often enough in the MER domain to assess degree of spatial
representations (collapsing across expertise levels), only two
strategies had spatial gestures significantly above the 18%
of segments base rate overall during significant uncertain
moments:
mental
spatial
transformations
(70%,
X2(1)=16.12, p<.001) and planning (33%, X2(1)=4.71,
p<.05). The other strategies co-occurred with spatial
gestures somewhat below the overall base-rate: Bound
Uncertainty (8%), More data (15%), and Domain
knowledge usage (15%).

Figure 3: Relative frequency of the most common
uncertainty problem solving strategies by domain.
Within each domain, there were also small but
statistically significant effects of expertise levels (see Figure
4). In the MER domain (X2(3)=10.12, p<.02), the experts do
more bounding of uncertainty and less planning. In the
METOC domain (X2(3)=17.07, p<.001), experts make more
use of domain knowledge and mental spatial
transformations, but do less examining of additional data.
Of the six common strategies that differed in use across
domains, it is interesting that 1) four of them also had
expert/novice differences, and 2) the direction of difference
is for experts across domains to differ more from one
another than do novices. In other words, with practice in a
domain, experts come to learn which general problem
solving strategies are particularly useful in that domain
(Lemaire & Siegler, 1995; Schunn, McGregor, & Saner,
2006).

General Discussion
What is the nature of problem solving in complex domains?
In this paper, we have focused on one element that
contributes to the complexity of problem solving:
informational uncertainty. Rather than focusing on
traditional distinctions among cognitive processes (e.g.,
analogies, spatial reasoning, categorization, deductive
reasoning, etc.), we take a strategies perspective (Siegler,
1996)—people solve tasks using a large variety of different
strategies that are a rich interplay of more basic cognitive
elements, and that choices in behavior and learning takes
place at the level of these strategies.

Becoming Uncertain
We highlight four different strategies used by experts and
novices in two different domains to identify significant
1477

elements of uncertainty. The relative use these indicator
strategies differed significantly across domains, likely
reflecting the relative abundance of information provided—
multiple sources likely inflates the use of inconsistency and
novelty the occurrence of ambiguity.
The relative use of these indicator strategies did not differ
significantly by expertise levels. However, the statistical
power of the expertise contrasts for indicator strategies was
not high. If the trends that were observed are to be believed,
they are consistent with the notion that experts more
strongly use the strategies that are particularly useful in a
given domain.
Interestingly, the three most common strategies were
significantly associated with spatial representations. The
degree of association was above base-rates, but far from
100%. Measuring spatial representations using spatial
gestures may result in an undercount of the level of spatial
representation. However, level of spatial gestures for the
indicator strategies was well below the highest level of
spatial gesturing in one of the problem solving strategies,
and thus is not likely just a conservative measure issue.
More likely is that these indicators are not exclusively
spatial, but rather a rich mixture of spatial and verbal
reasoning. A related caveat is the spatial gestures may
reflect communicative functions of gesture rather than
purely a mirror of internal representation (McNeil, 1992).
But this caveat simply reflects the general indirect nature of
measures of internal representations.

resolution problem solving suggests a more nuanced
picture: spatial reasoning is certainly an element, but it
appears to be just one tool among many, and that several of
these other strategies appear not to be especially spatial in
nature. But not all of the observed strategies occurred often
enough to determine their spatial/verbal status, and future
work should examine those strategies in detail.
Finally, the current work has examined just two different
domains. Future work should examine a broader array of
domains to understand what general features of domains
influence the choice of uncertainty indicator and uncertainty
problem solving strategies.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this work was provided by a grant from ONR to
CDS and JGT, and a grant from NASA to CDS.

References
Christensen, B. T., & Schunn, C. D. (2007). The
relationship of analogical distance to analogical function
and pre-inventive structure: The case of engineering
design. Memory & Cognition 35(1), 29-38.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kirsch, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing
epistemic from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science,
18(5), 513-549.
Lemaire, P., & Siegler, R. S. (1995). Four aspects of
strategic change: Contributions to children's learning of
multiplication. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 124, 83-97.
McNeil, D. (1992). Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal
About Thought. University of Chicago Press.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Schunn, C. D., McGregor, M., Saner, L. D. (2006).
Expertise in ill-defined problem solving domains as
effective strategy use. Memory & Cognition, 33(8), 13771387.
Schunn, C. D., Saner, L. D., Kirschenbaum, S. K., Trafton,
J. G., & Littleton, E. B. (2007). Complex visual data
analysis, uncertainty, and representation. In M. C. Lovett
& P. Shah (Eds.), Thinking with Data. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Siegler, R. S. (1996). Emerging minds: The process of
change in children's thinking. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Trafton, J. G., Trickett, S. B., Stitzlein, C. A., Saner, L. D.,
Schunn, C. D., & Kirschenbaum, S. S. (2006). The
relationship between spatial transformations and iconic
gestures. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 6(1), 1-29.

Becoming Certain
How do problem solvers resolve informational uncertainty?
Our analyses suggest that in complex real world settings,
problem solvers use a rich array of strategies rather than any
particular basic cognitive tool, like induction, deduction,
analogy, categorization, or spatial reasoning. The same set
of strategies applies across very different domains, although,
again, the distribution of strategy use varies significantly by
domain. While the number of variables that differ across the
two domains observed here are much too great to
convincingly argue for any particular factors underlying the
differences in strategy base-rates by domain, we provide one
possible explanation: the relative density of additional
information to explore immediately. When the information
is dense, one can spend considerable time exploring it for
converging evidence, or use heuristics that focus on
particular sources or average (mentally) across sources.
When information is less dense, one must make guess based
on domain knowledge or plan for additional data collection.
Interestingly, the domain differences were exaggerated
among experts (versus novices), suggesting a functional
rather than coincidental difference by domain.
Some of our previous research in these domains heavily
emphasized the role of spatial reasoning in resolving
uncertainty. Indeed, we found that spatial reasoning goes up
immediately following even minor moments of uncertainty
(Schunn et al, 2007), especially in experts (Trafton et al.,
2006). The current, more complete analysis of uncertainty
1478

