UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Diagnostic Visual Information in the Use of Microscopes in Histology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0wt6c0gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Pani, John R.
Chariker, Julia H.
Claudio, Natalie M.
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Diagnostic Visual Information in the Use of Microscopes in Histology
John R. Pani (jrpani@louisville.edu)1

Julia H. Chariker (julia.chariker@louisville.edu)1

Natalie M. Claudio (natalie.claudio@louisville.edu)1
1

Ronald D. Fell (rfell@louisville.edu)2

2

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Department of Biology, University of Louisville
Louisville, KY 40292 USA
Abstract

The science of histology depends on the skilled use of microscopes. Visual cognition in the use of microscopes is sometimes a matter of immediate recognition and very often a matter of extensive exploration and hypothesis testing. In every
case, there are fundamental questions about how visual information is used to drive cognition. In an experiment that varied
the visual information available to students of histology, nearly
any sample of tissue provided access to the part-whole hierarchy and taxonomies learned in the science. How specific the
recognition was, depended on the uniqueness of the morphology. The precise manner in which information accumulated
for complete recognition of a tissue varied from tissue to tissue.

many individual structures both one to many and many to one
(see Pani et al., 2005). As a consequence of this challenging
mapping between domains, hypothesis testing becomes a fundamental part of the practice of microscopy.

Keywords: medical imaging; visual cognition; visual search;
microscopy; perception; reasoning; scientific reasoning; education.

Visual Information in a Real World Domain
The science of histology is the study of the microanatomy of
biological tissue. It is a fundamental biological science and
forms the basis for the medical discipline of pathology (e.g.,
Ross, Kaye, & Pawlina, 2003). Histology is practiced in
large part through studying tissues in microscopes. Thus,
visuocognitive skill is at the center of mastering a complex
scientific domain (e.g., Crowley, Naus, Stewart, & Friedman, 2003; Pani, Chariker, & Fell, 2005; Pani, Chariker,
Claudio, & Fell, 2006). This paper reports a part of our effort to understand visuocognitive skill in such an advanced
discipline and complex domain.
Use of a microscope very often includes extended exploration of the microscope slide. Magnification is changed
often, and the position of the slide under the microscope is
systematically manipulated for purposes of exploration (consider also Hoffman, 1984; Kundel, 2000; Kundel, Nodine,
& Carmody, 1979; Lesgold, Rubinson, Feltovich, Glaser,
Kopfer, & Wang, 1988). One reason for this exploration is
that microscopy in histology is quite often very challenging
(Crowley et al., 2003; Pani et al., 2005, Pani et al., 2006).
The domain of histology is complex, and the use of thin
slices sampled from the interior of a tissue, as illustrated in
Figure 1, creates many problems for visual recognition.
A useful formulation of the task in microscopy is to consider it to be a visual information system in which there is a
target domain of structure, microanatomy in this case, and an
information domain of visual structure, here the microscope
slides, that is used to gain information about the target domain. It appears to be a particular problem in histology that
the mapping from whole tissue in the target domain to the
thin microscope sections in the information domain is for

Figure 1. Air passages and air sacs from the lung
viewed through a standard light microscope.
An understanding of visuocognitive skill in microscopy
requires knowing how practitioners use visual information in
the slides to recognize tissues (consider also Oliva & Schyns,
1997; Schyns, Goldstone, & Thibault, 1998). For example,
and in the simplest terms, what information in the slides permits immediate recognition? Perhaps more importantly, when
partial recognition drives hypothesis testing and exploration,
what visual information is recognized, and what is the character of the knowledge that is activated?
A pursuit of these questions requires a specific formulation of the mapping between target and information domains
in histological microscopy. Systematic naturalistic studies
have provided a good starting point for this (Crowley et al,
2003; Pani et al., 2005). In the target domain of microanatomy, there are several well established taxonomies. For example, there is a well articulated taxonomy of glandular structures. We have found, however, that taxonomies are not the
primary basis for discourse when practicing microscopy. The
major organization of knowledge is in terms of part-whole
hierarchies. Thus, for example, the digestive system has several organs, each organ has critical parts, and each of those

1373

parts has a complex morphology down to the level of individual cells and their parts and properties.
In the information domain, visual structure in microscopy is rarely described in visual terms. One rarely hears
uniquely visual descriptors, such as "speckled", and one is
unlikely to hear a phrase such as "bits of tubular structure."
Rather, visual structure is described in terms of the target
domain entities sampled by the slide and implied by the view
of it. The bits of tubular structure might lead to a phrase
such as, "this appears to be a glandular duct." Such a bias
toward target domain semantics is similar to the human response to language. Language use aims at building a representation of semantics and quickly moves beyond an explicit
consideration of phonology and syntax.

A second set of questions concerned the manner in which
visual information accumulates to provide complete access to
the target domain. There are several basic options for how
information might accumulate, and it seemed of fundamental
interest to investigate this question here. Thus:
--Are single structures ever fully diagnostic of the tissue
from which they were sampled? If so, is this common?
--As types of structure sampled from a tissue are increased in number, does visual diagnosticity increase
also?
--Does visual diagnosticity appear only with (or increase
suddenly with) particular combinations of structures?
--Is there a consistent pattern of information use across
tissues, or does it vary from tissue to tissue?

Questions about the Use of Visual Information
Although a study of discourse during the natural use of microscopes can reveal a great deal about visuocognitive skill, a
full understanding of the mapping between visual information and the semantics of the target domain requires experimental studies that move beyond the display of whole microscope slides. Visual information must be systematically varied and the effects on recognition of microanatomy assessed.
There are numerous ways to analyze and vary visual
structure in order to assess the information value of its components. As a first step in the study of microscopy, we analyzed visual information in microscope slides in terms of the
structures that histologists refer to when they describe the
slides: the various anatomical parts revealed in the tissue
(e.g., Pani et al., 2005). Thus, when showing slide information for the pancreas, the pancreatic acini, islets of Langerhans, and exocrine ducts were each shown alone, in pairs,
and with all three together. By comparing what is known
from each of these presentations, a variety of basic questions
about the mapping between target and information domains
can be answered.
In an experiment to be described briefly here, several research questions were addressed for the various anatomical
structures that compose each basic tissue in the histology
curriculum. Perhaps the most basic questions pertained to
the semantics of the visual structure when it is presented in
terms of individual structures or small combinations of them.
In particular:
--If students cannot provide a specific identification of a
tissue, do they nonetheless correctly identify a higher
taxonomic category (e.g., “gland”) or more inclusive
anatomical system (e.g., “digestive system”)?
--If students misidentify a tissue, will it be for a tissue
within the same higher-level category or anatomical system?
If these forms of partial recognition take place, it suggests that there is a dense mapping between components of
visual structure and components of microanatomical knowledge, as well as an opportunistic use of visual structure to
optimize access to the semantics of microanatomy.

--If students correctly identify tissues, do they also identify structures, consistent with the idea that recognition of
component structures is used to infer the identity of the
whole tissue?
Finally, there were several questions that arose from taking a cognitive science perspective in a domain of pre-existing
professional expertise:
--How well does the use of information in recognizing
microscope slides fit with the histologist’s concept of diagnosticity?
--Do students use subtle morphological differences for
identification that histologists view dismiss as nondiagnostic?

Visual Recognition of Histological Structures
To address these questions, an experiment was conducted in
which samples of tissue from microscope slides were shown
to college students who had nearly completed the undergraduate course in histology. All possible combinations of single
structures, pairs of structures, and higher level groups of structures from each basic tissue were shown. For example, the set
of slides shown for pancreas is illustrated in Figure 2. Centroacinar cells were included in this case because this is a very
small and hard-to-find structure that students are taught to
recognize. A global low power slide also was included to see
how a global overview compares with a more detailed view of
the anatomical parts. The students were asked to identify the
tissue as specifically as they could, but not to guess. After
identifying the tissue, they were to identify any anatomical
parts that they could.

Participants
Forty-two undergraduate students from the undergraduate
college course in histology participated in a single session that
lasted one and one-half hours. Nearly all of the students
were biology majors, and most of them were in the premedical or pre-dental curriculum. All of the students (that
were in the sample of 42 described here) received a grade of

1374

Low Power

Pancreas
Acini Duct,
Islet

Acini, Duct

Acini

Acini, Islet

Duct

A, B, or C in the course. The experiment was conducted at
the end of the semester, shortly before final examinations.

Method
Duct, Islet

Islet

Centroacinar

Figure 2. Illustration of the views of the
pancreas shown in the experiment.

Materials. Digital images of micrsocope slides were captured with a high resolution digital camera and stitched together with image processing software. Hundreds of images
of histological structures and their combinations were prepared, and then prototypical/canonical views of them were
selected for use in the experiment by the instructor of the histology course.
The images were standardized such that when projected to
an overhead screen, global views of the tissue simulated a 4X
magnification, and views of single structures and combinations of structures simulated a 20X magnification. The

Figure 3. Examples of images presented to students in the experiment. All images show tissue from the
pancreas. Beginning in the upper left, the images show the islets of Langerhans, the pancreatic acini, the
islet and the acini together, and the islet, acini, and interlobular ducts together.

1375

images were adjusted for brightness, contrast, and color so as
to be the best possible natural views of the tissues.
Images were prepared for nearly all basic tissues that
were covered in the histology course at the level of gland or
organ. These were 18 different tissues/organs, including
adrenal gland, colon, duodenum, esophagus, ileum, kidney,
liver, lung, pancreas, parotid gland, pituitary gland, spleen,
stomach, sublingual gland, thymus, thyroid, tonsil, and trachea.
The images showed the basic individual structures that
compose each tissue and all possible combinations of those
structures. When a structure naturally occurred next to, or
was embedded within, another structure that it was combined
with in the image, the image preserved that relationship.
When combinations of structures not normally next to each
other were displayed together, they were placed in separate
boxes and shown side by side. The selective display of structures often required using image editing software to cover
adjoining structures with gray, as illustrated in Figure 3.
Invariant details of the context of a structure were left in
the slides when they were not part of a structure that would
be selectively displayed in an alternative image. For example, if a duct is normally surrounded by connective tissue, the
connective tissue was left in the image. Similarly, the glomerulus of the kidney typically is surrounded by a structure
called Bowman’s capsule, and this was shown in all images
of glomeruli. No image of a structure or combination of
structures was repeated.
Procedure. The images were projected to a large screen at
the front of a standard classroom. They were presented with
a projector mounted on the ceiling and controlled by a computer using Microsoft Powerpoint presentation software.
Each slide was displayed for 40 seconds. To minimize bias
from previous presentations, single structures were shown
first, in random order, then combinations of two structures,
and so on.
The students were asked to identify the tissue/organ
from which the tissue shown in the slide was sampled, and
then to identify the specific structure(s) that was shown in
the slide. They were told to be as specific as possible, but to
give a general answer if that was the best they could do.
Multiple hypotheses were permitted, but they were not to
guess.
Each student was given a packet to write down their answers. Each slide had its own section with separate lines for
tissue and structure identification as well as a small black and
white thumbnail of the image. Testing was done during the
student’s lab portion of the histology course. The experiment
lasted for a total of one and half hours.

Results and Discussion
In regard to the basic questions about the semantics of visual
structure when it is presented in terms of individual structures, or small combinations of them, it was clear that there is
a dense and opportunistic mapping from visual structure to
the semantics of the target domain:

-- If students don’t recognize specific tissues do they identify
tissues at a higher taxonomic category or in a larger anatomical system?
This is very common and is characteristic of the students’
responses to the images. In the duodenum, for example, a
slide showing muscle layers and intestinal villi led to identification of duodenum 0% of the time. However, participants
knew the slide was from the small intestine 74% of the time.
A slide of intestinal glands, villi, and Brunners glands led to
identification of duodenum at a much higher rate: 60% of the
participants could identify duodenum from the slide. An additional 33% of the participants knew that it was from the small
intestine (93% total). Across 11 slides tested for identification
of duodenum, identification was near 100% if higher level
categories of small intestine, intestinal tract, and digestive
system were counted as correct identifications.
The higher level identifications of tissue were sometimes
at higher levels in a categorical taxonomy (e.g., submaxillary
gland, salivary gland, gland). Much more often, however, the
higher level terms were from a part-whole hierarchy (duodenum, small intestine, intestinal tract, digestive system). Once
again, part-whole hierarchies organized around the system
level (e.g., respiratory system) appear to be the primary form
of organization for histological knowledge.
-- When students misidentify tissues, do they name tissues
within the same anatomical category or system?
Just as students commonly resort to higher level descriptions, misidentification of a tissue for a different one that is
within the same relatively narrow category or system is very
common. For example, while 38% of the students could identify a sublingual gland from an image of glandular acini and
the associated exocrine ducts, an additional 48% of the students misidentified it as a different salivary gland.
On the other hand, it is also common to see misidentifications based on visual features that are not due to common
anatomy or physiology. For example, glomerular capsules of
the kidney and islets of Langerhans from the pancreas are
similar primarily in their both being small and round. Islets of
Langerhans quite often led to a misidentification of kidney
(38% of the time, compared with 36% correct identification of
pancreas). Histologists refer to this phenomenon as the problem of “lookalikes”.
Regarding the manner in which visual information accumulates to provide complete access to the target domain,
every major option was observed for at least some tissues:
-- Do students ever identify tissues from seeing single structures?
The students did this quite often, although it was a small
proportion of correct identifications overall. Table 1 shows
the frequency of identification for several structures that might
have been thought to be individually diagnostic of their larger
tissues. Some single structures, such as the islets of Langerhans, are not individually diagnostic, even though they are
described in those terms in histology texts.

1376

Alveoli (from Lung)…………………
Pars Distalis (from Pituitary)………..
Islets of Langerhans (from Pancreas)..
Brunner’s glands (from Duodenum)...

98%
52%
36%
17%

Table 1. Percentage identification of selected tissues from a single structure.
-- As structures are increased in number, does visual diagnosticity increase also?
This is quite a common pattern. Consider a measure of
diagnosticity that was constructed for these data. If a slide
was identified at the level targeted by the curriculum, the
response was given a score value of 1.0. All other responses
were recoded to the most specific structure or category in the
body that would make the response correct. For example, if
a participant misidentified a parotid gland as a salivary gland,
the most specific category that would make the response correct would be gland. Thus, the least accurate responses could
only be scored as “in the body”. These responses were given
a value of 5.0. Intermediate levels of specificity were assigned score values interpolated evenly between 1.0 and 5.0.
Figure 4 shows the mean scores for the various images of the
liver. Clearly some individual structures are more diagnostic
than others, but it is equally clear that diagnosticity increases
as more structures are added.

esophagus 7% of the time. The muscularis mucosa led to
identification 2% of the time. The epithelium together with
the mucosa led to identification of esophagus 57% of the time.
-- Is there a general pattern of information use across tissues,
or does it vary from tissue to tissue?
The specific manner in which visual information is used
varies from tissue to tissue. While kidney and lung are easily
identified from single structures, pancreas and liver depend on
combinations of structures that are increasingly diagnostic as
more are added. The morphological variation that allows
unique identification does not replicate across tissues.
-- If students correctly identified tissues, do they also identify
structures in them?
This is typical but not necessary. Thus, for example, of
the 98% of the students who could identify lung from a view
of the pulmonary acini, 85% of them went on to list the acini
as the structure. On the other hand, 52% of the students identified the pituitary gland from a view of the pars distalis, but
only 31% of those students went on to name the distalis.
Thus, there is evidence consistent with the idea that tissue
identification often is inferred from recognition of anatomical
parts, but this does not appear to be necessary.
For the questions that arose from taking a cognitive science perspective in a domain of pre-existing professional expertise:
-- How well does psychological diagnosticity in perception
map to the histological use of the term “diagnostic”?

Figure 4. Variation in diagnosticity for different
views of the liver. C is central vein, T is hepatic
triad, and H is hepatocytes. Circles show images
that were not statistically different from each other
(Fischer’s LSD).
-- Are certain combinations of structures substantially more
diagnostic than would be predicted by the diagnosticity of the
individual structures alone.?
This was evident in several instances, although again it
was not ubiquitous. As one example, stratified squamous
epithelium from the esophagus led to identification of

Overall, not well. Islets of Langerhans, for example,
must be seen in the context of surrounding acini to be highly
diagnostic. And ducts in the kidney are highly diagnostic
visually, although they are not generally described as being
diagnostic by histologists.
The histologists’ use of the term “diagnostic” refers to the
objective nature of the anatomy. Islets of Langerhans are specific to the pancreas, and ducts are not specific to the kidney.
It is now clear that the objective uniqueness predicts rather
poorly the perceptual diagnosticity. Although ducts are not
specific to the kidney, the students will tell you that, “Nothing
else looks like that.”
It is important to consider that in educational settings, the
perceptual diagnositicity introduced by the cognitive scientist
is equally as important as the objective description of the tissue that is favored in biology.
-- Do students use subtle morphological differences for
identification that histologists consider nondiagnostic?
In general the answer is no. Table 2 shows percentage
identification of tissues from seeing ducts characteristic of
those tissues. The interlobular ducts from the pancreas, for
example, led to identification of pancreas 0% of the time.

1377

Table 2. Frequency of identifying tissue
from seeing images of their ducts.
Pancreas
Parotid
Sublingual
Kidney

0%
2%
0%
90%

On the other hand, and as noted earlier, ducts from the
kidney led to identification of kidney 90% of the time. Use
of morphological variation among essentially similar structures appears to require very salient and consistent morphological characteristics. As shown in Figure 5, ducts in the
kidney form a very salient pattern. This pattern occurs in
nearly any slide from the kidney.

Figure 5. Collecting ducts from the kidney. Such
compacted ducts are characteristic of the kidney and
are nearly always recognized.

Conclusion
Graduates of a college course in histology have a well articulated model of anatomy that is composed of an extensive
part-whole hierarchy in conjunction with certain categorical
taxonomies. This knowledge is applied readily to visual perception of samples of tissue, such that nearly any structure
that can be shown takes the student to an appropriate place in
this well articulated knowledge system.
Students who have learned histology have found unique
visual structures in microscope slides that map to their
knowledge of anatomy at every level. A variety of patterns
in the use of visual information develop as part of the effort
to find the unique structures that provide full recognition of
specific tissues. In some cases, single structures are diagnostic. In other cases, the larger the set of structures that are
seen, the more specific is the recognition that follows. Finally, there are cases where only particular combinations of
structures are effective for specific recognition.
The nature of this use of visual information is not predicted well by the biological description of the domain. Cur-

riculum design will be well informed by the cognitive assessment of visual diagnosticity.

Acknowledgment
The authors were supported by grant 1 R01 LM008323-01A1,
Histological Reasoning: Visual Cognition in Microanatomy,
from the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of
Health, during completion of this work and preparation of this
manuscript. The second and third authors received support
from the Grawemeyer Awards during conduct of this research.

References
Chariker, J. H., Pani, J. R., & Fell, R. D. (2004). Visual cognition in
microanatomy. Talk presented at the annual meeting of the Psychonomics Society. Minneapolis, MN. Abstract in Abstracts of the
Psychonomic Society, 9, 8. Austin, TX: Psychonomic Society Publications.
Crowley, R. S., Naus, G. J., Stewart, J., & Friedman, C. P. (2003).
Development of visual diagnostic expertise in pathology: An information processing study. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 10, 39-51.
Hoffman, R. R. (1984). Methodological preliminaries to the development of an expert system for aerial-photo interpretation. (Technical Report, ETL-0342). The Engineer Topographic Laboratories.
Kundel, H. L. (2000). Disease prevalence and the index of detectability: a survey of studies of lung cancer detection by chest radiography. In E. A. Krupinski (Ed.), Medical imaging 2000: Image perception and performance. Proceedings of the International Society
of Optical Engineering, 3981, 135-144.
Kundel, H. L., Nodine, C. F., & Carmody, D. (1979). Visual scanning, pattern recognition and decision-making in pulmonary nodule detection. Investigative Radiology, 13, 175-181.
Lesgold, A. M., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R., Klopfer, D.,
& Wang, Y. (1988). Expertise in a complex skill: diagnosing xray pictures. In M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, & M. J. Farr (Eds.), The
nature of expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oliva, A. & Schyns, P.G. (1997). Coarse blobs or fine edges?
Evidence that information diagnosticity changes the perception of
complex visual stimuli. Cognitive Psychology, 34, 72-107.
Pani, J. R., Chariker, J. H., & Fell, R. D. (2005). Visual cognition in
microscopy. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.),
Cogsci 2005: Proceedings of the XXVII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 27, 1702-1707. Cognitive Science Society.
Pani, J. R., Chariker, J. H., Claudio, N. M., & Fell, R. D. (2006).
Visual search in microscopy implies high-level cognition. In R.
Sun (Ed.), Cogsci 2006: Proceedings of the XXVIII Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 28, 1920-1925. Cognitive
Science Society
Ross, M. H., Kaye, G. I., & Pawlina, W. (2003). Histology: A text
and atlas (4th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Schyns, P. G., Goldstone, R. L., & Thibault, J-P. (1998). The development of object features in object concepts. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21, 1-54.

1378

