UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distinguishing Between Perceptual and Decisional Sources of Holism in Face Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1v57v4bf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Richler, Jennifer J.
Mack, Micheal L.
Gauthier, Isabel
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Distinguishing Between Perceptual and Decisional Sources of
Holism in Face Processing
Jennifer J. Richler (jennifer.j.richler@vanderbilt.edu)
Psychology Department, 301 Wilson Hall
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Michael L. Mack (michael.mack@vanderbilt.edu)
Psychology Department, 301 Wilson Hall
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Isabel Gauthier (isabel.gauthier@vanderbilt.edu)
Psychology Department, 301 Wilson Hall
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Thomas J. Palmeri (thomas.j.palmeri@vanderbilt.edu)
Psychology Department, 301 Wilson Hall
Nashville, TN 37203 USA
The purpose of this paper is to 1) explore how one
behavioral measure of holism, the congruency effect, relates
to either perceptual or decisional loci of holistic effects as
defined within General Recognition Theory (GRT; Ashby &
Townsend, 1986), and 2) determine whether one current
model of face recognition, one that gives rise to congruency
effects similar to those seen in humans, localizes holism as
either perceptual or decisional using GRT measurement
tools. Results will be related to recent human data that
measures holistic processing both in terms of the
congruency effect and in terms of GRT constructs.

Abstract
Face recognition is thought to rely on holistic processing,
where the entire face is processed as a single unitary object.
The nature of this holism is often assumed to be perceptual,
however recent work applying the General Recognition
Theory (GRT) framework suggests that holistic processing of
faces may arise from decisional factors. Using Monte Carlo
simulations, we examined how known violations of GRT
constructs relate to a behavioral measure of holism, the
congruency effect, and found that both perceptual and
decisional sources of holistic processing can give rise to
significant congruency effects. We then explored whether a
well-known model of face recognition, one that reproduces
the congruency effect, would also reproduce the pattern of
GRT results seen in human participants. Surprisingly, like
humans, the model showed a consistent decisional locus of
holistic processing. This was surprising because there is no
explicit decisional component in the model that could give
rise to this finding. This suggests that either the model
contains some kind of implicit decisional component, or
alternatively that there may problems with the techniques
used to measure decisional versus perceptual holism from the
perspective of GRT.

Behavioral Measure of Holism:
The Congruency Effect

Keywords: holistic processing; face recognition

Introduction
A key characteristic of face perception which sets it apart
from regular object perception is that faces are said to be
processed holistically. That is, the features which make up a
face are not treated as independent parts, but rather the eyes,
nose and mouth are fused together and treated as a whole.
Typically, holistic processing of faces has been attributed to
holism within the perceptual representation (e.g., Young,
Hellawell & Hay, 1987; Hole, 1994), a perceptual fusion of
the face parts during recognition, however it is also possible
that important holistic effects may arise because of a form
of holism within a decisional process (Wenger & Ingvalson
2002, 2003).

Holism in face recognition has been measured behaviorally
using a composite face task. This sequential matching task
uses composite faces that are created by combining the top
half of one face with the bottom half of another face.
Participants study one composite face and then are tested on
a second composite face after a brief delay. In one version
of this paradigm, participants judge whether the top or
bottom of a test face is the same or different as the study
face; the cued part can be the same or different, and the
irrelevant part can also be the same or different. Congruent
trials are those in which the top and bottom are both the
same or both different whereas incongruent trials are those
in which one part is the same and the other part is different.
Holism is inferred by a congruency effect, which is defined
as better performance (measured in terms of d’) on
congruent vs. incongruent trials. Significant congruency
effects are seen with faces but not common objects. Even
though participants are instructed to ignore the irrelevant
part, it still affects their performance. One explanation of
these results is that the irrelevant part cannot be ignored
because the face is processed as a unitary perceptual whole
(Farah, Wilson, Drain & Tanaka, 1998; Gauthier, Curran,
Curby & Collins, 2003).

1427

In most studies that measure holism in terms of a
congruency effect, only a single response is made to either
the top or the bottom of the test face on every trial (e.g.,
Farah et al., 1998; Gauthier et al., 2003). However, a slight
variation of this task requires participants to give a samedifferent response to both the top and the bottom of the test
face on every trial (Wenger & Ingvalson, 2002, 2003;
Richler, Gauthier, Wenger, & Palmeri, submitted). This task
produces similar congruency effects as the single-response
version, but it also allows the data to be analyzed in terms of
GRT constructs (described below) which distinguish
between perceptual and decisional loci of holistic effects.
For this reason, we will be referring to this version of the
composite task in the remainder of the paper.

General Recognition Theory
According to classic signal detection theory, a participant’s
response to a stimulus reflects both a perceptual process and
a decision process. On each trial, the perceptual effect of a
stimulus (output of the perceptual process) can be
represented as a point in perceptual space. Because of
perceptual noise, that perceptual effect varies over trials,
resulting in a probability distribution of percepts, which is
commonly assumed to be normal. Discriminability between
stimuli is reflected by the distance between perceptual
distributions. Responses – and response biases – are
determined by where a percept lies in relation to a decision
criterion placed between the distributions.
Signal detection theory can readily be applied to
performance in a sequential same-different task. But in this
case, there is a percept of the first stimulus, a percept of the
second stimulus, and a comparison process that computes a
measure of similarity between the first and second stimulus.
Consider a simple face matching task, where the participant
studies one face and is tested on a second face, and simply
needs to judge whether the two faces are the same or not.
There would be one distribution for “same” trials and one
distribution for “different” trials. A response criterion would
determine whether the participant responds “same” or
“different”. The proportion of hits (i.e., responding “same”
when the correct response is “same”) and false alarms (i.e.,
responding “same” when the correct response is “different”)
are used to calculate both d’, which measures
disciminability between “same” and “different” trials, and
the response criterion, which reflects response biases. In
order to generalize this analysis to the sequential composite
face paradigm that is of interest to us, we need a
multidimensional analysis that can reflect the same-different
status of both the top part and the bottom part.
General Recognition Theory (GRT; Ashby & Townsend,
1986) is a multidimensional generalization of classic signal
detection theory. Stimuli give rise to percepts drawn from
multivariate normal distributions. Responses are determined
by decision boundaries separating these distributions.
Within this framework, holism can be described as having a
perceptual locus, by violations of Perceptual Independence
(PI) or violations of Perceptual Separability (PS), or as

having a decisional locus by violations of Decisional
Separability (DS). Each of these constructs and how they
can be violated are illustrated in Figure 1.
Two stimulus dimensions are perceptually independent
when the perceptual effect of one dimension (or part) is
statistically independent of the perceptual effect of another
dimension (or part). If faces exhibit PI, then variability in
the perceived sameness of the top part would be
uncorrelated with variability in the perceived sameness of
the bottom part. This is illustrated by the circular contours
of equal likelihood in Figure 1a (left). PI is violated when
there is covariance between the perceptual dimensions,
resulting in the tilted ellipses seen in Figure 1a (middle). In
other words, variability in the judged sameness of the top
and bottom parts would be correlated with one another.
Unlike some of the other violations to be discussed, PI is
considered a within-stimulus effect; some intrinsic property
of perceptual processing gives rise to correlated noise across
the two parts of the face. Because of this, a violation of PI
has been considered to be the strongest form of holism
within the GRT framework (Wenger & Ingvalson, 2002).
Perceptual distributions are perceptually separable when
the perception of one dimension is independent of the level
of the other dimension. If faces exhibit PS, then the
perceived sameness of the top part would be unaffected by
whether the bottom part is the same or different. As shown
in Figure 1b (left), this can be illustrated by connecting the
centers of the four perceptual distributions into a rectangle.
PS is violated when the perception of one part of the
stimulus depends on the level of the other part. As shown in
Figure 1b (middle), this can be illustrated when the
connected perceptual distributions form a non-rectangular
quadrilateral. If faces violate PS, there may be differences in
the degree of sameness for face bottoms when the tops are
the same compared to when the tops are different.
Finally, responses to each part of the stimulus are
decisionally separable when the location of the bound for
decisions about one dimension is not affected by the level of
the other dimension. If DS applies to faces, then the
boundary established for decisions about the top part is in
the same location irrespective of whether the bottom part is
the same or different. As shown in Figure 1c (left), this can
be illustrated by linear decision bounds that are parallel to
dimensional axes. Also as shown in Figure 1c (middle),
when DS is violated, the location of the decision bound for
one part depends on the other part. If faces violate DS, the
location of the criterion to say whether bottoms are the same
or different may vary based on whether the top is the same
or different.

Simulations Relating Violations of GRT
Constructs With the Congruency Effect

1428

Recall that the standard measure of holistic processing, the
congruency effect, is often attributed to a perceptual form of
holism. But within GRT, holism could be perceptual
(violations of PI or PS) or decisional (violations of DS). Are
congruency effects sensitive to these violations? If the

congruency effect can only arise due to violations of PI or PS,
or only arise due to violations of DS, GRT constructs tell us
little more than what is already measured by congruency
effects, because the congruency effect on its own would be
exclusively linked to a perceptual or decisional locus of holistic
processing. However, if congruency effects can be produced by
violations of any of these constructs, then analyzing data using
GRT constructs could prove to be a more powerful analytic
tool for understanding the nature of holistic processing of faces.
To answer these questions, we performed a series of Monte
Carlo simulations where we systematically violated PI, PS, and
DS and examined the congruency effect that emerged in each
simulation. The middle column of Figure 1 illustrates how each
of the GRT constructs was manipulated. We assumed a
multivariate distribution for each of the combinations of same
or different top with same or different bottom of the test face.
PI was systematically manipulated by varying the correlation
(rho) between the two dimensions in the covariance matrix
(Ashby, 1992); when there is a zero correlation, there is no
violation of PI. “Squareness” of the configuration of perceptual
dimensions

(theta) was varied to systematically manipulate PS; when
theta is set to 45 degrees the arrangement of the distributions is
a square and there is no violation of PS. We systematically
manipulated DS by changing the orthogonality of the decision
bounds to the dimensional axes (phi); when phi is set to 0, the
decision bounds are orthogonal to the coordinate axes and there
is no violation of DS. We also manipulated the variance (var)
along the two perceptual dimensions, but this parameter simply
acts as a scaling term and has no qualitative effect. Each GRT
construct was investigated independently; for example, if we
were examining a violation of PI with rho set to .5, we assumed
no violation of PS (theta = 45) and no violation of DS (phi = 0).
For each set of parameters, we ran a total of 4000 simulated
trials. On each trial, we randomly selected one of the four
multivariate normal distributions, and then randomly drew a
sample from that distribution. The response for each trial was
determined based on where the sample was located with
respect to the decision boundaries. Responses could then be
characterized as hits (correctly responding “same”) or false
alarms (responding “same” when the correct response is
“different”). The proportion of

Figure 1. (a) PI (left), a violation of PI and how PI was manipulated in the simulations (middle) and results of the simulations for PI
(right). (b) PS (left), a violation of PS and how PS was manipulated in the simulations (middle) and the results of the simulations of PS
(right). (c) DS (left), a violation of DS and how DS was manipulated in the simulations (middle) and the results of the simulations (right).

1429

hits and false alarms were used to calculate d’ for
congruent trials (both parts “same” or both parts “different”)
and incongruent trials (one part “same” and one part
“different”). The magnitude of the congruency effect is the
difference between d’ for congruent and incongruent trials.
The right column of Figure 1 summarizes the results of
the simulations of violations of each of the three GRT
constructs. Each graph plots the magnitude of the
congruency effect as a function of the value of the
systematically manipulated parameter for that simulated
violation. Each line represents a different value of the
dimensional variance (var).
As shown by the flat line in the top graph of Figure 1, no
violation of PI produces a congruency effect. This is
particularly surprising given that a violation of PI is
considered to be the strongest form of holism. If holistic
processing of faces occurs due to violations of PI, this
cannot be detected by measuring the congruency effect.
Violations of PS and DS, on the other hand, both produce
congruency effects, as shown by the increasing lines in the
middle and bottom graphs in Figure 1. When PS is violated,
the magnitude of the congruency effect increases as the
configuration becomes less square-like (i.e., as theta
increases). When DS is violated, the magnitude of the
congruency effect increases as the decision bounds become
less orthogonal to the dimensional axes (i.e., as phi
increases in magnitude).
Violations of PS indicate perceptual holism and violations
of DS indicate a decisional locus of holism. However, these
simulations show that a congruency effect can arise due to
either violations of PS and DS. Therefore, the congruency
effect on its own cannot distinguish between perceptual and
decisional sources of holism as defined by GRT.

is a difference in c for one part based on whether the other
part is the same or different.
Conditional analyses compare d’ and c for each dimension
at a given level of the other dimension, based on whether the
response to the other dimension was correct or incorrect. For
example, in a composite face task, one conditional test
compares the criterion for a bottom decision when the top is
the same and the response is correct versus the criterion for a
bottom decision when the top is same and the response was
incorrect. Whether the response is correct or incorrect
depends on the location of the decision bounds as well as the
location and shape of the perceptual distribution. Therefore, if
the conditional analyses reveal violations of DS (as shown by
differences in conditional c values), one cannot make
conclusions about PI, because differences in conditional d’
may be due to violations of DS, rather than violations of PI
(Ashby & Townsend, 1986).
Recent behavioral work that examined holistic processing
for faces with respect to the GRT constructs using the MSDA
program showed that DS was consistently violated in a
composite face task, while PS was inconsistently violated,
and PI was rarely violated (Wenger & Ingvalson, 2002, 2003;
Richler et al., submitted). Moreover, it has also been shown
that changes in the congruency effect due to stimulus
manipulations are linked to changes in marginal c, but not
marginal d’, values (Richler et al., submitted). In other words,
although the Monte Carlo simulations described earlier show
that violations of either PS or DS could give rise to a
congruency effect, the analysis of the human data using
MSDA suggest that it is violations of DS that play a dominant
role in producing this effect in a composite face task.

Behavioral Data: GRT

Measuring Holism in one Model of
Face Recognition
Because the Monte Carlo simulations showed that
congruency effects can arise from violations of either PS or
DS, face recognition models that account for congruency
effects need not produce the same pattern of GRT violations
as human observers. Thus, the GRT framework presents an
opportunity to further evaluate existing face recognition
models beyond the congruency effect.
In this paper, we examined one well-known model of face
recognition (Cottrell, Branson, & Calder, 2002; Dailey &
Cottrell, 1998). Our intent was not to particularly criticize this
model; this model has accounted for a far wider range of
important object recognition, face perception, and expertise
phenomena than just about any extant model in the field.
Instead, our intent was to illustrate that models of face
recognition must also account for regularities in the human
data that are revealed using MSDA; new work will examine
other models of face recognition. To be clear, GRT may not
be the correct underlying model of face recognition; in fact,
GRT is a framework and by itself cannot be a complete
model of face recognition or any other kind of object
recognition. But the measures afforded by MSDA and GRT
can provide more stringent measures of holistic processing in
humans and models.

Conclusions about the GRT constructs can be derived from
human data using an analysis technique called
Multidimensional Signal Detection Analysis (MSDA; Kadlec
& Townsend, 1992; Kadlec, 1995), which draws conclusions
about violations of PI, PS and DS based on a number of
measures, including what are known as marginal and
conditional d’ and c values. The values are calculated from
the complete confusion matrix of data obtained when
participants make same-different judgments about both the
top and the bottom half of the face. We very briefly describe
some of the main components of MSDA, but the reader is
referred to Kadlec & Townsend (1992) for complete details
of the theory underlying the statistical tests involved in
MSDA, and to Kadlec (1995) for complete details of the
MSDA program we used to perform these analyses.
Marginal tests compare d’ or c values between each level
of one dimension collapsed across both levels of the other
dimension. For example, for a composite face task, one
marginal test would compare d’ for same vs. different tops
collapsed across same and different bottoms. PS is violated
when there is a difference in d’ for one part based on whether
the other part is the same or different. DS is violated if there
1430

Our simulations closely follow the simulations presented in
Cottrell et al. (2002) and Nguyen and Cottrell (2005), so we
only briefly summarize them here. As shown in Figure 2, the
model by Cottrell and colleagues first preprocesses face
images through a bank of two-dimensional Gabor filters of
different scales and orientations, the Gabor-filtered image is
then represented by a vector of principal components (defined
by a PCA from a different collection of faces), and then is
classified by a two-layer neural network trained using back
propagation.

and passed through the model with different random initial
weights in the neural network of the model for each set. The
correlation data for each model repetition was then used for
calculating probability distributions for the different responses
allowing for MSDA.

Comparing the Model with Human Observers

Figure 2: Model schematic adapted from Dailey, Cottrell,
Padgett, & Adolphs (2002).

Like human observers, the model produces a significant
congruency effect, whereby d’ is higher on congruent trials
(when both parts are the same or different) than incongruent
trials (when one part is the same as the other part is different).
Also similar to human observers, when the top and bottom
parts of the test image are misaligned, this congruency effect
diminishes (see top Figure 3). This is exactly what Cottrell et
al. (2002) reported. What about the MSDA analyses?
The qualitative marginal analyses revealed consistent
violations of DS and very few violations of PS in the ten
simulations of the model. This matches human data, where DS
is always violated and PS is violated in some cases but not in
others (Wenger & Ingvalson, 2002, 2003; Richler et al.,
submitted).
Although the qualitative results are informative, a more
rigorous comparison of the model and human observers is
available when we examine the quantitative measures used to
make these qualitative statements. Recall that in the marginal
analyses a violation of PS or DS occurs when there is a
significant difference in d’ or c, respectively, based on whether
the other part is the same vs. different. Richler et al.
(submitted) found that stimulus manipulations that changed the
congruency effect for human observers also changed marginal
c values, but not marginal d’ values. According to MSDA, this
suggests violations of DS as a source of holistic processing. We
performed the same comparisons with the model simulations.
Specifically, we compared the change in the congruency effect
produced by the model under the different levels of stimulus
alignment with the marginal d’ and c values from the MSDA
output. The averages of these values are plotted in Figure 3.
The congruency effects produced by the model for the

The training procedure was carried out in the following
manner: the training sets consisted of twenty different face
composites with five different exemplars of each face (created
by jittering the composites by +/- 2 pixels in one or both of
image dimensions). The training set was first used to generate
the PCA layer representation. The model was next trained for
fine-level discrimination by learning to identify the face
composites with a unique name. This involved learning the
weights between the PCA layer and the hidden layer and the
weights between the hidden layer and the name layer via backpropagation.
To compare the model to the human data, the model had to
simulate all key elements of the composite face task with same
or different responses to both the top and bottom halves. Doing
this involved just a simple elaboration of the approach Cottrell
et al. (2002) used in their initial simulations of the task that
demonstrated the model’s account of the congruency effect.
Each trial consisted of passing a study face through the model
and saving in memory the representation of this face at the
hidden layer of the model’s neural network (this is akin to some
form of visual working memory). As with the task used with
human observers, the test face could have both parts the same
as the study face, one part the same and one part different, or
both parts different. Following Cottrell et al. (2002), attention
to the cued part (top or bottom) was simulated by attenuating
the Gabor layer representation of the to-be-ignored face half by
a factor of 0.125. The correlation between the hidden layer
representation of the study phase and the hidden layer
representation of the test faces was used to generate a same or
different response (to that half) by comparing that correlation
with a criterion. Correlations higher than the criterion yield
“same” responses, those lower than the criterion yield
“different” responses. The process was repeated for the other
half in order to generate the other same/different response. The
testing stage consisted of one hundred trials each with a
different study face.
Ten separate sets of training and testing faces were created
1431

Figure 3. Congruency effect (top), marginal d’ values
(bottom left), and marginal c values (bottom right) for
the model. Error bars show 95% confidence intervals.

three levels of alignment are shown in the top graph of
Figure 3. Marginal d’ values, which reveal violations of PS
for the model are plotted in the bottom left, and marginal c
values, which reveal violations of DS, are plotted in the
bottom right. The model was able to produce the same
pattern of results reported by Richler et al. with human
observers. That is, marginal d’ values were unaffected by
misalignment. However, marginal c values were affected by
misalignment such that differences in marginal c values
based on the same-different status of the other part
decreased with misalignment. The correspondence between
the decrease in the congruency effect and the decrease in the
differences between marginal c values could certainly
suggests that violations of DS play a dominant role in the
holistic processing effects seen in the composite task for this
model. Critically, these results are consistent with findings
from human observers.

Conclusions
The first goal of this paper was to relate a behavioral
measure of holism used in a composite face task with
measures of holism based on GRT that distinguish between
perceptual and decisional loci of holistic effects. The results
of the Monte Carlo simulations showed that while violations
of PI – the “strongest” form of holism – do not lead to any
congruency effect, both violations of PS (perceptual holism)
and violations of DS (decisional holism) lead to significant
congruency effects. The congruency effect is a rather coarse
measure of holism in that it cannot distinguish between
perceptual and decisional sources of holistic effects.
The second goal of this paper was to examine how one
well-known face recognition model, one that accounts well
for the congruency effect, would compare with human
observers in terms of the measures of holism provided by
MSDA. As is seen with human data, the model showed
consistent violations of DS. This was very surprising as
there is no explicit decisional component in the model that
could obviously lead to this finding. This suggests that
either the model contains some kind of implicit decisional
component, or, alternatively, this indicates that the values
derived using MSDA do not necessarily reflect the
decisional sources of holism defined by GRT. We are
currently exploring both possibilities.
We conclude that 1) behavioral work that seeks to explain
holistic processing of faces needs to use measures that are
more sensitive to the distinction between perceptual and
decisional sources of holism, such as MSDA, and 2) a more
thorough investigation of MSDA and how it relates to GRT
is required.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF SBE-0542013, NSF HSDDHBS05, and a grant from the James S. McDonnell
Foundation. Thanks to Gary Cottrell and the GURU lab for
providing the software implementation of their model for
use in this research.

References
Ashby, F.G. (1992). Multivariate Probability Distributions.
In F.G. Ashby (Ed.), Multidimensional models of
perception and cognition (pp. 1-34). Erlbaum.
Ashby, F.G., & Townsend, J.T. (1986). Varieties of
perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93, 154179.
Cottrell, G.W., Branson, K., & Calder, A.J. (2002). Do
expression and identity need separate representations? In
Proceedings of the 24th Annual Cognitive Science
Conference, Fairfax, Virginia. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Dailey, M.N., & Cottrell, G.W. (1998). Task and spatial
frequency effects on face specialization. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 10, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Dailey, M.N., Cottrell, G.W., Padgett, C., & Adolphs, R.
(2002). EMPATH: A neural network that categorizes
facial expressions. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
14(8), 1158-1173.
Farah, M.J., Wilson, K.D., Drain, M., & Tanaka, J.W.
(1998). What is “special” about face perception?
Psychological Review, 105, 482-498.
Gauthier, I., Curran, T., Curby, K.M., & Collins, D. (2003).
Perceptual interference supports a non-modular account
of face processing. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 428-432.
Hole, G.J. (1994). Configurational factors in the perception
of unfamiliar faces. Perception, 23, 65-74.
Kadlec, H. (1995). Multidimensional signal detection
analyses (MSDA) for testing separability and
independence: A Pascal program. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments & Computers, 27, 442-458.
Kadlec. H., & Townsend, J.T. (1992). Signal detection
analysis of dimensional interactions. In F.G. Ashby (Ed.),
Multidimensional models of perception and cognition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nguyen, N., & Cottrell, G.W. (2005). Owls and wading
birds: Generalization gradients in expertise.
In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Cognitive Science
Conference, La Stresa, Italy. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Richler, J.J., Gauthier, I., Wenger, M.J., & Palmeri, T.J.
(submitted). Holistic processing of faces: Bridging
paradigms.
Wenger, M.J., & Ingvalson, E.M. (2002). A decisional
component of holistic encoding. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 28, 872892.
Wenger, M.J., & Ingvalson, E.M. (2003). Preserving
informational separability and violating decisional
separability in facial perception and recognition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 29, 1106-1118.
Young, A.W., Hellawell, D. & Hay, D.C. (1987).
Configurational information in face perception.
Perception, 16, 747-759.

1432

