UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence for "Dumb" Local-to-Global Integration in Children's Judgments about Motion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5t2432hp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Kloos, Heidi
Srivorakait, Laura
Odar, Cathleen
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence for “Dumb” Local-to-Global Integration
in Children’s Judgments about Motion
Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
409A Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Laura Srivorakiat (lsrivorakiat@cinci.rr.com)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
409A Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Cathleen Odar (odarcc@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
409A Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA

Sarah Cummins-Sebree (cumminsh@ucrwcu.rwc.uc.edu)
Raymond Walters College, University of Cincinnati, Behavioral Sciences Department,
9555 Plainfield Rd., Cincinnati, OH 45236-1096, USA

Kevin Shockley (kevin.shockley@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology,
229E Dyer Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376, USA
theory at all, just a large collection of findings that do not lend
themselves to an overarching theory about how development
might progress. The problem seems to be that children’s
performance differs as a function of the specific content
domain that is employed in a task (e.g., Brown, 1990). For
example, the same 3-year-old can appear less knowledgeable
in an unfamiliar domain, but highly sophisticated in a familiar
domain. Clearly, simply attaching particular informationprocessing competencies to particular age groups does not
provide a coherent view of cognitive development.
A viable approach then might be to analyze each content
domain separately and map out the development of children’s
competencies in each of these content domains (e.g., for a
review of such an approach, see Wilkening & Huber, 2002).
The guiding assumption is that domain-specific content
matters. Children’s performance – successful or unsuccessful
– might be based on children’s knowledge about domainspecific, cause-effect relations (e.g., Booth & Waxman, 2002;
Corrigan & Denton, 1996; Defeyter & German, 2003;
Fiddick, Cosmides, & Tooby, 2000; Gottfried & Gelman,
2005). According to such a knowledge-based approach,
children early in life have only simplistic knowledge about
how the world works, which is enriched over time via their
experiences in the world. In other words, what develops
according to this approach is children’s knowledge.
While this knowledge-based approach can provide a
coherent pattern of developmental progression, it has an
important down-side. Findings show that children’s
performance is not only affected by the specific content
domain, but also by the precise task context in which a child
is asked to act. A good example pertains to tasks that deal
with children’s knowledge about solidity, knowledge that

Abstract
We investigated cue use for object movement in preschoolers
and adults. Participants’ task was to predict the direction of an
object’s motion: whether the object moves across the floor of a
room, or whether it floats to the top. While the direction of
object motion stayed the same across trials, the types of cues
were manipulated to differ along two factors. The factors were
(1) spatial proximity (one cue being spatially close to the
object, and the other cue being at a distance from the object)
and (2) causal relevance (one cue being causally meaningful for
the object’s motion, and the other one being causally
irrelevant). The results show the following developmental
progression: 3-year-olds used only the proximal cue, while 4year-olds used both proximal and distal cue to judge object
motion. However, neither group of children distinguished
between causally meaningful and causally meaningless cues.
Only adults were able to ignore the meaningless cues. The
pattern of findings supports the idea that development
progresses from local to global integration of pieces of
information, with spatial cues being available more readily than
causal relevance. The results undermine a common assumption
that young children perform on the basis of domain-specific
knowledge only.
Keywords: Cue-use; preschoolers; cognitive development;
attentional processes.

Introduction
What is it that develops in a child? After the waning of
Piaget’s influence on what it is that might develop, no solid
theory has taken its place to answer this question (e.g.,
Bjorklund, 1997). In fact, the latest handbook on cognitive
development (Goswami, 2002) provides no encompassing

401

Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). Furthermore, the attentionintegration approach can explain high context sensitivity
because attention is controlled by the immediate structure of
the task context. Differences in performance (such as those
described above around the concept of solidity) might
therefore be due to differences in structural properties of the
task, rather than due to knowledge-based components of the
mind.
The current study aims to provide evidence for this
alternative approach. The specific questions pertain to (1) the
degree to which children integrate pieces of information
locally, then gradually towards more global information, and
(2) whether children prefer to rely on perceptual
correspondences over knowledge about a domain.

solid objects cannot pass through other solid objects. When
tested with a habituation paradigm, even 2.5-month-old
infants appear to recognize when the solidity constraint is
violated (e.g., Spelke, Breinlinger, Macomber, & Jacobson,
1992). But when tested with a search task, 2-year-old toddlers
do not show knowledge about solidity (e.g., Berthier,
DeBlois, Poirier, Novak, & Clifton, 2000).
Strong context dependence is, of course, not limited to
solidity tasks. Quite the opposite is the case. Contextdependent performance is the rule, not the exception, in
developmental psychology (e.g., Elman, Bates, Johnson,
Karmiloff-Smith, Parisi, & Plunkett, 1999; Gigerenzer &
Richter, 1990). The mere configurations of stimuli will affect
how much ‘knowledge’ children seem to have (for a
discussion, see Kloos & Van Orden, in press). This makes it
difficult to frame development in terms of amount of
knowledge. A developmental theory needs to explain both
immediate context dependence as well as gradual progression
across age.

Cue Use in Judgment about Motion
To answer these questions, we looked at cue use in
preschool children and adults. Cue-use tasks are ideal for the
current purposes, for three reasons. First, any change in
performance as a function of a change in the cues
demonstrates the process of spontaneous integration. This is
because cues are separate from the target object, and cues are
not emphasized during instructions. Second, distance between
cue and target can be manipulated systematically to
investigate the developmental progression of local-to-global
integration. We predict that children first integrate the
proximal cue, and only later the more distal cue. And third,
the causal relevance of a cue can be manipulated
systematically to assess the importance of domain-specific
knowledge in participants’ performance.
The specific domain used in this study involves judging
the direction of an object’s motion as a function of the
shadow’s motions. This domain was investigated before with
adults (e.g., Kersten, Mamassian, & Krill, 1997) and is
illustrated schematically in Figure 1.

Alternative Approach
The current study tests an alternative approach, one that is
not tied to age-related domain-general competencies proposed
by traditional information-processing theories, nor does it
require new knowledge-based competencies for each specific
task context. The approach is based (1) on recent insights
about children’s ‘dumb’ attentional processes, and (2) on
research on children’s propensity to interconnect pieces of
information. First, attentional processes controlled by the
immediate context are strongly predictive of children’s
performance, independently of causal relevance (e.g., Amsel
& Brock, 1996; Smith, Jones, & Landau, 1996; French,
Mareschal, Mermillod, & Quinn, 2004; Sloutsky, 2003).
Children quickly detect correlational patterns in the
immediate task context and make use of it in their
performance. Second, children (and adults) are prone to link
pieces of information into an integrated whole, into a good
Gestalt so to speak, and to ignore pieces of information that
do not fit that larger organization (e.g., Franz, 2001; Kloos,
2007; Thagart, 2000). Such integration seems to happen
automatically, seemingly without effort and without being
explicitly elicited.
These advancements suggest a view of development that
centers around developing processes of attention and
integration, not on processes of knowledge improvement.
Early in a child’s life, attentional processes of integration
make use of local perceptual correspondences (i.e. links
between stimuli that are close to one another in space and
time), followed by more global correspondences (i.e. links
between stimuli that have a greater separation in space and
time), and then causal domain-specific correspondence (i.e.
links between stimuli that are based on cause-effect relations).
This developmental progression of attention in terms of
gradually expanding the number of interconnected pieces of
information is domain-general; The same processes can
explain differences observed across ages, as well as
differences observed between adult novices and experts (e. g.,

A

B

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the shadow effect. The
bull-eyes represent a target moving diagonally across a
surface, and the gray ellipses represent the shadow moving
either parallel with the target (A) or at an angle (B).
A target moves diagonally across a surface, and the task is
to judge the direction of its motion. The motion of a shadow

402

used with preschool children between 3 and 4 years of age
and adults.
If development is a matter of local-to-global integration in
the immediate context, the youngest children should be more
likely to use the proximal cue (the shadow cue that moves in
close proximity of the target object) than the distal cue (the
shadow cue that moves at an angle from the target object),
and older children should use both proximal and distal
shadow cues. Conversely, if children base their judgment on
domain-specific knowledge about shadows, they should
distinguish early on between causally relevant and causally
irrelevant displays. Clearly, even the youngest children tested
in this study can distinguish between a shadow and a mouse.

is added to the display. In one case, the shadow is close to the
object and moves parallel with the object (Panel A: proximal
cue); and in the other case, the shadow moves horizontally at
an angle from the object (Panel B: distal cue). Results show
that adults judge an object to move on the ground when the
shadow moves close to the object; and they judge the same
diagonal motion of the target object to be floating off the
ground when the shadow moves at an angle. In other words,
adults judged the direction of the object differently depending
on the distance between the object and the shadow cue.
Note that the motion of a shadow is a causally appropriate
cue to the motion of the object that casts the shadow. For an
object that moves on the ground, its shadow is indeed close to
the object; and for an object that moves above the ground,
suspended in air, its shadow is at a distance. Of course, if the
“shadow” was a distinct object with features that do not
match the target object, then the “shadow” would be a
causally inappropriate cue for indicating the movement of the
target object. For example, if the grey ellipse in Figure 1
would be replaced by a picture of a mouse, the same motion
would be meaningless to the motion of the target object.
Whether the mouse moves in parallel with the target object or
at an angle, it would not affect whether the target object
moves on the ground or suspended in air.
Of course, shadows are not foreign to young children.
Children are likely to have extensive experience with
shadows, they know the word shadow, and even infants can
link the motion of an object with the motion of a shadow,
whether the display involves 3D real-life projections (e.g.,
Van de Walle, Rubenstein, & Spelke, 1998) or 2D computer
animations (e.g., Yonas & Granrud, 2006). If performance is
merely a function of such domain-specific knowledge, even
the youngest children should be able to ignore causally
irrelevant cues. If on the other hand, performance is driven by
attentional processes of integration, participants have to
engage in deliberate ignoring of causally irrelevant pieces of
information, a process that develops relatively late (cf., Kloos
& Sloutsky, in press).

Method
Participants
Children were recruited from suburban middleclass
preschools, and adults were recruited from the subject pool of
Introduction to Psychology classes. Adults received course
credit in return for their participation. The final sample
consisted of 21 3-year-olds (14 girls and 7 boys; mean age:
42.8 months, SD = 2.6 months), 25 4-year-olds (12 girls and
13 boys; mean age: 53.9 months, SD = 2.7 months), and 32
adults (19 women and 13 men; mean age: 19.9 years, SD = 2
years). One additional adult was tested and omitted from the
sample because of distraction.

Visual Displays
Kersten et al.’s (1997) ball-in-the-box display was modified
to fit a child-friendly cover story. The ‘box’ was a barn that
housed two animals, a chicken and a duck. One of the
animals sat in the lower back corner of the barn, and the other
animal sat in the front top corner of the barn. Figure 2 shows
an example of the display. The ‘ball’ was an egg that moved
from one end of the barn to the other (see Figure 2). The task
was to determine whether an egg belonged to the chicken or
to the duck. If an egg moved toward the chicken, it belonged
to the chicken, and if it moved toward the duck, it belonged to
the duck.
The direction of egg’s motion stayed the same across
trials. What changed was the cue that informed about the
direction of the egg’s motion. In the Shadow condition, the
egg had a shadow rolling with it. The shadow moved either in
parallel with the egg (giving the appearance that the egg
rolled diagonally along the floor of the barn), or it moved at
an angle from the egg (giving the appearance that the egg
floated to the top of the barn). In the Mouse condition, the
shadow was replaced by a colorful picture of a mouse that
had the same size as the shadow. Children could clearly
recognize the mouse and made reference to it repeatedly. The
motion of the mouse was identical to that of the shadow: it
either moved in parallel with the egg (proximal cue), or at an
angle to the egg (distal cue).

Overview
Two goals were pursued in the current study: (1) to test
whether children’s use of a cue for object movement
progresses from using local to more global information, and
(2) to test the degree to which causal relevance plays a role in
children’s judgments. The task was to predict the direction of
an object’s motion: whether the object moves across the floor
of a room, or whether it floats to the top of the room. As was
done in Kersten et al. (1997), the direction of the object
stayed the same across trials, with only the feature of the
shadow cue changing across conditions.
To test whether using a proximal cue happens
developmentally earlier than using a distal cue, the cue could
move either parallel with the target or away from the target.
To test whether perceptual correspondence (either local or
global) is used more readily in making judgments than causal
information, the cue was either the causally appropriate
shadow or the causally inappropriate mouse. The resulting 2
X 2 design (perceptual proximity by causal relevance) was

403

Chelsea or Debbie, no feedback was provided, and a new trial
started.

Results and Discussion
The following scoring scheme was applied to participants’
responses: if the cue moved parallel with the object, the
correct response was to judge that the egg moved across the
floor to the back corner of the barn. If the cue moved at an
angle to the object, the correct response was to judge that the
egg moved to the top of the barn. Note that neither of these
judgments are correct when the cue is the causally irrelevant
mouse.
Performance during shadow trials is likely to reflect
participants’ baseline performance of using the cue in the
task. Participants who pay attention to causal relevance of the
cue are expected to show a drop in performance for mouse
trials.
Each participant obtained four proportion-correct scores,
two scores that reflect their performance on shadow trials
(when the shadow moved parallel and at an angle to the egg),
and two scores that reflect their performance on mouse trials
(when the mouse moved parallel and at an angle to the egg).
The first analysis pertained to whether children could
distinguish between the causally relevant shadow trials and
the causally irrelevant mouse trials. Accuracy scores were
calculated for each participant on the basis of hits on
proximal-cue trials and false alarms on distal-cue trials. An
accuracy score of zero is expected by chance alone.
Preliminary results indicated no significant difference in
accuracy as a function of order with all independent-sample ts
< 1. Participants’ accuracy scores were therefore collapsed
across block order.

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the display used in the
shadow condition. The arrows indicate the motion of the egg
(solid arrow) and shadow (dashed arrow). The egg moved
diagonally, and the shadow moved either parallel with the
egg, or away from the egg.

Procedure
The experiment was administered on a computer and
controlled by Presentation 9.90 software. Participants were
tested in a quiet room (either in their preschool or in the lab)
by female hypothesis-blind experimenters.
The cover story involved a farmer named Fred who owns
the chicken Chelsea and the duck Debbie. On sunny days,
these two birds are outside the barn, where they also lay their
eggs. At the end of the day, Farmer Fred collects all the eggs
in a basket and puts them through a tube at the left side of the
barn. After an egg rolls through the tube and arrives in the
front bottom corner of the barn, the egg starts moving
diagonally. The task is to determine whether the egg moves
toward Chelsea, in which case it is Chelsea’s egg, or whether
the egg moves toward Debbie, in which case it is Debbie’s
egg.
The procedure started with two warm-up trials in which
participants were familiarized with the task. They were
presented with a ‘view-from-above’ picture of the barn, in
which the two birds sat in opposite corners of one end of the
barn, and the egg rolled from the other end either toward
Chelsea or Debbie. All participants performed correctly on
these warm-up trials, indicating that they understood the task
instructions.
Testing trials started immediately after the warm-up trials.
They consisted of 16 shadow trials (where the egg is followed
by a shadow), and 16 mouse trials (where the egg is followed
by a mouse). The order of trials was blocked by trial type
with some participants starting with shadow trials, and the
other participants starting with the mouse trials. Within each
set of 16 trials, the cue (shadow or mouse) moved in parallel
with the egg (8 trials), or at an angle to the egg (8 trials).
Once the participant judged whether the egg belonged to

1

Mean Accuracy (Hits - FA)

0.9
0.8

Trial type
Shadow Trials
Mouse Trials

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
3-year-olds

4-year-olds

Adults

Figure 3: Mean accuracy of participants’ performance as a
function of age and trial type. Chance performance is at zero.
Error bars represent standard errors.
Figure 3 shows the mean accuracy scores as a function of
trial type (shadow trials vs. mouse trials) and age (3-yearolds, 4-year-olds, and adults). A 2 x 3 mixed-design ANOVA

404

A 2 X 3 mixed-design ANOVA (with cue type as the
within-subjects factor and age as the between-subjects factor)
revealed a significant age x cue interaction (F(2,75) = 4.4, p <
0.01). While 3-year-olds performed above chance only on
proximal-cue trials (single-sample t(20) = 4.2, p < 0.03, M =
.63), 4-year-olds performed above chance on both the
proximal-cue trials and the distal-cue trials (single-sample ts
(24) > 5.4, ps < 0.02, MShadow = 0.83, MMouse = 0.74). The
same pattern of age differences was found when only shadow
trials were considered. As Figure 4 shows, the discrepancy in
performance between the different types of cues decreased
gradually across development, with a significant difference in
3-year-olds’ performance (paired-sample t(20) = 5.5, p <
0.03), an only marginally significant difference in 4-yearolds’ performance (paired-sample t(24) = 4.2, p < 0.06), and
no significant difference in adults’ performance (pairedsample t < 1). This suggests that, while 3-year-olds could
make use of the proximal motion cue, only 4-year-olds could
make us of the both the proximal and distal cues to motion. It
is not until later that children can use both cues equally well.
An alternative interpretation needs to be considered for the
3-year-olds, however. It is possible that the youngest children
in our study ignored the motions of target and cue altogether
and considered only the static display after the egg came to a
halt. Note that in the final frame, the egg was closer to the
chicken than to the duck. In proximal-cue trials, the cueobject pair might have focused children’s attention to the
spatially close destination (the chicken), leading children to
pick the chicken more frequently than the duck. Conversely,
in the distal-cue trials, the cue might have acted as a
distractor, yielding chance performance in the youngest age
group. To rule out the possibility of these even more limited
attentional processes (ones that fail to integrate motion), it
would be necessary to create a display that lacks a destination
marker. Rather than asking children about the destination of a
moving target (bottom back corner vs. top front corner), it
would be necessary to ask children about the mode of motion
(rolling vs. floating).
Overall, the findings provide important insights about the
kind of information children might use to make a judgment
about the direction of motion. The task involved a familiar
domain, that of objects casting a shadow as they move
through space. Yet, preschool children had difficulty ignoring
the ‘shadow’ cue if it was causally irrelevant. They integrated
it with the motion of the object, whether it was a causally
meaningful shadow or a separate entity of a mouse (note that
even adults had difficulty completely ignoring the irrelevant
mouse cue). This is not to say that young children are unable
to appreciate causal relevance altogether. Instead, we argue
that an understanding of causal relevance is scaffolded by
simpler attentional processes (c.f., Samuelson & Smith;
2000). Children will ignore causal knowledge when it
requires deliberate ignoring of pieces of information, and
hence when it is in conflict with their automatic attentional
processes of integration.
The developmental progression reported here cannot be
interpreted as a progression in content knowledge. This is

was conducted, with trial type as the within-subjects factor
and age as the between-subjects factor. The most important
finding was a significant age x trial type interaction (F(2,75)
= 6.7, p < 0.01). While 3- and 4-year-olds did not perform
differently as a function of trial type (paired-sample ts < 1),
adults had higher accuracy scores on shadow trials (M = 0.89)
than on mouse trials (M = 0.59), paired-sample t(31) = 4.2, p
< 0.01. This indicates that adults, but not children, could
ignore the causally irrelevant cue. Even though, if considering
mouse trials alone, 4-year-olds performed on the same level
as adults, only adults showed a discrepancy in performance
across trial type.
Another interesting finding was a significant effect of age
(F(2,75) = 19.0, p < 0.01), with adults performing better than
4-year-olds, and 4-year-olds performing better than 3-yearolds; independent-sample ts > 4.2, p < 0.03. This indicates a
linear developmental progression of children’s ability to
integrate the cue with the target objects. Importantly, given
that a sizable progression happened already within one year
of age (between 3- and 4-year-olds), it is likely that a
progression of similar magnitude might happen between 4
and 5-year-olds.

1

Mean Proportion Correct

0.9

Cue Type
Proximal
Distal

0.8

0.7

0.6
0.5

0.4
3-year-olds

4-year-olds

Adults

Figure 4: Mean proportion of correct performance as a
function of age and motion type. Chance performance is at
0.5. Error bars represent standard errors.
Are children more likely to use the proximal than the distal
cue? To answer this question, we looked at children’s
performance on trials where the cue moved parallel to the egg
(proximal cue) vs. trials where the cue moved at an angle to
the egg (distal cue). Recall that children could either perform
correctly or incorrectly; thus, the chance performance is p =
0.5. Figure 4 shows the mean proportion of correct responses
as a function of cue type and age. Given that no difference
was found for children across trial type (shadow vs. mouse),
children’s scores were collapsed across trial type. Adults’
scores from the shadow condition are added for comparison.

405

Franz, V. H. (2001). Action does not resist visual illusions.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 457-459.
French, R. M., Mareschal, D., Mermillod, M., & Quinn, P. C.
(2004). The role of bottom-up processing in perceptual
categorization by 3- to 4-month-old infants: Simulations
and data. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 382-397.
Gigerenzer, G., & Richter, H. R. (1990). Context effects and
their interaction with development: Area judgments.
Cognitive Development, 5, 235-264.
Goswami, U. (2002). Blackwell Handbook of Childhood
Cognitive Development. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing.
Gottfried, G. M., & Gelman, S. A. (2005). Developing
domain-specific causal-explanatory frameworks: the role of
insides and immanence. Cognitive Development, 20, 137158
Kersten, D., Mamassian, P., & Krill, D. C. (1997). Moving
cast shadows induce apparent motion in depth. Perception,
26, 171-192.
Kloos, H. (2007). Interlinking physical beliefs: Children’s
bias towards logical congruence. Cognition, 103, 227-252.
Kloos, H., & Sloutsky, V. M. (in press). What's behind
different kinds of kinds: Effects of statistical density on
learning and representation of categories. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General
Kloos, H., & Van Orden, G. (in press). Soft-assembled
mechanisms for the grand theory In J. P. Spencer, M.
Thomas, & J. McClelland (Eds.). Toward a new grand
theory of development? Connectionism and dynamic
systems theory re-considered. To be published by Oxford
University Press.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. (2000). Grounding
development in cognitive processes. Child Development,
71, 98-106
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Smith, L.B., Jones, S. & Landau, B. (1996) Naming in young
children: A dumb attentional mechanism? Cognition, 60,
143-171
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson, K.
(1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review, 99,
605–632.
Thagard, P. (2000). Congruence in Thought and Action.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wilkening, F., & Huber, S. (2002). Children’s intuitive
physics. In U. Goswami (Ed.). Blackwell Handbook of
Childhood Cognitive Development. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishing, pp. 349-370.
Van de Walle, G., Rubenstein, J., & Spelke, E. S. (1998).
Infant Sensitivity to Shadow Motions. Cognitive
Development, 13, 387-419.
Yonas, A., & Granrud, C. E. (2006). Infants’ perception of
depth from cast shadows. Perception & Psychophysics, 68,
154-160.

because the rapid change in performance between 3- and 4year-olds does not correspond with a knowledge-based
change of similar magnitude during this age span. Instead, the
progression is likely to reflect a differences in lens size
through which children understand the task. The lens of more
experienced children is slightly larger, allowing them to
integrate across slightly larger distances.
Of course, the single experiment reported here is not
conclusive on the issue of what it is that might develop.
However, its findings are in line with recent studies that
question mere knowledge-based accounts. It shows that
children are engaged in an active sense-making of the
immediate task context that is controlled by simple attention
to structure.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Megan Riley and Rachel Zufall for their
help with data collection and analysis.

References
Amsel, E. & Brock, S. (1996). The development of evidence
evaluation skills. Cognitive Development, 11, 523-550.
Berthier, N. E., DeBlois, S., Poirier, C. R., Novak, M. A., &
Clifton, R. K. (2000). Where’s the ball? Two- and threeyear-olds reason about unseen events. Developmental
Psychology, 36, 394–401.
Bjorklund, D. (1997). In Search of a metatheory for cognitive
development (Or, Piaget is dead and I don't feel so good
myself). Child Development, 68, 144-148.
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. (2002). Object names and object
functions serve as cues to categories for infants,
Developmental Psychology, 38, 948-957.
Brown, A. L. (1990). Domain-specific principles affect
learning and transfer in children. Cognitive. Science, 14,
107-133.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. & Glaser, R. (1981)
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Corrigan, R., & Denton, P. (1996). Causal understanding as a
developmental primitive. Developmental Review, 16, 162202.
Defeyter, M. A., & German, T. P. (2003). Acquiring an
understanding of design: evidence from children's insight
problem solving, Cognition, 89, 133-155.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloff-Smith,
A., Parisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1999). Rethinking
innateness: A connectionist perspective on development.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fiddick, L., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). No
interpretation without representation: the role of domainspecific representations and inferences in the Wason
selection task. Cognition, 77, 1-79.
Fisher, A. V., & Sloutsky, V. M. (in press). When induction
meets memory: Evidence for gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction. Child
Development.

406

