UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Extending Statistical Learning Farther and Further: Long-Distance Dependencies, and
Individual Differences in Statistical Learning and Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jr8635v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Misyak, Jennifer B.
Christiansen, Morten H.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Extending Statistical Learning Farther and Further: Long-Distance Dependencies,
and Individual Differences in Statistical Learning and Language
Jennifer B. Misyak (jbm36@cornell.edu)
Morten H. Christiansen (mhc27@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract

language, a clear parallel becomes discernible between
successful learning of the artificial languages and those of
natural languages. Yet it remains to be fully evidenced
whether and to what extent SL and language are subserved
by the same underlying mechanism(s).
Furthermore, while considerable focus has been placed on
the successful learning of dependencies between adjacent
linguistic elements, e.g., syllables in words, comparatively
less work has addressed the issue of learning nonadjacent
relations (for exceptions see Gómez, 2002; Newport &
Aslin, 2004; Onnis, Christiansen, Chater & Gómez, 2003).
This is an area of decisive importance, as many key
relationships between words and constituents are conveyed
in long-distance (or remotely connected) structure. In
English, for example, linguistic material may intervene
between auxiliaries and inflectional morphemes (e.g., is
cooking, has traveled) or between subject nouns and verbs
in number agreement (e.g., the books on the shelf are dusty).
More complex relationships to surface forms are also found
in nonadjacent dependencies between antecedents and gaps,
such as in wh-questions (e.g., Who did you see __?) and
anaphoric reference (e.g., John went to the store where he
bought some apples). Indeed, previous work incorporating
statistical relations in behaviorism faulted when attempting
to account for long-distance dependencies created by the
presence of embedded materials. Will SL be consigned to a
similar fate, found “guilty by association” or through
associative shortcomings of its own? And how does SL
relate to language processing more generally?
We employ a two-pronged approach to explore the
hypothesis that SL and language are integrally interrelated.
We first conduct an AGL experiment in which the grammar
instantiates farther, more remote statistical relations than has
been previously studied—thereby preliminarily testing the
viability of SL to succeed in principle where earlier efforts
at associationist accounts of language had been deemed to
flounder. The detection of long-distance dependencies is
thus the focus of our first experiment. We then press further
to probe the degree to which SL and language may be
empirically linked. Accordingly, our second experiment
seeks to determine how individual differences in SL and
natural language are interrelated.

While statistical learning (SL) and language acquisition have
been perceived as intertwined, such a view must contend with
theoretical and empirical challenges. Against the backdrop of
criticism leveled at early associationist efforts to account for
language, a key concern for current SL approaches is whether
it may suffice to enable the detection of long-distance
relationships akin to those ubiquitously abounding in natural
language. In Experiment 1, we extend results from previous
work on the learning of nonadjacent dependencies to the
learning of long-distance relations spanning three intervening
elements; such learning is shown to obtain under two separate
contexts. In Experiment 2, we additionally test the strength of
SL and language's proposed relatedness by documenting the
nature of correlations in individual differences between the
two. Both experiments support the thesis that SL may overlap
with mechanisms for language, while raising questions as to
the singularity or duality of such underlying mechanism(s).
Keywords: Statistical Learning; Artificial Grammar
Learning; Language Comprehension; Sentence Processing;
Individual Differences; Working Memory; IQ

Introduction
Statistical learning (SL) has been proposed as centrally
connected to language acquisition and development.
Succinctly defined as the discovery of structure by way of
statistical properties of the input, such learning has been
characterized as robust and automatic, and has been
demonstrated across a variety of both linguistically relevant
and general cognition contexts, including speech
segmentation (Saffran, Aslin & Newport, 1996), learning
the orthographic regularities of written words (Pacton,
Perruchet, Fayol & Cleeremans, 2001), visual processing
(Fiser & Aslin, 2002), visuomotor learning (Hunt & Aslin,
2001) and non-linguistic, auditory processing (Saffran,
Johnson, Aslin & Newport, 1999). But important issues still
surround the general scope of SL, especially with respect to
how much of complex language structure can be captured
by this type of learning.
SL research—sometimes also studied as “artificial
grammar learning” (AGL) or under the rubric of “implicit
learning”—has shown that infant and adult learners, upon
brief and passive exposure to sequences generated by an
artificial grammar, can incidentally acquire and evince
knowledge for the predictive dependencies embedded
within the stimuli strings (for reviews, see Gómez &
Gerken, 2000; Saffran, 2003). As the instantiation of
statistical regularities among stimulus tokens in such
grammars commonly mirror the kinds of relations among
phonemic, lexical, and phrasal constituents in actual

Experiment 1: Statistical Learning of LongDistance Dependencies
Gómez (2002) investigated 18-month-old infants’ and
adults’ learning of nonadjacent structure by having them
listen to one of two artificial languages (L1 or L2), each of

1307

which generated three-element strings in which initial and
final items formed a dependency pair (e.g., a-d of aXd).
Drawing upon the observation that certain elements in
natural language belong to relatively small sets (function
morphemes like ‘a,’ ‘was,’ ‘-s,’ and ‘-ing’), whereas others
belong to very large sets (nouns and verbs), and the fact that
learners must often track key dependencies between
functional elements, Gómez manipulated the set size (i.e., 2,
6, 12, or 24 elements) from which she drew the middle
items (Xs), and found that participants were better able to
detect the nonadjacent dependencies when the variability of
the middle items was at its highest (i.e., set size 24). Onnis
et al. (2003) reported that such learning of nonadjacent
relations also occurs within the visual domain and when the
set size of the middle item is invariant (i.e., 1 element).
A theoretical shortcoming of these studies is that the
learning of nonadjacent dependencies only occurred across a
single interposed item. Here we extend those results to three
middle elements. We assess for learning of the long-distance
dependencies under a condition in which “overlapping” sets
for the middle items of the language’s generated strings (as
detailed below) reflects a property of natural language in
which embeddings are commonly varied and complex,
admitting of interspersions in multiple places. We also
include a condition without any overlap in intervening
material, but which nonetheless contains the same surfacelevel long-distance relations as the former.

Method
Participants Thirty-nine undergraduates at Cornell
University participated for course credit or monetary
compensation.
Materials During training, participants listened to strings
generated by an artificial language from one of two
conditions. Strings in both conditions had the form aXYZd,
bXYZe, and cXYZf, but differed in the exact composition of
sets comprising the middle positions (X, Y, and Z).
In the Overlapping-Nonwords condition, |X| = 2, |Y| = 3,
and |Z| = 4 for aXYZd (i.e., 2, 3, and 4 elements constituted
the sets for the X-, Y-, and Z-positions respectively), |X| = 3,
|Y| = 4, and |Z| = 2 for bXYZe, and |X| = 4, |Y| = 2, and |Z| = 3
for cXYZf. Overlap resulted from allowing four intervening
elements (i.e., nonwords) to occur within two of three
different sets across all dependency pairs. Using n1, n2, ...n9
to designate the 9 distinct intervening nonwords, then the
element-sets for positions X, Y and Z were as follows:
aXYZd:
X= {n1, n2}
Y= {n3, n4, n5}
Z= {n6, n7, n8, n9}

bXYZe:
X= {n1, n2, n3}
Y= {n4, n5, n6, n7}
Z= {n8, n9}

Strings were constructed by combining individual
nonword tokens recorded from a female speaker. The initial
(a, b, c) and final (d, e, f) stimulus tokens were instantiated
by the nonwords pel, dak, vot; rud, jic, and tood. The middle
items were drawn from the nonwords dup, cav, jux, lum,
mib, neep, tiz, rem, and bix. Assignment of particular tokens
(e.g., pel) to particular stimulus variables (e.g., the c in
cXYZf) was randomized for each participant to avoid
learning biases due to specific sound properties of words.
Nonwords were presented with a 250 msec inter-word
interval and a 750 msec inter-string interval.
Procedure Thirteen participants were recruited per
condition and for a no-training control group. Since the
Overlapping-Nonwords condition only had 24 unique
strings for each dependency pair, 24 of 27 possible strings
per dependent pair in the Non-Overlap condition were
randomly selected for presentation. Trained participants
listened to 4 blocks of stimuli strings, with each block
composed of a random ordering of the 72 strings (24 strings
x 3 pairs), for total exposure to 288 strings. Training lasted
about 24 minutes.
Participants were instructed to pay attention to the stimuli
because they would be tested on them later. Before testing,
they were informed that the sequences they had heard were
generated by a set of rules specifying the particular order of
nonwords and that they would hear 12 strings, 6 of which
would violate the rules. They were asked to judge whether
the stimuli followed the rules by pressing a “Yes” or “No”
key. Participants were then tested on a randomly ordered set
of 6 grammatical strings (e.g., aXYZd) and 6 foils (e.g.,
*aXYZe). Foils had been constructed by dissociating the tail
element of a string from the string’s head and replacing it
with another nonword from the final-element set. Test items
were identical for both conditions and for the control group.

Results and Discussion
Group means for accurate grammaticality judgments in the
two conditions were statistically identical, each at 7.85 (out
of 12), corresponding to 65.4% correct classification. This is
significantly higher than chance-level performance, t(12) =
2.24, p < .05 for the Overlapping-Nonwords condition; t(12)
= 2.89, p = .01 for the Non-Overlap condition. The control
group, without any training, had a mean correct
classification score of 6.31 (52.6%), which was not better
than expected by chance, t(12) = .74, p = .47. Furthermore,
comparisons of mean scores for each condition against that
of the control’s indicated significantly higher performance
for both of the trained conditions: Overlapping-Nonwords
versus control group, t(24) = 1.67, p = .054; Non-Overlap
versus control group, t(24) = 2.02, p = .028.
While performance was modest compared to that for
detecting single-item separated dependencies under highvariability contexts (cf. Gómez, 2002), significant learning
was nonetheless observed. These encouraging results form a
good starting point for exploring other contexts that may
potentially facilitate (or hinder) detection of remote
dependency structures. In support of this claim, it should be

cXYZf:
X= {n1, n2, n3, n4}
Y= {n5, n6}
Z= {n7, n8, n9}

Whereas in the Non-Overlap condition, |X| = 3, |Y| = 3 and
|Z| = 3 for all three nonadjacent dependency pairings:
X= {n1, n2, n3}
Y= {n4, n5, n6}
Z= {n7, n8, n9}

1308

noted that, while training duration was slightly longer than
those in earlier nonadjacency studies with adults (24
minutes versus 18 minutes), participants were actually
exposed to fewer total strings (288 versus 432) owing to the
longer sequences (5- versus 3-element strings). Moreover,
the middle-element sets’ sizes were either of fairly low or of
zero variability with respect to the other internal sets (i.e.,
versus a set size of 24). Thus, while the Overlapping
condition exhibited some internal variability that may have
helped place the level of learning performance on par with
the Non-Overlap condition, which would be consistent with
findings of Gómez (2002) and Onnis et al. (2003),
languages under both conditions were learned without
incorporating the facilitatory (variability) effect of large set
sizes, with exposure to fewer instances of strings, and with
dependent relations spanning across more items.
As a final point of interest, performance within the two
conditions was seen to be highly variable across individuals.
For example, 7 of the 26 trained participants (and none of
the controls) demonstrated learning above 83% correct
classification. Why do some individuals thus appear more
adept at discerning the relevant regularities? And what
implications and correspondence would such seemingly
differential sensitivity to statistical structure have with
respect to known population variance in natural language
ability? We address these issues as part of Experiment 2.

Experiment 2: Individual Differences in
Statistical Learning and Language
While individual differences in language have received
some attention to date, less is known about individual
differences in SL within the normal population. Although
seemingly present throughout development, some minor
differences across age have been documented. Saffran
(2001) observed consistent performance dissimilarities
between children and adults in one of her artificial language
studies. Cherry and Stadler (1995) reported that SL
differences, as gauged by a serial-reaction time (SRT) task,
correlate with variations in educational attainment,
occupational status, and verbal ability in older adults. More
recently, Brooks, Kempe and Sionov (2006) showed that
Culture-Fair IQ Test scores mediated successful learning on
a miniature second-language learning task bearing
resemblance in its design and learning demands to those
invoked by a traditional AGL task. Although these few
studies have looked at individual differences in SL, no
previous study has directly sought to link them to variations
in language abilities. Finding correlations between
individual differences in SL and language is crucial to
determining whether the two overlap in terms of their
underlying mechanisms. We thus set out to explore this in a
comprehensive study of SL and language differences using
a within-subject design.

SD=1.4) were recruited for course credit or money. None
had participated in Experiment 1.
Materials To study the relationship between individual
differences in SL and language, we administered a test
battery assessing two types of SL, language comprehension,
vocabulary, reading experience, working memory, memory
span, IQ, and cognitive motivation.
Statistical Learning. Two SL tasks, each implementing
one of two types of artificial grammars, involving either
adjacent or nonadjacent dependencies were conducted. The
auditory stimuli and design structure were typical of those
successfully used in the literature to assess statistical
learning (e.g., Gómez, 2002). In both tasks, training lasted
about 25 minutes and was followed by a 40-item test phase.
The latter used a two alternative forced choice (2AFC)
format in which participants were required to discriminate
grammatical strings from ungrammatical ones within sets of
contrastive pairs. Ungrammatical strings differed from
grammatical ones by only one element.
For the adjacent SL task, adjacent dependencies occurred
both within and between phrases generated by the grammar
(Figure 1, left). Regarding phrase internal dependencies,
there were two types of determiners—one of which (d)
always occurred prior to a noun (N), and the other of which
(D) always directly preceded an adjective (A) that, in turn,
occurred before a noun (D A N). Between-phrase
dependencies resulted from every verb phrase (VP) being
consistently preceded by a noun phrase (NP) and optionally
followed by another noun phrase. The language was
instantiated through 10 distinct nonwords distributed over
these lexical categories such that there were 3 N, 3 V, 2 A, 1
d, and 1 D. For the nonadjacent SL task, the grammar
consisted of 3 sets of dependency pairs (i.e. a-d, b-e, c-f),
each separated by a middle X element (Figure 1, right). The
string-initial and final elements that comprise the
nonadjacent pairings were instantiated with monosyllabic
nonwords. The intervening Xs were drawn from 24 distinct
disyllabic nonwords. None of the nonadjacent SL nonwords
were similar to those in the adjacent SL task.
S
NP
NP
VP

→
→
→
→

NP VP
dN
DAN
V (NP)

S→aXd
S→bXe
S→cXf
X = { x1, x2, … x24}

Figure 1: The two artificial grammars used to assess
statistical learning of adjacent (left) and nonadjacent (right)
dependencies.
Language comprehension. A self-paced reading task was
used to assess language comprehension. Sentences were
presented individually on a monitor using the standard
moving window paradigm and followed by “yes/no”
questions probing for comprehension accuracy. While
reading times were recorded, the measures of interest for
our analyses were the comprehension scores that served as

Method
Participants Thirty monolingual, native English speakers
from among the Cornell undergraduate population (M=19.9,

1309

offline correlates of language ability.1 The sentence material
consisted of sentences drawn from three different prior
studies of various aspects of language processing (see Table
1). We thus computed comprehension accuracy scores for
each set of materials: clauses with animate/inanimate noun
constructions (A/IN; Trueswell, Tanenhaus & Garnsey,
1994), noun/verb homonyms with phonologically typical or
atypical noun/verb resolutions (PT; Farmer, Christiansen &
Monaghan, 2006), and subject-object relative clauses
(S/OR; Wells, Christiansen, MacDonald & Race, 2007).

1-sec intervals. A standard tone after each sequence cued
the participant to repeat out loud the digits they had heard in
their proper order. Sequences progressed in length from 2 to
9 digits, with two distinct sequences given for each level.
IQ. We used Scale 3, Form A of Cattell’s Culture Fair
Intelligence Test (CFIT) (1971), which is a nonverbal test of
fluid intelligence or Spearman’s “g.” The test contained
four individually timed subsections (Series, Classification,
Matrices, Typology), each with multiple-choice problems
progressing in difficulty and incorporating a particular
aspect of visuospatial reasoning. Raw scores on each subtest
are summed together to form a composite score, which may
also be converted into a standardized IQ.
Cognitive Motivation. The Need for Cognition (NFC)
Questionnaire (Cacioppo, Petty & Kao, 1984) provided a
scaled quantification of participants’ disposition to engage
in and enjoy effortful cognitive activities. Participants
indicated the extent of their agreement/disagreement to 34
particular statements (e.g., “I prefer life to be filled with
puzzles that I must solve.”).
Procedure Participants were individually administered the
tasks during two sessions on separate days. For each
participant, one of the two SL tasks was randomly assigned
for the beginning of the first session, and the other was
given at the start of the second session. In addition to these
tasks for assessing statistical learning, participants
completed the measures of language and cognitive factors
noted above: self-paced reading task, SILS vocabulary
assessment, ART, reading span task, FDS, CFIT, and NFC.

Table 1: Language comprehension sentence examples.
Subject-Object Relative Clauses (S/OR)
Subject relative: The reporter that attacked the senator
admitted the error.
Object relative: The reporter that the senator attacked admitted
the error.
Animate-Inanimate Noun Clauses (A/IN)
Reduced: The defendant/evidence examined by the lawyer
turned out to be unreliable.
Unreduced: The [defendant who]/[evidence that] was examined
by the lawyer turned out to be unreliable.
Ambiguities involving Phonological Typicality (PT)
Noun-like homonym with N/V resolution: Chris and Ben are
glad that the bird perches [seem easy to install]/[comfortably in
the cage].
Verb-like homonym with N/V resolution: The teacher told the
principal that the student needs [were not being met]/[to be more
focused].

Vocabulary. The Shipley Institute of Living Scale (SILS)
Vocabulary Subtest (Zachary, 1994) was used to assess
vocabulary. It is a paper-and-pencil measure consisting of
40 multiple-choice items in which the participant is
instructed to select from among four choices the best
synonym for a target word.
Reading Experience. The Author Recognition Test (ART)
(Stanovich & West, 1989) was used as a proxy measure of
relative reading experience. The questionnaire required
participants to check off the names of popular writers they
recognize on a list. The list included 40 actual authors, 40
foils, and 2 “effort probes.”
Working Memory. The Waters and Caplan (1996) reading
span task gauged verbal working memory (vWM).
Participants were asked to recall all sentence-final words of
a given sentence set, while forming semantic judgments for
each individual sentence as it was visually presented. The
number of sentences in each set increased incrementally
from 2 to 6, with three trials at each level.
Memory Span. Rote memory capacity was indexed
through recall accuracy on the Forward Digit Span (FDS)
task, derived from the WAIS-R subtest (Wechsler, 1981). A
recording played a sequence of digits spoken in monotone at

Results and Discussion
The mean performance on the two SL tasks—62.1%
(SD=14.3%) and 69.2% (SD=24.7%) for adjacent and
nonadjacent respectively—was significantly above chancelevel classification and indicative of learning at the grouplevel; t(29) = 4.63, p < .0001 for the adjacent SL task; t(29)
= 4.26, p = .0002 for the nonadjacent SL task. The means
for the other measures were as follows: A/IN (M=90.1%,
SD=7.2%), PT (M=94.4%, SD=6.7%), S/OR (M=85.6%,
SD=9.8%), SILS (M=34.4, SD=2.9), ART (M=0.44,
SD=0.16), vWM (M=4.2, SD=1.3), FDS (M=11.0, SD=2.3),
CFIT (M=29.7, SD=3.6), and NFC (M=40.6, SD=31.6).
The first objective in our analyses was to determine the
relation between adjacency and nonadjacent dependency
learning. Based on whether these correlated significantly,
we intended to conduct either partial correlation analyses (in
the affirmative case) or standard bivariate analyses (if no
correlation was obtained). Using as our central language
measures the three language scores derived from the selfpaced reading task (i.e., comprehension subscores,
differentiated by sentence-type), we planned to explore
significant correlations found between the three language
measures, the two SL measures, and the other individual
difference factors, using stepwise regressions with
Bonferoni corrections for multiple comparisons.
We found no correlation between the two SL tasks (r =
.14, p = .45). We then computed the correlations between all

1

Given the offline nature of SL grammaticality tests, these offline
comprehension measures are more suitable for comparisons than
simple RTs (reading times) as they better equate task demands
across the experimental manipulations.

1310

Table 2: Intercorrelations between task measures in Experiment 2.
NA-SL
A/IN
PT
S/OR
SILS
ART
vWM
FDS
CFIT
NFC

Adj-SL
.14
-.02
.49**
.39*
.05
-.17
.46*
.40*
.23
.22

Nonadj-SL

A/IN

PT

S/OR

SILS

ART

vWM

FDS

CFIT

.41*
.12
.42*
.26
.16
.53**
.13
.19
.15

.18
.11
.28
.37*
.37*
.02
.20
.33†

.46*
.33†
.14
.40*
.32†
.02
.32†

-.07
-.05
.39*
.33†
.01
.03

.33†
.35†
.11
.21
.34†

.22
-.20
.07
.20

.36†
.28
.27

.16
.03

-.08

†p < .09. *p < .05. **p <.01. (two-tailed, n = 30).
task measures as shown in Table 2. Regarding SL, adjacent
dependency learning (“Adj-SL”) was positively associated
with PT-comprehension (“PT-comp”), S/OR-comp, vWM,
and FDS; nonadjacent dependency learning (“Nonadj-SL”)
was associated with A/IN-comp, S/OR-comp, and vWM.
For the language-processing measures, A/IN-comp—in
addition to the positive correlation with Nonadj-SL noted
above—correlated with ART and vWM. PT-comp, as well
as correlating with Adj-SL (above), was further positively
associated with S/OR-comp and vWM. And S/OR-comp—
besides correlating with Adj-SL, Nonadj-SL, and PTcomp—correlated with vWM. Note then that there was
considerable overlap in the language correlations obtained
between (and among) Nonadj-SL, Adj-SL, and vWM.
To determine which of our measures were the best
predictors of language comprehension and whether other
measures would explain part of the variance in those scores
after entry of each corresponding score’s strongest
predictor, we carried out three stepwise regression analyses.
The variables from the bivariate analyses that were
significant at the .05 level were entered as predictors and the
language comprehension scores entered as the dependent
variables (P value for entry = .05, P value for remaining =
.10). The stepwise regression for A/IN-comp revealed only
a single variable in the model: Nonadj-SL, t(29) = 2.39, p =
.024, R2 = .17 (i.e., ART and vWM did not enter). After
regression for PT-comp, the only variable left in the model
was Adj-SL, t(29) = 2.96, p = .006, R2 = .24. And for S/ORcomp, Nonadj-SL alone predicted the scores after
regression, t(29) = 2.47, p = .020, R2 = .18. In each case
then, the best (and sole) predictor of the languageprocessing measure was either of the two SL measures.
Because of the correlation reported by Brooks et al.
(2006) between CFIT (IQ) scores and their languagelearning task, we computed the correlations between CFIT
and our SL tasks, but did not detect any significant
associations; however, scores for nearly all our participants
were above their reported median and likely comprised a
narrower range. We also note that Vocabulary, traditionally
construed as a relative proxy for language experience, did
not correlate with the SL tasks, but did correlate with
marginal significance to PT-comp (p = .073), ART (p =
.076), NFC (p = .069), and vWM (p = .055) factors.

Our findings confirmed systematic variability in SL
performance across the normal adult population, and
indicated that SL scores were also strongly interrelated with
vWM and language comprehension. Moreover, SL ability,
rather than vWM, was the single best predictor of
comprehension accuracy for each of the types of sentence
material in the regression models. Following MacDonald
and Christiansen (2002), these results are consistent with the
likely role of vWM as merely another index of processing
skill for language comprehension and SL, rather than a
functionally separate mechanism.
Furthermore, the specific pattern of correlations between
SL measures and language comprehension subscores
suggests that individual differences in detecting adjacent
and nonadjacent dependencies may map onto variations in
corresponding skills relevant to processing similar kinds of
dependencies as they occur in natural language. Thus,
comprehending subject-object relative constructions in the
S/OR material entails tracking long-distance relationships
spanning across lexical constituents (e.g., relating the object
of an embedded clause to the subject and main verb of the
sentence). Analogously, statistics underlying successful
processing of A/IN material also invoke long-distance
elements given the ambiguous nature and relative clause
construction common to most sentences of that set. And
while the nature of individual differences in the processing
of phonologically typical lexical items has yet to be fully
known, it seems plausible that individual sensitivity to such
cues relies upon detecting sequential phonological
regularities that are in essence adjacently co-occurring and
thus hinge upon attunement to local (i.e., adjacent) relations.

General Discussion
As language often involves interspersing several words or
linguistic constituents between long-distance dependencies,
it is critical to determine the extent to which this can be
accomplished via SL. The results in Experiment 1 build
upon the formative findings of Gómez (2002), who studied
the learning of nonadjacent structure in three-element
dependency strings, and extend them to five-element
sequences—showing that the detection of farther, surfacelevel long-distance statistical relationships than previously
reported is, in fact, possible by human learners.
Additionally, sensitivity to such statistical structure was

1311

demonstrated across two different circumstances (i.e.,
variations in the permissibility of overlapped words and in
the relative set sizes of the intervening material). These
findings are a step forward in scaling up the complexity of
artificial grammars to match with that of language, and aid
in preliminarily countering concerns for the feasibility of
current SL approaches to account for the learning of longdistance relationships common to language—a point of
contention besetting earlier behaviorist endeavors.
Experiment 2 shows that the variation in learning
performance observed in Experiment 1 also pertains to SL
tasks instantiating more standard grammars and that such
variation within the normal population may provide a
suitable framework for further testing the empirical
relatedness of language and statistical learning. As a
confirmation of this approach, it appears that sensitivity to
particular kinds of statistical regularities (i.e., adjacent or
nonadjacent) in the artificial grammars was predictive of
processing ability for different types of sentence
constructions (i.e., involving the tracking of either local or
long-distance relationships).
Our results may also be relevant to questions regarding
the nature of underlying mechanism(s) for SL. Although
group performances for adjacent and nonadjacent grammar
tasks have been documented, the research presented here is
the first to assess within-subject differences across these
tasks. The lack of significant correlation detected between
them, and possibly the differentiation of their predictive
relations to the language measures, raises an intriguing
question as to whether the two types of SL may be
subserved by separate mechanisms. More research that, as
here, makes within-subject comparisons across tasks is
needed to understand the proper relation between different
types of SL and the degree to which they may be relying on
the same or different neural underpinnings.
Further work in the learning of long-distant dependencies,
in tandem with examining individual differences in
language and statistical learning, should thus aid in mapping
more concretely the relation between statistical sensitivities
and linguistic processing, while elucidating the nature of the
underlying mechanism(s) upon which statistical learning
and language may commonly supervene.

Cherry, K.E., & Stadler, M.A. (1995). Implicit learning of a
nonverbal sequence in younger and older adults. Psychology and
Aging, 10, 379-394.
Farmer, T.A., Christiansen, M.H., & Monaghan, P. (2006).
Phonological
typicality
influences
on-line
sentence
comprehension. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 103, 12203-12208.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R.N. (2002). Statistical learning of new visual
feature combinations by infants. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, USA, 99, 15822-15826.
Gómez, R. (2002). Variability and detection of invariant structure.
Psychological Science, 13, 431-436.
Gómez, R.L., & Gerken, L.A. (2000). Infant artificial language
learning and language acquisition. Trends in Cognitive Science,
4, 178-186.
Hunt, R.H., & Aslin, R.N. (2001). Statistical learning in a serial
reaction time task: Access to separable statistical cues by
individual learners. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130(4), 658-680.
MacDonald, M.C., & Christiansen, M.H. (2002). Reassessing
working memory: Comment on Just and Carpenter (1992) and
Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review, 109, 35-54.
Newport, E.L., & Aslin, R.N. (2004). Learning at a distance I.
Statistical learning of nonadjacent dependencies. Cognitive
Psychology, 48, 127-162.
Onnis, L., Christiansen, M.H., Chater, N., & Gómez, R. (2003).
Reduction of uncertainty in human sequential learning:
Evidence from artificial language learning. Proceedings of the
25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
886-891). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pacton, S., Perruchet, P., Fayol, M., & Cleeremans, A. (2001).
Implicit learning out of the lab: The case of orthographic
regularities. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130,
401-426.
Saffran, J.R. (2003). Statistical language learning: Mechanisms
and constraints. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
12(4), 110-114.
Saffran, J.R. (2001). The use of predictive dependencies in
language learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 493515.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996). Statistical
learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Saffran, J.R., Johnson, E.K., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1999).
Statistical learning of tone sequences by human infants and
adults. Cognition, 70, 27-52.
Stanovich, K.E., & West, R.F. (1989). Exposure to print and
orthographic processing. Reading Research Quarterly, 24(4),
402-433.
Trueswell, J.C., Tanenhaus, M.K., & Garnsey, S.M. (1994).
Semantic influences on parsing: Use of thematic role
information in syntactic ambiguity resolution. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33, 285-318.
Waters, G.S., & Caplan, D. (1996). The measurement of verbal
working memory capacity and its relation to reading
comprehension. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
49, 51-79.
Wells, J., Christiansen, M.H., MacDonald, M.C., & Race, D.
(2007). Experience and sentence comprehension: Statistical
learning, working memory, and individual differences.
Submitted manuscript.
Wechsler, D. (1981). The Wechsler Adult Intelligence ScaleRevised. New York: Psychological Corporation.
Zachary, R.A. (1994). Shipley Institute of Living Scale, Revised
Manual. Los Angeles: Weston Psychological Services.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Luca Onnis for assistance with the recording of
stimuli in Exp. 1; Courtney Blake for help with running
participants in Exp. 1; and Thomas Farmer for assisting with
the preparation/construction of sentence stimuli in Exp. 2.

References
Brooks, P.J., Kempe, V., & Sionov, A. (2006). The role of learner
and input variables in learning inflectional morphology. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 27, 185-209.
Cacioppo, J., Petty, R., & Kao, C. (1982). The need for cognition.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 116-131.
Cattell, R.B. (1971). Abilities: Their structure, growth and action.
Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.

1312

