UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Facial Features for Affective State Detection in Learning Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9w00945d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
McDaniel, Bethany
D'Mello, Sidney
King, Brandon
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Facial Features for Affective State Detection in Learning Environments
Bethany McDaniel (btmcdanl@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis

Sidney D’Mello (sdmello@memphis.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Memphis

Brandon King (bgking@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis

Patrick Chipman (pchipman@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis

Kristy Tapp (kmsnyder@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis

Art Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis

System. This system specified how specific facial
behaviors, based on the muscles that produce them, could
identify “basic emotions”. Each movement in the face is
referred to as an action unit (or AU). There are
approximately 58 action units. These facial patterns were
used to identify the emotions of happiness, sadness,
surprise, disgust, anger, and fear (Ekman & Friesen, 1978;
Elfenbein & Ambady, 2002). Doubts have been raised,
however, that these six emotions are frequent and
functionally significant in the learning process (D’Mello et
al., 2006; Kapoor, Mota, & Picard, 2001). Some have
challenged the adequacy of basing a theory of emotions on
these “basic” emotions (Rozin & Cohen, 2003). Moreover,
Ekman’s coding system was tested primarily on static
pictures rather than on changing expressions over time..
There is some evidence for a different set of emotions that
influence learning and cognition, specifically boredom
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; Miserandino, 1996), confusion
(Graesser & Olde, 2003; Kort, Reilly, & Picard, 2001), flow
(i.e. engagement, Csikszentmihalyi, 1990), and frustration
(Kort, Reilly, & Picard, 2001; Patrick et al., 1993).
Curiosity and eureka (i.e. the “a-ha” experience) are also
believed to accompany learning. A study was recently
conducted to investigate the occurrence of these emotions,
as well as Ekman’s basic emotions. The study used an
emote-aloud procedure (D’Mello et al., 2006), a variant of
the think-aloud procedure (Ericsson & Simon, 1993), as an
online measure of the learners’ affective states during
learning. College students were asked to express the
affective states they were feeling while working on a task, in
this case being tutored in computer literacy with AutoTutor.
Using the emote-aloud method allowed for the on-line
identification of emotions while working on the learning
task. A sample of 215 emote-aloud observations were

Abstract
This study investigated facial features to detect the affective
states (or emotions) that accompany deep-level learning of
conceptual material. Videos of the participants’ faces were
captured while they interacted with AutoTutor on computer
literacy topics. After the tutoring session, the affective states
(boredom, confusion, delight, flow, frustration, and surprise)
of the student were identified by the learner, a peer, and two
trained judges. Participants’ facial expressions were coded by
two independent judges using Ekman’s Facial Action Coding
System. Correlational analyses indicated that specific facial
features could segregate confusion, delight, and frustration
form the baseline state of neutral, but boredom was
indistinguishable from neutral. We discuss the prospects of
automatically detecting these emotions on the basis of facial
features that are highly diagnostic.
Keywords: Facial features; action units, affective states;
emotions; learning; AutoTutor; classifying affect

Introduction
It is widely acknowledged that cognition, motivation, and
emotions are three fundamental components of learning
(Snow, Corno, & Jackson, 1996). Emotion has been viewed
as source of motivational energy (Harter, 1981;
Miserandino, 1996; Stipek, 1998), but it can also be viewed
as a more complex independent factor that plays an
explanatory role in both learning and motivation (Ford,
1992; Meyer & Turner, 2002). The link between emotions
and learning has received more attention during the last
decade in the fields of psychology, education, and computer
science (Craig, Graesser, Sullins, & Gholson, 2004;
Graesser, Jackson, & McDaniel, 2007; Kort, Reilly, &
Picard, 2001; Picard 1997; Meyer & Turner, 2002).
Ekman and Friesen (1978) highlighted the expressive
aspects of emotions with their Facial Action Coding

467

participants completed a pretest with multiple-choice
questions, then interacted with the AutoTutor system for 32
minutes on one of three randomly assigned topics in
computer literacy (Hardware, Internet, Operating Systems),
and then completed a posttest. During the tutoring session,
the system recorded a video of the participant’s face, their
posture pressure patterns, and a video of their computer
screen.
The second phase involved affect judgments by the
learner, a peer, and two trained judges. A list of the affective
states and definitions was provided for all four judges. The
states were boredom, confusion, flow, frustration, delight,
neutral and surprise. The selection of emotions was based
on previous studies of AutoTutor (Craig et al., 2004;
D’Mello et al., 2006; Graesser et al., 2006) that collected
observational data and emote-aloud protocols while college
students learned with AutoTutor.
In the affect judging session, participants viewed video
streams of both the computer screen and face of the learner,
during the AutoTutor session. The judges were instructed to
make judgments on what affective states were present in
each 20-second interval (called mandatory judgments); at
these points the video automatically paused for their affect
judgments. They were also instructed to indicate any
affective states that were present in between the 20-second
stops (voluntary judgments). Four sets of emotion
judgments were made for each participant’s AutoTutor
session. First, in the self judgments, participants viewed
their own AutoTutor session immediately after their
learning session. Second, in the peer judgments, participants
came back one week later to view and judge another
participant’s session on the same topic in computer literacy.
Finally, two trained judges independently judged all of the
sessions. The judges were trained on Ekman’s Facial Action
Coding System (Ekman & Friesen, 1978) and on
characteristics of dialogue.

produced by 7 participants. The emotions of interest were
listed and defined for the student before they started the
learning task. The emotions came from both groups: (1)
learning-specific emotions, i.e., boredom, confusion,
curious, eureka, and frustration and (2) basic emotions, e.g.,
anger and disgust. The results indicated that the 5 learning
specific emotions accounted for 91% of the total verbalized
reports while the remaining 9% of the emote-aloud
utterances were for the basic emotions. In addition, curiosity
rarely occurred (3%) and eureka was often confused with
delight when giving a correct answer or surprise when
getting an unexpected feedback from the tutor. These
affective states were therefore replaced with delight and
surprise.
The present study focused on boredom, confusion,
delight, flow, frustration, and surprise as the affective states
that are relevant to learning. We acknowledge that this set of
affective states is not exhaustive for all learning
environments, but they were the most prominent while
college students learn with AutoTutor (Graesser et al.,
2006). Moreover, some of these affective states have been
correlated with learning gains. Boredom is negatively
correlated with learning, whereas confusion and flow are
positively correlated with learning (Craig et al., 2004).
This study identified the action units that accompany the
experience of these selected emotions. Once the
representative AUs for the learning-specific affective states
are determined, computer analyses can be used to
automatically identify those AUs and make inferences on
the emotions of the learner. If the affective states of a
learner can be detected with a reasonable degree of
accuracy, then intelligent tutoring systems, peer learning
companions, and educational software in general can revise
their pedagogical strategies by incorporating both the
affective states of the learner and their cognitive states.

Methods
Data Treatment

Participants

Analysis of Agreement among Judges. Interjudge
reliability was computed using Cohen’s kappa for all
possible pairs of judges: self, peer, trained judge 1, and
trained judge 2. There were 6 possible pairs altogether. The
kappas for the mandatory judgments were: self-peer (.06),
self-judge 1 (.11), self-judge 2 (.13), peer-judge 1 (.11),
peer-judge 2 (.15), and judge 1-judge 2 (.31). These kappa
scores revealed that the trained judges had the highest
agreement, the self and peer pair had lowest agreement, and
the other pairs of judges were in between. It should be
noted, however, that the kappa scores increased
substantially [self-peer (.12), self-judge 1 (.31), self-judge 2
(.24), peer-judge 1 (.36), peer-judge 2 (.37), and judge 1judge 2 (.71)] when we focused on voluntary judgments.
Additional details on this analysis are reported in Graesser
at al. (2006).

The participants were 28 undergraduate students who
participated for extra course credit in a psychology course.

Materials
AutoTutor. AutoTutor is a fully automated computer tutor
that simulates human tutors and holds conversations with
students in natural language (Graesser, Chipman, Haynes, &
Olney, 2005; Graesser et al., 1999). AutoTutor helps
students learn Newtonian physics, computer literacy, and
critical thinking by presenting challenging problems (or
questions) from a curriculum script and engaging in a
mixed-initiative dialog while the learner constructs an
answer. In this study, students interacted with AutoTutor on
topics concerning computer literacy.

Procedure
The study was divided into two phases. The first phase was
a standard pretest–intervention–posttest design. The

Data Selection. The above kappa scores indicate that an
emotion labeling task is more difficult if judges are asked to

468

frustration, and neutral. Surprise was not included because
this emotion was extremely rare. Flow was also excluded
because it rarely appeared in the voluntary emotion samples.

make emotion judgments at regularly polled timestamps,
rather than being able to stop a video display to make
spontaneous judgments. The states at regular timestamps are
much less salient so there is minimal information to base
their judgments, compared with those points when affective
states are detected by the judge. Therefore, we decided to
focus on data points where the affect judgments were
voluntarily provided by the judges. This approach is
beneficial for two reasons. First, the increased kappa scores
made us more confident in the validity of the emotion
measurement task. Secondly, it is reasonable to assume that
the facial expressions of learners are more animated at these
voluntary points compared to regularly polled timestamps
when their face is frequently neutral. This hypothesis was
confirmed by analyzing the proportions of emotion
categories at the mandatory points. When averaged over the
4 judges, the most common affective state was neutral
(36.9%), followed by confusion (21.2%), flow (18.8%), and
boredom (16.7%). The remaining states of delight,
frustration and surprise constituted 6.5% of the
observations. The more salient voluntary points had a rather
different distribution. The most prominent affective state
was confusion (37.7%), followed by delight (19.2%), and
frustration (19.1%). The remaining affective states
comprised 24.0% of the observations (boredom, surprise,
flow, and neutral, in descending order). Therefore, the
affective states that presumably accompany heightened
arousal (confusion, delight, and frustration) are more
prominent at the voluntary points.
One consequence of exclusively relying on voluntary
judgments for facial expression coding is that the frequency
of these points is substantially less than the mandatory
observations. There were 2688 data points for the
mandatory observations, but only 1133 points of voluntary
observations. A subset of the voluntary points was identified
by only a single judge (self, peer, or one of the trained
judges). This sample size reduction problem was mitigated
by an exhaustive voluntary affect judgment session in which
the trained judges repeated the judgment procedure with the
added requirement that they had to provide affect ratings on
all 1133 voluntary emotion observations. We found that the
two trained judges agreed 64% of the time (N = 720)
yielding a kappa score of 0.49. This kappa score is higher
than that achieved for the mandatory observations (0.31) but
substantially lower when compared to the purely voluntary
observations (0.71). However, it is on par with reliability
scores reported by other researchers who have assessed
identification of emotions by humans (e.g. Ang et al., 2002;
Forbes-Riley & Litman, 2004).
Since facial action unit coding is a time consuming, labor
intensive process, we sampled 212 emotion episodes out of
the 720 data points obtained from the exhaustive voluntary
affect judgment procedure. These points were sampled to
approximate a uniform distribution of the different
emotions, i.e., an approximately equal number of
observations was obtained from each participant and for
each of the affective states of boredom, confusion, delight,

Scoring Procedure. The expression of emotions tends to be
short in duration, lasting only about 3 seconds (Ekman,
2003). Two judges independently coded the facial videos 34 seconds before the emotional episode, using the Facial
Action Coding System (Ekman & Friesen, 1978).
Specifically, 212 video clips 3-4 seconds in duration were
prepared for action unit coding. The clips were not
associated with any discernable emotion annotation, so the
judges were unaware of the learner’s emotion while viewing
the clips. The two AU coders were not the trained judges
used for the emotion judgment procedure. Each coder
watched the clips and recorded the AUs present along with
the time of each observation. It is important to note that we
decided to focus on a subset (N = 33) of the action units that
were most relevant to the emotions under exploration.

Results
We computed the proportion of AUs observed by each rater
and discarded AUs that occurred relatively infrequently. We
adopted an ad-hoc selection threshold of 3%, such that AUs
that appeared in less than 3% of the samples were discarded.
When averaged across both judges, we preserved 12 AUs
that collectively represented 80% of the observations. The
21 less frequent AUs comprised the remaining 20% of the
observations and were subsequently discarded.
Facial Action Unit
AU1 Inner Brow Raiser
AU2 Outer Brow Raiser
AU4 Brow Lowerer
Upper Face
AU7 Lid Tightener
AU43 Eye Closure
AU45 Blink
Lower Face
AU12 Lip Corner Puller
Lip Parting & AU25 Lips Part
Jaw Opening AU26 Jaw Drop
AU55 Head Tilt Left
Head Positions
AU56 Head Tilt Right
Eye Positions AU64 Eyes Down
Other
-

Prop.
.056
.033
.057
.079
.047
.172
.100
.089
.056
.035
.035
.037
.206

Kappa
.642
.534
.779
.590
.605
.681
.707
.912
.851
.770
.665
.833
-

Table 1. Proportion of Action Units Observed
Table 1 presents the proportion of each of the AUs averaged
across the two human coders. Kappa scores between the two
coders for each of the AUs are also presented. We note that
the majority of the activity of the facial features during
emotional experiences occurred on the upper face, with the
mouth area a close second. The kappa scores also indicate
that the level of agreement achieved by the AU judges in

469

perhaps indicative of a half smile as evident in Figure 1d.
This may be an attempt by the learner to disguise an
emotion associated with negative connotations in society.

coding the target action units ranged from fair to excellent
(M = .721, SD = .117).

Relationship between Action Units and Emotions
Correlations were computed to determine the extent to
which each of the AUs were diagnostic of the affective
states of boredom, confusion, delight, frustration, and
neutral. Two sets of correlations were computed in order to
determine whether significant patterns emerged across both
independent coders. These correlations are presented in
Table 2. The analyses revealed that there was a good degree
of concordance among the two judges. Barring a few
anomalies that may be attributed to individual differences of
the coders, the directions of the relationships are consistent
between the two AU coders. In the subsequent discussion
we only focus on the significant correlations presented in
Table 2, when both coders achieved a consensus.
We found that confusion was manifested by a lowered
brow (AU 4), the tightening of the eye lids (AU 7), and a
notable lack of a lip corner puller (AU 12). Figure 1b
presents an example of confusion in which AUs 4 and 7 are
prominent (see furrowed brow). This pattern replicates
D’Mello et al.’s (2006) results when learners verbally
expressed their affective states while interacting with
AutoTutor. However, one exception is that, in the D’Mello
et al. (2006) study, the presence of a lip corner puller was
associated with a state of confusion.
The present study revealed that a number of action units
that span the entire face can distinguish delight from neutral.
In particular, the presence of AU 7 (lid tightener), AU 12
(lip corner puller), AU 25 (lips part), and AU 26 (jaw drop)
coupled with an absence of AU 45 (blink) segregate this
emotion from neutral. These patterns are generally
consistent with a smile, as illustrated in Figure 1(c) where
AUs 7 and 12 are activated.
Frustration is a state that is typically associated with
significant physiological arousal, yet the facial features we
tracked were not very good at distinguishing this emotion
from neutral. The only significant correlation with
frustration was obtained for AU 12 (lip corner puller) –

Facial Action Unit

Boredom
(N=26)
Judge1 Judge2

A. Boredom

B. Confusion

C. Delight

D. Frustration

Figure 1. Examples of Affective States
It appears that boredom is not easily distinguishable from
neutral on the basis of the facial features. Indeed, boredom
resembles an expressionless face (see Figure 1a). This result
replicates an earlier finding by Craig et al. (2004), where no
action unit was found to be associated with boredom.

Discriminating between Affective States
A discriminant analysis was performed with the affective
state of the learner as the dependent variable and the various
facial features as predictors. In this analysis only the AUs
that significantly correlated with the affective states were
included as predictors (AU 1, AU 4, AU 7, AU 12, AU 25,
AU 26, and AU 45). Although four discriminant functions
were calculated, the results indicated that only the first two
functions were statistically significant (χ2(28) = 200.8, p
<.001 for function 1 and χ2(18) = 79.64, p < .001 for

Confusion
(N=59)
Judge1 Judge2
.196
.458
.417
.157
.275
-.208 -.150

Affective State
Delight
(N=43)
Judge1 Judge2

Frustration
(N=47)
Judge1 Judge2

AU1 Inner Brow Raiser
AU4 Brow Lowerer
-.186
-.191
AU7 Lid Tightener
-.247 -.223
.240
.180
AU12 Lip Corner Puller
-.260 -.300
.522
.456
.167
.161
AU25 Lips Part
.342
.337
AU26 Jaw Drop
.363
.282
AU43 Eye Closure
.195
AU45 Blink
.313
-.169 -.180
Note. All listed correlations statistically significant at the p < .05 level.
Table 2 Statistically Significant Correlations between Action Units and Affective States

470

Neutral
(N=37)
Judge1 Judge2
-.240
-.288
-.265
-.156
-.164
-.178

-.160
-.270
-.224
-.197
-.145

of this emotion may have to use additional indicators,
acoustic-prosodic features of speech and posture patterns.
We have also had some success in separating boredom from
neutral on the basis of dialogue features in the log file of
interactions with AutoTutor (D’Mello & Graesser, 2006).
In the earlier study that utilized emote-aloud protocols
(Craig et al., 2004), it was reported that frustration was
associated with a raised inner and outer brow (AUs 1 and 2)
and a dimpler (AU 14). However, these patterns were not
replicated in the current study. This suggests that there
might be occasional differences between our current offline
methodology and our previous emote-aloud methodology,
which was an on-line measure. A smaller sample of
participants (N = 7) were run in the emote-aloud study
whereas 28 participants were run in the current study.
The broader goal of this research is to transform
AutoTutor into an affect-sensitive intelligent tutoring
system (D’Mello et al., 2005). This endeavor involves the
development of automatic affect detection systems and a
reengineering of AutoTutor’s pedagogical strategies to
incorporate the learner’s emotions. This research directly
contributes to that effort by identifying the facial features
that accompany certain emotions. There are existing
systems that can automatically code AUs with reasonable
accuracy (Cohn & Kanade, in press). We are currently
investigating the possibility of integrating these
computational systems to aid in inferring the affective states
of the learner. We are also considering the use of additional
sensors that track posture patterns, speech contours, and
dialogue information. We hope that the combination of
these methods will yield reliable estimates of the affective
states of the learner.

function 2). These functions were able to account for 98%
of the variance, with 63.5% of the variance explained by the
first function and the remaining 34.5% of the variance
attributed to function 2. Correlations between the predictor
variables and the discriminant functions indicated that AU
12 (lip corner puller) was the best predictor for function 1
while AU 1 (inner brow raiser), AU4 (brow lowerer), and
AU 7 (lid tightener) were the best predictors for function 2.
This implies that function 1 utilizes information from the
lower face (i.e. the mouth) to discriminate between the
affective states. The second function relies on information
from the upper face (i.e. the brow and eyelids) to
disambiguate the affective states.
The discriminant function was also able to successfully
predict the affective states with an accuracy of 49.1%, a
significant improvement over the base rate of 0.21 (kappa =
.35). This is a reasonable level of accuracy in inferring
complex mental states. We also computed kappa scores for
individually detecting each of the affective states. The
results indicated that the discriminant function was most
successful in detecting delight (kappa = .65) followed by
confusion (kappa = .41). This was expected since both these
states are typically accompanied by animated facial
expressions. The reliability of detecting the more subtle
affective states of boredom and neutral was lower than
delight and confusion (kappa = 0.12 for both states). Our
results also indicated that the discriminant analysis was
unable to distinguish frustration from the other emotions. In
fact, the kappa score for this emotion reflected an accuracy
equal to random guessing (kappa = -0.07).

Discussion
This study examined the facial features that accompany the
affective states that routinely occur during learning complex
topics with AutoTutor. We have discovered several
important patterns in the manner in which learners convey
these emotions though their faces. The highly animated
affective states of confusion and delight are easily
detectable from facial expressions. It is tempting to
speculate, from an evolutionary perspective, that learners
use their face as a social cue to indicate that they are
confused, which potentially recruits resources to alleviate
their perplexity. Delight is also readily expressed on the
face, perhaps because it is a positive emotion. However, it
appears that learners do not readily display frustration,
perhaps due to the negative connotations associated with
this emotion. This finding is consistent with Ekman’s theory
of social display rules, in which social pressures may result
in the disguising of negative emotions such as frustration.
The associations between the various facial features and
the affective states of confusion and boredom generally
replicate earlier findings from the emote-aloud study. For
example, the raising of the inner brow coupled with the
tightening of the lids appears to be the prototypical
expression of confusion. However, for boredom, in neither
study could any particular subset of action units be
associated with this emotion. This suggests that the tracking

Acknowledgments
We thank our research colleagues at the University of
Memphis and MIT, as well as Steelcase Inc. for providing
us with the Tekscan Body Pressure Measurement System at
no cost. This research was supported by the National
Science Foundation (REC 0106965, ITR 0325428, REESE
0633918). Any opinions, findings and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.

References
Ang, J., Dhillon, R., Krupski, A., Shriberg, E., & Stolcke,
A. (2002). Prosody-based automatic detection of
annoyance and frustration in human-computer dialog. In
J. H. L. Hansenet al (Eds.), Proceedings of the
International Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP’02) (pp. 2037-2039). Denver.
Cohn, J. F. & Kanade, T. (In press). Use of automated facial
image analysis for measurement of emotion expression. In
J. A. Coan & J. B. Allen (Eds.), The handbook of emotion
elicitation and assessment. Oxford University Press Series
in Affective Science. New York: Oxford.
Craig S., D’Mello S., Gholson B., Witherspoon A., Sullins
J., and Graesser A, (2004). Emotions during learning: The

471

Graesser, A.C., & Olde, B.A. (2003). How does one know
whether a person understands a device? The quality of the
questions the person asks when the device breaks down.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 524-536
Graesser, A. C., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Wiemer-Hastings, P.,
Kreuz, R., & the TRG (1999). AutoTutor: A simulation of
a human tutor. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 1,
35-51.
Graesser, A.C., Witherspoon, A., McDaniel, B., D’Mello,
S., Chipman, P., Gholson, B. (2006). Detection of
emotions during learning with AutoTutor. In R. Son (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meetings of the Cognitive
Science Society. (pp. 285-290). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Harter, S. (1981). A model of mastery motivation in
children: Individual differences and developmental
change. In W. A. Collins (Ed.). The Minnesota
symposium on child psychology. Aspects of the
development of competence, 14, (pp. 215-255). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kapoor, A., Mota, S. and Picard, R. (2001). Towards a
learning companion that recognizes affect. AAAI Fall
Symposium 2001, North Falmouth MA, November 2001.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R. (2001). An affective model
of interplay between emotions and learning:
Reengineering educational pedagogy—building a learning
companion. In T. Okamoto, R. Hartley, Kinshuk, & J. P.
Klus (Eds.), Proceedings IEEE International Conference
on Advanced Learning Technology: Issues, Achievements
and Challenges (pp. 43-48). IEEE Computer Society.
Meyer, D. K., & Turner, J. C. (2002). Discovering Emotion
in Classroom Motivation Research. Educational
Psychologist, 37, 107-114. Miserandino, M. (1996)
Children who do well in school: Individual differences in
perceived competence and autonomy in above-average
children, Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 203–
214.
Patrick B., Skinner, E. & Connell, J. (1993). What motivates
children’s behavior and emotion? Joint effects of
perceived control and autonomy in the academic domain,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 781–
791.
Picard, R. W. (1997). Affective computing. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. Rozin, P. & Cohen, A. B. (2003). High
frequency of facial expressions corresponding to
confusion, concentration, and worry in an analysis of
maturally occurring facial expressions of Americans,
Emotion, 3, 68–75.
Snow, R. E., Corno, L., & Jackson, D. (1996). Individual
differences in affective and conative functions. In D. C.
Berliner & R. C. Calfee (Eds.) Handbook of educational
psychology (pp. 243-310). New York: Macmillan.
Stipek, D. (1998) Motivation to learn: from theory to
practice (3rd ed.) Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.

first steps toward an affect sensitive intelligent tutoring
system. E-learn (in press). Association for the
Advancement of Computing in Education, Norfolk, VA.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience. Harper-Row: NY.
D'Mello, S. K., Craig, S. D., Gholson, B.; Franklin, S.,
Picard, R., & Graesser, A. C. (2005). Integrating affect
sensors in an intelligent tutoring system. In Affective
Interactions: The Computer in the Affective Loop
Workshop at 2005 International conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces, 7-13. New York: AMC Press.
D’Mello, S. K., Craig, S. D., Sullins, J., & Graesser, A. C.
(2006). Predicting affective states through an emote-aloud
procedure from AutoTutor’s mixed-initiative dialogue.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 16, 3-28.
D’Mello, S., & Graesser, A.C. (2006). Affect detection from
human-computer dialogue with an intelligent tutoring
system. In J. Gratch, M. Young, R. Aylett, D. Ballin, and
P. Oliver (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science:
Intelligent Virtual Agents: 6th International Conference
(pp. 54-67). Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Elfenbein, H. A. & Ambady, N. (2002) On the universality
and cultural specificity of emotion recognition: a
metaanalysis, Psychological Bulletin, 128, 203–235
Ekman, P. 2003. Emotions Revealed. New York: Henry
Holt and Company.
Ekman, P. & Friesen, W.V. (1969). Nonverbal leakage and
clues to deception. Psychiatry, 32, 88-105.
Ekman, P, & W. V. Friesen. (1978). The facial action
coding system: A technique for the measurement of facial
movement. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists Press
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. (1972). Constants across culture
in the face and emotion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 17, 124–129. Ericsson, K. A. & Simon, H. A.
(1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Revised
edition. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Forbes-Riley, K. & D. Litman. (2004). Predicting emotion
in spoken dialogue from multiple knowledge sources. In
Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 201-208.
Boston, MA.
Graesser, A. C., P. Chipman, B. C. Haynes, & A. Olney.
(2005). AutoTutor: An intelligent tutoring system with
mixed-initiative dialogue. IEEE Transactions in
Education, 48, 612-618.
Graesser, A.C., Jackson, G.T., & McDaniel, B. (2007).
AutoTutor holds conversations with learners that are
responsive to their cognitive and emotional states.
Educational Technology, 47, 19-22.
Graesser, A.C., McDaniel, B., Chipman, P., Witherspoon,
A., D’Mello, S., & Gholson, B. (2006). Detection of
emotions during learning with AutoTutor. In R. Son (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meetings of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 285-290). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

472

