UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gender-Congruency and Cognate Effect in Bulgarian-English Bilinguals: Evidence from a
Word-Translation Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/08z8c0k4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Janyan, Armina
Hristova, Marina

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gender Congruency and Cognate Effect in Bulgarian-English Bilinguals:
Evidence from a Word-Translation Task
Armina Janyan (ajanyan@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Marina Hristova (mhristova@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
The present study aims to investigate the cognate and gender
congruency effects in Bulgarian-English proficient bilinguals
using a visual word translation task. The results of two
experiments confirm the pattern generally observed in the
area: we have found a strong cognate effect present in both
translation directions (from the dominant L1 into nondominant L2 and vice versa). In addition, we have obtained a
gender congruency effect which suggests that bilinguals use
gender information of their native language during
translation.
Keywords: bilingualism, word translation, cognates, gender
congruency, reaction time.

Introduction
Most researchers agree on two basic assumptions concerning
bilingual language organization: first, that the concepts are
shared between the languages and second, that lexical
representations are segregated to a great extent. One such
model of bilingual language representation is the revised
hierarchical model (RHM) which assumes that lexical
representations are language specific whereas conceptual
representations are shared among the languages (Kroll &
Stewart, 1994; Kroll & de Groot, 1997). The model specifies
that language-dominant (L1) and language-non-dominant
(L2) word forms are associated with each other and to a
common concept to different degrees. The strength of these
associations is a function of language proficiency. The RHM
proposes that both L1 and L2 word forms activate common
concepts but that L1 words activate concepts more strongly
than L2 words. In addition, the RHM posits that L1 and L2
words can activate each other at the lexical level through
translation. However, according to the model, the lexical links
are stronger in the L2-L1 direction than in the opposite one.
Thus, the RHM predicts facilitated translation from L2 to L1
which is confirmed by experimental research (e.g., Kroll &
Stewart, 1994; Francis, Augustini, & Sáenz, 2003).
To address the issue of bilingual language representation,
many studies compare processing of cognates and noncognates in bilinguals. Cognates are words that have similar
form and meaning in both languages (L1 & L2) such as
English lamp and Bulgarian лампа [lampa]. Non-cognates

have different forms in L1 and L2 but similar meaning such
as elephant in English and слон [slon] in Bulgarian. The
general finding is that cognates are produced, recognized and
translated faster than non-cognates (e.g., Kroll & Stewart,
1994; Dijkstra, Grainger, & van Heuven, 1999; Costa,
Caramazza, & Sebastian-Galles, 2000; Costa, Santesteban, &
Caño, 2005). The faster production, recognition and
translation of cognates are usually attributed to a common set
of
form-based
representations
(e.g.
orthographic,
phonological, morphological) that are used to process them in
both languages. Another consideration in the model is that the
advantage magnitude of cognates is also dependent on the
language proficiency of an individual – the less proficient the
bilingual is in his/her non-dominant language, the larger the
magnitude (Kroll & de Groot, 1997) - which suggests that
less proficient bilinguals may rely more on lexical translation
strategy bypassing concept mediation.
However, in addition to various lexical and conceptual
properties a word also has grammatical ones. One of these
grammatical features widely researched in the area of lexical
access is grammatical gender. Among the questions asked are
where and when in the course of (monolingual) lexical access
grammatical information is selected and what are the factors
that influence that selection (e.g., Bates, Devescovi,
Pizzamiglio, D’Amico, & Hernandez, 1995; Miozzo, Costa &
Caramazza, 2002; Costa, Kovacic, Fedorenko, & Caramazza,
2003; Schiller & Caramazza, 2003).
A model that tries to take into account syntactic and
grammatical features representation in the bilingual mind is
the distributed feature model (Kroll & de Groot, 1997). First,
the model assumes that lexical forms and meanings are
integrated within unitary lexical and conceptual systems;
moreover, it assumes varying degrees of overlap of
conceptual and lexical features between L1 and L2
meanings. Thus, for example, the model predicts faster
cognate translation not necessarily because the translation
processing might be restricted to the lexical level but
because cognates have a higher level of feature overlap on
both the lexical and the conceptual levels (Kroll & de Groot,
1997). That is, the level of processing facilitation or
interference is a function of the degree of form-meaning
mapping consistency within and across languages. The
model also takes into account the language proficiency level
assuming weaker form-meaning mapping with less L2

1121

proficiency. Finally, the model introduces a languagespecific “lemma-level” which represents patterns of
activation between word forms and meanings. In the
absence of context, the lemma level may reflect only these
form-meaning mappings. In the presence of context, the
lemma may also reflect syntactic-level processes that
selectively weight the activation of lexical and conceptual
features (Kroll & de Groot, 1997). This means that in the
presence of syntactic context (e.g., grammatical gender
priming) the form-meaning mappings will get higher
activation when the context is congruent with the mapping
and the processing will be facilitated. On the other hand, if
the context is incongruent, processing will be encumbered.
The present study has two main aims. The first is to
confirm the cognate effect in Bulgarian-English bilinguals
and the facilitated translation from L2 to L1. Both these
effects are predicted by both models described above and
widely established in other language pairs. Second, we ask if
the bilinguals use gender information during lexical access
when their native language does have gender marking1, and
the non-native does not. Previous research on the role of the
gender system in bilingual language production has obtained
contradictory results. Costa, Kovacic, Frank & Caramazza
(2003) asked a number of groups of bilinguals with different
language pairs to name pictures whose names had either the
same gender in both languages or different. The results
showed no difference in these two conditions. The authors
concluded that the two gender systems of a bilingual are
functionally autonomous. On the other hand, Bordag (2004)
conducted the same experiment with Czech-German and
German-Czech bilinguals and obtained a robust effect of
grammatical gender of L1 – pictures with congruent gender
names were named faster in L2 than pictures with genderincongruent names. Finally, a study by Guillemon &
Grosjean (2001) employed auditory word naming preceded
by either gender-congruent or gender-incongruent context.
The results showed that gender priming produced inhibitory
and facilitatory effects but only for early English-French
bilinguals, late bilinguals were not sensitive to the gender
marking. It seems that these results fit nicely with the
distributed feature model (Kroll & de Groot, 1997).
Thus, we test the prediction of the distributed feature model
(DFM) that context will lead to the selective weight of
activation of some features over others. More specifically, we
expect that gender-congruent context will facilitate translation
especially in the case of cognates since they share a larger
number of form features between languages than noncognates. In addition, we expect that it will also enhance the
effect of translation direction (faster translation from nondominant gender-free language into dominant genderinflected language).
In order to activate both languages and to approach
bilingual mode as much as possible (Grosjean, 1997), we

have used mixed language presentation that requires constant
language switch: our language-proficient participants were
presented with words in Bulgarian and in English and were
required to translate from Bulgarian into English and from
English into Bulgarian.
Experiment 1 was designed to replicate the cognate effect
and facilitated translation in the L2-L1 direction in BulgarianEnglish bilinguals.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants 16 professional university teachers of English
(4 males and 12 females) volunteered to participate in the
experiment. They had an average age of 35.4 years
(SD=6.7). All of them had normal or corrected to normal
vision. All participants filled in a second language history
questionnaire. Table 1 presents means and standard
deviations of three self-reported measures.
Table 1: Self-reported measures of second language history.
SubProf
M(SD)
5.5 (0.5)

AoA
M(SD)
9.3 (3.6)

Period
M(SD)
25.5 (7.2)

Note. SubProf – subjective proficiency rating on a 6-point
scale (6 – the most proficient), AoA – age of the second
language acquisition (in years), Period – period of second
language learning (in years).
Stimuli and Design
60 cognates and 60 non-cognates
were selected from 2 data bases: one unpublished 400-word
data base (containing subjective frequency and word
imageability), and another data base with 520 pictures and
their dominant responses in seven languages including
English and Bulgarian (Szekely et al., 2004)2. For each
picture the data base contains the dominant responses for
English and Bulgarian. These dominant responses served as
a kind of control of translation equivalents and as lexical
items for the experiment. Items taken from the unpublished
data base had no such control of translation equivalents;
their dominant English translations were generated by a
near-native speaker of English. Translation equivalents for
both groups were then double-checked by a professional
translator. Thus, each of the 60 cognates and 60 noncognates had both English and Bulgarian equivalents. All
words referred to concrete objects. Bulgarian cognate items
were matched by subjective frequency with non-cognates.
Since no subjective frequency was available for all English
translation equivalents, objective frequency for words in both
languages was taken as a common lexical characteristic.
Objective word frequency data for Bulgarian words were
derived from a 72-million data base (Simov et al., 2004),

1

Bulgarian is a Slavic language with three grammatical genders
marked on nouns, adjectives, pronouns, (postpositional) articles,
some numeral and verb-forms.

2

For details on participants, procedures of object naming
experiment, and various psycholinguistic characteristics, visit an
on-line data base at http://www.crl.ucsd.edu/~aszekely/ipnp/.

1122

converted into frequency score per million and then 10-base
logarithm of the score was taken with one added to the score
per million to avoid the undefined Lg(0). Objective word
frequency data for English words were taken from an online
data base of word-form characteristics (Balota et al., 2002).
The English frequency data were based on Hyperspace
Analogue to Language (HAL) frequency norms which
consist of approximately 131 million words (Balota et al.,
2002). The same procedure of conversion into one-million
score and logarithm taking was applied to the English HAL
data. In addition, the words were coded for word length
measured in number of letters. Descriptive statistics is
presented in Table 2. T-tests showed that English words
were longer and more frequent than Bulgarian words and
that cognates were longer than non-cognates (ps<.05). No
differences were found only in word frequency within
languages across word types.
Table 2: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of
word characteristics for each language and each word type.
Frequency
En
1.6
(0.6)
Cognate
N-Cognate 1.4 (0.4)

Bg
0.8 (0.5)
0.8 (0.3)

Length
En
6.5 (1.5)
5.9 (1.5)

Bg
6.0 (1.3)
5.4 (1.1)

Results and Discussion
The following types of errors were identified and excluded
from the data prior to analysis. Trials on which no response
was registered (3.3%) and trials with technical errors (3.0%)
were excluded from the analyses. In addition, trials with
task switching (word reading, 0.5%) and trials with different
from the target equivalent production (3.1%) were
discarded. Further, response times lying more than ±2.5
standard deviations from the mean were also removed,
which resulted in the removal of 2.7% of overall responses.
Thus, a total of 87% of the originally collected RT data
were included in further analyses. The reported results are
based on both item and subject analyses. Since frequency and
word length were not fully controlled, item data were
analyzed with analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) where
word frequency and length served as covariates. Similarly,
subject data were also run with ANCOVA with the three selfreported measures of language history (cf. Table 1) and
subjects’ age as covariates. In such a way the influence of
(possible) confounding contained in item and subject
characteristics, was eliminated (or at least, highly reduced).
Table 3 presents item means and standard deviations for each
condition in ms.
Table 3: Mean response times (in ms) and standard deviations
(in parentheses) for four experimental conditions, item means.

The experiment had a 2 x 2 design: 2 (Word Type:
Cognate vs. Non-cognate) x 2 (Language of presented
stimulus: English vs. Bulgarian).
Procedure
Four pseudo-randomized lists were
constructed so that the same condition appeared no more
than 3 consecutive times and so that there were at least two
non-animate words between two animate. Each list
contained 60 English and 60 Bulgarian words. Each
stimulus was presented only once to each participant either
in English or in Bulgarian.
Participants were tested in a sound-proof booth. The
experimental session started with 8 practice trials, none of
which appeared in the experimental part. Each trial started
with a fixation cross “+” for a random time from 400 to 600
ms. After cross disappearance a word was displayed for
3000 sec or until a subject’s response was generated.
Stimuli were presented at the center of the screen in 28point Bulgarian Times. Participants were instructed to
translate words as fast and as accurately as possible into the
corresponding language (from Bulgarian to English and
from English into Bulgarian). The intertrial interval varied
randomly between 1.7 and 2.2 sec. Responses were recorded
by the experimenter. Reaction time (RT) was measured
from the onset of each stimulus. A serial response button
box recorded voice onset RT. Stimulus presentation and
response recordings were controlled by E-prime software
(Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002). The experiment
took about 10 min.

Cognate
1009 (106)
987 (148)

English
Bulgarian

Non-cognate
1071 (153)
1132 (151)

1150

~
1100
1050

~

***

1000

Cognate
Noncognate

950
900

English

Bulgarian

Figure 1: A Language by Word Type interaction.
A 2x2 ANOVA obtained a significant main effect of word
type and significant interaction. Main effect of language was
highly insignificant (ps>.3). Main effect of word type (Fi(1,
234)=27.18; p=.00; Fs(1, 56)=13.39; p<.001) showed that
cognates were translated faster (998 ms) than non-cognates
(1101 ms). A language by word type interaction (Fi(1,
234)=5.86; p<.05; Fs(1, 56)=3.17; p=.081) is presented in
Figure 1. It can be seen that cognates significantly
facilitated translation from Bulgarian into English. Cognate
facilitation during translation from English to Bulgarian
missed the significance level (p<.07). In addition, the
analyses showed a trend of easier translation from nondominant English into dominant Bulgarian than from

1123

Bulgarian into English (p<.09). No significance was found
between RT of cognate translation from both languages (see
Figure 1).
To summarize, the results replicated the cognate effect
(e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994) and showed a trend3 of
facilitated L2-L1 translation only for non-cognates. Cognates
were translated equally fast from both languages.
Experiment 2 employed the same design adding a gender
congruency variable.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants In addition to the same 16 subjects that
participated in Experiment 1, 8 more professional university
teachers of English volunteered for the experiment. Thus, 24
participants (4 males and 20 females) took part in the
experiment. They had an average age of 36 years (SD=8.0).
All of them had normal or corrected to normal vision. Table
4 presents means and standard deviations of three selfreported measures.
Table 4: Self-reported measures of second language history.
SubProf
M(SD)
5.5 (0.5)

AoA
M(SD)
10.0 (3.4)

Period
M(SD)
25.2 (8.1)

Note. SubProf – subjective proficiency rating on a 6-point
scale (6 – the most proficient), AoA – age of the second
language acquisition (in years), Period – period of second
language learning (in years).
Stimuli and Design
Another 60 cognates and 60 noncognates were selected with the use of the same two data
bases (see Experiment 1) and the same procedure was
applied in establishing translation equivalents and in
objective frequency conversion. Descriptive statistics is
presented in Table 2. Item characteristics (length and
frequency) were matched with the characteristics of items of
the Experiment 1 (cf. Table 2; no significant differences
between the characteristics were found).
Table 5: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) of
word characteristics for each language and each word type.
Frequency
En
1.4 (0.5)
Cognate
N-Cognate 1.4 (0.5)

Bg
0.75 (0.4)
0.75 (0.5)

Length
En
6.3 (1.3)
5.8 (1.5)

Procedure
The procedure was the same as in
Experiment 1 except for the following. Each of the four lists
contained 50% primes that agreed in gender and 50% that
disagreed in gender with either Bulgarian targets that were
to be translated into English or Bulgarian equivalents of
English targets that were to be translated into Bulgarian.
The phrase structure of primes was distributed roughly
equally in a list (i.e., each structure appeared approximately
1/5 of the time).
After cross disappearance the gender prime was presented
auditorily, immediately after which a stimulus was
displayed. The stimuli were presented in the center of the
screen with 30-point CyrillicIISans font. The sound stimuli
were presented using the Macintosh inbuilt sound system
without headphones.
A Carnegie Mellon button box recorded voice onset RT
and controlled stimuli presentation timing. A Power
Macintosh 6400/200 equipped with the PsyScope software
(Cohen et al., 1993) controlled order of presentation of the
stimuli. The experiment lasted 15-20 min.

Results and Discussion

Bg
5.8 (1.6)
5.1 (1.4)

Here again, t-tests showed that English words were longer
and more frequent than Bulgarian words and that cognates
were longer than non-cognates (ps<.05). No differences
3

were found in word frequency within languages across word
types (cf. Table 5).
Gender primes were selected to be semantically neutral and
to vary in their form and phrase structure starting from a
single gender-inflected modifier (edna=”one”, feminine,
singular; njakakva=”some (kind of)”, feminine, singular) to a
verb phrase (“tam se vizhdala”=”there was seen”, feminine,
singular; and “tam se vizhdala edna/njakakva”= “there was
seen one/some”, feminine, singular). The prime was
considered congruent if it agreed in gender with the Bulgarian
translation equivalent (e.g. “edna” = “one”, feminine,
singular, and “salata” = “salad”, feminine, singular) and
incongruent if it did not (e.g. “edna” and “kompas” =
“compass”, masculine, singular). The five types of modifiers
in each of the three genders (feminine, neuter, and masculine)
were taken from the stimuli of another experiment conducted
in the lab. The sound stimuli were recorded by a female
native Bulgarian speaker in a neutral intonation. The words
were digitized using the Macintosh SoundEdit system and
placed in a sound file within the PsyScope experiment
preparation shell (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost,
1993).
The experiment had a 2 x 2 x 2 design: 2 (Word Type:
Cognate vs. Non-cognate) x 2 (Gender priming: Congruent
vs. Incongruent) x 2 (Language of presented stimulus:
English vs. Bulgarian).

The low significance we attribute to the insufficient number of
subjects.

Several types of errors were identified and excluded from
the data prior to analysis. First, trials on which no response
was registered (5.8%) and trials with technical errors (6.3%)
were excluded from the analyses. Second, trials with task
switching (simple word reading, 0.3%) and trials on which a
different from the target equivalent word was produced
(6.5%) were discarded (in many cases participants tried to
produce a gender congruent response in the incongruent
condition, especially for a neuter gender prime followed by

1124

a masculine noun4). Furthermore, response times lying more
than ±2.5 standard deviations from the mean were also
removed, which resulted in the removal of 2.15% of overall
responses.
Thus, a total of 78.9% of the originally collected RT data
were included in further analyses. The reported results are
based on both item and subject analyses. Similarly to the
analyses conducted in Experiment 1, both types of averaged
data were analyzed with ANCOVA where in item analyses
word frequency and length served as covariates (cf. Table 5)
and participants’ age and the three self-reported measures of
language history (cf. Table 4) - in subject analyses. Table 6
presents item means and standard deviations for each
condition in ms.
Table 6: Mean response times (in ms) and standard deviations
for all experimental conditions, item means.
English

Bulgarian
NonNonCognate
Cognate
cognate
cognate
1031(171) 1187(166) 1061(147) 1310(164)
Congruent
Incongruent 1101(178) 1249(189) 1098(180) 1308(190)
A 2x2x2 ANCOVA obtained two significant main effects
and one interaction. Main effect of word type (Fi(1,
460)=150.10; p=.00; Fs(1, 180)=84.39; p=.00) showed that
cognates were translated faster (1073 ms) than non-cognates
(1264 ms). Main effect of gender congruency (Fi(1,
460)=7.12; p<.01; Fs(1, 180)=5.07; p<.05) revealed that
congruent primes facilitated translation (1148 ms vs. 1189
ms). Although subject analysis showed significance in main
effect of language, item analyses did not confirm it (Fi(1,
460)=0.09; p>.7; Fs(1, 180)=4.33; p<.05)5.
1350
1300

***

1250
1200
1150

***

***

Cognate
Noncognate

1100
1050
1000

English Bulgarian

Figure 2: A Language by Word Type interaction.
A language by word type interaction (Fi(1, 460)=6.63;
p<.05; Fs(1, 180)=3.85; p=.051) is presented in Figure 2. It
suggests that cognates facilitated translation from both
4

In Bulgarian a neuter diminutive derivative can be produced from
most masculine nouns by adding the suffix “-che”
5
ANOVA on item data obtained significance (p<.01) which
suggests that indeed, word frequency and length highly influenced
the translation processing.

languages and that, predictably, translation from English
into Bulgarian was easier in terms of reaction time than
from Bulgarian into English. Finally, translation of cognates
from both languages was equally easy (cf. Figure 2).
The results of this experiment replicated and strengthened
those obtained in Experiment 1. The results suggest that
cognate status has a robust facilitating effect on translation
and that translation from L1 to L2 takes longer than
translation from L2 to L1. These two effects are in agreement
with the predictions of both types of bilingual models (RHM
and DFM). Most importantly, the results showed the gender
congruency effect on translation processing. Although no
significant interaction between gender congruency and any
other variable was obtained, Table 6 suggests that the
congruency effect was present when translating into
Bulgarian (the language with a gender system). Thus, gender
congruent/incongruent primes seem to facilitate/inhibit
translation when the target language has a gender system, but
do not interfere with production in a gender-free language. A
separate post hoc analysis on insignificant interaction
between gender congruency and language (Fi(1, 460)=2.13,
p=.15; Fs(1, 180)=2.80; p=.09 showed that indeed, translation
from English into Bulgarian was affected by gender
congruency (p<.05). Thus, the expectations were partially
fulfilled. In particular, congruency was found to have an
effect on translation in the L2-L1 direction, although in the
present study this interaction did not reach significance level.
This congruency processing advantage might emerge more
clearly with the use of more sensitive measures such as EEG
(e.g. Barber & Carreiras, 2003).

Conclusion
One of the purposes of this study was to replicate the
cognate facilitation effect in word translation and translation
facilitation in L2-L1 direction compared to L1-L2 in
Bulgarian-English bilinguals. The results of two
experiments clearly confirmed results of other studies (Kroll
& Stewart, 1994; Francis et al., 2003) – L2-L1 translation
was found to be faster, which could be taken as evidence in
favor of stronger lexical links in that direction, as predicted
by the RHM. In addition, the results suggest that translation
facilitation in L2-L1 direction is valid only for noncognates. Thus, in certain cases, cognate status will override
the translation direction effect.
The second purpose of the study was to explore the
gender congruency effect in a translation task. Studies on
grammatical gender contribution to monolingual language
processing suggest that in production, a robust gender
congruency effect is usually observed in languages with a
free-standing determiner system; however, it concerns
languages where the determiner form can be selected on the
basis of noun gender alone (as in German) and not those in
which the determiner depends not only on the noun gender
but also on the phonological context (as in Italian) (Miozzo et
al., 2002; Schiller & Caramazza, 2003). Our study shows that
the gender congruency effect may be detectable with bare
noun translation task without producing freestanding gendermarked morphemes in addition to the noun (see Costa et al.,

1125

2003, for results on Croatian). Our results are in agreement
with the picture-naming bilingual study (Bordag, 2004) and
extend the findings to the translation task and to bilinguals
whose L1 has a gender system but whose L2 does not. They
are also in accordance with the predictions of DFM that
syntactic-level processes can increase/reduce the activation of
lexical and conceptual features and consequently result in
faster/slower selection of the appropriate translation
equivalent.
Further research is needed to explore the gender
congruency effect in bilinguals and its possible interaction
with the cognate status of a word.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our special gratitude to our
volunteer participants for their patience and willingness to
help.

References
Balota, D.A., Cortese, M.J., Hutchison, K.A., Neely, J.H.,
Nelson, D., Simpson, G.B., Treiman, R. (2002). The
English Lexicon Project: A web-based repository of
descriptive and behavioral measures for 40,481 English
words
and
nonwords.
http://elexicon.wustl.edu/,
Washington University.
Barber, H., & Carreiras, M. (2003). Integrating gender and
number information in Spanish word pairs: An ERP
study. Cortex, 39, 465-482.
Bates, E., Devescovi, A., Pizzamiglio, L., D’Amico, S., &
Hernandez, A. (1995). Gender and lexical access in
Italian. Perception and Psychophysics, 57(6), 847-862.
Bordag, D. (2004). Interaction of L1 and L2 systems at the
level of grammatical encoding. In: S.Foster-Cohen, M.S.
Smith, A.Sorace, & M. Ota (Eds.). EUROSLA Yearbook.
Annual conference of the European Second Language
Association. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Co.
Cohen, J.D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25(2),
257-271.
Costa, A., Caramazza, A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2000).
The cognate facilitation effect: Implications for models of
lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 1283-1296.
Costa, A., Kovacic, D., Fedorenko, E., & Caramazza, A.
(2003). The gender congruency effect and the selection of
freestanding and bound morphemes: Evidence from
Croatian. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 29(6), 1270-1282.
Costa, A., Kovacic, D., Frank, J., & Caramazza, A. (2003).
On the autonomy of the grammatical systems of the two
languages of a bilingual. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 6(3), 181-200.

Costa, A., Santesteban, M., & Caño, A. (2005). On the
facilitatory effects of cognate words in bilingual speech
production. Brain and Language, 94, 94-103.
Dijkstra, T., Grainger, J., & van Heuven, W.J.B. (1999).
Recognition of cognates and interlingual homographs:
The neglected role of phonology. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 496-518.
Francis, W.S., Augustini, B., K., & Sáenz, S.P. (2003).
Repetition priming in picture naming and translation
depends on shared processes and their difficulty:
Evidence from Spanish-English bilinguals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29(6), 1283-1297.
Grosjean, F. (1997). Processing mixed language: Issues,
findings, and models. In: A.M.B. de Groot & J.F.Kroll
(Eds.), Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic
perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.
Guillelmon, D., & Grosjean, F. (2001). The gender marking
effect in spoken word recognition: The case of bilinguals.
Memory and Cognition, 29(3), 503-511.
Kroll, J.F., & de Groot, A.M.B. (1997). Lexical and
conceptual memory in the bilingual: Mapping form to
meaning in two languages. In: A.M.B. de Groot &
J.F.Kroll
(Eds.),
Tutorials
in
bilingualism:
Psycholinguistic perspectives. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Publishers.
Kroll, J.P., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Miozzo, M., Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (2002). The
absence of a gender congruency effect in romance
languages: A matter of stimulus onset asynchrony?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28(2), 388-391.
Schiller, N.O., & Caramazza, A. (2003). Grammatical
feature selection in noun phrase production: Evidence
from German and Dutch. Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 169-194.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software
Tools Inc.
Simov, K., Osenova, P., Kolkovska, S., Balabanova, E.,
Doikoff, D. (2004). A language resources infrastructure for
Bulgarian. Proceedings of Language Resources and
Evaluation
Conference
(pp.1685-1688).
Lisbon,
Portugal(http://www.bultreebank.org/papers/BulgarianLRI
316.pdf).
Szekely, A., Jacobsen, T., D’Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., Lu, C-C., Pechmann, T., Pléh,
C., Wicha, N., Federmeier, K., Gerdjikova, G., Gutierrez,
G., Hung, D., Hsu, J., Iyer, G., Kohnert, K., Mehotcheva,
T., Orozco-Figueroa, A., Tzeng, A., Tzeng, O., Arévalo,
A., Vargha, A., Butler, A.C., Buffington, R., & Bates, E.,
(2004). A new on-line resource for psycholinguistic
studies. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 247-250.

1126

