UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Goal Framing Predicts Strategy Revision: When and Why Negotiators Reach Integrative
Agreements

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1k97201s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Loewenstein, Jeffrey
Brett, Jeanne

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Goal Framing Predicts Strategy Revision:
When and Why Negotiators Reach Integrative Agreements
Jeffrey Loewenstein (jeffrey.loewenstein@mccombs.utexas.edu)
McCombs School of Business, 1 University Station B6300
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Jeanne Brett (jmbrett@kellogg.northwestern.edu)
Kellogg School of Management, 2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract

(1940) provides and analyzes an archetypal example of
social conflict producing integrative agreements:

We propose a new model linking how negotiators represent,
or frame, their goals to whether they revise or persist with
their planned strategies. In three studies, we report evidence
consistent with the model’s predictions. The critical finding is
that how parties’ framed their goals predicted how they
revised their strategies upon subgoal failure. Parties with
interest-framed goals often revised their strategies and
negotiated creative, integrative agreements. Parties with
position-framed goals tended to persist with their strategies,
resulting in few integrative agreements. The suggestion is that
in complex task situations, flexible and creative strategy
revision is facilitated by how people represent their goals, and
whether they experience subgoal failure. The research has
implications for theories of planning, goal setting, and
strategic behavior.

A Dairymen’s Co-operative League almost went to pieces last
year on the question of precedence in unloading cans at a
creamery platform. The men who came down the hill (the
creamery was on a down grade) thought they should have
precedence; the men who came up the hill thought they should
unload first. [The dairymen did not want to have to wait on a
slope.] The thinking of both sides… was thus confined within
the walls of these two possibilities, and this prevented their even
trying to find a way of settling the dispute which would avoid
these alternatives. The solution was obviously to change the
position of the platform so that both up-hillers and down-hillers
could unload at the same time. …If the Dairymen’s League had
not fought over the question of precedence, the improved
method of unloading would not have been thought of.

The Camp David accords between Egypt and Israel
provide an analogous example (Pruitt and Rubin, 1986):
rather than haggling over control over proportions of the
Sinai Peninsula, the diplomats recognized that Egypt wanted
sovereignty and Israel wanted security, allowing them to
agree on a demilitarized zone under Egyptian control. In
both this and the Dairymen’s League example, negotiators
took stances on an issue that would allow them to meet their
goals. Forced into a temporary impasse because their
stances were conflicting, the negotiators returned to their
goals. This allowed them to discard their original stances,
revise their understanding of what issues were under
discussion, and invent creative solutions. This formulation
of the analogy between these classic examples is in effect a
sketch of a new model of goals, temporary impasses,
strategic changes, and negotiated agreements. We develop
and provide initial tests of this model.
This model provides three broad theoretical advances.
First, it provides a new explanation for a phenomenon
noticed in the goal-setting and negotiation literatures.
Specific, challenging goals are more motivating and lead to
better performance than abstract goals if tasks are simple,
but abstract goals are better for complex and ambiguous
tasks (e.g., Earley, Connolly & Ekegren, 1989; Sweller &
Levine, 1982; Latham & Pinder, 2005, provide a review).
We will suggest the benefit of abstract goals is tied to its
effect on strategy revision.
A second advance is clarifying two aspects of goal
abstractness. The primary focus in the goal-setting literature

Keywords: Strategy; Planning; Goals; Negotiation; Framing.

Introduction
People set goals and attempt to achieve them (Kruglanski et
al, 2002). Cognitive scientists have made substantial
progress thinking about goals in terms of hierarchies—a
goal spawns levels of subgoals using means-ends analysis or
some similar algorithm, amounting to a set of planned steps
for achieving a goal. But cognitive science approaches have
spent less time examining the effects of the different kinds
of goals that people set. In contrast, social psychologists
have made extensive progress examining kinds of goals on
motivation and task performance (Locke & Latham, 1990).
But goal-setting and related research has largely failed to
acknowledge goal hierarchies, and as a result suffers unduly
from a lack of theoretical specificity. We integrate the two
approaches in the context of examining how negotiators
represent their goals and how they revise their initial
strategies. In so doing, we provide a new explanation for
one of the central questions concerning negotiation, which is
when and why negotiators form creative and valuable
agreements.
Goals are critical for understanding negotiation and social
conflict, because in these situations people typically
perceive that their goals are in conflict (Thompson &
Hastie, 1990). Fortunately, sometimes necessity really is the
mother of invention and everyone ends up better off. Follett

443

has been on the motivational benefits of concrete goals
(particularly those that are high or extreme) over abstract
goals. However, abstractness can be important for defining
goals accurately. A widely accepted prescriptive claim from
negotiation is that negotiators should focus on their interests
(abstract, underlying needs and wants), not their positions
(specific stances on concrete issues; Fisher, Ury & Patton,
1991). Because a position-framed goal can be achieved by
reaching a particular negotiation outcome, it may be more
motivating than an interest-framed goal. Interest-framed
goals can only be enabled, but not actually achieved, by a
negotiation outcome. However, interest-framed goals should
better define the problem negotiators are trying to solve, and
entail less commitment to particular outcomes on specific
issues. For complex tasks, this should be helpful.
A third advance is that we can provide a descriptive
prediction for an open normative question in the artificial
intelligence literature on planning. There is no clear answer
as to whether planning algorithms should revise or maintain
and extend their goal hierarchies when there are subgoal
conflicts or failures (Veloso & Stone, 1995). We predict that
people choose based on how they frame their goals. At the
same time, this allows us to provide a precise definition of
what a temporary impasse in a negotiation is, and when and
why it leads negotiators to create integrative agreements.

resources for their return. Because they cannot directly trade
their business for their trip, they generate the obvious
subgoal of attempting to sell their business for a high
enough price to allow them to afford their trip and return.
Then the sellers need to find a buyer, and set a sub-subgoal
of listing their business with a broker.
Changes in strategy, according to means-ends analysis,
should be driven by failures to achieve subgoals. Meansends analysis provides two approaches to changing a
strategy in response to a temporary impasse. The first
approach we can call strategic persistence (cf., Audia, Locke
& Smith, 2000): if a negotiator cannot achieve a subgoal,
then the negotiator keeps that subgoal as part of their
strategy and adds a new subgoal at the next level down in
the goal hierarchy. This new lower-level subgoal is added to
fix the problem—if the negotiator can fulfill this new lowerlevel subgoal, they will then be able to accomplish the
formerly blocked subgoal. In our example, if the buyer
appears unwilling to pay at least the sellers’ minimum price
for their trip, the sellers might try to persuade the buyer in a
new way to pay this amount, or they might propose a
financing arrangement to reduce the difference between the
price they want and the price a buyer is willing to pay. Thus
the sellers do not give up their subgoal of achieving a
particular sale price, but instead persist by generating new
objectives that will enable them to make that price subgoal,
on that issue, acceptable.
The second approach to changing a strategy within
means-ends analysis we can call strategic flexibility. If a
negotiator cannot achieve a subgoal, then the negotiator can
modify or discard the subgoal, and seek out an alternative or
complementary subgoal. For example, the sellers might
decide to modify their existing subgoal by lowering what
price is acceptable and simultaneously add a new subgoal to
obtain a job contract with the buyer upon returning from
their trip. To clarify the contrast, strategic persistence means
maintaining the current set of goals and subgoals, and
adding new lower-level subgoals to the goal hierarchy.
Strategic flexibility means changing the current set of goals
and subgoals by eliminating, revising and/or adding new
subgoals at the same level in the goal hierarchy.
The final component of the model is a claim about
whether negotiators, upon encountering a temporary
impasse because they cannot achieve a subgoal, will exhibit
strategic persistence or strategic flexibility. We offer two
predictions. First, strategic persistence and strategic
flexibility should be beneficial or detrimental depending on
the fit of the goal hierarchy to the task circumstances. For
simple and unambiguous tasks, it is likely that people’s
initially planned goal hierarchies will be well formed for the
task, and hence strategic persistence should be
advantageous. For complex and ambiguous tasks, people’s
goal hierarchies are unlikely to be well formed, and hence
strategic flexibility should be advantageous because it
allows adaptation to new interpretations of the task. Because
there is so little research done on complex and ambiguous
negotiation situations, and so much interest in the creation

A New Negotiation Model
We propose a new model of goal-directed behavior in
negotiation. It has three main components: goals, strategies,
and temporary impasses. The model also has a simple metastrategy, or a set of general rules by which negotiators create
and change strategies.
A goal is an objective a negotiator plans to obtain. Key to
our account is that goals can be framed as the achievement
of negotiators’ interests, or as the achievement of particular
positions. These differ in several ways. Interests are defined
without respect to the specific issues that fulfill them. To
draw on our initial examples, the Dairymen’s desire not to
wait on a hill is not specific to the issue of the loading dock,
and the Israeli desire for security is not specific to control of
the Sinai. Positions are defined in terms of specific issues.
Being able to unload first presumes unloading priority is the
issue to be resolved, and controlling 90% of the Sinai
presumes amount of control is the issue to be resolved. Thus
interests and positions are framed differently, differ in their
level of abstraction, and differ in how strongly they commit
a negotiator to specific issues.
A strategy in this model is a plan for reaching a goal.
Critical for our purposes is that it is a set of objectives to
obtain (we leave open that there may be additional
influences on tactic or operator selection, such as broad
social motivations or skill-set). This allows us to focus on
strategies as goal hierarchies created by the model’s metastrategy, means-ends analysis (Newell & Simon, 1972). To
illustrate how this applies to negotiation, consider the
example of one party, a pair of sellers, who wish to sell their
business so they can travel for two years and have sufficient

444

of creative, integrative agreements, the current studies tested
these circumstances.
Our second descriptive prediction is that negotiators with
interest-framed goals will be more likely to exhibit strategic
flexibility and negotiators with position-framed goals will
be more likely to exhibit strategic persistence. Interestframed goals are less strongly associated with particular
issues than position-framed goals, and hence people should
be more willing to change issues. In addition, interest-based
goals should accommodate more and larger changes in
strategy, as a broader range of concrete outcomes should be
consistent with an interest-based goal than a position-based
goal. To change strategy when the goal is concrete could
require a reassessment of the goal itself, not just a subgoal.
Thus, we propose that the two different goal frames lead
negotiators to respond differently to temporary impasses.

the return from their trip—the buyers’ have the authority to
do so and need to hire many managers in the coming years,
and the sellers will need some form of employment on their
return, and are well qualified for the position.

Study 1
Study 1 tested whether framing goals in terms of interests
facilitates reaching integrative agreements. We predicted
that sellers encouraged to have interest-framed goals will be
more likely than those encouraged to have position-framed
goals to reach an integrative agreement. We also used Study
1 to rule out an alternative explanation for the effects of goal
framing. It is possible that goal framing has effects through
influencing negotiators’ targets. Because we already know
that targets can influence outcomes (Zetik & Stuhlamcher,
2002), it is important to show that goal framing is a distinct
issue from targets.

Model predictions

Methods

This model of goals, temporary impasses and strategic
change in negotiation generates a variety of predictions,
some of which provide new explanations for existing
research findings, and some of which are novel and we test
in the subsequent studies. In the interest of space, we
emphasize three here. First, negotiators with interest-framed
goals will be more likely to generate integrative agreements
than negotiators with position-framed goals. Although this
prediction is widely taught, it has never been directly tested
nor clearly theoretically explained. We claim that this effect
is due to negotiators having difficulty achieving subgoals
during their negotiations. Thus, our second prediction is that
temporary impasses (due to subgoal failure) will lead those
with interest-framed goals to revise their strategies, and
those with position-framed goals to persist with their
strategies, and that it is this difference that produces the
differential likelihood of forming integrative agreements.
Finally, we claim that without a temporary impasse, even
negotiators with interest-framed goals are likely to persist
with their strategies (as they lack a trigger to revise), and
hence only the small number of negotiators who planned
effective strategies from the start should reach integrative
agreements. Thus, our third prediction is that negotiators
who experience a temporary impasse are more likely to
form an integrative agreement than negotiators who do not
experience a temporary impasse.
We test these three predictions in the three studies that
follow. All three use a negotiation role-play exercise about a
party selling their small business that we used earlier to
illustrate the model. The key challenge in the case is that it
appears to be a negotiation simply over the sale price of a
small business. The buyers have a limit on how much they
can pay for the business, and this limit is below the amount
that the sellers need for their trip. They can decide not to
reach an agreement on this basis, the sellers can decide to
take whatever funds they can and shorten their trip, or the
parties can discuss additional issues latent in the case and
create more valuable agreements. The most clearly
beneficial agreement is for the buyer to hire the sellers upon

Participants A total of 222 people (154 MBA students and
68 executives) participated through negotiations courses.
They were randomly assigned to their roles and
counterparts. As we used the same population across all
studies, we will describe its general characteristics here. All
participants had at least five years of work experience. The
MBA students tended to be in their late 20’s and early 30s,
and roughly 65% were male. The executives tended to be in
their 30’s and 40’s (so have more work experience), and
roughly 75% were male. There were no reliable differences
between MBAs and executives in any study, so we
collapsed across sub-populations for data analysis.
Procedure and Materials Participants were randomly
assigned to either the buyer or the seller role for the Las
Flores negotiation (a variant of Les Florets, Goldberg,
2006). We modified the Seller role to make two versions
(about 50 words were changed out of a total of 750), one
emphasizing the interest in taking the dream trip, the other
emphasizing the financial bottom line. For example, the last
sentence was either: “For all these reasons, you and your
spouse feel that the buyer can [make an offer that allows
you to meet your goal of sailing around the world] / [make
the substantial offer you deserve so that you can meet your
goal of 190,000 euros].” Critically, there were no factual
differences between the two versions of the role materials.
The words used in both versions implied that selling the
business was how the seller would gain the funds needed for
the trip. Neither version of the seller’s role mentioned or
encouraged the discussion of additional issues. Prior to
negotiating, participants completed a one-page table asking
them about their goals, target values, and minimum
satisfactory outcomes, as well as their estimates of these
matters for the other party. After the negotiation,
participants wrote an open-ended description of their
agreements or that there was no agreement.
Scoring
We
coded participants’ pre-negotiation
questionnaires as to whether they wrote position-framed
goals (stating just a raw dollar amount or that the station

445

do so by asking negotiators whether they experienced a
temporary impasse, and if so how they attempted to resolve
it. We expected most parties to say they experienced a
temporary impasse (because the buyers cannot pay as much
as the sellers need for their trip), and the key question is
what parties do to try to overcome a temporary impasse.

needed to be sold), or interest-framed goals (references to
the trip or fulfilling the dream). This is a manipulation check
for the condition implementation. The dependent variable
was a coding of outcomes into one of three categories: no
agreement, a poor agreement reflecting a compromise that
did not meet at least one party’s interests, or an integrative
agreement that added issues (usually, a post-trip job) and
allowed both parties to meet their interests. A single rater
coded all pre- and post-negotiation questionnaires for all the
studies reported in this paper. Separately, this coder also
evaluated all the agreements. This coder was blind to the
studies’ purposes and the conditions (in the studies with
manipulations) from which the materials resulted. A second
coder evaluated 239 of the sellers’ pre-negotiation
questionnaires, disagreeing on only 11 (5%; κ = .92). The
second coder also evaluated a small number of agreements,
disagreeing on just 1 of 21 (5%; κ = .90).

Methods
Participants A total of 128 negotiations students (98 MBA
students and 30 executives) participated, in the same fashion
as in Study 1. No one participated in more than one study.
Procedure and Materials Participants were randomly
assigned to one of the original buyer and seller roles (not the
modified seller role as used in Study 1), and completed prenegotiation questionnaires. They completed a new postnegotiation questionnaire asking whether they had reached a
temporary impasse in their negotiations (forced choice, yes
or no). Temporary impasse was defined for them: “it is
called a temporary impasse when after negotiating for a
while, negotiations seem to come to a halt and it appears
unlikely that parties will reach an agreement.” Those who
responded yes answered additional questions: why the
temporary impasse happened (open ended), whether and
what parties did to get past it (open ended), and
approximately when in their negotiations it occurred (forced
choice: in the first, second, third or fourth quarter).
Scoring Two blind raters coded the open-ended responses
to the temporary impasse questions. They coded for
strategic flexibility, specifically, whether they explored nonprice issues or discussed interests (κ = .84 for a sub-sample
with n = 62). They also coded for strategic persistence,
specifically, whether they made further arguments
(including threats) to support their original claims about
price, made concessions on price, or changed the timing of
payments (κ = .83 for a sub-sample with n = 62).

Results and Discussion
Supporting our prediction, sellers in the interest-framed goal
condition (61%) formed more integrative agreements than
sellers in the position-framed goal condition (37%), χ22(1,
N=111) = 6.63, p = .01. Further indicating the effects were
in line with our predictions, we have evidence that our goalframing manipulation was effective. Sellers in the interestframed condition were more likely to write about interestframed goals on their planning documents than sellers in the
position-framed condition, 64% (38/59) versus 33% (17/52),
χ2(1, N=111) = 11.12, p = .001. And sellers who wrote
interest-framed goals were more likely to reach integrative
agreements than sellers who wrote position-framed goals,
60% (33/55) versus 39% (22/56), χ2(1, N=111) = 4.76, p =
.029. Framing goals in terms of interests must have helped
sellers consider information that emerged during the
negotiation because their agreements included information
relevant to reaching an integrative agreement, such as job
offers, profit sharing arrangements, and consulting
contracts, that was not on their planning documents.
In addition, out model predicts that the influence of goal
framing should be distinct from the influence of setting
specific numeric targets. Confirming this prediction, a
binary logistic regression model including the effects of
sellers’ condition and sellers’ targets on the likelihood of
reaching an integrative agreement showed that each
contributed separately and significantly to the likelihood of
an integrative agreement (goal framing condition: B = 1.40,
SE = .44, Wald χ2 = 10.05, p = .002; sellers’ targets: B =
.02, SE = .01, Wald χ2 = 5.94, p = .015).

Results and Discussion
As expected, sellers who wrote interest-framed goals on
their planning documents (50%, 15/30) were more likely to
reach an integrative agreement than sellers who wrote
position-framed goals (21%, 7/34), χ2 (1, N = 64) = 6.11, p
= .013. Also as predicted, temporary impasses were highly
likely: 91% of the dyads reported experiencing a temporary
impasse. The remainder of the Study 2 analyses was done
with just these dyads.
Negotiators’ largely reported handling their temporary
impasses by being flexible or by persisting with their
strategies. By flexible we mean asking about each other’s
interests and considering non-sale price related issues, such
as job offers. For example, one negotiator said that “I asked
what we could bargain with outside of money, and he
discussed freely his long term plan” and another stated that
they “agreed to ballpark figures and identified other areas of
value to make up the shortfall.” Dyads with a seller writing
interest-framed goals were more likely to exhibit flexibility
(50%, 13/26) than were dyads with sellers writing positionframed goals (25%, 8/32), χ2 (1, N = 58) = 3.88, p = .049.

Study 2
Our model explains the Study 1 results by suggesting that
negotiators largely formed integrative agreements because
they framed their goals in terms of interests and experienced
a temporary impasse. Further, we proposed that this impasse
due to subgoal failure triggered flexible revision of the
negotiator’ plans, leading to creative, integrative
agreements. Study 2 gathers direct evidence of temporary
impasses and how parties responded to those impasses. We

446

initial strategies will reach an integrative agreement. In
Study 3 we predict that negotiators who are likely to
experience temporary impasses (because their buyers have
limited funds to pay for the business) will be more likely to
form integrative agreements than negotiators who are
unlikely to experience temporary impasses (because their
buyers have sufficient funds to pay for the business). The
point is that negotiators are predicted to not reach an
integrative agreement whenever such an agreement is
possible, but to do so largely when forced, because they
cannot otherwise meet their goals.
It is important to note that our Study 3 prediction is not
about goal framing. We predict that no matter how
negotiators frame their goals, if they do not encounter
difficulties in executing their planned strategy and
experience a temporary impasse, they will not need to
change their strategy. They are also unlikely to negotiate an
integrative outcome.

The second approach was to persist: continuing with their
current rationales for their positions on sale price. Examples
of such persistence on price were that “our prices were too
far apart, so we tried to rationalize the price” and “they
stuck to a low price and would not provide the make up of
the price. I kept on going back to the verifiable components
of my valuation.” Dyads with sellers reporting positionframed goals showed a non-significant tendency to persist
more than dyads with sellers reporting interests-framed
goals (50% vs. 27%), χ2 (1, N = 58) = 3.19, p = .07. The
implication is that how sellers framed their goals led them to
pursue substantively different strategies in response to their
temporary impasses.
The two approaches for resolving temporary impasses had
different implications for creating integrative agreements.
Negotiators who were flexible after a temporary impasse
mostly reached integrative agreements (67%, 14/21),
whereas negotiators who were not seldom did (14%, 5/37),
χ2 (1, N = 58) = 17.18, p < .001. Negotiators who persisted
in response to a temporary impasse were very unlikely to
reach an integrative agreement (4%, 1/25), compared to
those who avoided persisting (55%, 18/33), χ2 (1, N = 58) =
16.50, p < .001.
These results imply that strategic flexibility mediated the
effect of sellers’ goal framing on reaching an integrative
agreement. A logistic regression including sellers’ goal
framing and strategic flexibility showed that sellers’ goal
framing was no longer a significant predictor of reaching an
integrative agreement, B = 0.73, SE = 0.68, Wald χ2 = 1.17,
p = .28, when being flexible with one’s strategic approach
was included in the equation, B = 2.42, SE = .68, Wald χ2 =
12.74, p < .001. Further, a bootstrapped test of the indirect
effect of sellers’ goals through integrative strategy that does
not make distributional assumptions found that the
estimated size of the indirect effect was 0.13, SE = 0.07, p <
.05 (Preacher & Hayes, 2004).
Overall, sellers with interest-framed goals were just as
likely to reach a temporary impasse as sellers with positionframed goals. What differed was how they reacted to that
temporary impasse. Sellers with position-framed goals were
likely to persist with their strategies, leading to poor, singleissue price agreements or no agreement at all. In contrast,
sellers with interest-framed goals were likely to be flexible,
share information and reach an integrative agreement.

Methods
Participants In all, 222 people (194 MBA students and 28
executives) participated through negotiations courses as in
the previous studies.
Procedure and Materials Participants in this study were
randomly assigned to the buyer and seller roles using the
materials from Study 2. No pre- or post-questionnaires were
given. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions. The negative bargaining zone condition was just
like in the other studies—the buyer could not meet the
seller’s minimum price. The positive bargaining zone
condition differed only in that the buyer could pay more
than the seller’s minimum price.

Results and Discussion
In the negative bargaining zone condition negotiators’
outcomes were as in previous studies: nearly evenly divided
between impasse (35%), poor, non-integrative agreements
(30%), and integrative agreements (35%). In contrast,
negotiators in the positive bargaining zone condition
frequently reached poor, non-integrative agreements (65%),
experienced few impasses (17%) and few integrative
agreements (19%; numbers add to more than 100% due to
rounding). The distributions of agreements were reliably
different, χ2 (2, N = 111) = 13.67, p = .001. Critically, the
negative bargaining zone condition (which should have
induced temporary impasses and hence spurred a subset of
negotiators to consider their interests and use integrative
strategy) yielded reliably more integrative agreements than
the positive bargaining zone condition (which should not
have induced any such temporary impasses and strategic
change), χ2 (1, N = 111) = 3.86, p = .049.

Study 3
The remaining core prediction of our model is that without a
temporary impasse forcing negotiators to re-evaluate their
strategies, negotiators will simply follow through with their
initially planned strategies. This implies that unless
negotiators happen to be lucky enough to plan an effective
strategy from the beginning, they should rely on temporary
impasses to prompt them to revise their strategies. This
leads to the prediction that if we limit the likelihood of a
temporary impasse (by increasing the amount the buyers can
pay such that it is higher than what the seller needs), then
only those negotiators who spontaneously generate effective

General Discussion
How people frame a problem influences the strategies
they use and the solutions they generate (Newell & Simon,
1972). We suggest on the basis of these studies that how
people frame their goals influences how they change their
strategies. We proposed a new theoretical model linking

447

how negotiators frame their goals to whether they persist
with or change their strategies. We showed that if sellers
had interest-framed goals and experienced a temporary
impasse, they were likely to flexibly alter their strategy and
reach integrative agreements. But if sellers did not frame
their goals with respect to interests (Studies 1 and 2), did not
experience a temporary impasse (Study 3), or in response to
a temporary impasse did not exhibit strategic flexibility
(Study 2), they were unlikely to form integrative
agreements. The implication is that although people may,
through luck or skill, be able to set useful strategies from the
beginning of their social interaction, if people frame their
goals in light of their interests, they will be more likely to be
able to effectively revise their strategies when confronted
with a challenge to achieving their goals. The result is that
our model predicted, and we found consistent evidence, that
integrative agreements largely happen out of necessity,
because simpler plans failed.
The model we proposed uses well-known conceptual
building blocks (goals, strategies, means-ends analysis) to
provide a full account of a variety of negotiation
phenomena. For example, it predicts that during a
negotiation, negotiators are likely to focus on achieving
their positional goals and the concreteness of those goals
may lead them to be myopic and miss information relevant
to their goals had their goals been framed in terms of
interests. It provides an explanation for why negotiators
satisfice rather than optimizing available value. It provides
an explanation for when concrete, stretch goals should be
effective (in unambiguous situations with positive
bargaining zones) and when abstract goals should be
effective (in ambiguous negotiations with negative
bargaining zones). And it provides an explanation for some
patterns commonly found in negotiation process research,
such as initial tendencies to engage in positional bargaining
(which we suggest is due to pursuing a planned strategy),
sometimes followed by a switch to an interests-framed
discussion (due to failing to achieve a subgoal and having
an interest-framed goal).
The model and our studies also suggest opportunities for
future research. For example, we have not specified what
influences the nature of negotiators’ initial strategies. We
have not suggested when negotiators will reframe their
goals versus change their strategies. We also have not
discussed the role of trust building in facilitating integrative
strategy early in the negotiation. Such an approach would
seem to be more directly under a negotiator’s control than
waiting for a temporary impasse.
Finally, we note that although the model we developed
was for the task of negotiation, few of its assumptions are
specific to negotiation. The model could be extended to
problem-solving generally. For example, whether to persist
is a major issue in social decision-making, and we predict
the effect of goal framing on strategic change should hold.
Abstractness may be less motivating, but it may also allow
for greater leeway for learning about the task and for
changing one’s strategy to suit it. Concretely framed goals

should aid persistence, which, if the task is clear, should
minimize strategic change—which is now a positive—and
thereby aid performance.

References
Audia, R G., E. A. Locke, & K. G. Smith (2000). The
paradox of success: An archival and a laboratory study of
strategic persistence following radical environmental
change. Academy of Management Journal, 43, 837-853.
Fisher, R., Ury, W., & Patton, B. (1991). Getting to yes (2nd
ed.). New York: Penguin.
Follett, M.P. (1940). Dynamic Administration:
The
Collected Papers of Mary Parker Follett (Eds. H. C.
Metcalf & L. Urwick). New York: Harper & Brothers
Publishers.
Earley, P.C., Connolly, T., & Ekegren, G. (1989). Goals,
strategy development, and task performance: Some limits
on the efficacy of goal setting. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 74, 24-33.
Sweller, J., & Levine, M. (1982). Effects of goal specificity
on means-ends analysis and learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 8(5), 463-474.
Latham, G. P., & Pinder, C. C. (2005). Work Motivation
Theory And Research At The Dawn Of The Twenty-First
Century. Annual Review of Psychology 56, 485-516.
Goldberg, S. (2006). Les Florets. In J. M. Brett (ed.)
Negotiation, Teamwork, and Decision Making Exercises.
Evanston IL: Dispute Resolution Research Center,
Northwestern University CD.
Kruglanski, A.W., Shah, J.Y., Fishbach, A., Friedman, R.,
Chun, W.Y., & Sleeth-Keppler, D. (2002). A theory of
goal systems. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 34, 331-378.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (1990). A theory of goal
setting and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2004). SPSS and SAS
procedures for estimating indirect effects in simple
mediation models. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 717-731.
Pruitt, D. G., & Rubin, J. Z. (1986). Social conflict:
Escalation, stalemate and settlement. New York: Random
House.
Thompson, L., & R. Hastie. (1990). Social perception in
negotiation. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 47(1), 98-123.
Veloso, M., & Stone, P. (1995). FLECS: Planning with a
flexible commitment strategy. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research, 3, 25–52.
Zetik, D. C., & Stuhlmacher, A. F. (2002). Goal setting and
negotiation performance: A meta-Analysis. Group
Processes & Intergroup relations, 5(1), 35-52.

448

