UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Group Problem Solving Behavior in a Networked Puzzle Game

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/50w2n29v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Wisdom, Thomas N.
Goldstone, Robert L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Group Problem Solving Behavior in a Networked Puzzle Game
Thomas N. Wisdom (tnwisdom@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47404 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47404 USA
Abstract
In this study we examined the influence on individuals of
choices made by fellow participants within a group. Using a
simple networked puzzle game, we studied the effects of
participant group size, availability of neighbor guess
information, and problem difficulty. Participants attempted to
guess a hidden computer-generated picture on a small square
grid game board over a series of rounds with score feedback.
The guesses of other players were visible to each participant
and could be copied at will. We found a significant
relationship between the number of neighbor guesses
participants could view and the tendency for participants to
copy the solutions of others, and a decreasing tendency to
imitate over rounds of a game, along with differences in score
and other performance measures between isolated and
grouped participants.
Keywords: Social learning; group behavior; information
diffusion; innovation diffusion.

Background
Human decision-making research is increasingly concerned
with the fact that many real-life decisions are made in the
presence of information about similar decisions made by
others, and that “social learning” using this information can
strongly affect the outcomes of such decisions. While
ignoring socially-mediated information in a laboratory
setting may yield a clear study of important cognitive
processes of individual problem solving and choice, in
many situations it represents an unrealistic constraint, and
may limit the relevance or applicability of the conclusions.
There are important behavioral differences between people
with access to social information and those who are isolated;
understanding these differences is vital to the study of
human decision making and problem solving.
One review of the group performance literature concludes
that groups generally do not outperform their best members,
although they may perform better than individuals on
average (Kerr et al., 1996). More recently, modeling work
by Hong and Page (2004) concludes that groups of highability problem solvers can be outperformed by more
diverse groups of problem solvers. And though
“conformity” often carries negative connotations in lay
usage, other research has shown that for uncertain
environments, “conformity bias” (the tendency to imitate
the behavior of others instead of exploring solutions
individually) can be adaptive (Boyd & Richerson, 1985;
Kameda & Nakanishi, 2002).

Two processes work together to produce this benefit:
innovation (generating locally novel solutions to problems)
produces a diversity of solutions, and imitation (copying of
solutions by others) diffuses these innovations. By
imitating, a decision maker can employ solutions discovered
and passed on by others without having to develop them
independently using costly trial-and-error learning. When a
decision maker acquires information from others about
possible solutions to a problem, the resources not expended
in information gathering can be used for other aspects of
problem solving, thus improving performance overall.
Domination of a system by either one of these processes can
be problematic. An excess of innovation may be inefficient
because good ideas produced by individuals are not built
upon by others, and an excess of imitation may be
maladaptive because suboptimal solutions that are
nonetheless better than other solutions by group members
are spread to the exclusion of better alternatives that are left
unexplored.
Research points to several factors that can modulate the
choice between innovation and imitation. Some animals are
able to use the observed success (or lack thereof) of
conspecifics to guide imitative foraging choices (Templeton
& Giraldeau, 1996). When humans process social
information, evidence of success is often delayed or
distorted; to alleviate this uncertainty, other cues are often
used to determine the utility of others’ choices. However,
this can introduce complexities of trust and observation, and
thus influence behavior (Bøg, 2006).
A common characteristic of much of the human research
in this area (e.g. Asch, 1951) is that some of the participants
are confederates or simulated agents. This is a somewhat
useful approach in that it addresses in a simple manner the
influence of outside information on individual decisionmaking; however, it does not explore the group-level
processes that emerge when individuals are all influencing
each other. For instance, the topology of the social network
that connects a group can substantially affect the diffusion
of information within it (Noble et al., 2004), which can in
turn affect how adaptive social learning will be for the
members of the group. Bavelas (1950) and Leavitt (1951)
examined the effects of various network structures on a
group coordination task and found that the topology of the
network and the complexity of the task strongly influenced
individual participants’ behaviors, including the types of
information sent by participants and the tendency for those

1665

in certain positions in a network to spontaneously act as
“leaders” in the group. Using computer simulations, Lazer
and Friedman (2005) showed that more locally connected
networks (those which disseminate information relatively
slowly) are better than more highly connected networks at
exploring a complex problem space with many local
maxima in the long run, though not in the short term.
Mason, Jones, and Goldstone (2005) examined these
phenomena in a study of humans exploring a onedimensional solution space and found that the network
topology and the nature of the problem space interacted in
influencing how well the group performed as a whole.
Consistent with Lazer and Friedman’s simulations, they
found that for more complex problems with multiple local
maxima, networks that had more restrictive local
connectivity performed better than fully connected
networks.
We wished to extend the study of these phenomena to a
more complex problem space and explore further contextual
manipulations. Toward this end, we designed an experiment
in which networked groups of people explored a
multidimensional problem space and passively shared
information. Each of the participants in the experimental
game was given the task of drawing a picture that matched
as well as possible a goal picture randomly generated by the
computer. They were instructed to do this by making
changes in their game boards over a series of time-limited
rounds and taking into account periodic score feedback to
direct subsequent board modifications. Participants could
observe and copy the most recent candidate solutions of
their neighbors as they explored. The form of interaction
was intentionally impoverished because we wished to study
both individual exploration and solution imitation
behaviors, and an important precursor to the latter is
determining whether information provided by others is
considered useful.
To explore the effects of network efficiency, we
manipulated the number of neighbors available to each
participant in a uniform network structure. The apparent
benefit of imitation was modulated by a manipulation of the
availability of evaluative (score) information about the
solutions of others. We also manipulated problem difficulty
(by manipulating the size of the problem space) in order to
observe the effect of differences in uncertainty on imitation
behavior (conformity bias). We limited the time available to
solve the problem, thus forcing participants to allocate their
time and effort between innovation and imitation. There was
no allowance for explicit communication, network
adaptation, organized cooperation, or defection. These
restrictions limited the possibilities of interaction but also
provided a usefully idealized situation for probing simple
innovation dissemination in social networks.
As this study is fairly novel, it is primarily exploratory;
nevertheless, we made the following tentative predictions.
The average scores of participants in large groups (greater
than 4 participants) were expected to be greater than those
in smaller groups or individuals, because the larger groups

would produce a greater diversity of solutions, and thus be
able to search the problem space more efficiently. Imitation
was expected to be more common when scores
accompanied neighbor guess information, because the utility
of each neighbor’s guess would be explicit and thus
imitators could be more confident in their actions. Average
turnover was expected to be higher when scores were visible
for the same reason, and thus positively correlated with
imitation behaviors. Score was expected to increase over
rounds within each game due to score feedback and simple
learning effects. For the same reason, the increase was
expected to be greater for later conditions (order greater
than 4) than for earlier conditions. Conversely, solution
turnover (the amount of game board modification between
rounds) would decrease within each condition as
participants found more parts of the correct solution and
narrowed their search to smaller areas of the board.

Method
Participants were recruited from the Indiana University
Psychology Department undergraduate subject pool, and
were given course credit for taking part in the study.
Participants populated each session by signing up at will for
scheduled experiments with a maximum capacity of 10
persons. 30 sessions (containing a total of 98 participants)
were run. 6 sessions (containing a total of 18 participants)
were discarded due to network or software problems, and
one single-participant session was discarded due to
inattention. The remaining 79 participants were distributed
as shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Distribution of Participants Across Group Sizes
Group Size
Participants

1
7

2
6

3
12

4
8

5
5

6
12

7
21

8
8

We implemented the experiment using custom software
run in a web browser. The task was a round-based picturematching puzzle game with score feedback given after each
round. The goal picture that participants attempted to match
was a randomly-generated spline quantized to a grid of
square pixels. The squares making up the spline were
colored black, and the remaining squares colored white (see
Figure 1 for examples).

Figure 1: Examples of randomly-generated goal pictures in
experimental task
The participant game board was a grid of the same
dimensions as the goal picture, with each square initially
colored white. The color of each square on the game board

1666

could be toggled between black and white by clicking it
with the mouse. Each participant’s display included their
own game board and most recent score (given as the number
of squares (both black and white) marked correctly out of
the total number of squares on the board), their neighbors’
game boards and (in the “Score Visible” condition) scores,
and indications of the current round in the game and the
amount of time remaining in the current round (see Figure
2). Each game consisted of 12 rounds of 20 seconds each.
After the last round in each game, participants were shown
their guesses and scores for each round, along with the goal
picture, and a button to click when ready to begin the next
condition. When all participants had clicked this button, the
next condition began.
Participants were informed that the picture they were
trying to match was randomly generated and not
representative of any particular object, shape, or symbol,
and was generally not symmetrical; that the black squares
were all connected to each other vertically, horizontally, or
diagonally; and that the black part of the picture was small
relative to the size of the grid.

Figure 2: Screenshot of participant display
After instruction, the participants ran the first condition,
after which the experimenter confirmed that each of the
participants understood the mechanics of the game, and
answered any questions that arose. The participants then
played the remainder of the conditions without further
interruption. Condition order was randomized within each
session.
We defined a participant’s score for a particular round as
a cell-by-cell comparison (overlap) between the
participant’s guess for that round and the hidden goal
picture (i.e. the number of cells which the two pictures have
in common), divided by the total number of squares in the
goal picture, to give a percentage which can be compared
between conditions of varying grid size (see Figure 3).
Turnover for a particular round (greater than 1) was a
measure of the amount of change in a participant’s guesses
between rounds. It was defined similarly to score, except

that the two pictures compared were the participant’s
guesses from the current round and the previous round.

Figure 3. Score / overlap calculation: the first two pictures
have 20 out of 25 squares in common (shown in dark grey
on the right), so they have an overlap of 80%.
Imitation (a measure of whether a participant copied a
neighbor’s guess in a particular round) was defined as
follows:

Where Gpr is the guess of participant p for round r, Gni(r-1)
is the guess of neighbor i for the round prior to round r, and
overlap is the comparison described above for the score
calculation. In other words, imitation has occurred (Ipr=1) if
a participant’s guess is closer to the most similar neighbor’s
previous guess than to the participant’s own previous guess.
Three factors with two levels each were manipulated, giving
a total of 8 within-subject conditions per session. Score
visibility – the scores of each participant’s neighbors were
either shown next to their game boards in the participant’s
display, or not. Network type – the set of neighbor
connections between participants was either a simple lattice
(each participant was connected to only two immediate
neighbors) or a fully-connected network (each participant
was connected to all other participants). Board dimension –
the lengths of the sides of the square game board were either
7 squares or 9 squares. (with the larger board assumed to be
more difficult). The size of the group participating in each
session was treated as a covariate. Another factor considered
was the (randomized) position of each condition in an
experiment session; this was called the order.

Results

1667

In the aggregate, participants achieved final scores of 78%,
and average scores (over all rounds) of 74.6%. The average
guess turnover rate per round was 13.7%, and participants
engaged in imitation on 28.8% of their guesses. For the
initial analysis, dependent variables were averaged across
all participants and all rounds to give measures for the
group’s aggregate activity in each condition. These data
were analyzed using a repeated-measures ANOVA, treating
each group as a single subject.
Since the two network type conditions are
indistinguishable for group sizes less than 4, these sessions
were discarded for analyses of the effect of network type.

Similarly, sessions with only 1 participant were discarded
for analyses of imitation, since isolated participants have no
neighbors to imitate.
The manipulated factors appear to have had little effect on
the behavior of the participants. The only significant effect
observed in the ANOVA was a complicated interaction
between network type and group size in which imitation was
less common for the fully-connected network for groups of
4 participants, approximately equal for the two network
types for groups of 5 participants, and increased for the
fully-connected network with larger group sizes up to 8.
This interaction suggested a simpler regression analysis
using a combination of the above two factors: the number of
neighbors (NN) visible to each participant in a given
condition. This combination is shown in Table 20. (Note
that all groups of 3 participants, and groups of 4 participants
or more in the Lattice Network condition are included in the
NN=2 group.)

In addition, regression analysis of score vs. round showed
significant positive relationships (all with p<.001; mean
β=0.897) for all game order positions except the first. (It is
worthwhile to note, however, that no significant trend
developed over the remainder of the conditions – that is,
after the first condition, participants did not get better or
worse, imitate more or less, etc. over the course of the
session.)

Table 2: Combination of group size and network type to
derive number of neighbors (NN)

Network
Type

Lattice
Full

1

2

0

1

Group Size
4 5 6
2 2 2
2
3 4 5

3

7
2
6

8
2
7

Curve fit estimation for a linear regression of imitation
against the number of visible neighbors yielded a significant
positive relationship (β=0.794, F=8.501, df=6, p<.05) (see
Figure 4). Interestingly, a similar analysis of final scores in
each condition did not yield a significant linear relationship,
but a significant quadratic relationship was apparent which
peaked at NN=4 (β1=3.195, β2=-3.259, F=10.346, df=7,
p<.05) (see Figure 5).
The same data were averaged across all participants in
each game to give dependent variable measures for each
round and all values of game order and group size. Linear
regressions were run on the round data for each dependent
variable. Analysis of score vs. round showed a slightly
positive but nonsignificant relationship for sessions with
one participant, and a strongly significant result for all other
group sizes (see Figure 6): in the aggregate, scores in groups
with between 2 and 8 participants showed a positive linear
relationship (β=0.966, F=137.525, df=11, p<.001).
Similarly, a slightly negative but nonsignificant relationship
was found for turnover vs. round for sessions with a single
participant, and a strongly significant trend for all other
group sizes (see Figure 7): turnover rates in groups of
between 2 and 8 participants showed a strongly positive
linear relationship to round number (β=-0.979, F=210.612,
df=10, p<.001). These results seem to indicate a general
difference in guessing behavior between isolated individuals
and groups. A significant negative trend was found for
imitation rate vs. round (see Figure 8): participants tended to
imitate less as each game progressed (β=-0.884, F=32.805,
df=10, p<.001).
1668

Figure 4. Linear regression of imitation vs. the number of
visible neighbors (NN)

Figure 5. Quadratic regression of final score vs. the number
of visible neighbors

Discussion

Figure 6. Linear regression of score vs. round for group
sizes greater than 1

Figure 7. Linear regression of turnover rate vs. round for
group sizes greater than 1

Figure 8. Linear regression of imitation rate vs. round

The specific predictions made for the effects of the
experimental manipulations were generally unsupported by
the results. Most surprisingly, the rate of imitation was
unaffected by the availability of score information, which
seems to indicate that at least in this paradigm, this
information was not perceived as useful. Likewise, score
visibility did not affect turnover rate, though turnover was
correlated with imitation. We observed linear increases in
score and decreases in turnover over rounds, which were
predicted as consequences of the progressive discovery of
partial solutions and a corresponding narrowing of solution
space exploration, respectively. Rates of score increase did
not change significantly over the course of a session as was
predicted.
The linear decrease in imitation over the course of the
game (i.e. a tendency for participants to copy others’
guesses less often in later rounds) has several possible
interpretations. It may be that confidence in one’s own
personally acquired information grows with experience at
working toward a particular solution, or that the effort
expended in developing a solution becomes a sunk cost that
participants are unwilling to write off by copying and
switching to a different solution. Though competition was
not specifically encouraged, it may be that participants
realized that copying another solution toward the end of the
game would result only in a tie with its source, and that they
had to personally find a better solution to beat their fellow
participants. If present, this effect is probably exacerbated
by a decrease in the diversity of the solutions available for
copying as participants approach the solution. These
questions merit further study in future experiments, as they
relate directly to questions of conformity bias and the
tradeoff between imitation and innovation.
The regression results for score and turnover in relation to
group size admit a simple explanation: isolated participants
show less consistent changes in their score and less
consistent variability in their guesses due to the fact that
there are no other participants to observe or imitate. The
lack of other participants limits the diversity of approaches
to solving the problem to those generated internally by the
participant. The regression results for score vs. round in
relation to game order indicate that the first game in each
session may have functioned as a practice game, during
which participants were still learning the mechanics of the
experiment. This suggests that in future versions, an explicit
practice game should be included in order to obtain more
consistent data.
The positive relationship between imitation rate and NN
may indicate a tendency for imitation behavior to scale
according to the number or diversity of examples available.
However, there may be a simpler explanation: the more
participants there are, the greater the chance that two of
them will randomly resemble each other at any given time.
That is, this may be an artifact of the choice of problem
space and the imitation calculation.

1669

Finally, the quadratic relationship between score and NN
appears anomalous and possibly spurious: it seems
reasonable to expect that scores would show a steady
improvement as groups grew in size, rather than peak at an
intermediate level. At the risk of over-interpretation of a
limited data set, a possible answer is suggested by the
concept of “span of managerial responsibility” (Drucker,
1954), which proposes that the optimal size for a typical
subordinate unit to operate with minimal management
control is between 3 and 6 people. This numerical rule of
thumb survives in modern industrial and military practices
(Department of the Army, 2003). In this experiment, scores
peaked at an effective group size of 5; it may be that groups
of this size allow particularly efficient information sharing
and decision-making for a problem of the complexity
encountered here. This is highly speculative, but it will be
interesting to see if similar effects arise in future studies.
In this study we found that the behavior of isolated
individuals attempting to solve a multidimensional problem
differs markedly from that of people connected in groups,
and that differences in the size of a group can have
significant and sometimes unexpected effects on behavior.
These results present several intriguing areas for further
study. Specifically, having larger groups of participants
would allow exploration of the possible scaling effects for
group size seen here, as well as the implementation of a
wider variety of network topologies. The use of alternate
methods for indicating to participants the potential utility of
neighbor guesses, as well as determining when imitation has
occurred, would allow a closer examination of the
circumstances that encourage conformity bias and similar
phenomena. Overall, there are strong implications for
testing the predictions of past work in the area of group
problem-solving behavior, and potential applications to
many real-world problems.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Allen Lee, Andy Jones, and
Zoran Rilak for their technical assistance and help in
designing and programming the experiment. Our lab is
currently funded by Department of Education, Institute of
Education Sciences grant R305H050116, and National
Science Foundation REC grant 0527920.

References
Asch, S. E. (1951). Effects of Group Pressure Upon the
Modification and Distortion of Judgements. In H.
Guetzkow (ed.), Groups, Leadership, and Men.
Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Press.

Bavelas, A. (1950). Communication patterns in taskoriented groups. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 22, 725-730.
Bøg, M. (2006). Whom Should I Observe? – Learning
through Observation and Experimentation in Simple
Bandit Problems. Manuscript submitted for publication
(copy on file with author).
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the
evolutionary process. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Drucker, P.F. (1954). The Practice of Management. New
York: Harper & Brothers.
Department of the Army (2003). Field Manual 6-0:
Command and Control of Army Forces. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.
Hong, L., & Page, S.E. (2004). Groups of diverse problem
solvers can outperform groups of high-ability problem
solvers. PNAS, 101, 16385-16389.
Kameda, T., & Nakanishi, D. (2002). Cost–benefit analysis
of social/cultural learning in a nonstationary uncertain
environment: An evolutionary simulation and an
experiment with human subjects. Evolution and Human
Behavior, 23, 373–393.
Kerr, N.L., MacCoun, R.J., & Kramer, G.P. (1996). Bias in
Judgment: Comparing Individuals and Groups.
Psychological Review, 103, 4, 687-719
Lazer, D. & Friedman, A. 2005. The hare and the tortoise:
the network structure of exploration and exploitation.
Proceedings of the 2005 National Conference on Digital
Government Research. ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series, 89. Digital Government Research
Center.
Leavitt, H. (1951). Some effects of certain communication
patterns on group performance. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 46, 38-50.
Mason, W.A., Jones, A., & Goldstone, R.L. (2005).
Propagation of innovations in networked groups.
Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Noble, J., Davy, S., & Franks, D.W. (2004). Effects of the
topology of social networks on information transmission.
From Animals to Animats 8: Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive
Behavior (pp. 395-404). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press /
Bradford Books.
Templeton, J.J., & Giraldeau, L.-A. (1996). Vicarious
sampling: the use of personal and public information by
starlings foraging in a simple patchy environment.
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 38, 105-113.

1670

