UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grounding Symbol Structures in Space: Formal Notations as Diagrams

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zz4b1h6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Landy, David
Goldstone, Robert L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grounding Symbol Structures in Space: Formal Notations as Diagrams
David Landy (dlandy@indiana.edu)
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408 USA

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408 USA
Abstract

than the element representing B – any relation that is
inherently asymmetric and transitive. Representations are
extrinsic when their inherent structure is arbitrary. They
model the represented world by explicitly building the
necessary structure so as to conform to the world. Palmer
argues that analog representations are intrinsic;
correspondences and inferences between represented and
representing worlds come for free because of their shared
intrinsic structure. Propositional representations, including
language, logic, and mathematics, are extrinsic, and hence
come to represent objects by explicitly establishing relations
with whatever structure is needed. The only intrinsic
relation necessary to propositions is the left-right
concatenation of basic symbols. Although traditionally
understood as extrinsic, it is possible that representations in
mathematics and logics nonetheless possess intrinsic and
analog properties, and it is this possibility that we
empirically pursue here.
Specifically, we propose that formal notations are
diagrammatic as well as sentential and the property
conventionally described as syntactic structure is
cognitively mediated, in part, by spatial information.
Elements of expressions are “bound” together through
perceptual grouping—often induced by simple spatial
proximity. Thus, our claim is that mathematical
formalizations of syntax are not themselves the direct
cognitive mechanisms typically employed in processing that
structure. The former really are concatenative, but we
propose that people use space and spatial relationships in
representational schemas to facilitate the processing of
syntax. To be clear: we are not claiming here that the
execution of each individual step in a proof or computation
is inherently spatial or processed exclusively using sensorimotor mechanisms. We do suggest that spatial reasoning
over the physical layout of notational forms is common in
reasoning with formal languages, and that spacing practices
play a significant role in human reasoning using notations.
We have argued previously that a broadly similar
interference of metric (non-order-related) spatial properties
on syntactic judgments provides evidence that syntax
processing typically involves spatial
and perceptual
grouping processes (Landy & Goldstone, in press; Kirshner
& Awtry, 2004). These works conclude that mathematical
reasoners are sensitive to non-formal properties of presented
equations, and in particular align close proximity with high
operator precedence. For instance, in Landy & Goldstone

Although a general sense of the magnitude, quantity, or
numerosity is common both in untrained people and animals,
the abilities to deal exactly with large quantities and to reason
precisely in complex but well-specified situations—to behave
formally, that is—are skills unique to people trained in
symbolic notations. These symbolic notations employ
typically complex, hierarchically embedded structures, which
all extant analyses assume are the product of concatenative,
rule-based processes. The primary goal of this article is to
establish, using behavioral measures on naturalistic tasks, that
the some of the same cognitive resources involved in
representing spatial relations and proximities are also
involved in representing symbolic notations. In short, formal
notations are used as a kind of diagram. We examine selfgenerated productions in the domains of handwritten
arithmetic expressions and typewritten statements in a formal
logic. In both tasks, we find substantial evidence for spatial
processes even in these highly symbolic domains.
Keywords: symbolic processing, mathematics, embodied
cognition, relational reasoning

Introduction
It is clear that mathematical equations written in modern
notation are, in general, visual forms, and furthermore that
they share some properties with diagrammatic or imagistic
displays. Equations and mathematical expressions are often
set off from main text, use non-standard characters and
shapes, and deviate substantially from the linear placement
of text. Furthermore, evidence indicates that at least some
mathematical processing is sensitive to the particular visual
form of its presentation notation (Campbell, 1999, McNeil
& Alibali, 2004). Nevertheless, notational mathematical
representation is typically considered ‘sentential,’ and
placed in opposition with diagrammatic representations in
fields as diverse as education (Zazkis et al, 1996; Stylianou,
2002), philosophy of science (Galison, 1997), computer
science (Iverson, 1980), and cognitive studies of problemsolving (Anderson, 2005; Stenning, 2002).
The standard conception of mathematical notation is best
understood via Stephen Palmer’s (1978) classic distinction
between intrinsic and extrinsic representational schemes. A
representation is intrinsic “whenever a representing relation
has the same inherent constraints as its represented relation”
(p. 271). Line A being shorter than Line B can be
intrinsically represented by the representational element that
corresponds to A being shorter, taller, brighter, or larger

425

(in press), participants were much more likely to attribute
equality to “n + w*y + b = y + b*n + w” than to the
formally equivalent “m+p * e+g = e+g * m+p”.
The fact that people are sensitive to small changes in the
physical spacing of formal expressions suggests that
symbolic interpretation is processed, in part, through spatial
reasoning. If so, then people might also respond spatially to
the syntax of internally represented expressions, leading
symbolic productions to reflect syntactic structure, e.g., the
more tightly two mental terms are bound syntactically, the
closer they should be written physically. A relationship
between spatial and syntactic proximity would be at best
unexplained if space is not part of how we represent formal
syntax.
Study 1 directly examines our proposal by
measuring physical inter-operand spacing in handwritten
equations constructed by participants from presented word
equations.

Figure 1: Sample responses in Study 1.

Method
24 Indiana University undergraduates participated in the
experiment, which fulfilled a partial course requirement.
This experiment lasted about 25 minutes.
Word equations were presented one at a time on a
computer; participants wrote out corresponding equations
using standard mathematical symbols. Participants were
instructed to use only standard Arabic numerals and formal
operator symbols (‘+’, ‘x’, ‘=’), and were explicitly asked
not to use any parentheses. Participants were not asked to
solve or evaluate the correctness of any equation, nor were
they reminded of the correct order of operations.
For each participant, 10 triples of numbers between 2 and
9 were randomly generated (because 1 is much narrower
than other numbers, it was excluded from this experiment)
Syntactic binding between terms was systematically
manipulated by altering the operator of equations. Each
triple appeared in 4 different equations, one with each of the
operator structures plus-plus, plus-times, times-plus, and
times-times, making 40 translations in all. The other side of
the equation contained the same expression, but with the
first operation completed. Thus, if the number triple was
{2,4,9}, the equations would be 6 + 9 = 2 + 4 + 9, 2 + 36 =
2 + 4 x 9, 8 + 9 = 2 x 4 + 9, and 8 x 9 = 2 x 4 x 9. The
middle two equations are labeled mixed operator conditions,
while the first and last are termed unmixed (since there is no
particular hierarchical structure on either side of the
equation). In 5 of the 10 equation sets, the triple appeared as
the right-hand side of the equation; in the other 5, the triple
appeared on the left. This procedure eliminates any
interference of particular number choices, since each
production is compared to productions that are identical
except for operator context.
Each participant received a different, randomly generated
stimulus set. Word equations were presented on a computer
screen, one at a time, and remained on the screen while
participants wrote the corresponding symbolic equation in a
printed box (1.1cm high by 10.4cm wide, see Figure 1) on a
piece of paper. Word equations employed number words
along with the words “times,” “plus,” and “equals”. For
instance, if the word equation probe was “six plus five times
four equals two plus nine times three,” participants would
respond by writing “6 + 5 x 4 = 2 + 9 x 3”. Each participant

Study 1
In this study, participants were asked to write out simple
equations by hand. If, as we propose, formal notations
automatically encode spatial relations corresponding to
structural relations, then spacing in handwritten equations
should reflect the formal structure of the equation. In
particular, equality spacing should be very large, since
equality signs denote, in all cases, the broadest partition of
the sentence. Within the 2-operator side of each equation,
spacing should depend on the structure of the expression. In
mixed expressions, the middle term is syntactically “bound”
to the higher-order multiplication sign, and so the spacing
around that sign should be compressed (or that around the
lower-order addition sign expanded) relative to its unmixed
spacing. Thus, we expect a dependency of operator spacing
on the interaction between operator and context.
Although traditional sentential accounts of notational
reasoning provide no reason to expect operator spacing to
ever be non-uniform, experience with typeset or handwritten
equations might drive some kinds of spacing regularities.
Typeset equations are generally not fixed-width, and
multiplication symbols are generally narrower than addition
signs. Experience with typeset equations could lead
equation writers to generally space multiplicands more
narrowly than addends. However, no prominent equation
typesetter adjusts the spacing of terms based on syntax (and
if one did, we would regard this as evidence favoring our
view!): therefore, while either the spatial encoding or the
amodal perspective might predict a main effect of operator,
neither the width of the operators themselves nor experience
with typeset equations could lead to the predicted
interaction. Thus, the principle theoretical measure is the
interaction between operator sign and mixed/unmixed
structure.

426

viewed 40 equations in total. Responses that were left blank,
contained parentheses or other extraneous marks, or
contained crossed out values or other errors were dropped
from the analysis. The measure was the distance between
the innermost points of each pair of adjacent operands.

received more training with mathematical expressions in
which the spacing is consistent with the syntactic structure.
However, this explanation does not provide any additional
insight into why this spacing convention has been adopted
in the first place. For that, the most parsimonious account
for the environmental regularity is, once again, that spatial
processes are involved in the representation of mathematical
syntax in the normal course of algebraic reasoning.
There is a plausible alternative to the spatial information
hypothesis: it might be that syntax processing (somehow)
mediates access to the lexicographic forms for numbers and
symbols. If syntactically bound items are chunked in
memory, for instance, then access to terms within a chunk
may be quicker than access to terms across chunks (Cheng
& Rojas-Anaya, 2006). If so, and if horizontal pen
movement between characters correlates with access time (if
for instance the pen is moved at some more-or-less fixed
velocity while the lexical form is being accessed), then a
memory delay could produce increased spacing. Study 2
addresses this possibility by exploring spacing behavior on a
typed input task.

Results
For each participant, spacing was averaged across the
stimuli in each condition. The mean distances across
participants for each context are shown in Table 1. These
mean values were analyzed using a 2-way withinparticipants ANOVA, using distance as a dependent
measure, and operator and expression structure as
independent categorical variables. As predicted by the
typesetting hypothesis, the ANOVA revealed a main effect
of operator type: multiplicands were spaced more closely
than addends, (F(2, 46)=7.9, MSE=3.35, p<0.01), and
equality signs were spaced substantially more widely than
either (F(2,46)=105.7, MSE=249.2, p<0.001). The
interaction between operator type and expression structure
was also significant: participants’ compression of
multiplicands relative to addends increased in the mixed
condition (F(1,23)=4.726, MSE=1.28, p<0.05).

Study 2
A limitation with Study 1 is that the formal system used was
a small (though important) one: pre-algebra using equality,
addition and multiplication. While this system is convenient
in that it is widely known and studied, nevertheless
generalizing from such a small system is difficult. Study 2
broadens the scope of our examinations by exploring a very
different notational system: formal propositional (quantified
and unquantified propositional) logic. Instead of asking
participants to write unused and useless pseudo-equations in
a laboratory setting, Study 2 involves a corpus analysis of
self-generated expressions by participants interacting with a
Web-based teaching tool designed and maintained by Colin
Allen and Chris Menzel, and based on an accompanying
textbook (Allen & Hand, 2001).

Table 1: Mean spacing (with standard error) by
measurement condition (mm).
Operator

Unmixed

Mixed

Overall

Addition

9.52±.48

9.77±.48

9.65±.48

Multiplication

9.38±.50

9.16±.53

9.27±.51

Equality

12.38±.59

12.13±.57

12.25±.58

Discussion
Study 1 indicates that syntax in arithmetic equations, at
some level, is processed automatically. Although the simple
transcription task requires no consideration of syntax at all,
the results show a modulation of productions in virtue of
syntactic structure. Moreover, writers are not swayed
arbitrarily by syntax—they construct spatial properties that
match their psychological groupings. Terms were spaced
more narrowly when they were grouped more closely.
Historical interactions with typeset equations do not predict
these effects, nor do traditional symbolic accounts of
mathematical competence. So of the hypotheses considered
earlier, this result is compatible only with the suggestion
that participants systematically vary spacing according to
the particular syntactic structure of the current equation.
Because this behavior presumably generalizes to the
population at large, including the teachers and parents of our
particular participants, historical interactions with other
hand-written equations could account for the results—
participants in our task might reasonably be sensitive to
syntax because their teachers and parents were, and
therefore sensitivity of spacing to syntax forms part of the
participants’ training. That is, our participants may have

Method
The current analysis is based on the "Logic Daemon and
Quizmaster" (Allen & Menzel, 2006, http://logic.tamu.edu/)
which is an interactive Website designed for use with the
Logic Primer textbook by Allen & Hand (2001). Although
the site is publicly accessible, the primary users are
probably students in introductory logic courses, who can use
this Website to tackle exercises found in the textbook as
well as additional problems of the same type (because the
data we analyze was anonymous and already collected,
informed consent was not obtained. This research was
approved as exempt by Indiana University IRB (approval
number 06-11025). For our analysis, we chose to focus on
the 'translation' exercises which require students to render
sentences of English into the formal system described in
chapters one (propositional) and three (predicate logic) of
Logic Primer. In these exercises, students are presented with
up to five English sentences and under each sentence is a
standard Web form single-line text input field. Students

427

freely type a response for one or more of the sentences and
click a submit button. For instance, problem 9 from problem
section 1.3 (in chapter 1) states that “If Mary dances
although John is not happy, Bill will dance”. Instructions
state that “Q”, “S”, and “R” are to be used to denote the
atomic sentences “Mary dances”, “John is happy”, and “Bill
dances”, respectively. Participants enter a formal sentence
corresponding to this sentiment (one correct response would
be “((Q & ~S) -> R)”).
Each string of characters submitted in this way is checked
first to see whether it represents a well-formed formula
(wff) according to the specifications of the formal system.
Although the textbook uses non-ASCII characters, these are
mapped to ASCII strings for keyboard input; specifically,
the single arrow is represented as '->' (dash-greater-than,
double arrow with '<->' (less-than-dash-greater-than), the
upside-down 'A' of universal quantification with '@', and the
backwards 'E' of existential quantification with '$'. The wff
formation rules specify the use of parentheses around binary
sentential connectives: '&' (and), 'v' (or), '->' (if...then), and
'<->' (if and only if). Some of these parentheses may also be
omitted following a formal convention that is defined in
chapter one of the text. The parenthesis-dropping
conventions follow the specified order of operations: & and
v precede ->, and -> precedes <->. Any string that passes
the wff test is next checked for correctness with respect to
the particular translation problem attempted (logical
equivalency to a stored answer. Both the wff check and the
correctness check is indifferent to any white space
introduced by the student, and when problems are returned
to students with feedback, any spaces are removed.
It is worth noting that although interface, formal system,
physical situation, and participant pool and motivation are
different from Study 1, the task is quite similar: in both
cases, participants are asked to take a natural language
statement and translate it into a formal system.

spacing violated these constraints, then the expression was
flagged as inconsistent.
Our predictions are as follows: first, we predict that
because representations of space play a role in the way
reasoners process syntax, participants using the site will at
least occasionally insert spaces. Although random insertion
of spaces would be far more likely to produce inconsistent
than consistent spacings, we predict that .spacing will be
primarily consistent, and that only consistent spacing will
improve performance.
Study 1 indicated that spacing is modulated in the
presence of hierarchical syntax, participants should be more
likely to produce spaces in responses containing more than
one operator. Also, we predict that accuracy will be higher
on consistently spaced statements than on other statements,
whenever structure matters (i.e., whenever there are two or
more operators).
The problems studied came from two sections of the
book; one on propositional logic (chapter 1), and one on
predicate logic (chapter 3). Because the latter is from a later
section of the book, submissions on this section can be
assumed to come from more advanced reasoners; one might
wonder whether such reasoners will space more or less
frequently and regularly than beginners. Both possibilities
are compatible with out hypothesis. One might think that
advanced reasoners should have a better mastery of spatial
systems of reasoning, and consequently space more. On the
other hand, one might think that advanced reasoners have
internalized the appropriate perceptual structures, and do not
need physical cues to indicate them. Because more
experienced reasoners are less likely to be dependent on
perceptual support (Chi, Feltovich & Glaser, 1981), we also
predict that more advanced participants will be less likely to
space expressions at all. Our prediction then is that spacing
will be more common in the first, more elementary section,
suggesting that advanced reasoners have internalized the
appropriate perceptual segmentation.
In analyzing these data, we do not attempt to evaluate the
statistical significance of our results for two reasons: first,
the breakdown of submissions by unique IP address/date
does not adequately divide submission into independent
samples. Since we have no way to determine unique
individuals, and furthermore no way to determine the
relationship between individuals, statistical tests based on
the assumption of independent samples are inappropriate.
Second, the large size of the sample guarantees that standard
statistical measures will indicate significance (all of the
contrasts considered here are highly significant by standard
measures), regardless of the underlying mechanisms. For
these reasons, we report frequencies without invalid
statistical measures.

Analysis & Predictions
129,526 submissions to the translation verification interface
(exercises 1.3 and 3.2) submitted between May 5, 2005 and
April 4, 2006 were collected and analyzed. Junk entries,
entries which used incorrect symbols (e.g., “=>” instead of
“->”), and repeated entries coming from a single IP address
on a particular day were removed. After all of these
reductions, 48,131 statements from 595 unique IP
address/time stamp combinations remained. The same
verification system used to provide submission feedback
was used to categorize submissions for our analysis.
We distinguish three physical spacing conditions: spacing
consistent with the operator structure, spacing inconsistent
with operator structure, and no spacing at all (unspaced). An
expression is considered consistent when the space around
every operator in the expression is appropriate: spaces
around conjunction, disjunction, conditional, and biconditional signs should be even, spaces should only be
inserted to the left of negation signs and quantifiers. If any

Results
Table 2 presents the frequencies of submission broken down
by spacing, number of operators, and logic type. As
expected, participants frequently spaced expressions. 10.8%
of all expressions submitted contained some spacing. When

428

Table 2: The use of spacing in typed formal translations.
Logic Type
Type
U

Propositional
C

I

U

First Order
C

I

Correct

1,344

160

11

1,187

12

0

Incorrect

1,592

145

15

735

9

0

6,175

1,058

159

12,899

1,044

165

Single Op

Multiple Ops
Correct

Incorrect
5,182
844
213
13,817
1,011
339
Results from Study 2. Entries specify number of submissions of each category. U denotes unspaced submissions, C those in
which spacing and operations were consistent, and I submissions with at least one inconsistently spaced operation.
expressions were spaced, moreover, they were
predominately consistently spaced: 82.6% of all spaced
equations were consistent with operator syntax. Consistently
spaced submissions were also more likely than either
inconsistent or unspaced expressions to be correct; 53% of
consistent equations were correct, compared with only 37%
of inconsistently spaced and 50% of unspaced equations.
In order to test the structure sensitivity of consistent
spacing, we divided the dataset according to whether a
problem required syntax resolution (that is, whether it had
two or more connectives). Participants did indeed space
more frequently on multi-operator problems (9.2% of multioperator problems were consistently spaced against 6.8% of
few-operator problems). Furthermore, accuracy was highest
(53%) when expressions were consistently spaced, and
lowest on those inconsistently spaced (37%; 50.1% of all
unspaced expressions were correct), principally on multioperator expressions. On few-operator problems, 52% of
consistent, 42% of inconsistent, and 52% of unspaced
submissions were correct. However, the number of
problems of this type is very small (there were only 26
inconsistently spaced few-operator submissions in all).
We also tested the theory that more training would reduce
the need for formally extraneous spacing. Translation
problems appear in two sections of the textbook: Chapter 1
(propositional logic) and Chapter 3 (predicate logic). We
divided the full dataset into these two categories, and
measured spacing frequency across these two categories;
both consistent and inconsistent spacings were more
frequent on propositional problems (13.1% and 2.4%,
respectively) than on predicate logic problems (6.7% and
1.6%).

Study 1, Study 2 establishes that people working in two
very different domains systematically space formal systems
that do not require differential spacing.
Because the participants in this study were typing on a
keyboard, a chunking account that predicts differential
spacing on handwritten equations as a result of the timecourse of memory retrieval within and across chunks cannot
account for spacing here. Other accounts of the results of
Study 2 are possible, however. For instance, other formal
systems, such as programming languages, are often taught
with explicit instructions to space logical terms; participants
might be transferring this practice from programming
experience. This possibility cannot be definitively
eliminated (though why spacing is common in programming
is still mysterious), but the fact that more experienced
reasoners space less, not more, seems incompatible with the
idea that appropriately spacing is an acquired skill.

General Discussion
In both typed logic and handwritten arithmetic translation
tasks, participants created formally irrelevant spatial
relationships in stimuli. In both cases, these relationships
aligned with the syntactic structure of the formal statement
being expressed. The kinds of regularities produced in
Study 1 have been shown to benefit correct syntactic
interpretation (Landy & Goldstone, in press). People seem
to spontaneously create alignments of space and syntax that
help them reason formally.
That spacing is connected to syntax is important for our
understanding of mathematics and mathematical learning,
but it is also important for education and cognitive
psychology more generally. For education, our results
suggest increased sensitivity to the physical features of how
mathematics is presented to students and how they present
mathematics to their teachers. Physical properties such as
spacing may be used to give students a perceptual scaffold
for the rules underlying algebra. Further research is
necessary to know whether these scaffolds, when removed,
help students to continue to obey the appropriate
mathematical rules or if they act as crutches that thwart rule

Discussion
Despite being formally unnecessary and informally
discouraged, spaces were frequently inserted into typed
sentences of formal logic. These spacings were nearly
always consistent with the operations they abutted;
submissions with consistent spacing were also more likely
to be correct than unspaced submissions. Together with

429

development. Reciprocally, by examining students’ spacings
of their own productions, we may be able to diagnose their
misunderstandings. In the same way that manual gestures
are sensitive indicators of inchoate explicit mathematical
understandings (Alibali & Goldin-Meadow, 1993; GoldinMeadow, Wein & Chang, 1992), production spacing may
indicate the beginnings, or lack thereof, of knowledge for
order of precedence.
Most fundamentally, our results challenge conceptions
of symbols as amodal and divorced from analog, spatial
information. In this respect, we offer a reinterpretation of
Newell and Simon’s (1963, 1976) influential “Physical
Symbol System Hypothesis.” Their hypothesis was that
physical symbol systems had the necessary and sufficient
means for producing intelligent action. A symbol system
includes both physical symbols such as marks on paper or
punches on a computer tape, and the explicit rules for
manipulating these tokens. In action, all of their physical
symbols were distantly related to their worldly referents,
and were digital and discrete entities such as the strings “P
⊃Q” and “GOAL 7 TRANSFORM L3 INTO LO.” The
arbitrary nature of these entities was by design because they
wanted symbols to be able to designate any expression
whatsoever without any a priori prescriptions or limitations.
We concur with Newell and Simon’s emphasis on physical
symbols, and believe in paying even more attention to
symbols’ physical attributes involving space, shape, and
perceptual grouping. Accordingly, our revised physical
symbol systems hypothesis is that symbols are not arbitrary,
unconstrained tokens, but rather are represented and
processed using space and perceptually organized groups.
This conception of physical symbols makes them far more
constrained than those underlying Newell and Simon’s
General Problem Solver, but these constraints are not only
limiters, but permitters as well. For Specific Problem
Solvers that are humans, it is good policy to design symbols
that can be processed efficiently given what we know about
perceptual and cognitive mechanisms. From this
perspective, it is hardly surprising if the symbols we write
look a lot like those that we are good at reading, and if the
symbols we think with are a lot like those we are good at
thinking.

Alibali, M. W. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (1993). Gesturespeech mismatch and mechanisms of learning: What the
hands reveal about a child's state of mind. Cognitive
Psychology 25, 468-523.
Anderson, J.R. (2005). Human symbol manipulation within
an Integrated Cognitive Architecture. Cognitive Science
29:313-341.
Campbell, J.I.D. (1999). The surface form x problem size
interaction in cognitive arithmetic: Evidence against an
encoding locus. Cognition 70, B25-B33.
Cheng, P. Rojas-Anaya, H. (2006). A temporal signal
reveals chunk structure in the writing of word phrases.
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Vancouver, B.C.
Chi, M. T. H, Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Galison, P. (1997). Image and Logic. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Wein, D. & Chang, C. (1992).
Assessing knowledge through gesture: Using children's
hands to read their minds. Cognition and Instruction,
9(3), 201-219.
Iverson, K. E.(1980). Notation as a tool of thought.
Communications of the ACM, 23(8), 444-465.
Kirshner, D., & Awtry, T. (2004). Visual salience of
algebraic transformations. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 35(4), 224-257.
Landy, D. & Goldstone, R. (in press). How abstract is
symbolic thought?
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2004). You’ll see what
you mean: Students encode equations based on their
knowledge of arithmetic. Cognitive Science, 28(3), 451466.
Newell, A., and Simon, H.A. (1963). GPS: A Program that
Simulates Human Thought. In E.A. Feigenbaum and J.
Feldman. (eds.), Computers and Thought. McGraw-Hill,
New York.
Newell, A., and Simon, H.A. (1976). Computer science as
empirical enquiry: Symbols and search. Communications
of the ACM 19(3), 113--126.
Palmer, S. E. (1978). Fundamental aspects of cognitive
representation. In E. Rosch & B. B. LLoyd (Eds.),
Cognition and categorization. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates. (pp. 259-303)
Stenning, K. (2002). Seeing Reason: Image and Language
in Learning to Think. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Stylianou, D. A. (2002). On the interaction of visualization
and analysis: the negotiation of a visual representation in
expert problem solving. Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 21, 303-317.
Zazkis, R., Dubinsky, E., & Dautermann, J. (1996).
Coordinating visual and analytic strategies: A study of the
students’ understanding of the group d4. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 27 (4), 435-456.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by Department of Education,
Institute of Education Sciences grant R305H050116, and
National Science Foundation ROLE grant 0527920. The
authors thank Colin Allen for his support, both material and
conceptual.

References
Allen, C. & Hand, M. 2001 Logic Primer, 2nd edition.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Allen, C. and Menzel, C. (2006) Logic Daemon and
Quizmaster website (http://logic.tamu.edu/). Accessed
Sep 28, 2006.

430

