UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Language Affects Thought in a Connectionist Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7q47j690

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Dilkina, Katia
McClelland, James L.
Boroditsky, Lera

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Language Affects Thought in a Connectionist Model
Katia Dilkina (knd@{andrew.cmu.edu, stanford.edu})
Stanford University, Department of Psychology
Jordan Hall (Bldg 420), 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

James L. McClelland (jlm@psych.stanford.edu)
Stanford University, Department of Psychology
Jordan Hall (Bldg 420), 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Lera Boroditsky (lera@psych.stanford.edu)
Stanford University, Department of Psychology
Jordan Hall (Bldg 420), 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA

kinds of sensory-motor (including linguistic) input. Within
this framework, linguistic information about an entity (its
name, grammatical gender, other relevant grammatical and
syntactic markings, etc.) is treated the same way as other
applicable kinds of information – information about what
that entity looks like (visual), what it sounds like (auditory),
what it feels like (tactile), how it moves (motoric), and so
on. The semantic system involves a large network of
modality-specific distributed representations (as suggested
by imaging studies; Martin & Chao, 2001). Importantly, we
believe that there is an additional representation sensitive to
both within- and between-modality covariation that serves
to link the modality-specific information together (Damasio,
1989; Rogers et al., 2004). These representations combine
sensory-motor information with linguistic information and
provide the substrate where effects of meaning similarity in
picture and word naming and recognition tasks as well as
linguistic relativity findings arise (for a related perspective
see Vigliocco and colleagues, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006).
We have used a connectionist implementation of this
theory to account for the relationship of semantic and lexical
deficits in semantic dementia patients (Dilkina &
McClelland, 2006). Furthermore, the theory has
implications for a wide range of research areas including
language comprehension and production, bilingualism, and
conceptual representations and processing (note that for the
purposes of this paper, semantics is synonymous with
conceptual knowledge; it does not refer to the meaning of
words per se). In the current paper, we will focus on its
implications for findings of linguistic relativity, and more
specifically on effects of grammatical gender categories.

Abstract
How do the languages we speak shape the way we think? In a
series of studies, Boroditsky, Schmidt, and Phillips (2003)
investigated the effect of grammatical gender on people’s
responses to questions about the properties and similarity
relations among objects. Here, we use a connectionist
network to simulate these findings and find a possible
mechanism for linguistic relativity effects (such as effects of
grammatical categorization). The model’s behavior paralleled
the effects seen in the human data. The results also suggest
that the within- and between- category similarity relations
among objects may play a role in generating these effects.
Keywords: semantics; conceptual knowledge; language;
language and thought; linguistic relativity; connectionism.

Introduction
How do the languages we speak shape the way we think?
The hypothesis that aspects of language may influence the
way we think is most strongly associated with Sapir (1921)
and Whorf (1956). Recently, evidence supporting this
hypothesis has come from experimental studies
documenting that speakers of different languages perform
differently on (non-linguistic) tasks such as categorization,
perceptual discrimination, and similarity judgments (e.g.,
Boroditsky, 2001; Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips, 2003;
Davidoff, Davies & Roberson, 1999, 2000; Levinson, 1996;
Lucy, 1992; Sera et al., 2002; Slobin, 1992, 1996).
In this paper we ask how cross-linguistic differences may
arise, and attempt to provide a computational mechanism
through which aspects of linguistic representations may
influence thinking. In our view, cross-linguistic differences
arise as a result of differences in experience. Speakers of
various languages are exposed to distinct patterns of
linguistic input characterized by its specific statistical
properties and associations with other kinds of information.
Throughout development, conceptual knowledge about
objects in the world is acquired by integrating different

Grammatical Gender
In English, only persons are referred to with the gendermarked pronouns he and she. However, in many other
languages, including Spanish and German, all nouns are
marked for gender – even nouns referring to inanimate
objects. For example, the word for ‘key’ is feminine in

215

investigated were the density of the object perceptual
representations and the between-category similarity of the
persons’ and the objects’ representations. We hypothesized
that as the between-category similarity increased, so would
the gender categorization effects. The reason is because the
objects’ semantic representations are influenced by the
perceptual features they share with humans. We also
expected that the density of the object representations may
also affect the magnitude of the gender effects, or it may
modulate the effect of between-category similarity.
Our findings supported the notion that the language(s) we
hear and speak make an important contribution to the
representations and organization of our semantic system.
And also, the similarity structure of pre-semantic
representations may play a role in linguistic relativity
effects, and clearly affects semantic representations.

Spanish and masculine in German, while the word for
‘bridge’ is masculine in Spanish and feminine in German.
In a series of experiments with English-Spanish and
English-German bilinguals, Boroditsky et al. (2003) looked
at grammatical categorization effects using a set of objects
half of which were feminine in Spanish but masculine in
German, while the other half were masculine in Spanish and
feminine in German.
In one of the experiments, they presented subjects with
the English names of the objects and asked them to list the
first three adjectives that came to mind to describe each
object. The adjectives were scored as describing a feminine
or masculine property of the object by five independent
naïve native English speakers. The results showed that the
adjectives people listed were consistent with the
grammatical gender of the objects in their native language.
In another experiment, the investigators presented their
subjects with pairs of drawings – one of the items was an
object from the list while the other was a male or female
person (e.g., a boy vs. a girl). The task was to rate the
similarity of each pair on a scale from 1 to 9. Each object
was paired with each of eight person drawings. People
indicated pairs as more similar when the grammatical
gender of the pictured object and the biological gender of
the pictured person were consistent than when they were
not. Similar results were obtained when the experiment was
performed with verbal shadowing where the participants
repeated English letters played one per second. Shadowing
was included to prevent or at least suppress verbalization.
Boroditsky et al. (2003) found that the grammatical
category of the labels affected the semantic representation
of the objects, even though the participants had no idea of
the relevance of gender in the tasks. That was the case even
when the task involved English labels, English being a
language without grammatical gender (as in the first
experiment), or non-linguistic stimuli (as in the second
experiment). Also, that was true even when linguistic
processing of the stimuli was suppressed (as in the third
experiment), suggesting that the effects arise at a postlexical level of representation.

Methods
Network Architecture. The network overall architecture
can be seen on Figure 1. There are five visible layers – one
for perceptual representations (equivalent to drawings), one
for descriptive representations (equivalent to adjectives),
and three for the names of the items – in English, Spanish,
and German. In the present investigation, each network
“speaks” English, and only one other language; thus, only
two of the lexical layers are used in a given simulation. The
visible layers are bidirectionally connected to a single
hidden layer called semantics. All layers are self-connected.
semantics

descriptive

(20 units)

perceptual
(35 units)

English
(30 units)

(20 units)

Spanish

(32 units)

Ger ma n
(32 units)

Figure 1: Network architecture.
Simulation Materials. Training and testing patterns were
identical. The set included 30 items, 10 persons (5 male, 5
female) and 20 objects (5 feminine in both Spanish and
German, abbreviated as FF; 5 masculine in both, MM; 5
feminine in Spanish but masculine in German, FM; and 5
masculine in Spanish, feminine in German, MF).
The lexical patterns were localist word representations.
Each item had a specific unit as its label in each language.
In addition, the Spanish and German representations
included two units to mark grammatical gender.
The perceptual and descriptive input patterns were binary
patterns generated based on the stochastic prototypes shown
in Table 1. There are no necessary or sufficient features
included. Rather, these patterns reflect tendencies of entities
of particular types (e.g., men and women) to have some
properties and not others. Each symbol in the prototypes

Toward a Mechanistic Account
The goal of the current project was to investigate the
mechanism by which linguistic relativity phenomena such
as gender categorization effects arise. We simulated
Boroditsky et al.’s data using a connectionist model. Our
findings are discussed with respect to the inherent properties
of connectionist networks, namely distributed overlapping
representations and sensitivity to coherent covariation, and
what they can tell us about the underlying mechanism.
Furthermore, we were interested to see what aspects of
the items’ perceptual representations are important for
gender categorization effects to occur. The two aspects we

216

stands for the probability of assigning a value of 1 to that
vector position. The symbol-probability pairs are included
in the table. The positions marked with ‘X’ and ‘Y’ varied
their probability based on the experimental manipulations,
as will be explained shortly. The generated patterns were
manually adjusted to ensure equal within- and betweencategory similarity for each of the four sets of objects.
The perceptual vectors had 35 positions. The first 10 were
used to represent predominantly human characteristics; the
next 15 object characteristics, and the last 10 correlated with
biological gender (5 female, 5 male). The descriptive
vectors had 20 positions. The first 10 were more likely to
apply to females, the second 10 to males.
Table 1: Perceptual and descriptive prototypes.
perceptual prototypes
female

++++++++++ --------------- ***** ^^^^^

male

++++++++++ --------------- ^^^^^ *****

object(low)

------XXXX ===========YYYY ^^^^^ ^^^^^

object(high)

------XXXX ******YYYY----- ^^^^^ ^^^^^

descriptive prototypes

symbol

P(1)

female

********** ^^^^^^^^^^

-

0.0

male

^^^^^^^^^^ **********

^

0.2

object

========== ==========

=

0.4

*
+

0.6
0.8

Network Training. As mentioned earlier, each network spoke
English and either Spanish or German. Thus, there were
four relevant patterns for each item – perceptual,
descriptive, English, and Spanish or German. During
training, the network was given all four, just the perceptual,
just the English, or just the Spanish or German pattern, and
was asked to produce all four outputs. All items were
included in the training in random order. Back-propagation
was used to do online learning, where the connection
weights between units were updated after every example.
The presentation of each example lasted for seven time
intervals. During the first three intervals, the input pattern(s)
was clamped on. For the remaining four intervals, the input
was removed, and the network was allowed to adjust the
activation of all units in all layers, including the one(s)
previously clamped. During the final two intervals, the unit
activations are compared to their corresponding targets. The
network was trained with 250 sweeps through the training
set, using standard gradient descent with no momentum,
with a learning rate of .005 and weight decay of .000005.
Network Testing. To simulate the first paradigm, we used
the English patterns of the FM and the MF objects as input.
The three most active units in the descriptive layer were
selected as indicating the three adjectives the network listed
for that item. As in the original Boroditsky et al.

217

experiment, a masculine adjective was given a score of -1,
while a feminine adjective was given a score of +1.
To simulate the second paradigm, the network was presented
with the perceptual patterns of the FM and the MF objects as
well as the persons (female and male). Each item produced a
unique semantic activation. For each object-person pair, we used
the cosine of their semantic vectors as a measure of similarity. To
make it comparable to the nine-point Likert scale used in the
experiment, we multiplied the cosine measure by 10 and rounded
the number.
To simulate verbal interference, all lexical layers were
removed and the network was tested again as just described.
Experimental Design. We manipulated two parameters
independently – the within-category similarity of the object
perceptual representations and their between-category
similarity with person perceptual representations.
In a set of binary representations of fixed size as we have
here, the within-category similarity is closely related to the
density of the representations, i.e. the number of 1s in a
vector given the length of the vector. We chose two levels
of object pattern density – low density of 40% (six 1s in the
15 positions representing object perceptual characteristics)
vs. high density of 60% (six 1s in 10 of those 15 positions;
the remaining 5 positions were always 0s). The resulting
prototypes can be seen in Table 1. Among the actual
patterns, the cosine measure of within-category similarity
was .33 for the low-density set and .46 for the high-density.
Secondly, to vary the between-category similarity, we
manipulated the degree of overlap between the persons’ and
the objects’ perceptual prototypes. Initially, they only
overlapped in the last 10 positions (representing biological
gender). To increase the overlap, we simply shifted the 15
position representing object characteristics forward (so that
they overlapped with the first 10 positions representing
human characteristics). We shifted them one, two, three, or
four times (as indicated by the Xs in the prototypes). The
gap left after each shift is marked with Ys in the prototypes
and was filled with ‘–‘ (i.e. a zero in the patterns).
Importantly, this manipulation was done with the actual
object patterns, not the prototypes. Therefore, the patterns
used were exactly the same at all five levels of overlap. The
two categories overlapped in 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 positions, which
translated to a cosine measure of .08, .13, .18, .23, and .28
between each of the four object sets (FF, MM, FM, and MF)
and each of the two person sets (female and male); i.e. this
was a linear manipulation of between-category similarity.
In summary, this was a 2 x 5 full factorial design. To
ensure appropriate sampling, each type of network –
Spanish- or German- speaking, with its particular level of
pattern density and overlap – was trained 40 independent
times (using different random number generator seeds) and
tested for the three experiments. Once again, the only
difference between the Spanish- and the German- speaking
networks was the grammatical gender of the FM and MF
objects. All other patterns were identical.

Results

(F(1,78)=3.179, p=.078); and there was no five-way
interaction (F(4,312)=1.42, p=.228). An increase in overlap
or in density generally resulted in an increase in the effect
observed (Figure 4). Finally, there was no main effect of
density (F(1,78)=.649, p=.423), but there was a main effect
of overlap (F(4,312)=9.91, p<.0005) such that as the degree
of overlap increased so did the average similarity rating.
semantic similarity rating (spa - ger)

0.6
0.4

1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
-0.3
-0.6
-0.9
-1.2
FM-female FM-male MF-female MF-male
object-person perceptual pairs

0.2

Figure 3a: L1 by object gender by person gender in Exp 2.

0
-0.2

semantic similarity rating (spa - ger)

description genderedness score
(spa - ger)

Experiment 1. Our results mirrored the findings of
Boroditsky et al. Language was not a significant factor
(F(1,78)=1.796, p=.184), but it interacted with the item type
(F(1,78)=314.6, p<.0005). As can be seen on Figure 2, the
genderedness of the object descriptors the networks
provided was consistent with the grammatical gender of the
objects in their “native” language. For the FM subset of
objects, which were feminine in Spanish and masculine in
German, the Spanish-speaking networks described these
objects as more feminine than the German-speaking
networks; and vice versa for the MF objects. Furthermore,
the density of the object perceptual representations
modulated this interaction (F(1,78)=17.80, p<.0005), while
the object-person pattern overlap did not (F(4,312)=1.097,
p=.358).

-0.4
-0.6
FM

MF

object
grammatical gender

Figure 2: Language by gender interaction in Exp 1.
FM objects = feminine in Spanish, masculine in German;
MF objects = masculine in Spanish, feminine in German;
The y-axis shows the difference in the description
genderedness between Spanish- and German- speaking
networks (positive = more feminine, negative = more masculine).

1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
0.0
-0.3
-0.6
-0.9
-1.2
FM-female

FM-male

MF-female

MF-male

object-person perceptual pairs

Figure 3b: L1 by object gender by person gender in Exp 3.

Experiment 2. Again, language was not a significant factor
(F(1,78)=1.209, p=.314), but just as in Boroditsky et al.’s
study there was a three-way interaction between L1, object
gender, and person gender (F(1,78)=1969.9, p<.0005). The
networks exhibited higher semantic similarity for pairs
where the grammatical gender of the object and the
biological gender of the person were consistent than for
pairs where they were not. For example, as can be seen on
Figure 3a,when FM objects (feminine in Spanish, masculine
in German) were paired with female persons, Spanishspeaking nets indicated a higher semantic similarity than
German-speaking ones. Conversely, when the same objects
were paired with male persons, the German-speaking nets
indicated higher semantic similarity than Spanish-speaking
ones. The object-person pattern overlap significantly
modulated this interaction (F(4,312)=9.209, p<0.0005); the
density of the object representations did so marginally

FM objects = feminine in Spanish, masculine in German;
MF objects = masculine in Spanish, feminine in German;
The y-axis shows the difference in semantic similarity
between Spanish- and German- speaking networks.
Experiment 3. The results were similar to Experiment 2,
although the effects were weaker. The three-way interaction
between L1, object gender, and person gender
(F(1,78)=1276.6, p<.0005) is presented on Figure 3b. The
modulation of this interaction by object-person pattern
overlap was not significant (F(4,312)=.818, p=.514); and
there was a significant modulation of the interaction by
density (F(1,78)=4.044, p=.048). Both can be seen on
Figure 4. Again, there was no main effect of L1
(F(1,78)=.68, p=.412) or density (F(1,78)=.056, p=.813), but
a main effect of overlap (F(4,312)=24.46, p<.0005).

218

Discussion
The results we obtained were consistent with the findings of
Boroditsky et al.: (1) In the object description paradigm,
there was a significant language by item interaction
indicating that the networks’ description of a given item was
masculine- or feminine- biased depending on the language
the network “spoke”, and thus on the grammatical gender of
the item in that language. (2) In the object-person picture
similarity paradigm, there was a significant language by
object gender by person gender interaction indicating that
the networks’ similarity ratings were higher when the
object’s grammatical gender and the person’s biological
gender were consistent (both feminine, or both masculine)
than when they were not (one feminine, one masculine). (3)
This interaction persisted and was still highly significant
even under an extreme manipulation of verbal interference,
that is when all lexical layers of the networks were removed.
This finding supported our view that linguistic information
helps shape semantic representations throughout
development (or throughout training for the network), and
the driving cause of the observed effects is not merely the
participants’ verbalizing in their native language or the
networks’ activating its lexical representations.
It should be noted that the effect decreased in size under
verbal interference (Figure 3). Thus, though the grammatical
categorization effects arose at the semantic level, there is
also on-line contribution from the lexical representations –
which when intact boost up the saliency of grammatical
gender. However, this contribution is not critical.
In the original studies by Boroditsky et al., there was no
difference in the effect size between the verbal-interference
experiment and the no-interference one. One possibility is
that verbalization may not be necessary for lexical access,
and so the verbal suppression did not interfere with the
online lexical support in the behavioral experiments. With
respect to the simulation results presented here, the observed
difference between Experiment 2 and 3 is most likely due to
the extreme implementation of verbal interference. A more
moderate implementation would have been to introduce
noise at the lexical levels rather than shut them down
entirely. However, we felt it is important to show that the
effects can be found even in this most extreme situation so
that we can confidently draw the conclusion that the effects
arise at the semantic level.
The more interesting question we set out to answer was
about the mechanism underlying the observed effects. There
are two attributes of connectionist networks that are relevant
here, and importantly, neither of them is tied to the
particular architecture or size of the network. They are
general properties of this type of networks. The first one is
that they are sensitive to the coherent covariation of the
various properties of items. We emphasize here that
linguistic properties should be included. For example, the

Figure 4: Effects of overlap and density on the L1 by object
gender by person gender interaction in Exp 2 & 3.
The y-axis plots the difference between semantic similarity
of object-person pairs where the object and the person agree
on grammatical gender vs. pairs where they do not.
biological gender of a person and the grammatical gender
used when referring to that person are perfectly correlated.
In addition, the biological gender of a person and the
femininity or masculinity of the adjectives we use to
describe them are also correlated (even if not perfectly). The
network learns the coherent covariation between perceptual,
descriptive, and grammatical properties of humans.
What about the objects? They have no biological gender
and their descriptors are generally not biased. Why does
their grammatical gender affect their semantic
representations if there is no coherent covariation between
perceptual, descriptive, and lexical properties? The second
important attribute of connectionist networks is that they use
distributed overlapping representations. Because of that, all
categories “borrow” partial sensitivity to coherent
covariation, even when it is completely unsupported in a
category. The objects, therefore, borrow from the structure
of the person representations and exhibit the respective bias.
In relation to this second property, we postulated that
increasing the overlap among objects’ and persons’
perceptual patterns will result in a stronger effect. Why? As
the between-category similarity increases, the semantic
representations of the objects would be more similar to the
semantic representations of the persons, which in turn are
based on the coherent covariation among the persons input
patterns (perceptual, descriptive, and lexical). That coherent
covariation demands that there is a relationship between the
grammatical gender of an item and other characteristics
such as what the item looks like or how it is described.
Indeed, the results from the second experiment confirmed
that (a) the semantic similarity between objects and persons
increased with overlap in the perceptual representations; and

219

presented at the 28th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Vancouver, BC.
Levinson, S.C. (1996). Frames of reference and Molyneux’s
question: Crosslinguistic evidence. In P. Bloom, M.
Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.), Language and
space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Grammatical Categories and Cognition:
A Case Study of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, A., & Chao, L.L. (2001). Semantic memory and the
brain: Structure and processes. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 11, 194-201.
Roberson, D., Davies I., & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a Stone-age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 369-398.
Rogers, T.T., Lambon-Ralph, M.A., Garrard, P., Bozeat, S.,
McClelland, J.L., Hodges, J.R., & Patterson, K. (2004).
The structure and deterioration of semantic memory: A
neuropsychological and computational investigation.
Psychological Review, 111, 205-235.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language. New York, NY: Harcourt,
Brace, and World.
Sera, M., Elieff, C., Forbes, J., Burch, M.C., Rodriguez, W.,
Dubois, D.P. (2002). When language affects cognition
and when it does not: An analysis of grammatical gender
and classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131, 377-397.
Slobin, D.I. (1992). The Cross-Linguistic Study of Language
Acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Slobin, D.I. (1996). From "thought and language" to
"thinking for speaking". In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson
(Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Vigliocco, G., & Kita, S. (2006). Language-specific
properties of the lexicon: Implications for learning and
processing. Language & Cognitive Processes,21,790-816.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Lewis, W., & Garrett, M.F.
(2004). Representing the meaning of object and action
words: The featural and unitary semantic space
hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 48, 422-488.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Paganelli, F., & Dworzynski,
K. (2005). Grammatical gender effects on cognition:
Implications for language learning and language use.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 134, 501-520.
Vinson, D.P., Vigliocco, G., Cappa, S.F., & Siri, S. (2003).
The breakdown of semantic knowledge: Insights from a
statistical model of meaning representation. Brain &
Language, 86, 347-442.
Whorf, B. (1956). In J. B. Carroll (ed.), Language,
Thought, and Reality: Selected Writing of Benjamin Lee
Whorf. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

(b) that increase was larger for object-person pairs that
agreed on gender than pairs that did not (Figure 4).
Importantly, the overlap we explored involved not
features of biological gender but overall person vs. nonperson distinctions. The motivation was that there are
different kinds of non-person categories. For example,
animals share many more features with humans than
artifacts do; within artifacts, toys may share more features
with humans than household items do; etc. Our findings
suggest that if the object-person picture similarity paradigm
was tested using a set of animals instead of a set of objects,
the grammatical gender effect should be even stronger. This
is partially supported by Vigliocco et al.’s study (2005),
where animals that shared grammatical gender were found
to be more similar to each other than those that did not;
while no such difference was present for artifacts.
As mentioned, the positions of overlap had nothing to do
with the male vs. female distinction. Thus, the increase in
overlap promoted the object category to “borrow” more
partial sensitivity to coherent covariation from the person
category, but it did not lend direct support for it. Because of
that, the interaction seen in Experiment 2 disappeared in
Experiment 3, where the lexical layers (which do in fact
lend direct support) were not allowed to contribute to the
semantic activation. This also emphasizes the idea that two
mechanisms seem to be at work: (1) a long-term mechanism
whereby linguistic information helps shape conceptual
representations; and (2) an on-line mechanism whereby the
activation of lexical representations bring linguistic
information to bear on conceptual tasks.
A natural extension of this project is to test the effect of
increased overlap in the perceptual features marking
biological gender. Our prediction would be that the
strengthening of the grammatical gender effects would be
even more pronounced than increasing the overlap among
the other perceptual features.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
English and Mandarin speakers’ conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex,
Syntax, and Semantics. In Gentner & Goldin-Meadow
(Eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of
Language and Cognition. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Damasio, A.R. (1989). The brain binds entities and events
by multiregional activation from convergence zones.
Neural Computation, 1, 123-132.
Davidoff, J., Davies, I., & Roberson, D. (1999). Colour
categories in a stone-age tribe. Nature, 398, 203-204.
Dilkina, K., & McClelland, J.L. (2006). A connectionist
account of the pattern of deficits across semantic and
lexical tasks in five semantic dementia patients. Poster

220

