UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferring Properties when Categorization is Uncertain: A Feature-Conjunction Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xn8k2s7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Hayes, Brett K.
Ruthven, Chris
Newell, Ben R.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferring Properties when Categorization is Uncertain: A Feature- Conjunction Account
Brett K. Hayes (B.Hayes@unsw.edu.au)
Chris Ruthven (Cruthven@psy.unsw.edu.au)
Ben R. Newell (Ben.Newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Abstract
Two studies examined how people make feature inferences
about exemplars whose category membership is uncertain.
Participants studied categorized exemplars, were given a
feature of a novel item and asked to make predictions about
other features of the item. Feature base rates were
manipulated to test a series of possible inference strategies.
Both studies found evidence for a feature conjunction strategy
in which predictions are based on comparisons with
exemplars similar to the test item. In both studies the majority
of participants disregarded category membership when
making feature predictions.
Keywords: Induction, Feature inference, Inductive reasoning

Introduction
Imagine that you were asked to predict the likelihood that
the approach of the US government to the war in Iraq will
change after the 2008 Presidential elections. It seems
evident that to answer this question one needs to consider
two possible outcomes (a Republican or a Democrat
victory) and to think through the probabilities of policy
change conditionalized on these outcomes. This sort of
problem can be construed as one of making a property
inference based on a category (the party affiliation of the
next President) whose identity is uncertain. Most previous
work on property inference has focused on predictions about
the attributes of members of known categories (see Heit,
2000 for a review). Given the often unpredictable nature of
the environment, however, it is inevitable that people will
also make inferences about objects whose category
membership has yet to be determined.
One approach to this problem, derived from Bayesian
calculus and suggested in the earlier example, is to identify
the possible categories to which an object might belong,
derive the probabilities of the predicted property for each
category, and then combine these conditional probabilities,
weighting each according to the likelihood of the object
being in that category. Bayesian models of human inference
(most notably Anderson, 1991, but also see Tenenbaum,
1999) suggest that people do something like this when faced
with property predictions under uncertainty. Arguing
against this account, however, is a considerable body of
evidence that people often ignore category uncertainty when
making such predictions (see Murphy & Ross, 2007 for a
review). Murphy and Ross (1994), for example, presented
stimuli like those in Figure 1, said to have been drawn by
different children. Participants were then shown novel

instances with a given feature and asked to predict another
feature, referred to as the “critical feature” (e.g., given that
the object is a cross, how likely is it that it is brown?; given
that the object is a diamond how likely is it that it is pink?).
In each case one category is clearly the most likely or
“target” category for the given feature (Liz drew the most
crosses; Paula drew the most diamonds) but category
membership is uncertain because instances containing the
given feature are found in other categories (Paula and Jane
also drew crosses). A Bayesian multiple-category approach
leads to different estimates of the probability of the critical
feature for these two examples (see Table 1 and Appendix
for details). However, if people only consider the target
category they should give similar estimates for each.
Murphy and Ross (1994) found that most people followed
the single-category strategy, even when they acknowledged
that they were unsure about the category membership of test
items. Such single-category reasoning has since been shown
to be far more prevalent than the Bayesian alternative across
a range of inference problems involving both artificial and
natural categories (e.g., Malt, Ross, & Murphy, 1995;
Murphy & Ross, 2005; Ross & Murphy, 1996).

Figure 1: Example of a stimulus set used in Experiment 1.
These results are important because they show that people
do not always follow Bayesian principles when making
inferences about instances from uncertain categories. What
is still not clear, however, is whether the single-category
strategy that has been the focus of most of the previous
work is the most prevalent non-Bayesian strategy that
people employ when making uncertain inference. A serious
problem with the psychological plausibility of both
Bayesian and single-category approaches is that they

1073

assume that exemplar features are processed independently.
In the single category strategy the given feature is used to
identify the target category (e.g., in Figure 1, if a test item is
cross-shaped Liz is the target). Inferences about the critical
feature are then based on an assessment of relative feature
frequencies within the target category independent of the
frequency of the given feature. Seven out of Liz’s ten
drawings were brown so this should lead to a fairly
confident prediction that it is the critical color. Note that the
given feature of shape is only used to identify the target
category, and thereafter plays no role in the feature
prediction process.
A key assumption of many theories of object
categorization (e.g., Love & Markman, 2003; Medin &
Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1992), however, is that different
feature dimensions are not treated as independent units.
Instead people often encode the feature configurations in
individual exemplars. Supporting this view are data showing
that people are sensitive to feature correlations when
making uncertain inferences (e.g., Murphy and Ross, 1994,
Experiments 7-8).
This suggests a different way of dealing with the problem
of making uncertain inferences - referred to as the “feature
conjunction” approach. This involves focusing only on
exemplars that possess a given feature and making property
predictions based on the other features of these exemplars.
If people follow this strategy they may ignore category-level
information entirely. That is, they may base their feature
predictions on the relative frequency with which different
features are paired with the given feature across all available
exemplars, ignoring category boundaries. According to this
approach, after viewing Figure 1 someone who is told that
an item is cross-shaped will examine all crosses in all
available categories, and compare the relative frequency of
different colors in these exemplars. The majority were
brown so that would remain the critical feature. However,
because more crosses are examined, and many of these are
not brown, this would lead to a much lower probability
estimate for this color than the single-category approach
(see Table 1 and Appendix). In the same way, an
experienced doctor who sees a patient with a livid rash on
their chest and wants to predict other symptoms that the
patient may have, might retrieve instances of previous
patients with similar symptoms before assigning the patient
to a diagnostic category (cf. Norman & Brooks, 1997).
The argument that induction when category membership
is uncertain may be based on generalization from specific
exemplars (rather than categories of exemplars) is consistent
with exemplar models of categorization (e.g., Medin &
Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1986). Such models propose that
categories are represented by storing exemplars as
individual memory traces, and classification occurs via
comparison with these traces. In an uncertain induction task,
the given feature would cue the retrieval of known
exemplars that shared the feature. These could then be
examined to discover which features co-occurred with the
given.

The possibility that people use feature conjunction has
been acknowledged in past work on uncertain induction
(e.g., Murphy & Ross, 1994) but has not been examined in
any detail. Murphy and Ross (1994, Experiments 5-6), for
example, minimized the likelihood that this strategy would
be employed by making sure that no feature was paired with
the given feature more frequently than any other (i.e.,
feature conjunction did not yield a clear feature prediction).
In other cases, the predictions of the feature conjunction
approach have been confounded with those of other
strategies. In Murphy and Ross (1994, Experiments 1-3;
2005), for example, a feature conjunction approach would
have predicted the same findings as the single-category
approach favored by the authors. Murphy and Ross’ (2005)
finding that probability estimates of a second feature given
an observed feature were affected by manipulation of
category validity but not cue validity is also consistent with
feature conjunction.
The current studies therefore sought to advance
understanding of how people make property inferences
under category uncertainty by setting up situations in which
the predictions of the feature conjunction approach were
contrasted with those of category-based induction strategies.
Experiment 1 compared feature conjunction with the singlecategory strategy suggested by Murphy and Ross (1994).
Experiment 2 compared feature conjunction with a Bayesian
multiple-category approach.

Experiment 1
This study compared the predictions of two strategies for
making property predictions about instances whose category
membership was uncertain. The first strategy was the
single-category approach described by Murphy and Ross
(1994) (which assumes that features are processed
independently). The second was a feature conjunction
approach in which predictions are based on examination of
all exemplars that have the given feature.

Method
Participants
Twenty male and female employees of a market research
firm (Mage = 25.1 years) were recruited by the second
author.
Design and Materials
Two stimulus sets were constructed that followed the
structure illustrated in Figure 1. In each set there were four
categories containing ten exemplars that varied on two
feature dimensions (shape and color). The cover story was
that these were drawings done by different children. For
each test item participants were given one feature of a novel
exemplar whose category membership was unknown. They
had to judge which category it was most likely to belong to
and to predict what other feature it was most likely to have.
For each stimulus set two types of inferences were
generated. One of these was referred to as the neutral
inference. For the stimulus set in Figure 1, an example of a

1074

neutral inference was predicting the color of an exemplar
given that it was cross-shaped. The second type was referred
to as the “increasing” inference (because some strategies
predict a higher probability for the critical feature on these
items than in the neutral case). An example from Figure 1
was predicting the color of an exemplar given that it was
diamond-shaped. Stimuli were designed so that although
different reasoning strategies always led to the same critical
feature being predicted for any given item (in the above
examples the expected or critical colors were “brown” and
“pink” respectively), the estimated probability of this
feature depended on the strategy being applied. Singlecategory reasoning led to very similar probability estimates
for the critical features in neutral and increasing inferences.
Feature conjunction led to higher probability estimates for
the increasing inferences than for neutral items (see Table
1). The probability of identifying the target category was
always the same for neutral and increasing inferences.
Table 1: Formal probability estimates for predictions of the
critical feature based on different reasoning strategies1
Strategy
Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Single
category
Feature
conjunction
Single
category
Multiple
category
Feature
conjunction

Neutral
items
0.70

Increasing
items
0.70

0.38

0.67

0.70

0.70

0.40

0.40

0.40

0.60

The frequency structure of these stimuli did not allow for
a reversal of the direction of inferences (i.e., the probability
estimates given in Table 1 did not hold for predictions about
shape given color). Therefore all analyses were based on
predictions of color given shape. However, filler items were
developed with color given and a shape prediction required.
Responses to these items were non-diagnostic with all
strategies leading to similar probability estimates for critical
feature predictions.
The feature frequency structure of the second stimulus set
was identical to the first set but made use of different colors
and shapes. The use of two sets meant that each participant
responded to a total of two neutral and two increasing test
items (and an equal number of filler items).
Procedure
The two stimulus sets were presented in random order. For
each set participants answered questions about four test
1
Although formal estimates are derived we did not assume that
intuitive probability ratings would approximate these values. Like
Murphy and Ross (1994) our interest was only in whether people
gave different estimates for neutral and increasing items.

items, with items presented in random order. The first two
questions for each item were about category membership
(e.g., “I have a drawing of a cross. Which child do you think
is most likely to have drawn this? What is the probability
that the child you just named drew it?”). The purpose of
these questions was to check that participants could identify
the target category. These were followed by two property
inference questions (e.g., “What color do you think this
cross is most likely to be? What is the probability that this
cross is the color you just named?”). All probability ratings
were made on a 0 (Not at all likely) – 100 (Highly likely)
scale. There was no time limit on task completion.

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses established that feature predictions did
not vary across stimulus sets. All subsequent analyses were
collapsed across this factor. Data from one participant were
dropped from the analyses because the partcipant gave
ceiling-level probability estimates for all category
judgments and inferences.
Strategy predictions were based on the assumptions that
people could readily identify the target category given the
test feature, and that they recognized that category
membership was uncertain. To check these assumptions we
calculated the proportion of items where the target category
was correctly identified and the probability estimates
attached to these judgments. The target category was always
identified correctly for neutral and increasing items. The
mean probability estimate for these judgments was 0.64
across item types. People had no difficulty in identifying the
category to which a test exemplar was most likely to belong,
but recognized the uncertain nature of this judgment.
When people were asked to predict an additional
exemplar feature after being given either its shape or color
they always selected the critical feature that was predicted
by the respective reasoning strategy for both neutral and
increasing items. Our main interest therefore was in the
probability estimates attached to feature predictions.
Estimates given for increasing items (M = 0.693, SD =
0.212) were significantly above those given for neutral
items (M = 0.612, SD = 0.168), t(18) = 2.215, p < .05. This
suggests that many people were using a feature conjunction
strategy to make feature predictions. Looking at individual
response patterns, ten participants gave higher estimates
(i.e., greater than a 3% difference) for increasing than for
neutral items, suggesting that they used feature conjunction.
Six gave similar estimates for neutral and increasing items,
and three gave higher estimates for the neutral items.
This is the first positive evidence that some people
employ a feature conjunction strategy rather than a
categorical strategy when making feature predictions under
conditions of uncertain category membership. Contrary to
Anderson’s (1991) rational model and Murphy and Ross’
(1994) single-category account, these findings suggest that
when people make predictions about exemplars with
uncertain category membership many disregard category
bounds. Instead predictions may be based on an

1075

examination of individual exemplars from multiple
categories that have a given feature. The results also show
that a majority of participants do not treat feature
dimensions as independent when making inductive
inferences.
Before we can be certain that we have found firm
evidence of the use of feature conjunction, however, we
need to consider at least one other possible explanation.
When constructing the stimuli it was difficult to produce
divergent predictions for the single-category and feature
prediction accounts while holding constant the predictions
of all other strategies. In particular, the Bayesian multiplecategory approach also predicted a higher probability of the
critical feature for increasing items than for neutral items
(see Appendix). Although there is little previous evidence
that people use this strategy (cf. Malt, et al., 1995; Murphy
& Ross, 1994, 2005), to be confident in our conclusions
about feature conjunction it was important to remove this
confound. This was the main aim of Experiment 2.

Design and Procedure
The design and procedure followed Experiment 1 with three
important exceptions. First, neutral and increasing test items
were designed to compare the predictions of feature
conjunction with Bayesian multiple-category reasoning. An
example is given in Figure 2. A neutral inference for this set
was predicting an exemplar’s color given that it was a
square (critical feature = purple). An example of an
increasing inference was predicting exemplar color given
that it was a circle (critical feature = red). The multiple
category approach always predicted similar probability
estimates for these two types of items, whereas feature
conjunction predicted a higher estimate for increasing items
(see Table 1).

Experiment 2
Experiment 2, therefore, set up a direct comparison of
feature conjunction and Bayesian multiple-category
reasoning. The experimental design was similar to
Experiment 1 except that stimuli were constructed to
contrast predictions based on these two strategies, while
controlling for other possible strategies (e.g., singlecategory reasoning). The formal probability predictions
derived from these strategies are summarized in Table 1.
The feature conjunction approach predicted different
intuitive probability estimates for neutral and increasing
items, whereas the multiple-category approach predicted no
difference between these estimates.
A subsidiary aim of this study was to extend our findings
to a wider range of stimulus formats. First, we constructed
parallel sets of shape/color figures so that participants were
given test items that required predicting exemplar color
given shape and shape given color. Second, we developed
alternative stimulus sets using non-geometric stimuli. Love
and Markman (2003) have suggested that people do not
typically regard object shape and color as independent
attributes, but instead treat color as a predicate for shape.
Such stimuli would seem particularly amenable to a strategy
like feature conjunction strategy that focuses on the
configurations of individual exemplars. As a more stringent
test of the feature conjunction strategy therefore we
included exemplars that were composed of feature
dimensions that we believed would be less likely to be
treated as integral configurations (i.e., number-letter
combinations).

Method
Participants
Forty two male and female employees of a market research
firm (Mage = 26 years) were recruited by the second author.
None of these took part in the previous study.

Figure 2: Example of a geometric shape/color set used in
Experiment 2
The second innovation was the construction of parallel
stimulus sets that had the same feature frequency structure
as the shape/color stimuli illustrated above but which called
for predictions of object shape given object color. Finally
we created alternative stimulus sets made up of numberletter combinations (see Figure 3 for an example). The
statistical structure of these sets was identical to the
geometric items. Like the geometric items sets were
constructed that called for the prediction of a number given
a letter or vice versa. The order of appearance of
letters/numbers in category exemplars always matched the
direction of prediction to be made (e.g., when numbers
appeared first, followed by letters, participants were given a
number at test and asked to predict the corresponding letter).
Participants were randomly allocated to geometric or
number-letter conditions. For the number-letter format the
cover story was that the combinations were codes used by
four different spies. After being given one component of a
novel code participants were asked to judge which spy
produced it and to predict the second code component. In
each condition participants completed four test items (two
neutral, two increasing) and four nondiagnostic fillers
(which were not analyzed). As in Experiment 1, participants
were asked to first decide on the category membership of
the test item given a feature, then to predict the feature most
likely to be found in the item, and estimate its probability.
The direction of prediction (color given shape vs. shape

1076

given color or letter given number vs. number given letter)
was counterbalanced across items.

Figure 3: Example of a number-letter set (NB: Feature
frequency structure is identical to Figure 2).

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses established that feature predictions in
the two task formats were unaffected by the direction of the
prediction so all subsequent analyses were collapsed across
this factor.
The target category was always identified correctly for
both neutral and increasing items. The mean probability
estimate for these judgments was 0.62 across stimulus
formats and item types, again indicating that participants
recognized the uncertainty regarding category membership.
The critical feature was predicted for 98% of items.
Probability estimates were only analyzed for predictions of
this feature. Estimates were entered into a 2 (inference type:
neutral vs. increasing) x 2 (stimulus format) ANOVA with
repeated measures on the first factor. People generally gave
higher probability estimates for predictions about increasing
items (M = 0.641, SD = 0.130) than neutral items (M =
0.590, SD = 0.161), F(1, 40) = 4.526, p < .05. Format had
no overall affect on estimates and did not interact with
inference type. At the individual level seventeen participants
gave higher estimates for increasing items, consistent with
feature conjunction. Sixteen gave similar estimates for
neutral and increasing items, and nine gave higher estimates
for neutral items.
These data show that across both stimulus formats a
narrow majority of participants used a feature conjunction
approach when making property predictions under
uncertainty. This also suggests that the evidence favoring
the feature conjunction account in Experiment 1 was not
due to the use of a multiple-category strategy.

General Discussion
These studies were concerned with how people make
inferences about exemplar features when an exemplar’s
category membership is uncertain. Previous work on this
issue has suggested two possible reasoning strategies, a
Bayesian multiple-category strategy (Anderson, 1991) and a
single-category strategy (Murphy & Ross, 1994), with the
balance of evidence favoring the latter approach. Our

studies suggest that the answer to the question of how
people make inferences under category uncertainty is more
complex. In both of our studies a substantial proportion of
people did not use category-level information as a basis for
making inferential predictions. Instead many employed a
feature-conjunction strategy, basing predictions on an
examination of instances that contained the feature given
during the inference test. This approach is non-categorical in
that all exemplars with the given feature are considered
when making predictions, regardless of their category
membership. Experiment 2 showed that this strategy is
applied across a variety of stimulus formats. These results
are particularly impressive given that inferences were
always made after participants had identified the category
that was most likely to contain the test instance. So even
though participants were aware of the categorical structure
of the stimuli, and could readily identify the category that
was most likely to be associated with a test item, they used
exemplars from all available categories when making
feature predictions.
Our findings support the view that people do not
necessarily treat feature dimensions as independent when
doing categorization or induction (cf. Medin & Schaffer,
1978). Instead, we found that, after observing a feature of a
novel exemplar, many people made inferences by focusing
only on exemplars that had this feature.
Our argument that feature inference may sometimes
operate by direct comparison with known exemplars,
regardless of their category membership, is novel. In many
respects, however, this approach is consistent with the
general features of exemplar models of categorization. Such
models do not store summary information about feature
relations within or between categories. Instead, judgments
about these relations, such as whether features are
correlated, are based on the retrieval and examination of
relevant exemplars. In the same way, when the category
membership of a stimulus is uncertain, inferences about its
other features may be based on direct comparison with
similar instances retrieved from memory, without a
preliminary decision about category membership.
These data suggest that single-category and Bayesian
multiple-category models underestimate the variety and
complexity of the strategies that people use when asked to
make inferences without certain category membership. We
have shown that, in addition to categorical strategies, people
may employ exemplar-based or associative approaches. An
important challenge for future work in this field is to
examine the factors that lead people to adopt different
reasoning strategies. One factor that is likely to be important
is the perceived relevance of the category to the property
that is being predicted (cf. Ross & Murphy, 1996).
Categories are more likely to influence predictions when
they are seen as particularly informative or relevant (e.g.,
knowing which party is governing when predicting foreign
policy). In contexts where category structures are more
arbitrary, however, people may eschew their use in favor of
direct comparison with individual exemplars.

1077

Acknowledgments

Appendix

This work was supported by Australian Research Council
Discovery Grant DP0770292 to the first and third authors.
We thank Brian Ross for his comments on this work.

Experiment 1: Example probability calculations
(for Figure 1).
For the Neutral item the given feature was cross and the
critical feature was brown. Liz was the target category. For
the Increasing item the given feature was diamond and
critical feature was pink. Paula was the target.
Feature Conjunction. Across all categories there were 13
crosses. Five were brown, so p(Brown| Cross) = 0.38.
There were 12 diamonds. Eight were pink so
p(Pink| Diamond) = 0.67
Single-Category. Seven of Liz’s ten of drawings were
brown so p(Brown| Cross) = 0.7
Seven of Paula’s ten drawings were pink so
p(Pink| Diamond) = 0.7
Multiple-Category. Liz was the target, but Paula and Jane
also drew crosses (total = 13). Applying Bayes’ formula for
predicting feature j given observed feature F across k
categories:
p(j|F) = ∑ p(k|F) p(j|k)

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.
Heit, E. (2000). Properties of inductive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 569-592.
Love, B. C. & Markman, A. B. (2003). The nonindependence of stimulus properties in human category
learning. Memory and Cognition, 31, 790-799.
Malt, B. C., Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1995).
Predicting features for members of natural categories
when categorization is uncertain. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 646661.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85, 207308.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Predictions from
uncertain categorizations. Cognitive Psychology, 27,
148-193.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (2005). The two faces of
typicality in category-based induction. Cognition, 95,
175-200.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (2007). Use of single or
multiple categories in category-based induction. In A.
Feeney & E. Heit (Eds.) Inductive Reasoning: Cognitive,
Mathematical,
and
Neuroscientific
Approaches.
Cambridge University Press.
Norman, G. R., & Brooks, L. (1997). The non-analytical
basis of clinical reasoning. Advances in Health Sciences
Education, 2, 173-184.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification–categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39–57.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1992). Exemplars, prototypes and
similarity rules. In A. Healy, S. Kosslyn, & R. Shiffrin
(Eds.) From Learning Theory to Connectionist Theory:
Essays in Honor of W. K. Estes (Vol. 1, pp. 149-168).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1996). Category-based
predictions: Influence of uncertainty and feature
associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 736-753.
Tenenbaum, J. B. (1999). Bayesian modeling of human
concept learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 11, 59-68.

k

p(Brown| Cross) = ((7/13)·(7/10)) + ((3/13)·(0/10)) +
((0/13)·(6/10)) + ((3/13)·(0/10)) = 0.37
Although Paula was the target, Liz and Emma also drew
diamonds (total = 12). Applying the formula:
p(Pink| Diamond) = ((7/12)·(7/10)) + ((3/12)·(3/10)) +
((2/12)·(4/10)) + ((0/12)·(0/10)) = 0.55

Experiment 2: Example probability calculations
(for Figure 2).
For the Neutral item the given feature was square and the
critical feature was purple. Chris was the target. For the
Increasing item the given feature was circle and critical
feature was red. Tom was the target.
Feature Conjunction. There were 15 squares. Six were
purple so p(Purple| Square) = 0.40.
There were 15 circles. Nine were red so
p(Red| Circle) = 0.6
Single-Category. Seven of Chris’ ten drawings were purple
so p(Purple| Square) = 0.7
Seven of Tom’s ten drawings were red so
p(Red| Circle) = 0.7
Multiple-Category. Chris was the target, but Bill, James
and Tom also drew squares (total = 15). Applying the
formula:
p(Purple| Square) = ((7/15)·(7/10))+((3/15)·(3/10)) +
((2/15)·(1/10)) + ((3/15)·(0/10)) = 0.40
Tom was the target but Bill, James, and Chris also drew
circles (total = 15). Applying the formula:
p(Red| Circle) = ((7/15)·(7/10))+((3/15)·(0/10)) +
((2/15)·(1/10)) + ((3/15)·(3/10)) = 0.40

1078

