UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating iSTART into a High School Curriculum

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6wp286sz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Bell, Courtney M.
McNamara, Danielle S.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating iSTART into a High School Curriculum
Courtney M. Bell (cbell@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152
Active Reading and Thinking (iSTART) into their science
classrooms and curriculum.

Abstract
This study examines the viability in the classroom of a
tutoring system called Interactive Strategy Training for
Active Reading and Thinking (iSTART). This study
investigated the effects of teacher-guided and iSTARTguided extended practice (following initial reading strategy
training with iSTART) including 78 high school students
from four biology classes. Eight high school teachers were
also trained to administer reading strategy training. The
results supported the conclusion that teachers can
successfully integrate educational technology in such a way
that it compliments their traditional teaching roles while
helping to meet the needs of their students.

Intelligent Tutoring Systems
Intelligent tutoring systems are part of the advancements
in educational technology aimed at promoting studentcentered learning. As an outgrowth of earlier computeraided instruction systems (Lajoie & Azevedo, 2005),
intelligent tutoring systems are designed to capitalize on
the power of one-to-one tutoring. Research by Cohen,
Kulik, and Kulik (1982) indicates that when compared to
traditional classroom instruction, one-to-one tutoring by
untrained tutors, such as peers, cross-age tutors, or
paraprofessionals, can produce an effect size for learning
of .4 sigma (i.e., .4 standard deviations). Research using
trained tutors suggests varying effects. For example,
Bloom (1984) reported an effect size of 2 sigma (2.0
standard deviations) for math skills training, whereas
VanLehn and colleagues (2007) reported an effect size of
only 1 sigma (1.0 standard deviation) for physics tutoring.
Despite these variations, research indicates that overall,
one-to-one tutoring is effective in producing learning
gains but impractical to implement on a large scale
because of cost and time requirements.
Intelligent tutoring systems can provide cost-effective
one-to-one tutoring which is adaptable to individual
students’ needs and personalizable (Tsiriga & Virvou,
2004). With the help of a student model that is
dynamically monitored and updated using assessment
tasks, intelligent tutors are able to provide students with
adaptive feedback (Lajoie & Azevedo, 2005). This
feedback guides students in correcting misconceptions
and errors while helping them to effectively progress
through the system (Graesser et al., 2004).
iSTART is based on a human-delivered intervention
called SERT (McNamara, 2004). It is an automated
reading strategy trainer that teaches students to selfexplain texts using five reading comprehensions
strategies: comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing,
elaboration, prediction, and bridging (McNamara et al.,
2004). The system consists of both vicarious and
interactive components to enhance learning and also
consists of three phases: an introduction, demonstration,
and practice, which are guided by pedagogical agents. In
the introduction, students vicariously learn the five
reading strategies by watching the instructor agent, Dr.
Julie, use examples and definitions to teach two student
agents, Mike and Julie. A short quiz follows each

Keywords: Intelligent tutoring systems; iSTART;
AutoTutor; classroom; curriculum; educational technology;
artificial intelligence; education; science.

Introduction
As a result of educational reforms and new standards,
educational goals and instructional methods are changing.
Traditionally, school districts defined their goals and
methods in terms of students being exposed to large
amounts of declarative knowledge - the more, the better.
And, students’ understanding and knowledge have
generally been assessed in terms of explicit recall,
primarily relying on fill in the blank and multiple choice
tests: assessments that fail to assess deep level
understanding. These techniques have often been
supplemented by skill-based technologies centering on
repetitive drills and practices that lack the benefits of
feedback, adaptation, and knowledge construction.
More recently, school districts have begun adopting
instructional measures that train students to learn, train
students in methods of research, help students develop the
motivation to pursue personal enrichment, and train
students to be creative and innovative (Domingo et al.,
2002). Consequently, educational technology is also
changing, and must change to adapt to the evolving
understanding of how to enhance the learning process.
Although policy-makers, educators, and researchers
have invested large amounts of resources to meet the
technological changes, successful integration at the rates
hoped for has yet to occur for a number of reasons
including a lack of teacher training as well as teachers’
fears of replacement and threats to their traditional roles.
Thus, in this study, we examine how training influences
teachers’ ability to successfully integrate an intelligent
tutoring system called Interactive Strategy Training for

809

strategy. In the demonstration, two new agents, Merlin
and Genie, demonstrate how the strategies can be used to
self-explain science texts. Genie self-explains a science
text presented sentence by sentence while Merlin provides
feedback on the quality of the self-explanation. The
student identifies the strategy being used and may also be
asked to identify the part of the self-explanation
containing a particular strategy. Merlin’s feedback to both
Genie and the student is designed to provide the student
with appropriate scaffolding. During the practice phase,
Merlin coaches the student in using a repertoire of
strategies to self-explain texts. Merlin also provides the
student with feedback that is moderated by the selfexplanation quality as determined by word-based and
LSA algorithms (McNamara et al., in press).
In addition to the regular practice session that includes
only two texts, iSTART also contains an extended
practice module which allows students the opportunity to
practice their strategies and skills in weekly intervals. One
focus of this study is to compare the effectiveness of
using iSTART for extended practice to having a teacher
guide extended practice in classroom discussions.
Several experiments indicate the success of iSTART in
enhancing students’ reading comprehension and selfexplanation quality. For example, results from a study
comparing iSTART and SERT (the live version) to a
control condition in which students read a text without
strategy training indicated that iSTART was as effective
as SERT in terms of producing comparable selfexplanation quality. Both the iSTART and SERT groups
outperformed the control group. A reliable advantage for
iSTART and SERT was also shown when students read a
science text and answered comprehension questions 1
week after training (O'Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara,
2004).
A second study involving 42 middle-school students
also confirmed iSTART’s effectiveness in increasing
reading comprehension in students with low reading
strategy prior knowledge (McNamara, O'Reilly, Best, &
Ozuru, 2006). Half of the students received iSTART
training prior to self-explaining a text about heart disease
and half did not. Results suggest that iSTART’s
effectiveness was mediated by both students’ prior
knowledge of reading strategies and the level of
comprehension assessed. More specifically, students in
the iSTART group with low-prior knowledge of reading
strategies performed better on text-based comprehension
questions than their counterparts in the control condition.
In contrast, students participating in the iSTART training
with
high-prior
strategy
knowledge
showed
comprehension gains when assessed by bridging inference
questions. This pattern of results was also found in a third
study involving 44 college students (Magliano et al.,
2005).Students were asked to read and self-explain two
texts before and after receiving iSTART training. As with
middle-school students, better readers performed better on
bridging inference questions, thereby gaining in terms of

deeper comprehension levels. Again, less-skilled readers
performed better on surface level or text-based questions.

Purpose and Predictions
In spite of research indicating the benefits of educational
technology, an unprecedented allocation of resources for
technology development and implementation, and the
promotion of technology as being essential to improving
education, mass integration into classrooms and
curriculum has yet to occur. Researchers in the field of
educational technology offer a myriad of explanations
implicating numerous factors as barriers to greater, more
successful integration. However, this study focuses
primarily on the teacher, as research indicates that
although the availability of technology is important, its
use is primarily predicated on teachers’ willingness and
capability to use it (Tao & Wepner, 2002). We focus on
teacher training and pedagogical beliefs about instruction
and teacher roles as two of the main barriers to more
successful integration.
Our current goal is to explore whether an intelligent
tutoring system can be successfully integrated into the
classroom meeting the needs of both the teacher and
students, while at the same time complimenting teachers’
pedagogical beliefs about instruction and their roles. In
our study, teachers were trained to use iSTART to better
understand the rationale behind its development, how it
works, why it works, and how it meets their needs and
those of their students. Our question is whether such
scaffolding helps teachers to successfully integrate the
system into their curriculum in such a way that it both
compliments and gradually changes traditional teacher
roles to meet new educational standards.
We answer our question using two experiments. In the
first study, teachers receive iSTART training. In the
second study, students either participate in extended
practice led by the teacher who received training (teacherguided extended practice) or led by iSTART (computerguided extended practice). We use the extended-practice
module in this experiment because unlike the other
iSTART phases, it has not been tested against live
training to assess its benefits.
Based on previous research indicating iSTART’s ability
to improve reading comprehension in low-prior strategy
knowledge readers when assessed by text-based questions
(McNamara et al., 2006) and observational data
suggesting high levels of participation and engagement by
high-knowledge students during live training (McNamara
& the CSEP Lab, 2006), we make a number of predictions
and hypotheses. First, we predict that low-strategy
knowledge students will continue to benefit from iSTART
or computer-guided extended practice and that highknowledge students will benefit more from the teacherguided extended practice than low-knowledge students.
Specifically, we hypothesize that low-knowledge readers
in the computer-guided extended practice condition will
show greater reading comprehension improvements when

810

assessed by text-based comprehension questions, moreso
than low-knowledge students in the teacher-guided
condition. We also hypothesize that because highknowledge students tend to be more engaged and
participatory during live training, those in the teacherguided condition will show greater improvements on
deeper level comprehension measures than highknowledge students in the computer-guided condition.

Table 1: Number of positive responses regarding the
reading strategy workshop
Question
Positive
Responses
Was the presentation clear and comprehensible?
8
Did you find the information useful to your learning 6 **
about and understanding iSTART?
Did you find the information beneficial/useful beyond
how it might be applied to iSTART training?
Have you been exposed to any of the presented
concepts previously? If yes, which concepts?
Do you already use/apply any of the presented
concepts when teaching? If yes, which concepts?*
Do you think you would use the presented information
in some non-iSTART capacity in your classes?

STUDY 1
Participants
Participants were 8 high school teachers from two high
schools including three science teachers, two English
teachers, one reading lab director, and one computer
technician (a former teacher) who received monetary
compensation for their participation.

7*
8
7
7*

Notes: * 1 teacher did not answer; ** 2 teachers did not answer

The data indicate that overall, the teachers felt positive
about the workshop. All teachers found the presentation
clear and comprehensible. Teachers who answered found
the information beneficial and indicated that they would
use the information gleaned from the training in a noniSTART capacity in their classes – meaning that they
intended to incorporate reading strategies into their
courses. The majority of teachers also indicated that they
were already using some of the iSTART strategies. In this
study, however, we did not follow up on the validity of
their responses. That is, we did not confirm that they
incorporated the strategies or that they already taught
some of the strategies.
We also asked teachers about the perceived usefulness
of iSTART in addition to information regarding the
context and frequency of its use. When asked “Did you
find the iSTART training left you with a clear
understanding of how and why iSTART can facilitate text
comprehension?”, all of the teachers indicated that they
understood how and why iSTART would facilitate text
comprehension. When asked “Do you foresee using
iSTART in the classroom after the IIS intervention at
your school?”, the majority of respondents (7 out of 8)
indicated that they could see themselves using the system
after the initial intervention. Half of the teachers who
indicated that they would use iSTART indicated that they
would use it with all students and half indicated that they
would use it with lower-level students. When asked “How
often would you use iSTART and/or its related concepts
(i.e., training only, training and extended practice, once a
week, daily, etc.)?”, four teachers indicated that they
would use iSTART for weekly practice and one teacher
indicated that it would be used monthly. Overall, the data
indicates that teachers had a positive perception of
iSTART and were willing to use it in classrooms.
Albeit a small sample, this study provided information
to us regarding teachers’ impressions of iSTART. It was
important for us to establish that teachers understood and
resonated toward the utility of iSTART and that they
would be willing to use iSTART in the classroom.

Materials
A 2-day workshop was designed by the experimenters to
train teachers in administering reading strategy training
using iSTART. The workshop focused on providing
teachers with the theoretical basis for iSTART including
the cognitive processes involved in text comprehension
and models of text processing and how the models and
processes relate to the reading strategies taught by
iSTART. The workshop also provided teachers with an
opportunity to go through the iSTART training. A 10item, open-ended response questionnaire was used to
assess teachers’ background knowledge about text
processing, perceived usefulness of iSTART, and the
system requirements needed to implement iSTART in a
regular high-school classroom.
Procedure
The teacher training took place during the summer prior
to the beginning of the academic year. During the
training, the teachers participated in a 2 day workshop at
the University of Memphis which lasted approximately 6
hours. On the first day, an experimenter presented the
theoretical basis for the development of iSTART which
included session on the cognitive processes involved in
text comprehension and models of text processing and
how these related to the reading strategies taught with
iSTART. On the second day, teachers went through the
iSTART training and completed a questionnaire. This
study reports the teachers’ impressions of iSTART as
revealed on the questionnaire.
Results
Responses from the workshop questionnaire gauging
teachers’ opinions of the workshop and perceived
usefulness of iSTART were classified as either positive
(i.e., “yes”) or negative based on the content. A frequency
of positive responses was calculated. Positive frequencies
for teacher opinions regarding the workshop are reported
in Table 1.

811

During the training, students progressed through the
three phases of the iSTART program over the course of
three class periods on three consecutive days. On the
fourth day, students were administered the immediate
posttests, which consisted of a comprehension test on a
science text about heart disease and a self-explanation
quality assessment on a text about body temperature.
Students began the extended strategy practice phase the
following week. Extended practice lasted for 6
consecutive weeks. Teachers selected texts (about 20
sentences in length) corresponding to the topics taught
during the regular class period. Students participated in
either the teacher-guided or computer-guided practice
sessions. In the teacher-guided practice, the teacher asked
students to self-explain the texts and called on several
students to provide self-explanations for each sentence of
the text. For the computer-guided practice, the students
used iSTART which provided individualized feedback to
their typed self-explanation. Students in both groups took
a quiz on the self-explanation texts each week. Both
experimenters and teachers made observations.
During the delayed posttest, students were administered
the posttest measures in the following order:
metacognitive awareness of reading strategies inventory,
Gates MacGinitie reading measure, and a comprehension
test on a passage about red blood cells.

STUDY 2
Participants
Participants were 78 high-school students selected from
four 9th grade biology classes taught by one of the
teachers who had participated in the first study. All
students received self-explanation training via iSTART.
After the initial training, there were 6 weeks of extended
practice training occurring once per week. Two classes
(n=33) participated in the teacher-guided extended
practice condition whereas the other two classes (n=45)
participated in the computer-guided extended practice
condition. Not all students were present for each of the
assessments, and thus the number of participants varies
somewhat by dependent measure.
Materials
A number of measures were used to assess students’
comprehension skills, reading ability and prior
knowledge. A modified 48-item multiple choice version
of the Gates-MacGinitie reading skill test was used to
assess students’ reading comprehension. Students’ prior
science knowledge was assessed using a 20-item, fouralternative, multiple-choice test that covered biology,
chemistry, earth science, research methods and math.
Items were selected from high school science texts
collected from several states.
Pretest passage comprehension was measured using a
science text on earthquakes (words=334, sentences=23,
Flesch Reading Ease=56.4, Flesch-Kincaid grade
level=8.8) and the origins of the universe (words=299,
sentences=18, Flesch Reading Ease=45.7, Flesch-Kincaid
Grade Level=10.7). Texts were counterbalanced such that
half the class read the earthquake text and the other half
read the text on the origins of the universe. Eight openended questions were developed for each passage, with
four being text-based and four being bridging. Text-based
questions are those whose answers can be found within a
single sentence of the passage. Bridging questions are
those whose answers require students to combine
information contained in two or more sentences of the
passage.
Finally,
students’
delayed
posttest
passage
comprehension was measured using 4 open-ended textbased and 4 bridging inference questions about a red
blood cell passage (words=281,sentences=20, Flesch
Reading Ease=56.1,Flesch-Kincaid grade level=8.9).

Results
We confirmed that there were no differences between the
two conditions in terms of reading skill and prior
knowledge. Thus, the two groups were of equal ability
levels. There were also no differences on any of the
dependent measures right after initial training. Thus, we
focus here on the measures that are indicative of
differences between the two conditions after the extended
practice sessions – the delayed posttest.
The students completed a comprehension test on a text
about red blood cells after the extended training period.
An ANOVA including the within-subjects variable of
question type and the between-subjects factor of condition
(teacher-guided vs. computer-guided) was conducted. As
shown in Table 1, there was a main effect of question
type, F(1,72)=8.44, p=.005. The effect of condition was
marginal, F(1,72)=2.57, p=.113, with an advantage for the
teacher-guided condition. The interaction was not
significant, F<2.
Table 1: Proportion correct on the delayed posttest for
comprehension
Mean
SD
N
TextComputer
0.41
0.23
43
based
Teacher
0.52
0.28
31
Total
0.45
0.26
74
Bridging Computer
0.51
0.27
43
Teacher
0.57
0.26
31
Total
0.53
0.26
74

Procedure
There were four phases: pretest, training, immediate
posttest, extended practice, and delayed posttest. The
pretest, training, and posttests were identical for both
conditions. Prior to training, students completed the
pretest material in the following order: metacognitive
awareness
of
reading
strategies
inventory,
metacomprehension index, prior science knowledge,
Gates-MacGinitie, and the passage on either earthquakes
or the origins of the universe, along with the set of
appropriate comprehension questions.

812

We further examined whether these effects differed as a
function of students’ individual differences by including
those variables as dichotomous variables in separate
analyses. The effect of prior knowledge was reliable,
F(1,68)=11.22, p<.001 (Mhigh=0.61; Mlow=0.43), and
interestingly, the effect of condition was reliable in this
analysis, F(1,68)=5.94, p=.017. There were no
interactions, however.
There was an effect of reading skill, F(1,65)=6.70,
p=.012 (Mhigh=0.61; Mlow=0.43), and condition,
F(1,65)=5.24, p=.025, and a marginal interaction of
condition and reading skill, F(1,65)=2.92, p=.092. The
advantage for the teacher condition was absent for less
skilled readers (Mcomputer=0.43; Mteacher=0.46), F<1. In
contrast, the advantage for the teacher-guided practice
condition for the skilled readers was quite substantial
(Mcomputer=0.46; Mteacher=0.70), F(1,32)=9.91, p=.005.
Table 2: Mean ratings of student motivation and difficulties
with iSTART
Topic
Student motivation
Student enjoyment
Student difficulties
Teacher difficulties

Observer ratings
Mean (SD)
2.8(0.5)
2.3(0.6)
0.3(0.6)
0.3(0.6)

Teacher ratings
Mean(SD)
2.5(0.8)
2.4(0.8)
0.7(1.0)
0.3(1.0)

objectively noting which methods teachers used
throughout the sessions. Experimenters achieved adequate
inter-rater reliability. The data indicates that teachers
spent more time providing feedback to students,
explaining the iSTART strategies, and teaching the
students to self-explain during the teacher-guided
practice. Also, during teacher-guided practice, teachers
focused on content teaching, such as explaining word
meanings, sentence meanings, and global text
understandings. To expand on these findings, notes made
by the researchers regarding the quality of both conditions
suggested that during the teacher-guided sessions,
teachers continuously talked about the strategies in terms
of explaining their meanings and providing content
relevant information. Overall, the results suggest that live
training offered teachers the opportunity to provide more
strategy instruction and topic related content than the
computer-guided practice. On the other hand, researchers
also noted a few instances in which teachers provided
inaccurate information and deviated from the teaching
protocol set forth by iSTART.
Table 3: Mean score for methods used in
practice sessions
Teaching method
Teacherguided
practice
Mean (SD)
Self-explanation instruction
3.0(1.4)
iSTART strategies instruction 3.2(1.2)
Other strategy instruction
0.8(0.9)
Word meanings
1.5(0.9)
Sentence meanings
1.5(1.6)
Whole text meaning
1.3(1.8)
Teacher feedback
3.6(0.9)
Peer feedback
0.5(0.6)

Observations were made by both the experimenters and
teachers administering iSTART to gauge student reactions
and engagement and to examine whether and how
teachers can administer training and the extended practice
sessions. Table 2 shows the mean ratings from the
observers and teachers based on a 0-4 (0=low; 4=high)
scale regarding student motivation, enjoyment, and
difficulties. These constructs were defined in terms of
students’ levels of participation, on-task comments, and
question asking. Scores were assigned by subjectively
noting the various levels of each construct by two
experimenters who achieved adequate inter-rater
reliability.
The ratings indicate that students’ motivation and
enjoyment were above average, whereas student and
teacher difficulties were low. However, notes made by the
researchers suggested that high-ability learners were more
participatory and engaged during the teacher-guided
sessions than were low-ability learners. High-ability
learners were also more likely than low-ability learners to
complain of boredom and engage in “off task” activities
during computer-guided practice.
Observations were also made by two experimenters to
determine which methods teachers used to assist students
during the teacher-guided and computer-guided extended
practice.. Table 3 reports the mean scores for each
teaching method used in the teacher-guided and
computer-guided practice sessions based on a 0-4 scale
(0=not at all; 4=always). The scores were assigned by

the extended
Computer
-guided
practice
Mean(SD)
1.8(1.7)
1.3(1.4)
0.1(0.6)
0.1(1.3)
0.5(1.3)
0.1(0.3)
0.006(0.3)
0

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to explore whether an
intelligent tutoring system can be successfully integrated
into the classroom meeting the needs of both the teacher
and students, while at the same time complimenting
teachers’ pedagogical beliefs about instruction and their
roles. We hypothesized that low-knowledge readers in the
computer-guided extended practice condition would show
greater reading comprehension improvements when
assessed by text-based comprehension questions and more
so than low-knowledge students in the teacher-guided
condition. We also hypothesized that because highknowledge students tend to be more engaged and
participatory during live training, those in the teacherguided condition would show greater improvements on
deeper level comprehension measures than highknowledge students in the computer-guided condition.
The results supported our hypotheses. The data indicates
that low-knowledge students benefited more from the

813

iSTART extended practice than high-knowledge students
who benefited more from the teacher-guided extended
practice. Results from observational data also indicate that
higher-knowledge students in the teacher-guided
condition were more engaged and participatory than the
low-knowledge readers. Research on prior knowledge and
engagement shows that when learners engage in deeper
levels of critical thinking, prior knowledge is activated,
which invariably enhances learning (Sharma & Hannafin,
2004). In light of this research, the observational data may
explain why students in the teacher-guided group
outperformed their counterparts during live training.
Results from the observational data indicating the rare
tendency of teachers to provide misinformation and
deviate from iSTART’s teaching protocol provides
information as to which strategies and procedures
researchers need to devote more attention to during
training.
Our results add to the research showing that with
training, teachers can successfully integrate educational
technology into their classrooms and curriculum. Results
indicating that computer-guided practice was more
beneficial for low-knowledge readers than highknowledge readers suggest the need for the integration of
educational technology. At the same time, results
indicating that high-knowledge readers benefited more
than low-knowledge readers from teacher-guided practice
suggest the continued importance of traditional classroom
teaching. Together these results suggest that educational
technology can be integrated in such a way that meets the
needs of each student. The technology could be used in
such a way that augments traditional teaching roles
instead of replacing them. For example, in keeping in line
with current teacher-centered classrooms, teachers can be
trained to administer training to high-knowledge students
while low-knowledge students learn using iSTART.

Educational Psychology (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Magliano, J. P., Todaro, S. Millis, K., Wiemer-Hastings,
K., Kim, H. J., & McNamara, D. S., (2005). Changes in
reading strategies as a function of reading training: A
comparison of live and computerized training. Journal
of Educational Computing Research, 32, 185-208.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading
training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara, D., Levinstein, I., & Boonthum, C. (2004).
iSTART: Interactive strategy training for active reading
and thinking. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
& Computers, 36, 222-233.
McNamara, D. S., O'Reilly, T., Best, R. & Ozuru, Y.
(2006). Improving adolescent students' reading
comprehension with iSTART. Journal of Educational
Computing Research. 34, 147-171.
McNamara, D. S., Boonthum, C., Levinstein, I. B., &
Millis, K. (in press). Evaluating self-explanations in
iSTART: comparing word-based and LSA algorithms.
In T. Landauer, D.S. McNamara, S. Dennis, & W.
Kintsch (Eds.), Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McNamara, D. S., O'Reilly, T., Rowe, M., Boonthum, C.,
& Levinstein, I. B. (in press). iSTART: A web-based
tutor that teaches self-explanation and metacognitive
reading strategies. In D.S. McNamara (Ed.), Reading
comprehension strategies: Theories, interventions, and
technologies. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
O'Reilly, T. P., Sinclair, G. P., & McNamara, D. S.
(2004). Reading strategy training: Automated versus
live. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner & T. Regier (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1059-1064). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sharma, P., & Hannafin, M. (2004). Scaffolding critical
thinking in an online course: An exploratory study.
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 31, 181208.
Tao, L., & Wepner, S.B. (2002). From master teacher to
master novice: Shifting responsibilities in technologyinfused classrooms; when technology becomes an
integral part of the classroom, teachers’ roles may
change. The Reading Teacher, 55, 643-653.
Tsiriga, V., & Virvou, M. (2004). A framework for
initialization of student models in web-based intelligent
tutoring systems. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 14, 289-316.
VanLehn, K., Graesser, A.C., Jackson, G.T., Jordan, P.,
Olney, A., & Rosé, C.P. (2007). When are tutorial
dialogues more effective than reading? Cognitive
Science, 31, 3-62.

References
Bloom, B.S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for
methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one
tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13, 4-16.
Cohen, P.A., Kulik, J.A., & Kulik, C.C. (1982).
Educational outcomes of tutoring: A meta-analysis of
findings. American Educational Research Journal, 19,
237-248.
Domingo, P., Garcia-Crespo, A., Ruiz, B., & Iglesias, A.
(2002). EDU-EX: A tool for auto-regulated intelligent
tutoring systems development based on model.
Artificial Intelligence Review, 18, 15-32.
Graesser, A.C., Lu, S., Jackson, G.T., Mitchell, H.,
Ventura, M., Olney, A., & Louwerse, M.M. (2004).
AutoTutor: A tutor with dialogue in natural language.
Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 36, 180-193.
Lajoie, S. P., & Azevedo, R. (2005). Teaching and
learning in technology-rich environments. In P.
Alexander and P. Winne (Eds.), Handbook of

814

