UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactions of Expertise and Prior-Knowledge Activation with Low-Coherent and HighCoherent Concept Mapping Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6387m2f7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Gurlitt, Johannes
Renkl, Alexander
Faulhaber, Lucie
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactions of Expertise and Prior-Knowledge Activation with Low-Coherent and
High-Coherent Concept Mapping Tasks
Johannes Gurlitt (gurlitt@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Alexander Renkl (renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Lucie Faulhaber (luciefaulhaber@nexgo.de)
University of Freiburg, Educational Psychology, Engelbergerstr. 41
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany

Frank Fischer (frank.fischer@psy.lmu.de)
University of Munich, Educational Psychology, Leopoldstrasse 13
D-80802 Munich, Germany

Abstract
The following experiment investigated effects of low- and
high-coherent prior-knowledge activation using concept
maps. Thereby, we refer to and extend coherence-effects from
text comprehension (McNamara & Kintsch, 1996) to priorknowledge activation. Low-coherent prior-knowledge
activation was operationalized by conditions of creating-andlabeling-lines between provided concepts, high-coherent
prior-knowledge activation by labeling provided lines in a
concept mapping task. Subjects with two different levels of
expertise (43 high-school and 45 physics university students)
were randomly assigned to three conditions (1) no priorknowledge activation (2) creating-and-labeling-lines and (3)
labeling-provided-lines. Results confirm a positive effect of
prior-knowledge activation, a positive effect of expertise, and
an interaction between expertise and the coherence of priorknowledge activation in the posttest.
Keywords: Prior-knowledge activation; concept mapping;
coherence.

Introduction
Prior-knowledge is one of the most important prerequisites
for learning (e.g., Ausubel, 1968). It influences learning
through cognitive processes of selection, organization,
integration, and recall (Mayer, 1997; Renkl, 1996). (1) For
selection, prior-knowledge focuses the learner's attention on
relevant information and away from distractions, thus
saving information-processing resources. (2) For
organization, prior-knowledge facilitates the combining of
information into meaningful ‘chunks’ that can be processed
as a whole, again saving information-processing resources.
(3) For integration, prior-knowledge provides a framework
or scheme through which new information can be actively
assimilated (integration in existing schemes) or
accommodated (modification of existing schemes that
conflict with the new information). (4) For recall, the
influences of prior-knowledge on the selection,
organization, and integration of new information reduces the
amount of information chunks to be recalled and provides
association cues for accessing information from long-term
memory.
Ausubel (1968) emphasized the importance of priorknowledge and developed the idea of the advance organizer.

1055

He did not, however, provide educators with simple
functional tools to assess and activate prior-knowledge
(Novak & Gowin, 1984). Based on Ausubel's work, Novak
and Gowin, 1984 described hierarchical concept maps as a
tool for getting students to examine their prior-knowledge
before studying new materials. Concept maps provide an
external network-like representation of knowledge
structures and consist of spatially grouped nodes with keywords representing concepts, connection lines representing
the semantic connection of concepts, and labels on the lines
to specify the kind of the semantic relation.
Concept maps may be created entirely by the student.
Alternatively educators may prepare incomplete maps and
leave specific activities, for example creating and labeling
the connection lines, for the learners. Research has shown
that different mapping tasks evoke different cognitive and
metacognitive processes (Ruiz-Primo, Shavelson, Li, &
Schultz, 2001). A think-aloud study from Gurlitt, Renkl,
Motes, and Hauser (2006) has shown that the low-coherent
mapping task of creating-and-labeling lines elicits more
organization- and model-construction processes compared
to the high-coherent mapping task of labeling provided
lines. Think-aloud statements were labeled as organization
processes if the relationship between two concepts was
processed. Think-aloud statements were classified as modelconstruction processes if subjects drew a conclusion or
related more than two concepts with each other. Modelconstruction processes focus on higher-order relations; they
should be especially useful for the construction of higherorder structures (Gentner, 1983) in domains with interacting
relations.
Although external representations as concept maps
influence the internal mental models and learning, this
influence is not a straight-forward process. Instead there
may be complex interactions between the level of priorknowledge and the task used for prior-knowledge activation.
This possibility of different instructional methods for
different levels of expertise is supported by research about
learning from texts (McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, &
Kintsch, 1996; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996) that shows an
interaction between the level of prior-knowledge and text
coherence: High-knowledge readers learned more after

reading a low-coherence text, while low-knowledge readers
benefited more from a high-coherence text. In these
experiments, high coherence was operationalized by
inserting linking words for better argument overlap, making
important references explicit, and rearranging sentences in a
way that learners first encountered already possessed
information and then to be connected new information (see
also Britton & Gulgoz, 1991).
In the following experiment we investigated how highand low-coherent concept-mapping tasks may be used to
activate prior-knowledge. In addition to the activation of
specific concepts, learners should get involved in organization and model-construction processes (relationships
between more than two concepts). Similar to research about
learning from texts we investigated how two different levels
of expertise interact with the coherence of prior-knowledge
activation.

Research Questions
The first three questions relate to the effects of priorknowledge activation on learning outcomes. The next two
questions investigate effects of prior-knowledge activation
on the navigation and goal-orientation in the hypertext used
for the learning phase; in this context, goal-orientation refers
to the extent to which learner goals instead of ‘bottom-up’
processes drive navigation. The last question examines
possible differential effects on questions that learners
voluntarily asked themselves after low- vs. high-coherent
prior-knowledge activation and before hypertext reading.
1. Does prior-knowledge activation with concept
maps improve results in the posttest?
2. Does a higher level of expertise improve results in
the posttest?
3. Do participants with a higher level of expertise
benefit from low-coherent prior-knowledge
activation, while participants with a lower level of
expertise benefit from high-coherent priorknowledge activation?
4. Does prior-knowledge activation influence the
number of pages visited in the hypertext?
5. Does prior-knowledge activation influence the
perceived goal-orientation?
6. Does low- and high-coherent prior-knowledge
activation have differential effects on selfquestioning?

participated in the study. The experiment took about 1 hour
and 20 minutes. The participants received 10 EUR (US$ 13)
for participation. While all participants had previous lessons
about the content ‘motion on inclined plane’, physics
students had additional lessons about this topic at university
level. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
following conditions:
1. The low-coherence group activated prior-knowledge by
a creating-and-labeling-lines task, reflected about
possible knowledge gaps, and studied a hypertext about
motion on inclined plane.
2. The high-coherence group activated prior-knowledge
by a labeling-provided-lines task, reflected about
possible knowledge gaps, and studied a hypertext about
motion on inclined plane.
3. The baseline group just studied a hypertext about
motion on inclined plane.
The baseline group was included to estimate the effect of
prior-knowledge activation with concept maps and
reflection about one’s own knowledge.

Procedure
First, participants in the prior knowledge activation groups
received written instructions that explained concept
mapping. The instructions included an example from
biology. It explained how to label the lines (‘+’ for a
positive relationship or ‘-’ for negative relationships, or a ‘?’
for indecisive for either one of the former two). Using the
same example, participants also completed a label-providedlines mapping task and a create-and-label-lines mapping
task on the computer to familiarize themselves with the
software used in this study. The mapping-software (EasyMapping Tool; http://www.cognitive-tools.com) was specifically adapted to the research so that concepts could not be
changed, rearranged, or added. The only possible actions for
participants were drawing and labeling lines. All participants were informed that there would be no ‘calculationquestions’ in the posttest.
In the high-coherent group, participants had to label
provided connection-lines between physics concepts that
were relevant to the topic “motion on inclined plane”
(Figure 1).

Method
Participants and Design
We used a 3x2 design with prior-knowledge activation (no
map, create-and-label-the-lines map, label-the-lines map)
and level of expertise (physics-major student at university,
student at high school) as between-subjects factors. Fortythree German high-school students (mean age M = 17.6
years; 21 female, 22 male) and 45 German physics-major
students (age M = 21.6 years, 14 female, 31 male)

1056

Figure 1: High-coherent prior-knowledge activation,
labeling provided lines

Figure 2: Low-coherent prior-knowledge activation,
creating and labeling lines
In the low-coherent group, participants had to create and
label connection-lines (Figure 2) between the same
concepts.
Both groups were informed about the goal of the
mapping-task - to find out for themselves what they already
knew and did not know. After 6 minutes, learners in the
prior knowledge activation groups had 4 minutes to reflect
on their knowledge gaps and to formulate questions if they
liked. The self-questioning task was introduced to bridge the
gap between the two different representations, the mapping
task and the following hypertext. Therefore, possible selfgenerated questions were also available in the hypertext.
The hypertext and possible self-generated questions were
presented on a split-screen: The left-side of the split-screen
included the hypertext about motion on inclined plane,
while the right side incorporated the voluntarily generated
questions. Participants were not ‘forced’ to answer their
previously generated questions. Learners of the baseline
group only studied the hypertext for 20 minutes without
prior-knowledge activation. A clock counting from 20
minutes until 1 minute was provided inside the learningenvironment. One minute before the end of the learning
phase, learners were reminded to come to an end, and after
the last minute, learners were interrupted and asked to work
on the posttest. The time for writing down answers to open
questions was visualized and controlled by the computer,
automatically reminding learners to come to an end 30
seconds before the provided time ended.

Dependent Variables
Measures included the rating of the questions asked after
prior-knowledge activation, self-rated goal-orientation, the
number of pages visited in the hypertext, the posttest score
and the control variable ‘physics grades in the last two years
in high-school’.
As we investigated prior-knowledge activation effects, we
did not use a pretest (which would have been also a type of
prior-knowledge activation) to split learners into high- and
low-knowledge readers (McNamara et al., 1996; McNamara
& Kintsch, 1996). Instead we used learners with different
levels of expertise. In order to control for the variation of
high-school knowledge about physics within groups we

asked participants about their physics grades in the last two
years of high school.
Two raters categorized the questions that participants
asked themselves after prior-knowledge activation. The
categories were related to the ones used the analyses of
thinking-aloud during such mapping tasks (Gurlitt et al.
2006): (1) Organization questions were defined as questions
asking if two concepts are related. (2) Reflection questions
were defined as reflecting about the details of the
relationships between two concepts. (3) Model-construction
questions were defined as questions about the interrelations
in cluster of variables. (4) Definition questions referred to
the definitions of certain concepts. Interrater agreement for
the single categories was acceptable to good (from r = .67 to
r = .91).
As another learning process parameter, we recorded the
number of pages visited. The parameter indicated whether
the hypertext was explored in a focused or more explorative
way. Learners were also asked to rate on a 6-point rating
scale whether they used a goal-oriented approach or whether
they were rather driven by the links (1 equals 'I've been
driven by the links all the time'; 6 equals 'I have searched for
specific information all the time').
A posttest assessing the learning outcomes evaluated the
understanding of the learning contents and not
computational skills in this content sub-domain. It included
three open format questions and six multiple choice items.
Newtonian mechanics applied to the motion on inclined
plane includes relations between mass, gravity, slope,
inertia, friction, and forces. These relations may only be
fully understood considering their complex interplay.
Therefore the following open questions focus on the
understanding of relationships between concepts: The first
open question asked participants to explain during five
minutes the relationship between mass and acceleration. The
second and third open question asked participants to write
about the effects of gravity increase (three minutes) and of
friction increase (three minutes). We also asked six
questions on relationships in a multiple choice format, for
example, the greater gravity the … acceleration. Students
had to decide between 'the more', 'the less', 'equal', 'not
enough information to decide' and 'I don't know'. The latter
was used to improve the chance for honest answers and
reduce the occurrence of guessing.
Multiple choice questions were scored correct or
incorrect. All open questions were rated by scores between
0 and 5, depending on the inclusion of the interplay between
mass, gravity, slope, inertia, friction, and forces. Raters
judged the quality of the answers by considering whether
answers showed simple recall or a deeper understanding of
relations and especially relations between relations. The
maximum score (five) was assigned for a logical and clear
argumentation chain considering relations and relations
between relations. The minimum score (one) was assigned if
the answer did not show an understanding of any relation
between concepts. All written answers to the open questions
were scored independently by two raters. Interrater

1057

agreement was high (from r = .79 to r = .88). As all of these
posttest items measured conceptual understanding, they
were aggregated to an overall score of learning outcomes.

interaction effect was of medium practical significance, η² =
.06 (medium effect).
14
Learning outcome

Results
An alpha level of .05 was used for all statistical tests. As an
effect size measure, we used partial η², qualifying values
<.06 as small effects, values in the range between .06 and
.13 as medium effects, and values >.13 as large effects (see
Cohen, 1988).
Posttest
For the posttest, a 3x2 analysis of covariance was
performed, using the control measure ‘average physics
grade in the last two years in high-school’ as a covariate and
the between-subjects factors prior-knowledge activation
(none, create-and-label-the-lines, label-the-lines) and level
of expertise (physics student, student at high school). The
covariate met the homogeneity of regression slopes
requirement and had a statistically significant effect on the
posttest, F(1,81) = 22.43, p < .05. Means and standard
deviations for the different groups and levels of expertise
are shown in table 1.
Table 1: Means and standard deviations (in parentheses)
of the learning outcomes

Physics
students

Creatingand-labeling
lines
6.89
(3.71)

Labeling
provided
lines
8.89
(4.07)

9.07
(2.45)

12.33
(2.89)

10.97
(3.58)

10
8

Creating-andLabeling Lines

6

Labeling provided
Lines

4
2
0
Physics Students

High School
Students

Level of Expertise

Figure 3: Learning outcome performance of university
physics-major and high-school students (means).
Navigation in the Hypertext and Perceived GoalOrientation
For the navigation and the perceived goal-orientation, a 3x2
analysis of variance was performed with the factors priorknowledge activation (none, create-and-label-the-lines,
label-the-lines) and level of expertise (physics student,
student at high school). The control variable ‘average
physics grade in the last two years in high-school’ did not
show a significant relation with the dependant measures and
therefore was excluded from this analysis.
70

Does prior-knowledge activation with concept maps
improve results in the posttest? Consistent with our
hypothesis, an ANCOVA yielded a statistically significant
difference for an a priori defined contrast (the pooled
activation groups vs. baseline group) in favor of priorknowledge activation, F(1,81) = 7.47, p < .05, η² = .08
(medium effect).
Does a higher level of expertise improve results in the
posttest? As was hypothesized, an ANCOVA test for
differences in group means yielded a statistically significant
difference for expertise in favor of the physics students,
F(1,81) = 7.89, p < .05, η² = .09 (medium effect).
Do participants with a higher level of expertise benefit
from low-coherent prior-knowledge activation, while
participants with a lower level of expertise benefit from
high-coherent prior-knowledge activation? Figure 3 shows
the corresponding significant interaction, F(1,81) = 5.02, p
< .05, η² = 06: Physics students performed better when
creating-and-labeling lines while high-school students
performed better when just labeling provided lines. This

Number of Pages Visited

High-school
students

No priorknowledge
activation
5.73
(2.71)

12

60
50
40

Creating-andLabeling Lines

30

Labeling provided
Lines

20
10
0
Physics Students

High School
Students

Level of Expertise

Figure 4: Number of pages visited in the hypertext
(means).
Does prior-knowledge activation influence the number of
pages visited in the hypertext? Log-files of six subjects were
not recorded due to technical difficulties. ANCOVA yielded
a statistically significant difference in the number of pages
visited for an a priori defined contrast (the pooled activation
groups vs. baseline group), F(1,76) = 18.75, p < .05 , η² =
.20 (large effect). Participants in the groups with priorknowledge activation (M = 56.04, SD = 22.21) visited less
pages than participants in the baseline group (M = 79.50,
SD = 30.03). In addition we found that physics students
visited fewer pages after the low-coherent prior-knowledge
activation while high-school students visited fewer pages

1058

after the high-coherent prior-knowledge activation (Figure
4). The corresponding interaction effect reached only the
10%-level of significance, F(1,75) = 3.91, p < .1, η² = .05
(small effect), so that it has to be interpreted with caution.
The reduced number of pages visited in the conditions
with prior-knowledge activation is also reflected by the selfrating of goal-orientation, ANCOVA test for differences in
group means yielded a statistically significant difference in
favor of prior-knowledge activation, F(1,81) = 14.29, p <
.05, η² = .15 (large effect). Participants with priorknowledge activation (M = 3.50, SD = 1.25) perceived
themselves more goal-oriented than participants in the group
without prior knowledge activation (M = 2.47, SD = 1.22)
on the rating scale ranging from one to six. In addition, we
found that physics students rated themselves as less goaloriented (M = 2.83, SD = 1.27) than high-school students
(M = 3.43, SD = 1.34) F(1,81) = 6.30, p < .05, η² = .07
(medium effect).
Effects on Self-Questioning
To investigate effects of different prior-knowledge
activation on self-questioning, a 2x2 analysis of variance
was performed using prior-knowledge activation (createand-label-the-lines, label-the-lines) and level of expertise
(physics student, student at high school) as factors. We
found a significant main effect of different prior-knowledge
activation on model-construction-questions. Participants
creating and labeling lines asked more model-constructionquestions (M = .52, SD = .74) than their peers labeling
provided lines (M = .13, SD = .40) F(1,54) = 5.98, p < .05,
η² = .10 (medium effect). In addition, we found an effect of
different prior-knowledge activation on reflection about
single relationships. Participants creating-and-labeling lines
asked less reflection questions (M = 1.00, SD = 1.11) than
their peers labeling provided lines (M = 1.89, SD = 1.92)
F(1,54) = 4.54, p < .05, η² = .08 (medium effect). There
were no effects of different prior-knowledge activation on
organization and definition questions.
Finally, we obtained an effect of expertise on
organization-questions. Physics students asked less
organization questions (M = .17, SD = .42) than high-school
students (M = .52, SD = .78) F(1,54) = 4.75, p < .05, η² =
.08 (medium effect). There were no interactions between the
level of expertise and the type of prior-knowledge activation
on questions.

Discussion
The first three research questions about effects of priorknowledge activation on learning outcomes can be answered
as follows: First, prior-knowledge activation with concept
maps improves learning outcomes compared to a baseline
condition without prior knowledge activation. Second, as to
expect, learners with a higher level of expertise
outperformed learners with a lower level of expertise (Chi,
Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). Third, we found empirical
support for an interaction between the level of expertise and
the coherence of prior-knowledge activation, indicating that

1059

participants with a higher level of expertise benefit more
from low-coherent prior-knowledge activation, while
participants with a lower level of expertise benefit more
from high-coherent prior-knowledge activation.
The results of the last three research questions provided
first insights into the processes between low- and highcoherent prior-knowledge activation and learning outcomes.
Prior-knowledge activation reduced the number of pages
visited in a subsequent content-related hypertext also
showed a trend towards an interaction between the level of
expertise and the coherence of prior-knowledge activation:
Physics students visited fewer pages after the low-coherent
prior-knowledge activation while high-school students
visited fewer pages after the high-coherent prior-knowledge
activation. Learners with prior-knowledge activation
perceived themselves as more goal-oriented than the
learners without prior-knowledge activation. Reflecting
subsequently after prior-knowledge activation, participants
in the low-coherent prior-knowledge activation condition
asked more model-construction questions than their peers in
the high-coherent prior-knowledge activation condition, but
did less reflection about single relationships.
The beneficial effect of prior-knowledge activation is
evidence for the theoretical claim that it is not enough to
assume that prior-knowledge is activated automatically, for
example, while reading an instructional text. Related to this
‘automatic view’ is an extended common-strategy
hypothesis (Lorch & Lorch, 1995), assuming that mature
readers automatically activate prior-knowledge and attempt
to encode the top-level structure of a text. But as both,
learners with a high-level of expertise and learners with a
lower level of expertise benefited from prior-knowledge
activation, the results do not support the common-strategy
hypothesis.
One theoretical explanation for the general beneficial
effect of prior-knowledge activation may be the intentional
activation of specific concepts from long term memory. This
may have focused learners on the most important aspects,
and is based on assimilation theory and the assumption that
prior-knowledge activation allows learners to add more
information to long-term-memory because more ‘anchors’
for assimilation are activated (for reviews see R. Mayer,
1979; Preiss & Gayle, 2006). Although this theoretical
explanation is in accordance with the general beneficial
effect of prior-knowledge activation, it is not able to explain
the interaction between different levels of expertise and the
coherence of prior-knowledge activation - in particular as
both, the low- and high-coherent prior-knowledge activation
used the same concepts. As physics students performed
better in a condition with less information (no connection
lines between provided concepts) this may only be
explained by different cognitive and metacognitive
processes elicited through the low-coherent and highcoherent prior-knowledge activation. One explanation may
be the following view about prior-knowledge activation: In
addition to the automatic activation of prior-knowledge, and
the activation of specific concepts, carefully designed prior-

knowledge activation may establish a distinctive ‘mental
set’ (see Luchins, 1942; Schuck, 1981) for the learning
phase. On a broader level, the ‘mental set’ should determine
what kind of information is focussed on. For example if
learners focus on definitional content, more definitions
should be recalled, if the attention is directed on relations
between concepts, more relations should be recalled. On a
finer level, different activities using the same concepts may
elicit different cognitive and metacognitive processes
(Gurlitt et al., 2006), different processing of the information
during learning, and different learning outcomes. Further
complicating this issue, only learners with just the right
degree of expertise may be able to benefit from different
processes elicited during prior-knowledge activation. This
view about establishing a distinctive mental set with specific
prior-knowledge activation is also supported by the
differential amount of model-construction questions vs.
reflections about single relationships after low- and high
coherent prior-knowledge activation. Finally, the trend in
the number of pages visited in the hypertext also tentatively
supports the claim to consider both, the coherence of priorknowledge activation and the level of expertise.
While the above view is focused on the activity of priorknowledge activation, it is related to the strategy-switch
hypothesis (Lorch & Lorch, 1995). This hypothesis stated
that signals (e.g., topical overviews, headings, or
summaries) may facilitate learners to switch their reading
strategies from a list-learning approach to a structure
strategy, focusing their attention towards the top-level
structure of the text (Lorch & Lorch, 1995).
Summarizing, the interaction between the level of
expertise and the coherence of prior-knowledge activation,
extends coherence effects found in text comprehension
(McNamara et al., 1996; McNamara & Kintsch, 1996)
towards prior-knowledge activation. Further, the
interactions between expertise and the mapping-task used
for prior-knowledge activation support the hypothesis that
different mapping-tasks elicit qualitatively different
processes, analogous to the research from Ruiz-Primo et al.
(2001) and Gurlitt et al. (2006). Generalizations of these
results should be interpreted carefully with respect to the
realized topic, mapping tasks, learning outcomes, and type
of learners.

References

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gurlitt, J., Renkl, A., Motes, M. A., & Hauser, S. (2006).
How can we use concept maps for prior knowledge
activation: Different mapping-tasks lead to different
cognitive processes. In S. A. Barab, K. E. Hay & D. T.
Hickey (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 217-221):
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lorch, R. F., & Lorch, E. P. (1995). Effects of
organizational signals on text-processing strategies.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 537-544.
Luchins, A. (1942). Mechanization in problem solving; the
effect of Einstellung.
Mayer, R. (1979). Twenty years of research on advance
organizers: Assimilation theory is still the best predictor
of results. Instructional Science, 8, 133-167.
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking
the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 32, 1-19.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch,
W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of
text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from
texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
Novak, J. D., & Gowin, D. B. (1984). Learning how to
learn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Preiss, R. W., & Gayle, B. M. (2006). A meta-analysis of
the educational benefits of employing advanced
organizers. In B. M. Gayle, R. W. Preiss, N. Burrell & M.
Allen (Eds.), Classroom communication and instructional
processes: Advances through meta-analysis. (pp. 329344): Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Renkl, A. (1996). Vorwissen und Schulleistung [prior
knowledge and school achievement]. In J. Möller & O.
Köller (Eds.), Emotionen, Kognitionen und Schulleistung
(pp. 175-190): Weinheim: Beltz.
Ruiz-Primo, M. A., Shavelson, R. J., Li, M., & Schultz, S.
E. (2001). On the validity of cognitive interpretations of
scores from alternative concept-mapping techniques.
Educational Assessment, 7, 99-141.

Acknowledgment

Ausubel, D. P. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive
view. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Britton, B., & Gulgoz, S. (1991). Using Kintsch’s
computational model to improve instructional text:
Effects of repairing inference calls on recall and cognitive
structures. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 329345.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts
and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the
behavioral sciences: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

1060

This work was supported by a scholarship granted to the
first author from the Virtual Ph.D. Program ‘Knowledge
Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New Media’ of
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (German
Research Foundation).
Furthermore, we would like to thank the physicist
Michael Kozhevnikov and the physics teacher Christoph
Gurlitt, for their advice. We also thank all physics teachers
who cooperated with us and the high-school and university
students who participated in our experiment.

