UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating Children's Eye-Movements: Cause or Effect of Reversing Ambiguous Figures?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/84t4b5nb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Wimmer, Marina C.
Doherty, Martin J.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating Children’s Eye-Movements: Cause or Effect of Reversing Ambiguous
Figures?
Marina C. Wimmer (MW22@Stir.Ac.Uk)
Department of Psychology, Stirling, FK9 4BR, Scotland

Martin J. Doherty (MJD1@Stir.Ac.Uk)
Department of Psychology, Stirling, FK9 4BR, Scotland
Abstract
We examined whether eye-movements play a significant role
in perceiving both interpretations (reversing) of ambiguous
figures such as the duck/rabbit (Jastrow, 1900). In an eye
tracking study we investigated 3-, 4- and 5-year-old children’s
reversal abilities while their eye-movements were recorded.
Children’s eye-movement patterns were also compared to
those of adults. No significant differences in eye-movement
patterns between children who reversed and those who did not
reverse were found. This means that looking at specific parts
of the image is not sufficient to perceive both alternative
interpretations. We conclude that eye movements are not a
major cause of reversing ambiguous figures.
Keywords: ambiguous figures; preschool-children; eye
movements.

Introduction
Ambiguous figures such as Jastrow’s (1900) duck/rabbit
(Figure 1) are figures for which multiple interpretations are
possible although the figure itself remains unchanged.
Viewers experience the two competing interpretations
reverse from one to the other and only one interpretation can
be perceived at a time. In this study we investigated the role
of eye-movements in the ability to reverse ambiguous
figures.
Studies with adults have been unable to determine
whether fixation changes cause reversal, or reversal causes
observers to alter their fixation points. For example it has
been suggested that focusing on a particular part of the
image (e.g. between the duck’s beak and eye) may bias the
image towards one interpretation (e.g. duck) (Tsal & Kolbet,
1985). Adopting appropriate search patterns may therefore
induce shifts.
Studies have suggested that eye-movements precede
reversals (Ellis & Stark, 1978; Kawabata, Yamagami, &
Noaki, 1978; Ruggieri & Fernandez, 1994), that eyemovements follow rather than precede reversals (Einhäuser,
Martin, & König, 2004; Gale and Findlay, 1983; Pheiffer,
Eure, & Hamilton, 1956), or that eye-movements and
reversals are unrelated (Flamm & Bergum, 1977; Ito,
Nikolaev, Luman, Aukes, Nakatani, & van Leeuwen, 2003).
It has also been suggested that there are considerable
differences between scanning strategies across individuals
(Holcomb, Holcomb, & De La Peña, 1977).
Only a few studies have looked at children’s perceptions
of ambiguous figures (e.g. Doherty & Wimmer, 2005;
Gopnik & Rosati, 2001; Rock, Gopnik, & Hall, 1994). Rock

et al. (1994) looked at spontaneous reversals in 3- to 4-yearold children. Children were given a Reversal task where
they had to look at an ambiguous figure for 60 seconds and
report any perceived change of interpretation. They found
that preschool children who are not initially informed about
the ambiguity of an ambiguous figure do not perceive
changes in interpretation over a one minute viewing period.
Even when informed about the ambiguity only a few
children were able to reverse an ambiguous figure. Gopnik
and Rosati (2001) found that children at the age of 5 but not
younger are able to reverse an ambiguous figure during a 60
second viewing period when initially informed about the
ambiguity. This was replicated by Doherty and Wimmer
(2005), who nevertheless found that by the age of about 4
years children understood that these figures can have two
interpretations. Although it appears that a conceptual deficit
underlies the ability to reverse, this is overcome a year
before children can reverse, leaving open the question of
what additional ability is required to achieve reversal.
In this study we examine whether this additional ability
relates to appropriate eye-movements. As discussed,
research with adults has not been able to reach a consensus
on whether eye-movements are the cause or effect of
reversal. Developmental work can make a unique
contribution to the debate by examining fixation patterns
around the age children begin to reverse. If eye-movements
are an important factor in perceiving reversal, we would
expect a change in the pattern of fixation at or around the
time children become able to reverse.

Method
Participants
Thirty-seven children (18 boys, 29 girls) from a
predominantly middle class background in Stirling,
Scotland took part. Children’s age ranged from 3;2 (3 years,
2 month) to 5;9 (5 years, 9 months), Mean age = 4;4, SD = 8
months. The children were divided into three age groups:
Eleven 3-year-olds, Mean age = 3;7; thirteen 4-year-olds,
Mean age = 4;3; and thirteen 5-year-olds, Mean age = 5;2.
In addition 12 adults between the ages of 24 and 50 from the
University of Stirling took part.

Design

1659

Each child received two conditions: uninformed and
informed. The uninformed condition was always presented

first and was the same for all children and adults.
Afterwards 17 children received an ambiguous figures
Reversal task requiring a pointing response (Reversal task
Point) and 20 children a Reversal task requiring a verbal
response (Reversal task Verbal). All twelve adults received
the Reversal task Verbal.

Materials
For this study a Tobii 1750 eye tracking machine (accuracy
0.5°, drift < 1 degree, binocular tracking, data rate 50 Hz)
was used, along with Clearview 2.1.0 analysis Software.
The eye tracker, integrated in a 17” monitor, was nonintrusive and had a head-motion compensation mechanism.
This means that the child was not required to wear any
apparatus and could move freely in front of the eye tracker.
The child sat approximately 60 cm from the screen. A
pointer stick (19 cm) with a soft tip was used for pointing
out features of the ambiguous figure. Before starting the
task a 5 point calibration phase was conducted.
The ambiguous figure used was the duck/rabbit. This
figure has been used in previous studies with children, who
can reliably perceive both alternatives when disambiguated
by an experimenter. For the disambiguation phase two
disambiguating context drawings were used – the duck’s
body on a lake with other ducks in the background, and a
rabbit’s body, complete with a carrot. The bodies appeared
around the duck’s/rabbit’s head on the eye tracking screen.

Figure 1: duck/rabbit (Jastrow, 1900) divided into areas of
interest

Procedure
Uninformed condition This was the same for all
participants. Children (or adults) were shown the ambiguous
figure on the eye tracking monitor. They were asked, “What
is this?” After the child’s response, (e.g.) “Duck”, they were
asked, “What is it now?” 3 times: after 5, 30 and 60
seconds. Children and adults who reported any perceived
change of interpretation during the 60 second viewing
period were coded as reversers. The purpose of this
condition was to investigate eye-movement patterns when
unaware of the ambiguity of the image.

phase of the Reversal task verbal/point. The child (or adult)
was shown the duck/rabbit on the monitor again and asked
“What is this?” after the child’s answer (e.g.) “duck” the
body of the duck was added and the child was asked to point
to the duck’s eye. Then the experimenter said “But look it
can be something else too. [puts on the body of the rabbit]
What is it now? . . . Yes you are right, it’s a rabbit!” Again
the child was asked to point out the rabbit’s ears to ensure
that s/he was genuinely perceiving this alternative. The
experimenter finally reminded the child of the two
alternatives “Now this is very funny. This picture can
change back and forth from a duck [the duck’s body added
briefly on the screen] to a rabbit [the rabbit’s body added
briefly on the screen]” and then with appropriate swapping
of the disambiguating contexts on the screen and brief
pauses to allow the child to look at the figure, “or from a
rabbit to a duck”. But it might just stay a duck or it might
just stay a rabbit”.
Reversal task verbal This task was adapted from Rock et
al. (1994) and followed exactly the same procedure as the
uninformed condition. The difference was that children had
now been informed about the ambiguity.
Reversal task point The instructions were the same except
that children were asked to point out features of the nonreported interpretation after 5, 30 and 60 seconds instead of
giving verbal responses. For example if the child initially
perceived the duck s/he was asked to point to the mouth of
the rabbit after 5 seconds. If the child correctly pointed to
the mouth of the rabbit s/he was asked to point to the beak
of the duck after 30 seconds and to the ears of the rabbit
after 60 seconds. If the child failed to point out features
correctly after 5 seconds the same question was repeated
after 30 seconds and so forth. Children who were able to
point out features of each interpretation at least once during
the 60 seconds period were deemed reversers.
This task had 2 purposes:
1) The Reversal task Point has been used in previous
research (Wimmer, 2007) and is a methodologically more
sensitive task for assessing reversal abilities, because
children do not have to give verbal responses. Giving verbal
responses about one’s own perceptual experience is difficult
for preschool children.
2) Asking children to point out features plausibly prompts
them to scan the whole image in order to search for the
required feature. This may induce active search.

Analysis

Disambiguation phase The disambiguation phase took
place after the uninformed condition and before the test

The eye movement analysis was based on the average
fixations lengths and the average number of fixations. The
analysis represents the time children were actively looking
at the figure/screen rather than a timeline of 60 seconds
taken for the tasks. Additionally we were interested in how
long and how often children averted their gaze from the
screen, thus whether they had problems maintaining
fixation. Children’s difficulty maintaining fixation in this

1660

Uninformed vs. Informed In the Verbal task, children did
not fixate the image longer or more often once informed of
the ambiguity. In the Pointing task children fixated longer
once informed, and this was marginally significant, t (15) =
1.93, p = 0.072. In this task children also looked away less
frequently (t (15) = - 2.18, p = 0.046) and for less time once
informed (t (15) = -2.05, p = 0.058). The gaze aversions in
the Point task were also fewer and shorter than in the Verbal
task, (t (35) = 2.31, p = 0.027, and t (35) = 2.01, p = 0.051,
respectively).
100
80
% fixation time

task has been noted in previous studies (Wimmer, 2007) but
eye tracking equipment was not available to measure it
experimentally.
We were primarily interested in fixation patterns over the
whole image and within specific areas of the image. For this
the ambiguous figure was divided into areas of interest as
follows: beak of the duck/ears of the rabbit; eye; mouth of
the rabbit/back of the duck’s head (Figure 1). The beak
comprises the largest area of the ambiguous figure and the
mouth (from the rabbit perspective) the smallest. Hence the
beak is more likely to have longer and more frequent
fixations. This should be taken into consideration and
therefore we give more emphasis to the overall fixation
pattern.
We also analyzed the order of fixations. In particular, we
assessed the likelihood for a participant to fixate one
specific area of interest (eye, beak, mouth) following
fixation of another (e.g. mouth). For that we evaluated the
baseline likelihood to fixate one area of interest [e.g. the
probability of fixating the beak is the number of fixations of
the beak divided by the total number of fixations]; and the
likelihood to fixate one area of interest after fixating
another area of interest [e.g. the probability of fixating the
beak after fixating the mouth is the number of fixations of
the beak after the mouth divided by the proportion of
fixations that were of the mouth].

60
40
20
0
Beak

Eye

Reversal Point Reversers
Reversal Verbal Reversers

Mouth

Background

Averted

Reversal Point Non Reversers
Reversal Verbal Non Reversers

Figure 2a: Mean length of fixation of reversers and non
reverses to different areas of interest in relation to the
overall fixation time.

Results
Task performances
None of the thirty-seven children reversed in the
uninformed condition. In the informed condition 4 out of 20
children who received the Verbal task reversed (20%), and 9
out of 17 who received the Pointing task (53%). There were
no significant differences between the tasks or the age
groups.

% number of fixations

100

Eye movement data
Reverser vs. Non Reverser Reversers did not fixate longer
or make more fixations than non-reversers in either Reversal
task, nor did they avert their gaze more often or for longer.
Figure 2a shows the proportional length of fixation to
different parts of the figure; Figure 2b shows the
proportional number of fixations to different parts of the
figure. The bars for “Background” refer to fixations outside
the defined areas of interest and the bars for “Averted” refer
to gaze aversions from the screen.
There were no differences between reversers and nonreversers in the length of time different parts of the image
were fixated for either task. Similarly, the number of
fixations to different parts of the image did not differ for the
Verbal task. In the Pointing task, reversers fixated the
mouth more often than non-reversers (a mean of 8 times
compared to 2 times) and this was marginally significant (t
(11) = 1.95, p = 0.077).

80
60
40
20
0
Beak

Eye

Reversal Point Reversers
Reversal Verbal Reversers

Mouth

Background

Averted

Reversal Point Non Reversers
Reversal Verbal Non Reversers

Figure 2b: Mean number of fixations of reversers and non
reversers to different areas of interest in relation to the
overall fixation time
Fixation Order In order to compare the fixation orders of
reversers and non-reversers directly, performance on both
Reversal tasks (verbal/point) was merged together, due to
the small number of reversers in the Reversal task verbal (N
= 4). We calculated the fixation order, disregarding
successive fixations of the same area of interest: when
fixation of one area of interest is finished, where do
reversers and non-reversers fixate next? As can be seen

1661

(Figure 3), the fixation order for the reversers is similar to
the non-reversers. Both reversers and non-reversers were
most likely to fixate the eye after the beak or the mouth.
After reversers and non-reversers looked at the eye, then the
beak was more likely to be fixated than the mouth. Both
reversers and non-reversers rarely fixated the beak after the
mouth or vice versa.
40

%

20
0
-20

Figure 4: Fixation pattern of adult non reverser in the
uninformed condition. The red fields indicate longer
fixations

ye

ea
k
af
te
rM
ou
th

af
te
rB

af
te
rE

ea
k
af
te
rM
ou
th

af
te
rB

af
te
rE

ye

-40

Informed condition In the informed condition all adults
reversed but 3 out of 12 did not fixate the mouth area of
interest and one additional adult did not fixate the beak area.
This supports the findings from the uninformed condition
and strongly suggests that fixations of specific areas are not
necessary in order to reverse.

Reversers vs. Non-Reversers
Eye

Beak

Mouth

Figure 3: Likelihood of fixating one area of interest after
fixation of another, relative to the baseline likelihood of
fixating for reversers (left) and non-reversers (right)

Fixation order Adult reversers showed the same pattern of
successive fixations as children (Figure 5). Adults were
most likely to fixate the eye after fixating the beak or the
mouth. They were unlikely to fixate the beak after the
mouth or vice versa. In this respect, adults’ fixation
sequence is similar to children’s.

Comparison of age groups
In the uninformed condition, 3-year-olds looked away more
frequently and for longer than older children: F (2, 32) =
3.97, p = 0.029, F (2, 32) = 6.45, p = 0.004 respectively. In
the Reversal task verbal 3-year-olds also looked away more
frequently than older children: F (2, 17) = 3.24, p = 0.064.
No other age effects were found. In the Reversal task point,
3-year-olds fixated the image significantly longer than older
children: F (2, 14) = 4.29, p = 0.035.

40

%

20
0

Adults

-20

Uninformed condition Only 2 of the 12 adults reported that
they had never seen the ambiguous figure before, one of
whom did not reverse in the uninformed condition. The eye
movement pattern is very clear for this participant (Figure
4). She perceived the duck, and made no fixation to the
mouth area (which plausibly favors the rabbit
interpretation). This suggests that if reversal does not occur,
adults tend to only fixate the parts of the figure consistent
with their interpretation. However, from only one observer
conclusions are not possible. Out of the 11 adults who
reversed two did not fixate the mouth area and one did not
fixate the beak area. This indicates that it is not necessary to
fixate those areas for reversal if someone is aware of the
figure’s ambiguity.

-40
after Eye

after Beak

after Mouth

Adults
Eye

Beak

Mouth

Figure 5: Likelihood of fixating one area of interest after
fixation of another, relative to the baseline likelihood of
fixating for adults

Comparison between children and adults

1662

Adults fixated longer than children (adults: Mean = 29.2
seconds; children: Mean = 11.6 seconds), t (47) = -6.07, p <
0.001. Adults made more fixations than children (93
compared to 44, t (47) = -5.86, p < 0.001). Furthermore,
none of the adults averted their gaze during the 60 seconds
period, so children looked away significantly more often (t
(47) = 2.72, p = 0.009) and for longer (t (47) = 1.95, p =
0.057).

meta-representational
understanding
includes
the
conceptual understanding that an ambiguous figure can have
two interpretations (Doherty & Wimmer, 2005), that people
can have different mental representations of the same state
of affairs (Doherty & Wimmer, 2005; Wimmer & Perner,
1983), and numerous related developments (e.g., Flavell,
1986; Flavell, Flavell, & Green, 1983; Gopnik and
Astington, 1988). Even though children can recognize the
possibility of multiple interpretations of an ambiguous
figure, they nevertheless cannot perceive the reversal until
one year later. This study examined the possibility that in
addition children have to develop appropriate eyemovement patterns in order to reverse
Our results speak against this possibility for two reasons:
1) Most obviously, there were no differences in eye
movement patterns between reversers and non reversers. 2)
There were no differences in scanning strategies between
observers who were uninformed and informed about the
ambiguity. We conclude that eye-movements are not a
major cause of reversal.
It remains possible that eyemovements can facilitate reversal once the appropriate
conceptual development has taken place. However, they do
not appear to be necessary. This may be why previous
studies with adults have produced consistently inconsistent
results.

Discussion
Overall there were no differences between the fixation
patterns of those children who reversed an ambiguous figure
and those who did not reverse. This suggests that eyemovements are not critical to the development of the ability
to reverse. This was also confirmed by the fact that adults
were able to reverse without focusing on all specific key
areas (e.g. the mouth of the rabbit) of the ambiguous figure.
For example adults were still able to reverse if they only
focused between the beak and the eye area. However this
does not mean that eye movements cannot facilitate
reversal; appropriate scanning strategies may enhance the
reversal process.
Our findings also revealed no differences in the eye
movement patterns when children were uninformed versus
informed about both relevant interpretations. This implies
that being informed about the ambiguity does not trigger
specific scanning strategies over the image. The same
conclusion cannot be drawn from the sample of adults, since
only two observers were naïve and had never seen this
ambiguous figure before. The one adult who did not reverse
in the uninformed condition did not fixate the mouth area
and perseverated in the perception of a duck. However
observers who had no problems reversing also did not
necessarily fixate all areas. On the other hand those adults
were aware of the ambiguity. It seems that once aware of
the ambiguity it is not necessary to scan over the whole
image to reverse. A larger sample of naïve adult observers
would be needed in future research to clarify this issue.
Overall adults fixated longer and more frequently than
children. However, this cannot explain why some children
could not reverse since reversers looked as long and as often
at the figure as non-reversers. In addition the fixation
patterns of child reversers and non-reversers and adults were
all similar: the eye was usually fixated between a fixation of
the beak or of the mouth area.
Our findings also revealed that asking children to point
out features did not induce more active search. There were
no differences in the scanning patterns of children who
participated in the Pointing and Verbal reversal tasks. There
were also no significant performance differences between
the Verbal and the Pointing tasks and no significant
performance increases with age. This conflicts with
previous findings of improvement in reversal ability
between the ages of 3 and 5 (Doherty & Wimmer, 2005;
Gopnik & Rosati, 2001). However, this is plausibly due to
the small number of children per age group and the small
number of children in the Reversal task verbal (N = 4) who
reversed.
The lack of differences in eye-movement patterns
between reversers and non-reversers suggests that adopting
appropriate scanning strategies is neither necessary nor
sufficient for reversal to occur. This leaves open the
question of what causes the sudden development of reversal
ability around five years. There is considerable evidence
that children recognize that representations can have
multiple interpretations between the ages of 3 and 4. This

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Peter Hancock for help with the eye
tracking equipment and Nicolas Pugeault for statistical
advice. This research was funded by a doctoral studentship
from the Department of Psychology, University of Stirling,
held by the first author.

References

1663

Doherty, M. J., & Wimmer, M. C. (2005). Children’s
understanding of ambiguous figures: Which cognitive
developments are necessary to experience reversal?
Cognitive Development, 20, 407-421.
Einhäuser, W., Martin, K. A. C., & König, P. (2004). Are
switches in perception of the Necker cube related to eye
position? European Journal of Neuroscience, 20 (10),
2811-2818.
Ellis, S. R., & Stark, L. (1978). Eye movements during
viewing of a Necker cube. Perception, 7, 575-581.
Flamm, L. E., & Bergum, B. O. (1977). Reversible
perspective figures and eye movements. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 44, 1015-1019.
Flavell, J. H. (1986). The development of children’s
knowledge about the appearance-reality distinction.
American Psychologist, 41, 418-425.
Flavell, J. H., Flavell, E. R., & Green, F. L. (1983).
Development of the Appearance-reality distinction.
Cognitive Psychology, 17, 95-120.
Gale, A. G., & Findlay, J. M. (1983). Eye movement
patterns in viewing ambiguous figures. In R. Groner, C.
Menz, D. F. Fisher, & R. A. Monty (Eds.), Eye

movements and psychological functions: International
views. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children’s
understanding of representational change and its relation
to the understanding of false belief and the appearancereality distinction. Child Development, 59 (1), 26-37.
Gopnik, A., & Rosati, A. (2001). Duck or rabbit? Reversing
ambiguous figures and understanding ambiguous
representations. Developmental Science, 4, 175-183.
Holcomb, J. H., Holcomb, H. H., & De La Peña, A. (1977).
Selective attention and eye movements while viewing
reversible figures. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 44, 639644.
Ito, J., Nikolaev, A. R., Luman, M., Aukes, M. F., Nakatani,
C., & van Leeuwen, C. (2003). Perceptual switching, eye
movements, and the bus paradox. Perception, 32, 681698.
Jastrow, J. (1900). Fact and fable in psychology. Oxford,
England: Houghton, Mifflin.
Kawabata, N., Yamagami, K., & Noaki, M. (1978). Visual

fixation points and depth perception, Vision Research, 18,
853-854.
Pheiffer, C. H., Eure, S. B., & Hamilton, C. B. (1956).
Reversible figures and eye-movements. American Journal
of Psychology, 69, 452-455.
Rock, I., Gopnik, A., & Hall, S. (1994). Do young children
reverse ambiguous figures? Perception, 23, 635-644.
Ruggieri, V., & Fernandez, M. F. (1994). Gaze orientation
in perception of reversible figures. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 78, 299-303.
Tsal, Y., & Kolbet, L. (1985). Disambiguating ambiguous
figures by selective attention. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 37A, 25-37.
Wimmer, M. C. (2007). Children’s perception and
understanding of ambiguous figures. Unpublished
doctoral thesis, University of Stirling.
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs:
Representation and constraining function of wrong beliefs
in young children’s understanding of deception.
Cognition, 13 (1), 103-128.

1664

