UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Issues in Reasoning about Iffy Propositions: "The" Interpretation of Conditionals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0kq3x4sw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Schroyens, Walter

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Issues in Reasoning about Iffy Propositions:
“The” Interpretation(s) of Conditionals
Walter Schroyens (Walter.Schroyens@ugent.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Ghent
2, Henry Dunantlaan, Gent, Belgium
are:

Abstract
Recent studies indicate that a vast majority of people judge the
probability of a conditional <if A then C> as to the conditional
probability of <A, given C> (Evans, Handley, & Over, 2003;
Oberauer &Wilhelm, 2003). This means that in evaluating the
applicability of a conditional people do not seem to take count
of situations in which the antecedent event is false. This has
been taken as evidence against the model theory (Johnson-Laird
& Byrne, 2002). This theory, however, claims that the
conditional interpretation in which false-antecedent cases are
relevant is only one of many possible interpretations of ‘if’. We
present new evidence that confirms this flexibility of the
interpretive system. When people are primed by thinking (a)
about truth and the difference between the <if A then C> and
<if A then possibly C> or (b) are invited to judge which
situations are consistent with the conditional, they are more
likely to select a probability estimate that takes count of the
false-antecedent cases.

Introduction
Recent literature has questioned that accepting an utterance
like “if someone punches you straight in your face, you will
be in pain”, <if A then C>, implies a situational tendency to
reason in accordance with the belief that everything is
possible, except one possibility: It becomes an impossibility
that you will not be in pain when someone punches you
straight in the face (not<A and not-C>). The most obvious
possibility is that you will be in pain after having received a
punch straight in the face, <A and C>. It is however also
possible that nobody has punched you in the face, but that
you are still in pain (i.e. a decent blow with a baseball bat also
does the trick, <not-A and C>). Everything else being equal,
it is also possible that you are not punched in the face, and
that it does not hurt (a gentle kiss by a loved one is one such
possibility, <not-A and not-C>). We present evidence
showing that though far from the dominant interpretation, this
interpretation of “if” is psychologically real.
To investigate the interpretation of conditionals, Evans et
al. (2003) used the sentence-probability task.. In this task
people evaluate how likely a conditional utterance of the form
<if A then C> is true. This question is posed in the context of
explicit information about the frequency of four truth
contingencies. Given an antecedent <A> and a consequent
event <C> there are four possible combinations in which the
antecedent/consequent is true (T) or false (F). These
contingencies are classically referred to as TT<A_C>,
TF<A_not-C>,FT<not-A_C>, FF<not-A_not-C>. In the
sentence probability task people are given frequencyinformation about these truth-table contingencies. For
instance, imagine that in a set of ninety colored figure there

TT 50 Circles that are red.
TF 0 Circles that are yellow
FT 10 Triangles that are red
FF 30 Triangles that are yellow
You are then asked to judge the probability that the
conditional “if it is a circle, then it is colored red” is true.
Evans et al. distinguished three hypotheses about the
interpretation of if (see Table 1): The so-called conjunctive
(AND), conditional probability (CP) and material-implication
(MI) interpretation. These interpretations are defined as
functions of the truth contingencies people would represent.
For instance, a conditional <if A then C> interpreted as MI is
only false when the consequent <C> does not follow from the
antecedent <A>. This TF<A_not-C> contingency is a
conceptual impossibility, if the conditional is true. Table 1
illustrates the probability of the conditionals when interpreted
as AND, MI or CP. For instance, the likelihood of <if A then
C> interpreted as <C given A> (i.e., CP) equals the
proportion of TT<A_C> cases relative to True-antecedent
cases (both TT<A_C> and TF<A_not-C>). This amounts to a
probability of 50/50+0 in Example 1 (see Table 1). Table 1
also illustrates the decrease in both P(MI) and P(CP) with an
increase of TF<A_not-C> cases.
Evans et al. (2003) found no evidence for MI and showed
performance was best explained by AND and CP. The lack of
any evidence for MI made Evans et al. claim to have “shown
why the assumption of material implication embedded in the
mental model theory of conditional reasoning (Johnson-Laird
& Byrne, 1991, 2002) is unjustified” (p. 334). Schroyens and
Schaeken (2004) already questioned Evans et al.’s
representation of the model theory. They demonstrated that
the evidence against MI is not inconsistent with the theory
(also see, Johnson-Laird, 1994, 1995) and showed that neither

1455

Table 1: Contingencies represented under different
interpretations of <if A then C>.

TT
TF
FT
FF

Example
Interpretation
1 2 3
AND
CP
MI
50 50 50 A and C A and C
A and C
0 10 25
A and not-C
10 5 5
Not-A and C
30 25 10
Not-A and Not-C

Probability
Example 1
Example 2
Example 3

TT
TT
TT+FT+FF
TT+TF+FT+FF TT+TF TT+TF+FT+FF
50/90
50/50
90/90
50/90
50/60
80/90
50/90
50/75
65/90

Note. TT, TF, FT, FF: True/False antecedent/consequent

AND nor CP conflicts with an apposite treatment of the
model theory. Briefly: the model theory claims that the
interpretation of a conditional can but need not be MI. It is
just one of many possible interpretations. For instance,
Johnson-Laird and Byrne (2002, p. 650) argued that querying
the probability of <if A then C> might easily be interpreted as
a question for the conditional probability of <C> given <A>
and Johnson-Laird (1994, 1995; Johnson-Laird et al., 1999)
already demonstrated how such conditional probabilities can
be computed.
The present paper sets out to demonstrate the flexible
nature of the interpretation of if according to the model
theory. That is, we aim to establish that MI is indeed one
alternative interpretation of if. This challenges arguments
against the model theory based on the claim that people never
interpret the conditional as such (Evans et al., 2003; Evans,
Over, Handley, 2005). Demonstrating that even in the
sentence-probability task some people can have MI
interpretations obviously does not affect the robust
observation that CP interpretations are dominant in this task.
It would however demonstrate the mistake in claiming that
people will never make such an interpretation.
We believe interpretations are varied and variable in
nature, and that an interpretation of a sentence is to be
distinguished from its idealized meaning (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 2002). Interpretations are dependent upon content and
context, while a proposition's meaning abstracts such factors.
One possible interpretation of the conditional is the Material
Implication interpretation. Table 1 shows that the major
difference in MI versus CP interpretations lies in the
relevance of false-antecedent cases; FT<not-A_C> and
FF<not-A_not-C>. The absence of MI interpretations in the
studies of Evans et al. (2003) therefore indicates that the
participants did not take count of these false-antecedent cases
and treated them as irrelevant. Irrelevance, however, is not a
fixed property or third truth-value (Sperber & Wilson, 1986).
To yield performance in accordance with MI we only need to
make the false-antecedent cases more relevant to the task at
hand. If the model theory is right, then we should be able to
engage the processes of pragmatic and semantic modulation
such that people will arrive at a MI interpretation. Indeed,
starting
from
a
minimal
initial-model
representation/interpretation (there is no interpretation
without representation), people reason towards one or the
other representation/interpretation.

then it is red” is strictly speaking true about a set of colored
figures. At the same time we also asked these subjects to
indicate whether “if the figure is a circle, then it is red” or the
tautological conditional “if the figure is a circle, then it is
possibly red” gives the best description of the set of colored
figures. The contrast between <if A then C> and <If A then
possibly C> highlights the status of the TF<A_not-C> cases,
which are impossible for the former and possible for the
latter. Asking people to judge whether the conditional is
strictly speaking true of the set of colored figures is also likely
to increase the relevance of false-antecedent cases. Truthtable task studies (e.g. Barrouillet & Lecas, 1998) indeed
show that almost all people judge a conditional as being
falsified by TF (also see, Evans, 1983). If the conditional is
only falsified by TF, then other cases would not falsify it and,
hence, these other cases might be taken to contribute to its
truthfulness or verisimilitude. In summary, we expect an
increase in MI interpretations when the sentence-probability
task is preceded by a truth-table task or a truth questionnaire.
Both these priming tasks make people think more profoundly
about what it means for a conditional rule to be true.

Method
Design Three independent groups completed the sentenceProbability Task (PT), either as the first task (PT-TQ) or the
secondary task presented after a Truth-Table task (TT-PT) or
Truth Questionnaire (TQ-PT). The sentence probability task
consisted of three problems that varied in their frequency of
falsifying TF cases (0, 10 and 25 out of 90 exemplars; see
Table 1).
Participants. All participants (N = 156) were first year
psychology students at the University of Leuven who
participated in partial fulfillment of a course requirement.
Participants were randomly allocated to three groups, with 61,
53 and 42 participants in the PT-TQ, TT-PT and TQ-PT
groups

Experiment 1

Materials and Procedure. The sentence-probability task
consisted of three problems (see Table 1). The frequencies of
the colored figures corresponding to TT, TF, FF and FF were
(a) 50,0,10,30 (b) 50,10,5,25 and (c) 50,25,5,10. For instance,
it was said that “There are 50 CIRCLES that are RED; 10
CIRCLES that are NOT RED; 5 NON-CIRCLES that are
RED; 25 NON-CIRCLES that are NOT-RED”. Participants
were given the conditional rule (e.g. “if the figure is a
CIRCLE, then the figure is colored RED”) and judged “the
probability that the rule is true”. That is, we did not explicitly
specify that they had to judge the probability that the rule is
true of an element (Evans et al., 2003) or subset of elements
(Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2003) drawn from the set of colored
figures. Participants answered by selecting one of the three
relative frequencies corresponding to AND, CP and MI (see
Table 1). Non-simplified relative frequencies were used: e.g.,
(50+10+30)/90 and not ‘1’ formed the MI option in the TF=0
problem, as compared to 50/(50+0) for CP. With each of the
non-simplified relative frequencies, a brief description was
given.
The truth-table task probed for an evaluation of the four

We envisaged two ways of increasing the relevance of the
false-antecedent cases. First, we asked one group to start with
a truth-table task. In this task participants indicate for each of
the four truth-contingencies whether they are possible or
impossible when assuming a rule like “if the figure is a circle,
then it is red” is true. Hence, as compared to a group who
completed the sentence-probability task first, we expected to
see an increase in MI responses. Indeed, it is a robust
phenomenon that many people will judge FT<not-A_C> and
FF<not-A_not-C> cases as being consistent with If A then C
(see, e.g., Barrouillet & Lecas, 1998). Second, on a more
explorative basis, we asked whether “if the figure is a circle,
1456

truth contingencies as “possible, assuming the rule is true” or
“impossible, assuming the rule is true”. Participants had to
assume that the rule was true and were informed that “if the
rule is indisputably true, then there would not be a single
colored figure that goes against the rule”. They read that “a
possible or permissible combination could occur if the rule
were true” and that “an impossible or excluded combination
should not occur if the rule were true”.
The truth questionnaire contained two questions. It first
probed participants to indicate whether a conditional like “if
the figure is circle then the figure is red” is strictly speaking
true or false about the set of colored figures. We also asked
them to indicate whether the strict conditional “if the figure is
a circle, then it is red” or the tautological conditional “if the
figure is a circle, then it is possibly red” gives the best
description of the given set of colored figures. When the
truth-questionnaire (TQ) was given before the sentenceprobability task (in the TQ-PT condition), this meant that the
truth-questionnaire was given before each of the three
sentence-probability problems.

Experiment 2

Experiment 1 showed that the vast majority of our
participants accepted the false-antecedent cases as possible.
We nonetheless observed only a minority of MI
interpretations in the sentence-probability task. However,
something being possible according to a rule does not make
this rule true, even though it does make this rule less likely to
be false (which is tantamount to saying it makes the rule more
likely to be true). As noted by Johnson-Laird and Byrne
(2002, p. 652): “the judgment of the truth or falsity of
assertions containing connectives, such as conditionals and
disjunctions, is a meta-ability. That is, it calls for a grasp of
the metalinguistic predicates true and false, which refer to
relations between assertions and the world (see, e.g., Jeffrey,
1981). In contrast, a task that taps directly into the
interpretation of assertions is to judge what is possible.”
Saying that something is more likely to be true is not the
same as saying that it is true. Any (philosophy of) science
student knows that corroboration is distinct from verification.
It is only in the sense of corroborating (i.e., not falsifying) a
rule that false-antecedent cases make a rule more truthful, i.e.,
less likely to be false. Whereas falsity can be established by a
Results and Discussion
single observation, categorical truth can not: verity is not
verisimilitude. It is only within a closed world, where one has
Table 2 presents the relative proportion of selected sentenceexhaustive information about all truth-table cases (vs. just
probabilities for the three problems in the three experimental
one, or one type of truth-table case), that one can judge
conditions. Table 2 confirms MI responses increase when
whether a rule is categorically true. Philosophy of science has
participants first complete the truth-table task (2.7 vs. 13.2,
taught us that most of our empirical generalizations can never
Mann-Withney U = 1329, Z = 2.78, p < .01). It also shows
be established as categorically true. We can only assume
that when people first judge whether the conditional is strictly
them to be categorically true. For instance, we have good
speaking true of the given set of colored figures and choose
reasons to believe that if the next morning comes, the sun will
between either <if A then C> or <if A then possibly C> as the
rise. But, then again, it might not. However unlikely, the next
best description, they similarly show an increase in MI
observation (and in non-closed world there always is a next
evaluations (2.7 vs. 12.7, U = 1068 , Z = 2.56, p < .01). The
observation) might always bring a falsification.
proportions of MI interpretations differed significantly from
These theoretical considerations suggest that to further
zero, both when the truth-table task or the truth-questionnaire
increase the likelihood of MI interpretations one could make
was presented first (p <.001). As can be seen in Table 2,
the sentence-probability task coherent with the metathough variable, the CP interpretation remains dominant
linguistic insights participants are assumed to have -- and
throughout all conditions.
need to have -- to bridge the gap
The TT, TF, FT and FF acceptance
Table 2: Percentage frequency of
between knowing what is possible, and
ratings in the truth-table task were 1.0, 0
probability judgments in line with a
and .83 and .924. Presentation order did conjunction (AND), material implication the import of these possibilities on the
(vs.
not affect the truth-questionnaire. (MI), or conditional probability (CP) as a verisimilitude/truthfulness
verity/truth) of a conditional. However,
function of the whether the probability
Combined over these two groups of
there is a simpler way of testing whether
task (PT) was presented first (PT-TQ;
participants we observed that .805, .058
N=61),
or
second
after
the
Truth-Table
the possible-to-truthfulness gap plays a
and .048 responded that the conditional
task
(TT-PT;
N
=
53)
or
a
Truthsignificant role in the difficulty of
is “strictly speaking true” about the
Questionnaire (TQ-PT; N = 42).
reasoning towards an MI interpretation.
three frequency sets with respectively 0,
We can altogether bypass the tricky
10 and 25 TF cases (see Table 1). The
Group
implications of the law of the excluded
likelihood that <if A then C> was
Set
TQ-PT TT-PT PT-TQ
middle (something is either true or
chosen as the best description of the sets
P(TF) =0/90
false) and the paradoxes of verification.
was respectively, .796, .048 and .029.
AND
28.57 22.64 29.51
Asking for the probability that the rule
MI
19.04 16.98 3.28
That is, when the conditional is logically
is false (vs. true) of a card accomplishes
CP
52.38
60.38
67.21
false (as is the case when there are TF
this. Reasoners only need to consider
P(TF)=10/90
cases), the vast majority of people say
AND
19.05 20.75 19.67
the impossible (not the possible) to
that the conditional is strictly speaking
MI
7.14
15.09 3.28
satisfy the demands of the task. Hence
false, and think that <if A then possibly
CP
73.81 64.15 77.05
one avoids the paradoxical problem of
C> rather then <if A then C> provides
P(TF)=25/90
seeing how the possibility of “a white
the better description of the frequency
AND 21.43 24.52 19.67
dove”, FF<not-A_not-C> corroborates
set.
MI
11.90 7.54
1.64
“if it is a raven, then it is black”, <If A
CP
66.76 67.92 78.69
then C>. Moreover, in this situation, the
1457

MI is psychologically
real.
In
Experiment
1
participants
evaluated
the probability that the
rule was true. Strictly
speaking, the rule cannot
be true of a set that
includes
FT
cases.
P(Not True)
P (True)
Ideally, the task should
CP MI ME AND
CP MI ME AND consequently also have
TRUE Context: P(TF)=0
included
a
zeroMethod
probability
option,
which
Design.
The sentence- No Prime 40.0 44.0 0.0 16.0
44.0 36.0 0.0 20.0
it did not when there
probability task was primed
35.5 35.5 3.2 25.8
25.8 38.7 3.23 32.3
were
FT
cases.
or non-primed by presenting Primed
Experiment 2, however,
it after or before a FALSE Context: P(TF)=10/90
repeats
the
main
probability-based truth-table
No Prime 60.0 24.0 4.0 12.0
64.0 0.0 4.0 32.0
priming-effect in these
task and inference task. The
Primed
41.9 35.5 0.0 22.6
32.3 19.3 0.00 48.4
conditions
with
a
sentence-probability
task
sentence-probability task that asks to evaluate the probability
presented a logically true or false rule and probed for true or
that the rule is true of an element from the set of coloured
false probability ratings.
figures. Hence, it annuls a potential suspicion about the
validity of the result of Experiment 1.
Participants. All participants (N = 56) were first year
Second, and most importantly, there was a main effect of
psychology students at the University of Leuven who
question type. There were more MI selections when people
participated in partial fulfillment of a course requirement.
evaluated the probability that the rule was not true, as
Participants were randomly allocated to the two groups, with
compared to the probability that the rule was true (.348 vs.
25 and 31 subjects in the non-primed and primed groups.
.241, T = 63.5, Z = 1.807, p < .05 one-tailed). This effect
neither interacted with the order of presentation (primed vs.
Materials and Procedure. The sentence-probability task
non-primed; Z = 0.272), nor with the presence of exceptions
consisted of two problems. The frequencies of the colored
to the rule (Z = 1.376). As was the case for the priming effect,
figures corresponding to TT, TF, FF and FF were (a) 50, 0, 5,
the question-type effect was only reliable when there were
35 (b) 40,10,5,35. Participants were also given the option to
exceptions to the rule (i.e, TF=10; 303 vs. .107; T = 27.0, Z =
select the sentence-probability under a bi-conditional or
2.343, p < .05). That is, when there are exceptions to the rule
Material-Equivalence interpretation (ME). Under such an
we have a main effect of both the type of question (.303 vs.
interpretation, the FT<not-A_C> contingency also falsifies
107) and the prime (.275 vs. .120). When there are no
the conditional. The two priming tasks were presented on a
exceptions, we have high MI rates throughout.
single page, either before or after the page with the two
The question-type effects corroborate (i.e., fail to falsify)
problem sets for the sentence-probability task. (The order of
and hence increase the acceptability of our hypothesis that
individual problems within the priming and primed tasks was
people have difficulty coping with the paradoxes of
counterbalanced). The experiment was run in a single
verification and do not fully grasp the idea that something that
collective session.
does not falsify a rule (or hypothesis) makes this rule more
truthful (though not necessarily true). False-antecedent cases
Results and Discussion
are considered possible, and therefore do not make the rule
Table 3 presents the relative proportion of selected sentencefalse. This does not mean that they make the rule true; it only
probabilities. First, the priming effect was in line with that
means that these possible cases make the rule more truthful in
observed in Experiment 1.The overall effect, however, was
the sense of a failed falsification of this rule. Avoiding these
not statistically significant (Z = .444). As can be seen in Table
complexities about truth, by asking people to judge the
3, the present experiment's priming effect depended on the
probability that the rule is false, effectively increases the
type of rule. It only reached significance when there were
sentence-probability judgement in line with a MI
exceptions to the rule (.275 vs. .120; U = 296.5, Z = 1.784, p
interpretation. The question-type effect is particularly strong,
< .05, one-tailed). The absence of a significant effect on the
given that it was established in a within-subjects design,
logically true rule seems due to the high level of MI
which gives the best chance of rejecting our hypothesis.
interpretations (40%), even when participants were not
Participants first judged the probability that the rule is not true
primed. This is even higher than was observed in primed
and on the next line were asked to judge the probability that
conditions of Experiment 1. The reason for this might be that
the rule is true. One would think that if they select 10/90 as
both 0/50 and 0/90 amount to 0. The former is the CP
the “not-true” sentence-probability, they would simply take 1probability, whereas the latter is the MI probability. Since
[10/90], i.e., 80/90 as the corresponding “true” sentenceboth end up as 0, participants might not have differentiated
probability. The question-type effect seems to be strong
between the two. We could also take the high MI
enough to counter this simple heuristic, at least when there
interpretations at face value. That is, the present study
are exceptions to the rule.
reinforces the main conclusion of Experiment 1; it shows that
computational
task
is
simpler. Consider Example 2
in Table 1. Coming to the
“not true” MI estimate of
10/90
requires
less
computation than the “true”
estimate:
50+5+25/90.
Indeed, one need not
consider the false-antecedent
cases.

Table 3: Percentage frequencies of selections of probability
judgments of logically true vs. false conditional utterances
according to the Conditional Probability (CP), Material
Implication (MI), Material Equivalence (ME) and the
Conjunction (AND), as a function of whether the probability
judgments were completed before (non-primed) or after
(primed) a conditional inferences task and truth-table task.

1458

The TT, TF, FF and FT acceptance ratings in the truth-table
task were .95, .11 and .89 and .80, which did not differ as a
function of presentation order. The inference-acceptance rates
for Modus Ponendo Ponens (“A therefore C”), Affirmation of
the Consequent (“C therefore A), Modus Tollendo Tollens
(“not-C therefore A”) and Denial of the consequent (“not-A
therefore not-C) were respectively .96, .07, .14 and .55. In
another replication of an aspect of Experiment 1, we observed
that .80 and .08 responded that the conditional is “strictly
speaking true” about the two frequency sets with respectively
0 and 10 TF cases. The likelihood that <if A then C> was
chosen as the best description of the sets was respectively
.875 and .089.

General Discussion
The most direct import of our results is simple. We have
shown that some people at least sometimes interpret a
conditional in line with Material Implication. In such an
interpretation of <if A then C> people accept that everything
is possible, except that <A> is not followed by <C>. Though
the Material-Implication interpretation is made in a minority
of cases, comprehensive theories of human reasoning need to
account for the possibility that people can have such an
interpretation of ‘if’. In doing so, they will have to specify or
explain the conditions under which particular interpretations
are more likely. Interpretations of ordinary conditionals
depend on the content of the problems and their interpretative
context. ‘The’ interpretation of ‘if’ does not exist.
The possibility of MI interpretations shows that Evans et al.
(2003; Evans and Over, 2004; Evans et al., 2005) are
mistaken to criticize the model theory for its adherence to MI,
for which they had found no evidence. They also show that
their own theory is incomplete to the extent it denies the
psychologically
reality
of
Material-Implication
interpretations. We do not need to present this theory in
detail. We have shown that Evans et al.’s (2003) data were
too limited in scope as regards the range of possible
interpretations. Their theory is based on these data and
explicitly eschews the possibility of MI interpretations. It is a
fortiori too limited as regards the interpretational process it
proffers. Of course, this present limitation need not denote a
fundamental flaw of the hypothetical-thinking model. It can
easily be extended to incorporate (in a consistent way) the
idea that the irrelevancy of false-antecedent cases is not a
fixed third truth-value but a variable interpretation of their
relevancy. Our findings show that most people think falseantecedent cases are possible (e.g., FF was considered
possible by 92.4% of the participants in Experiment 1) and
that priming the sentence-probability task with the possibilitybased truth-table task seems to make these false-antecedent
cases appear somewhat more relevant.
The model theory has received many criticisms because of
its adherence to the Material-Implication hypothesis. These
critiques are annulled by distinguishing the interpretation of a
conditional from its presumed meaning. The so-called coremeaning principle is part of the theory of meaning and states
that when one assumes that the proposition <if A then C> is
true, everything except the falsifying TF,<A_Not-C>
contingency is possible (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002, p.
650). One important aspect of the core-meaning principle is
its focus on so-called basic conditionals. Basic conditionals

are:”[conditionals] with a neutral content that is as
independent as possible from context and background
knowledge, and which have an antecedent and consequent
that are semantically independent apart from their occurrence
in the same conditional” (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002, p.
649). This makes clear that the core meaning forms an
idealization conveyed by making an abstraction of the
specific content and context of utterance: “Meaning as model
theoretic interpretations are idealizations – abstract theoretical
fictions, though nonetheless useful for all that” (JohnsonLaird, 1983, p. 182). As an idealization, the core-meaning
assumption therefore does not license inferences about the
prevalence of particular interpretations.
When one is asked to evaluate the probability that a
conditional like “if the figure is a circle, then it is red” is true
about a set of colored figures, we are not dealing with a basic
conditional. The sentence-probability task forces people to
make their interpretation dependent upon the contextual
information. A per se abstract or 'knowledge-lean' conditional
becomes very specific and concrete, i.e., knowledge-rich
when one is given information about the exact frequency of
all possible figures that might be relevant to the conditional.
Hence, by definition, it is no longer a basic conditional. It
might even be considered a 'hyper-real' conditional: In real
life we hardly ever have the luxury of having exact frequency
information about the possibilities present in the world
surrounding us.
The core-meaning principle does not deal with ordinary
conditionals in daily parlance. It deals with basic (i.e.,
idealized conditionals and finds its basis more in other
arguments that are generally more logico-philosophical and
linguistic in nature. For instance, a central argument in favor
of an idealized Material Implication is that <if A then C> can
not mean the same thing as neither <if and only if A then C>
nor <if A then possibly C>. They are indeed different
sentences. This ‘semantic occamism’ argument (Bennett,
2003) favors a difference in the meaning of <if A then C>
versus <if A then possibly C>. They are not the same
utterances. Hence they can not mean exactly the same, though
this does not imply that <if A then C> might not be
interpreted as <if A then possibly C>. Indeed, it will be
recalled that when there were TF<A_not-C> cases, the bulk
of our participants selected <if A then possibly C> and not <if
A then C> as the best description, and the other way round
when there we no TF cases.
An idealization still finds its source in reality. That is, as an
idealization, the core-meaning assumption has some
explanatory import. We have worked with the general
principle that when we approach the idealization, e.g., by
imposing contextual constraints that bring us nearer to the
idealized language game, we should observe behavior that
more closely approaches the strictures and implications of
that language game. That is, the comparative contrast
identifying <if A then C> as meaning something different
from <if A then possibly C> or <if and only if A then C> can
also steer people towards the MI interpretation. Schroyens
and Byrne (1998) observed, for instance, that when <if A then
C> is contrasted with <if and only if A then C>, people are
more likely to reason in accordance with a consequence of
this contrast, i.e., the consequence that with <if A then C>
there might be FT<not-A_C> situations in which <C> occurs

1459

without <A> being the case. Politzer (1981) observed a
similar contrast-induced increase of so-called material
implication patterns in the truth-table task. The effect of
asking participants to first complete the truth-questionnaire
similarly induced a comparative contrast between <if A then
C> and <if A then possibly C>. We accordingly observed that
more participants solved the sentence-probability task in
accordance with the presumed core meaning of <if A then
C>. Analogously, when logical validity is stressed by
explicating the notion of necessary inferences (vs. possible
inferences) and/or highlighting the hypothetical truth of
logical valid inferences, we see an increase in deductive
rationality (Schroyens et al., 2003).
The idealization hypothesis also grounded the present
research. First, the core-meaning principle makes an
abstraction of the implicit-model principle, by which people
initially only consider the TT<A_C> contingency and not the
false-antecedent contingencies. We used a possibility-based
truth-table task to prime consideration of false-antecedent
cases and accordingly observed a statistically significant
increase in material-implication interpretations akin to the
core-meaning. Second, the core-meaning assumption makes
an abstraction of people's capacity to deal with the paradoxes
of verification that follow from considering the implications
of what is possible vis-à-vis what is true. Experiment 2
showed that bypassing these complicating and complicated
idealizations effectively increases the likelihood of seeing
performance in accordance with Material Implication.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Flanders
(Belgium) Fund for Scientific Research (G.0320.05) and the
Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (NSERC 297517).

References

General summary. We have shown that people sometimes
have an interpretation of <if A then C> that corresponds to
the core meaning of the conditional in the model theory. This
vindicates the model theory (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002),
which explicitly claims that the MI interpretation is one of
many possible interpretations. Our findings show that any
theory of conditionals needs to specify a comprehension
theory that mirrors the highly flexible nature of our
interpretation vs. idealized meaning of “if”.
In conclusion, we should abandon the quest for ‘the’
interpretation of conditionals and the introduction of
theoretical oppositions about ‘the’ interpretation. Instead we
should pose research questions that allow us to comprehend
and model the flexible nature of the interpretational
processes, which any theory has to do. The idealizationhypothesis and the associated difference between meaning
and interpretation that is made by mental-model theorists has
shown to be a helpful guide in delineating conditions in
which people are more or less likely to demonstrate behavior
reflecting a particular interpretation.

Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J.-F. (1998). How can mental models
theory account for content effects in conditional reasoning?
A developmental perspective. Cognition, 67(3), 209-253.
Bennett, J. (2003). A philosophical guide to conditionals.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition., 29(2), 321-335.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If . New York:
Oxford University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Over, D., & Handley, S. J. (2005).
Suppositions, Extensionality, and Conditionals: A critique
of the mental model theory of Johnson-Laird & Byrne
(2002). Psychological Review, 12(4), 1040-1052.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002). Conditionals:
A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference.
Psychological Review, 109(4), 646-678.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of
conditionals: Conditional probabilities, mental models, and
personal utilities. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 29(4), 680-693.
Politzer, G. (1981). Differences in interpretation of
implication. American Journal of Psychology, 94(3), 461477
Schroyens, W., & Byrne, R. (1998). The role of a conditional
or bi-conditional interpretation in conditional reasoning
about ‘if (Psychological reports No. 242). Leuven:
University of Leuven. Laboratory of Experimental
Psychology.
Schroyens, W., & Schaeken, W. (2004). Guilt by association:
On iffy propositions and the proper treatment of mentalmodels theory. Current Psychology Letters 12(1).
http://cpl.revues.org/document411.html
Schroyens, W., Schaeken, W., & Handley, S. (2003). In
Search of Counter Examples: Deductive Rationality in
Human Reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 56A(7), 1129-1145.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance:
Communication and cognition. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

1460

