UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mathematical Models of Visual Category Learning Enhance fMRI Data Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4mx008br

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Nomura, Emi M.
Maddox, W. Todd
Reber, Paul J.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mathematical Models of Visual Category Learning Enhance fMRI Data Analysis
Emi M Nomura (e-nomura@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60201 USA

W Todd Maddox (maddox@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1 University Station
Austin, TX 78712 USA

Paul J Reber (preber@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60201 USA
Abstract

one learning system over another. However, this approach
presupposes that learning the categories only recruits the
operation of one system at a time. A key question is whether
the systems are independent or competitive.
Here we collected fMRI data from two groups performing
visual category learning in two different ways. The
underlying category structure of the to-be-learned categories
differed between groups so as to encourage one type of
strategy over another. Mathematical models of learning
were fit to the behavioral data to identify the specific
strategy each subject was using. Modeling identified
particularly good instances of strategy use, but also
demonstrated that some subjects used the sub-optimal
strategy regardless of their experimental group. We then
analyzed the fMRI data in two different ways. The first
grouped subjects according to their experimental group,
which assumed that the group assignment was sufficient to
elicit the appropriate learning strategy. The second regrouped the subjects according to their preferred strategy.
By looking selectively at subjects who best exhibited each
strategy, additional elements of the neural circuits
supporting each type of category learning were identified.
The results of these analyses demonstrate that models of
category learning can effectively guide fMRI data analysis.
Likewise, imaging can provide additional constraints to
existing models of categorization.

Models of categorization instantiate specific hypotheses
about psychological processes controlling behavior.
Neuroimaging provides a tool to visualize the neural
correlates of these same processes in human subjects. By
combining techniques, we can begin to make the connection
between behavior and neural activity. Here we collected fMRI
data using a category learning paradigm where subjects were
encouraged toward a particular strategy by the underlying
category structure. The application of mathematical models of
category learning to this behavioral data enabled the
organization of fMRI data according to the actual strategy
employed.
Keywords: categorization; modeling; neuroimaging

Categorization is a process by which the brain assigns
meaning to stimuli. Experience with these stimuli facilitates
the grouping of distinct items that may share similar
properties into categories, such as ‘cars’ or ‘birds.’ This
grouping is critical for rapidly and appropriately selecting
behavioral responses. While there are numerous categories
that we’ve already acquired over our lifetime, adults possess
the ability to acquire new categories. It is this learning
process that is under investigation here.
The study of categorization has a long history in cognitive
psychology, particularly in the domain of computational and
mathematical modeling. A variety of models exist that
support different theories about the cognitive operations
involved in categorization. These models are traditionally
tested by comparison to human behavioral data in an
attempt to understand the specific operations that contribute
to categorization.
Collecting functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data while subjects are undergoing category learning allows
us to test hypotheses about the involvement of neural
processes in theoretical models of categorization. Recently,
a number of different neuroimaging studies have
investigated the neural correlates of category learning in
different tasks. In general, the data suggests that there exist
multiple neural systems that can support category learning.
One approach aimed at dissociating these systems is to
present different category structures that preferentially elicit

Models of categorization
In the literature, models designed to capture category
learning behavior can be grouped into three general types:
exemplar, prototype and decision-boundary models.
Exemplar models of categorization (Medin and Schaffer
1978; Hintzman 1986; Nosofsky 1986) posit that people
represent categories by storing individual exemplars of the
category in memory. When encountering a novel item, their
classification decision depends on the similarity of that item
to every stored exemplar. Categorization relies upon
memory for these exemplars, which is presumably the same
memory that allows for the recognition of those exemplars
(Nosofsky 1991). One challenge to exemplar theory comes
from the performance of amnesic patients on a

539

categorization task. These patients have no memory for
individual stimuli, but retain the ability to categorize
(Knowlton and Squire 1993). Although this is taken by
some as evidence for multiple memory systems, others (eg.
Nosofsky and Zaki, 1998) have shown that a single-system
model can also account for this result. Our hypotheses rely
on the multiple systems framework, which is constrained by
known neuroanatomical connections. At this time, the single
system models have not incorporated a hypothesis about
how to connect to neuroanatomy so it is not yet possible to
compare predictions about functional neuroimaging data
across theories.
Prototype models (Posner and Keele 1968; Reed 1972;
Smith, Murray et al. 1997) maintain that a category
representation consists of a prototype of the trained
exemplars. A prototype is usually defined as corresponding
to the central tendency of the experienced stimuli. Novel
stimuli are then categorized according to their similarity to
this prototype. This differs from the exemplar models in that
one does not need to have seen the prototype of the category
to effectively learn, rather this information is accumulated
over training.
In decision-bound models (Ashby and Townsend 1986),
people make categorical decisions using a decision
boundary that divides a multidimensional psychological
space into category-response regions. Through experience,
the categorizer learns to associate a particular category label
with each region, and learning the categories amounts to
identifying the decision-boundary that separates the
categories. The mathematical models described here are
based on the decision-bound theory of categorization.

can be partitioned into 2 (or more) categories by decision
boundaries that can be linear or non-linear.
A linear boundary that segments the perceptual space
along one dimension (e.g., a horizontal or vertical boundary)
can be easily described by a verbal rule (Rule-based; RB).
In contrast, a decision boundary that does not fall along a
cardinal orientation requires the learner to integrate
information across the 2 dimensions in order to determine
category membership (Information-integration; II). These
two category structures (Figure 1), while existing in the
same perceptual space, require very distinct types of
learning strategies.

COVIS
One multiple systems model that provides a specific
hypothesis about the neural basis of RB and II
categorization is the COVIS model (COmpetition between
Verbal and Implicit Systems) proposed by Ashby (Ashby,
Alfonso-Reese et al. 1998). In this model, 2 learning
systems compete to provide the output response: an explicit,
rule-based system dependent upon working memory and
attention; and an implicit, procedural learning system. While
COVIS itself is not a DBT model, we can use DBT-based
mathematical models to test the theory. That is, models that
isolate RB and II behavior can shed light on a theory that
makes hypotheses about their specific neural correlates.
Evidence in favor of COVIS comes from a number of
sources, most recently neuroimaging.
Under the COVIS theory, the rule-based system learns
through a conscious process of rule generation and testing,
cognitive functions normally subserved by the frontal lobes.
Neuroimaging of rule-based tasks has shown consistent
activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), anterior cingulate
and head of the caudate (Rao, Bobholz et al. 1997;
Lombardi, Andreason et al. 1999; Filoteo, Maddox et al.
2005). The theory maintains that potential rules being tested
are stored in working memory and are either discarded or
retained according to the feedback. The structures within the
medial temporal lobe (MTL) may also support this type of
learning (Ashby and Valentin in press) by maintaining the
specific rule that distinguishes the categories. This could
effectively consist of memorizing a specific stimulus near
the decision boundary.
The implicit learning system in COVIS is hypothesized to
depend upon the posterior body and tail of the caudate
nucleus and its interconnections with posterior visual
cortical areas. Evidence supporting the important role of the
caudate in this system is based primarily on its
neurobiological properties. The spiny neurons in the tail of
the caudate receive projections from the visual cortical
neurons in TE (inferotemporal cortex) in a many-to-one
fashion (Wilson 1995). This massive convergence allows a
wide variety of complex information to be compressed to its
most basic representation, which is precisely the type of
process necessary for categorization.
While neurally inspired, the COVIS model makes several
strong predictions about the different behavioral

Decision-bound theory
A number of reports support DBT as an effective
description of visual category learning (Ashby and Gott
1988; Ashby and Maddox 1990; Ashby and Maddox 1992;
Maddox and Ashby 1993). Typically, the stimuli in these
experiments vary on 2 or more dimensions. For example, in
the current task the stimuli were sine wave grating that
varied in frequency (thickness of lines) and orientation of
lines. The two-dimensional perceptual space of the stimuli

Figure 1: (A) RB and (B) II category learning tasks. Each
point represents a distinct Gabor patch (sine-wave) stimulus
defined by orientation and frequency (thickness of lines). In
both stimulus sets, there are 2 categories (red and blue
points). RB categories are defined by a vertical boundary
(only frequency is relevant) and II categories by a diagonal
boundary (both dimensions are relevant). In both stimulus
sets there are examples of a stimulus from each category.

540

characteristics of RB and II category learning that have been
tested empirically. RB learning was disrupted more than II
learning by the simultaneous performance of either a
numerical Stroop (Waldron and Ashby 2001) or a sequential
memory scanning task (Maddox, Ashby et al. 2004). The
interfering tasks both rely on working memory and
attention, which emphasizes the importance of these
processes to the RB system. In contrast, manipulations of
the nature and timing of the feedback impair II category
learning more than RB (Maddox, Ashby et al. 2003;
Maddox and Ing 2005), supporting the observation that the
feedback-based dopamine learning signal is time dependent.
COVIS provides a strong theoretical basis for RB and II
category learning that we can use to interpret the
neuroimaging results.

trials in four 80 trial blocks. An equal number of fixationonly trials were pseudo-randomly interspersed between
stimulus trials to maximize the separability of the measured
hemodynamic response.
MRI acquisition
fMRI data were collected using a GE 3.0 T MRI scanner
equipped with a transit/receive head coil while participants
performed the categorization task. Whole-brain, gradientrecalled EPI (40 axial 3 mm slices, 0 gap) were collected
every 2 sec (TE= 25 ms; flip angle = 78°; 22 cm FOV;
64x64 acquisition matrix; resulting voxel size = 3.44 x 3.44
x 3 mm) for 326 volumes in each of 4 scans. Following the
functional runs, high-resolution, 3D MP-RAGE T1weighted scans (voxel size = 0.859 mm x 0.859 x 1 mm;
160 axial slices) were collected for each participant.

fMRI of RB and II category learning

Data analysis
Preprocessing and statistical analysis of the data were
performed with a collection of software based on AFNI
(Cox 1996). Functional images were co-registered through
time to correct for motion, normalized to MNI stereotactic
space, and spatially smoothed. Voxels were fit to a general
linear model function based on blocking stimuli to track
activity that changes as a result of processing specific trials.
Based on a priori hypotheses about the involvement of
specific neuroanatomical areas (Nomura, Maddox et al.
2007) we also employed a region of interest (ROI) analysis
in the hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus and the caudate
nucleus of the basal ganglia. Each individual’s ROIs were
aligned using the ROI alignment (ROI-AL) method
described in Stark and Okada (2003).

We implemented a visual category learning experiment in
the scanner to examine the neural correlates of RB and II
category learning. The application of mathematical models
of category learning to the behavioral data allowed for
characterization of the actual strategies being employed by
the participants. This modeling then allowed us to
reorganize the imaging data in a way that better
distinguished the RB and II category learning network
activity.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-three healthy, native English-speaking, right-handed
adults (10 males) were recruited from the Northwestern
University community. All participants gave informed
consent according to procedures approved by the
Northwestern University Institutional Review Board and
were compensated for their time. Participants were
randomly assigned to either the RB (N=11) or II (N=22)
group. Two II participants were eliminated due to poor
quality EPI data (due to subject movement). Twice as many
II subjects were recruited because initial model analyses
revealed a sub-set of II subjects using an RB strategy.

Mathematical models of RB and II learning
Following previous work (Maddox and Filoteo 2001), two
models derived from DBT were fit to each participant’s
responses to get a more detailed picture of how they were
categorizing the stimuli. For each participant, both the RB
and II models were fit separately to each of the four 80-trial
blocks. The RB model assumed a vertical decision boundary
(in stimulus space) reflecting the use of a rule dependent on
a single stimulus dimension (e.g. frequency). The II model
assumed a decision boundary with slope equal to 1.0 (i.e. a
diagonal line reflecting integration of both dimensions). In
each case, the model identified the placement of this
boundary and the perceptual noise parameter that best
accounted for the observed data.
Thus the models both had exactly two free parameters to
allow for direct comparison of fit. Best fitting parameter
values were identified by a downhill simplex method and
the corresponding fit value were used to sort the subject
runs.

Materials
Stimuli were circular sine wave gratings that varied in
spatial frequency and orientation (Maddox, Ashby et al.
2003). Participants were instructed to place each stimulus
into one of two categories and to try to learn these
categories over time based on the feedback given after each
trial. The category structures differed only in the location of
the optimal category boundary (Figure 1).
Procedure
On each trial, a fixation cross was presented for 750ms
followed by a single stimulus for 2 sec. During this time,
participants indicated to which category they judged the
stimulus belonged. Stimulus offset was followed by a 500
ms visual mask and then 750 ms of feedback (“Right”,
“Wrong”). Each participant received 320 categorization

Results and Discussion
Behavioral performance
For both groups of participants, performance was above
chance in all runs, and the groups demonstrated similar

541

learning curves. Learning across runs was reflected in a
significant linear trend (F (1, 29) = 24.716, p < 0.05). Mean
accuracy averaged across all 4 runs for the RB group was
77.3% (SE = 0.034) and for the II group was 66.6% (SE =
0.055). The RB group accuracy was significantly greater
than the II accuracy across runs (F (1,29) = 12.5, p< 0.05).
The performance difference between groups was an
expected consequence of matching the discriminability of
the categories.
Modeling behavior
Out of 31 subjects, there were 120 useable blocks of data.
The RB model best accounted for 78/120 runs and the II
model for 42/120 runs. After sorting the model fits from
high to low by group, we selected only the top third from
both to be included in the resulting fMRI analyses. In some
cases, subjects contributed more than one run to the
analysis. The accuracy of the best RB-fit runs was 66.0%
(SE = 1.21) and the best II-fit runs was 63.0% (SE = 1.14).
A color-coded schematic of the best fitting model per run
is shown in Figure 2. The results of the analysis revealed
that the RB subjects, in general were using an RB strategy
with the exception of RB subject #11. The II subjects were
more heterogeneous. Four out of 20 II subjects were fit
consistently with the II model, but five II subjects were fit
better with the RB than the II model across all runs. The
remaining II subject runs were split between either an RB or
II fit, suggesting these people were particularly prone to
strategy switching behavior. This model analysis was used
to sort the fMRI data in a way that better segregates RB and
II strategy use irrespective of the group assignment.

Figure 3: RB vs. II, correct vs. incorrect trials in the (A)
MTL and (B) Caudate ROIs. In the left anterior MTL,
successful RB categorization activity was greater than that
of the II group. In contrast, II successful categorization was
greater in the right posterior body of the caudate than RB
categorization activity.
that the activity patterns in these small volumes are
consistent with previous fMRI studies (Nomura, Maddox et
al. 2007) suggests that the activity was related to strategyuse.
An alternative interpretation to the dissociation between
successful categorization activity here is that the MTL and
caudate play differential roles in the processing of positive
and negative feedback. With the current design it is
impossible to dissociate the activity to the initial
categorization from the feedback-associated activity because
of the limitations of deconvolution, but hypotheses about
feedback processing will become important in future models
of categorization.

Figure 2: RB and II
model fits for RB
(top) and II subjects
(bottom). Fit values
were separated into
thirds with darker
hues (i.e. from pink to
red for RB fits)
indicating better fit.
RB fits are in warm
and II in cool colors.
The darkest hues were
included in the fMRI
analysis. White
blocks indicate data
loss due to subject
movement.

Models applied to fMRI data
Mathematical models of RB and II categorization
successfully identified subjects within a particular group
using a non-optimal strategy. In particular, the II group
contained a large number of subject runs that were better fit
with the RB model. This may explain in part the lack of
whole-brain group differences in the fMRI analysis above.
The models also identified blocks of trials in which a
subject was using a strategy particularly well. By examining
the functional activity associated with only the best fit runs,
we hoped to isolate activity associated with purely RB or II
category learning.
Figure 4A contrasts correct and incorrect trial activity
within the top 26 subject runs that were best fit by the RB
model. Activity during correct trials was observed in the left
anterior MTL and bilateral superior frontal cortex. Similar
MTL activity was also seen in the ROI analysis (Figure 3A)
using the non-modeled grouping of subjects. That the same
area was revealed in this model-based analysis of the same

fMRI analysis
Region-of-interest (ROI) analyses based on a priori
hypotheses in the MTL (Figure 3A) and caudate (Figure 3B)
revealed differential activity between groups during
successful categorization. Although performance differences
between the groups suggests differences in task difficulty,

542

Figure 4: Correct (red) vs. incorrect (blue) trials for (A) best
RB model fit runs and (B) best II model fit runs. All images
were thresholded at T>4, cluster>350mm3. When fMRI data
was grouped according to model-fit value, activity was
detected in areas consistent with the COVIS theory of
category learning.
data suggests that the best fit RB runs here may have been
driving the effect seen in the ROI. There were also several
areas that were more active for these RB-fit subjects when
they made an incorrect category judgment, particularly in
PFC and medial frontal cortex.
The pattern of activity elicited by correct and incorrect
trials suggests that these trials are associated with different
cognitive operations. According to COVIS, the RB system
generates and selects amongst a variety of rules based on the
feedback after each trial. The feedback received during
incorrect trials should be an important indication of when
the decision boundary needs updating. The data here
suggests that the inferior and medial PFC are associated
with updating the rule after receiving disconfirming
feedback whereas the MTL and frontal cortices are involved
with maintaining the appropriate rule.
This is one example where fMRI analysis can inform
models of categorization. Given two models that make
contrasting predictions about feedback processing, the
evidence shown here would support a model that assigns the
processing of positive and negative feedback to different
components of the hypothesized network.
Figure 4B shows the contrast of correct and incorrect
trials within the top 14 subject runs that were best fit by the
II model. During correct trials, we observed bilateral
caudate activity as well as an area in the left visual
association cortex. While activity in the caudate was
expected based on our ROI analysis, the visual cortical

activity was not present in the previous fMRI analysis. In II
category learning, the trials in which the subject responded
correctly are those in which it is particularly important to
link the category label with the appropriate region in
perceptual space. In COVIS, one of the hypothesized
functions of the caudate is to develop a category
representation through the association of activity in
posterior caudate with activity in visual association cortex.
By only examining functional activity in subjects that were
utilizing an II strategy, we’ve identified a component of this
II categorization network that was expected based on a
theoretical model.
A specific example of the efficacy of the model-fitting
method of identifying strategy independently of the imposed
category structure is shown in Figure 5. This data comes
from an II subject run that was best fit with the RB model.
This subject persisted in clearly using an RB strategy
(although still maintained 66.35% accuracy) in spite of
disconfirming feedback. Including this subject in the II
group analysis would not contribute to understanding the
neural correlates of II category learning. Of further note,
the pattern of functional activity observed during this run is
similar to that of the group of RB-modeled subjects (Figure
4A), i.e., the MTL and frontal activity for correct trials and
inferior PFC activity for incorrect trials. The methodology
of this analysis suggests that the possibility that future fMRI
endeavors may be able to make predictions of strategy use
based on neural correlates.

Figure 5: One II subject (#18, run 4) run that was best fit
with the RB model (left) and the corresponding contrast of
correct vs. incorrect trial activity (right). Plus signs indicate
the category membership of the stimuli whereas the circles
show the pattern of subject responses. Instances where
colors agree indicate correct responses and all others are
incorrect. The green line indicates the optimal decision
boundary and the black line the best fitting account of the
data according to the RB model.

Conclusion
The observed differences in functional activity in the MTL
and caudate ROIs suggest that the groups were segregated
enough to reveal distinct neural correlates of RB and II
category learning as seen previously (Nomura, Maddox et

543

al, 2007). That is, although modeling revealed that the II
group contained a portion of subjects better fit with an RB
model, the sensitive ROI analysis was still able to pull out
the activity related to II learning.
The results of the RB and II mathematical model-based
fMRI analyses revealed a collection of areas that were not
detected in the original fMRI analysis. In accordance with
the COVIS theory of category learning, the best fitting RB
runs were associated with activity in PFC and MTL and best
fitting II runs in caudate and posterior visual cortex. The
successful utilization of the model-fitting technique shown
here to isolate the most effective applications of RB and II
strategies suggests that this method in combination with
fMRI can be used to further identify the brain networks
supporting these processes. Development of a trial-by-trial
computational model that instantiates the competitive
interaction between the hypothesized RB and II networks is
underway and will enable even more specific analyses of the
fMRI data.

Lombardi, W. J., P. J. Andreason, et al. (1999). Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test performance following head injury:
dorsolateral fronto-striatal circuit activity predicts
perseveration. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 21(1): 2-16.
Maddox, W. T. & F. G. Ashby (1993). Comparing decision
bound and exemplar models of categorization. Percept
Psychophys 53(1): 49-70.
Maddox, W. T., F. G. Ashby, et al. (2003). Delayed
feedback effects on rule-based and informationintegration category learning. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem
Cogn 29(4): 650-62.
Maddox, W. T., F. G. Ashby, et al. (2004). Disrupting
feedback processing interferes with rule-based but not
information-integration category learning. Mem Cognit
32(4): 582-91.
Maddox, W. T. & J. V. Filoteo (2001). Striatal contributions
to category learning: quantitative modeling of simple
linear and complex nonlinear rule learning in patients
with Parkinson's disease. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 7(6):
710-27.
Maddox, W. T. & A. D. Ing (2005). Delayed feedback
disrupts the procedural-learning system but not the
hypothesis-testing system in perceptual category learning.
J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 31(1): 100-7.
Medin, D. L. & M. M. Schaffer (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review 5: 207-238.
Nomura, E. M., W. T. Maddox, et al. (2007). Neural
correlates of rule-based and information-integration visual
category learning. Cereb Cortex 17(1): 37-43.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 115: 39-57.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1991). Tests of an exemplar model for
relating perceptual classification and recognition memory.
J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 17(1): 3-27.
Posner, M. I. & S. W. Keele (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology 77:
353-363.
Rao, S. M., J. A. Bobholz, et al. (1997). Functional MRI
evidence for subcortical participation in conceptual
reasoning skills. Neuroreport 8(8): 1987-93.
Reed, S. K. (1972). Pattern recognition and categorization.
Cognitive Psychology 3: 382-407.
Smith, J. D., M. J. Murray, et al. (1997). Straight talk about
linear separability. Memory and Cognition 23: 659-680.
Stark, C. E. & Y. Okada (2003). Making memories without
trying: medial temporal lobe activity associated with
incidental memory formation during recognition. The
Journal of Neuroscience 23: 6748-53.
Waldron, E. M. & F. G. Ashby (2001). The effects of
concurrent task interference on category learning:
evidence for multiple category learning systems. Psychon
Bull Rev 8(1): 168-76.
Wilson, C. (1995). The contribution of cortical neurons to
the firing pattern of striatal spiny neurons. Cambridge,
MA, Bradford.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the funding sources
for this research: NIMH R01-MH58748 (PJR), Mechanisms
of Aging and Dementia Training Grant T32-AG020418
(EMN).

References
Ashby, F. G., L. A. Alfonso-Reese, et al. (1998). A
neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in
category learning. Psychol Rev 105(3): 442-81.
Ashby, F. G. & R. E. Gott (1988). Decision rules in the
perception and categorization of multidimensional
stimuli. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 14(1): 33-53.
Ashby, F. G. & W. T. Maddox (1990). Integrating
information from separable psychological dimensions. J
Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 16(3): 598-612.
Ashby, F. G. & W. T. Maddox (1992). Complex decision
rules in categorization: Contrasting novice and
experienced performance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance 18: 5071.
Ashby, F. G. & J. T. Townsend (1986). Varieties of
perceptual independence. Psychol Rev 93(2): 154-79.
Ashby, F. G. & V. V. Valentin (in press). Multiple systems
of perceptual category learning: theory and cognitive
tests. New York, Elsevier.
Cox, R. W. (1996). AFNI: software for analysis and
visualization of functional magnetic resonance
neuroimages. Comput Biomed Res 29(3): 162-73.
Filoteo, J. V., W. T. Maddox, et al. (2005). Cortical and
subcortical brain regions involved in rule-based category
learning. Neuroreport 16(2): 111-5.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a multipletrace memory model. Psychological Review 93: 411-428.
Knowlton, B. J. & L. R. Squire (1993). The learning of
categories: parallel brain systems for item memory and
category knowledge. Science 262(5140): 1747-9.

544

