UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Meaning Matters In Children's Plural Productions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27p6544r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Zapf, Jennifer A.
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Meaning Matters In Children’s Plural Productions
Jennifer A. Zapf (zapfj@uwgb.edu)
University of Wisconsin-Green Bay
Department of Psychology and Human Development
2420 Nicolet Drive, MAC C310, Green Bay, WI 54311, USA

Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Indiana University
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
1101 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA

Abstract
The English plural is about the number of individuals in a set
of like kinds. Two year old children use the plural but do
not do so in all obligatory contexts. The present report asks
whether the limitations on their use of the plural in any way
related to meaning. Experiment 1 elicited plural productions
from 2-year olds (n=26) for sets of size two and four and for
instances of basic level categories that were either similar or
identical. Children were much more likely to produce the
plural of these well known nouns when there were four rather
than two and when the instances were identical rather than
merely similar.
Experiment 2 examined spontaneous
productions of parents speech to two-year-olds (n = 16).
They showed a comparable similarity effect, but not a
number effect. The results provide new evidence on
children’s acquisition of the English plural, showing that
children’s early productions are not just limited by
knowledge of the noun and its plural form but also is limited
by properties of the labeled sets in ways that are relevant to
the underlying meaning of the plural.

Keywords: category knowledge; language learning;
language acquisition; morphology; production

Introduction
Two-year-old children learning English spontaneously
produce the plural forms of nouns, using them to label
sets containing multiple instances of the same kind.
However, they do not use the plural in all required
contexts (Cazden, 1968; Mervis & Johnson, 1991; Brown,
1973; Berko, 1958; Clark & Nikitina, in press). Past
explanations of this limited productivity have focused on
morphological rules, exceptions to those rules, and
phonological constraints (Marcus et al., 1992; Marchman,
Plunkett, & Goodman, 1997; Winitz, Sanders & Kort,
1981). The meaning of the plural, however, has not been
studied in relation to its growing productivity. This report
presents new evidence that meaning matters.
Formally, the English plural partitions sets into those
with precisely one individual versus those with more than
one. Although this seems natural to mature English

speakers, other meaning distinctions are possible. For
example, the Russian plural distinguishes sets of one, sets
with few members, and sets with many members. Many
Indo-European languages have a separate plural form for
sets of exactly size two. Sursurunga, an Austrongesian
language, has five plural forms that are dependent on the
number of instances in the referred to set. Other
languages such as Japanese have no plural but quantify
sets through the use of quantifiers that depend on the kind
of thing in the set. These cross-linguistic differences
mean that learners have to figure out the relevant meaning
categories for their language. This paper examines two
factors that might be relevant to young children’s figuring
out the meaning of the English plural: the similarity of the
instances in the set and the number of things in a set.

Hypothesis 1: Similarity matters.
The plural is about the number of things in a set and thus
requires that children think about the individuals as
forming a coherent group, and not just as unrelated
distinct things. This should be easier if those things are
highly similar (e.g. Markman & Gentner, 2005; Mix,
Huttenlocher, & Levine, 2002). Thus, although the plural
forms of English count nouns can be used to label sets of
highly similar things and sets of very different things (e.g.
poodles, dogs, animals, and things), for young children
the similarity of the instances in the to-be-labeled set may
be critical. Accordingly, Experiment 1 presented children
with sets that could be labeled by the same basic-level
noun (e.g. “dog”) but that varied in the similarity of the
presented instances. Are two-year-old children more
likely to use the plural to label four identical dogs, for
example, than to label four individually recognizable but
distinct dogs?

Hypothesis 2: Number matters.
Considerable research suggests that infants and toddlers
accurately and categorically distinguish small set sizes
such as one versus two versus three (e.g., Schaeffer,
Eggleston, and Scott, 1974; Kouider, et al., 2006), and

743

treat sets of one and also sets of two as unique categories
(e.g., Wynn, 1990). As Barner and Snedeker (2005)
recently suggested, this sophisticated and categorical
apprehension of small numerosities could present
problems for learning the English plural in that the plural
requires children to treat sets of two, four, and one
hundred as equivalent. In light of this, two opposing
versions of the “number matters” hypothesis make
developmental sense.
First, young learners could
preferentially attach the plural to sets of two, since these
are well-differentiated from sets of one and easily
quantifiable. If so, children might use the plural first for
pairs of things before they use the plural for larger set
sizes. Alternatively, if children first understand the plural
as being about many instances, and if they understand
many as distinct from both one and two, they may be
most likely to use the plural when there are more things
than just two in the set. This is also tested in Experiment
1. Are young children more likely to use the plural to
label two dogs than four, or perhaps, are they more likely
to use the plural to label four dogs than to label just two?

preliminary study, 28 children (mean age = 26 months)
who did not participate in the main experiment indicated a
named object in a three-choice forced-choice task. The
four unique instances selected for each category were
recognized by at least 90% of these children.
The four different instances formed the Similar-Instance
P set size four. Two unique instances were randomly
selected to form the Similar-Instance P set size two. Two
or four identical replications of one instance were used to
form the Identical-Instance P sets. Different unique
instances were selected to form these Identical-Instance P
sets for different children so that across children
performance on identical sets could not be due to the
particular instance used.

(a)

Experiment 1
The experimental task, borrowed from Johnston, Smith,
and Box (1997), elicits productions by asking children to
describe things to a blind-folded teddy bear. In the
present version, the child was presented on each trial with
an array of objects as illustrated in Figure 1. Each array
included two sets: a set of one (S Set) and a set of more
than one (P set). The child’s task was to tell the bear “to
get” one of the sets. On some trials, this was the S set and
so a likely word to indicate that set would be the singular
basic-level category term (e.g. “tree”). On the critical test
trials the target set was the P set, potentially generating a
plural noun (e.g. “pigs”). The size of the P set (two or
four) and the similarity of instances within the P set
(identical versus merely similar) was varied.

(b)

(c)

Method
Participants
Participants were 34 children between 23 and 30 months
of age (mean age = 26 months). They were assigned
randomly to the two between-subjects conditions, P set
size of two and P set size of four.
Stimuli and Design
Four unique three-dimensional instances (varying from 9
to 25 cm on the longest dimension) were selected from
the following categories: dogs, flowers, monkeys, turtles,
babies, birds, spoons, planes, boats, forks, cows, cars,
hats, keys, dolphins, horses, trucks, bears, pigs, bunnies,
bottles, crayons, giraffes, and books. These were chosen
from a preliminary study such that all instances were
readily recognizable by two-year-old children. In that

(d)
Figure 1: Sample stimuli sets from Experiment 1: (a) two
identical dogs, (b) two similar dogs, (c) four identical
dogs, and (d) four similar dogs. In the placement of
objects during the experiment, the position of the target
was counter-balanced.

744

Procedure
To begin a trial, the experimenter placed an S set and a P
set on the table. The child was allowed to play with the
objects for fifteen seconds to minimize subsequent
choices based on toy preferences. The experimenter then
arranged the objects into the two segregated sets (P and S)
and placed the blindfold over Teddy’s eyes. The child
was reminded that Teddy could not see but could hear.
The experimenter then told the child, “Tell Teddy to get
___” at which time the experimenter gestured to the S set
or the P set. After the child told Teddy what to “get,” the
experimenter took the blindfold off and Teddy “got” what
the child said. On each trial, Teddy retrieved whatever
the child verbally specified. If the child said nothing or
something ambiguous (e.g. “that”) the question was
repeated once and if the child still did not respond or said
something that did not unambiguously indicate one set,
the experimenter went on to the next trial without Teddy
retrieving anything. If the child used the singular form
when a plural was called for, Teddy “got” one instance.
No other feedback of any kind was given.
The session began with “warm up” trials in which the
experimenter demonstrated the task twice (once indicating
an S set and once a P set) and had the parent perform the
task and then had the child immediately imitate the
parent. Once these two “warm up” trials were complete,
the ten experimental trials began.
On two of the trials the experimenter targeted the S set
and on eight of the trials she targeted the P set. On half
the P set trials the instances in the set were similar and on
half they were identical. The identical and similar trials
were blocked such that half the children received the
identical trials first and the similar trials second and half
received the similar trials first and the identical trials
second. Size of the P set was two or four and varied
between subjects. No child saw instances of the same
basic-level category more than once.
Results and Discussion
Children primarily labeled the sets with basic level
category nouns, either in the plural or singular form,
doing so on 73% of trials of the P sets and on 76% of the
S sets (here only one child on one trial ever used a plural
form). The frequency of basic noun responses (plural
plus singular) did not differ for the P sets and S sets, t(33)
= -1.192, p = .24, indicating that children were equally
able to recognize the presented instances of these
categories when presented as a single individual or in sets
of multiple instances.
On the critical P set trials, children used the plural 51%
of the time, using the singular form 22% of the time.
They also sometimes said nothing (26%) , rarely, they
used some alternative expression might be construed as
correct (e.g. “these”) less than 1% of the time. The
number of plural productions on P trials were submitted
to a 2(set size) x 2 (order – similar/identical first) x 2

(similarity) ANOVA with similarity as a within subject
factor. The analysis yielded three main effects: (1)
number, F(1, 30) = 5.36, p < .03, (2) order (identity trials
first or second), F(1, 30) = 7.24, p < .02, and similarity,
F(1, 30) = 4.58, p < .05. As is evident in Table 1,
children produced the plural more often when labeling a
set of four than a set of two and more often when labeling
identical rather than similar instances. Set size and set
composition thus matter to children’s early plural
productions. For young children, sets with four identical
items are a more potent elicitor of the plural than are sets
with two; and sets of identical things are a more potent
elicitor of the plural than are sets of similar things.
Table 1: Percent of children’s productions occurring in
the plural form for target P sets in Experiment 1
Set
Identical
Size Order
Trials
2 Similar trials first
.18
Identical trials first
.60
Overall
.39
4

Similar trials first
Identical trials first
Overall

.60
.85
.73

Similar
Trials
.21
.50
.36
.40
.70
.55

The effect of order was unexpected and dramatic. When
children were asked to label sets of size two, they more
frequently produced the plural for sets with identical
instances and for sets with similar instances when the
experiment began with the identity trials. However, they
much less frequently produced the plural – for the identity
sets and the similar sets when the experiment began with
the similar trials. This same pattern was obtained for set
size four. It is as if first seeing multiple identical
instances directed attention to the set and its quantity and
this generalized to the Similar-Instance sets. In contrast,
first seeing sets composed of basic-level category
instances that varied in their individual properties seems
to have directed attention away from the set as a whole
yielding fewer plural productions even on subsequent sets
containing identical things. One possibility is that this
order effect may be the result of progressive alignment in
which the identical items give rise to a strong sense of
plurality and this, then, is carried over to the set of similar
items (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Markman & Gentner,
1993).
These results indicate that children’s early productions
of the plural form depend on both the similarity and
number of items in a basic-level noun category. These
are new findings about the early use of the plural and
raise many questions about the relevant underlying
knowledge and processes. Before considering these
issues, Experiment 2 addresses a pertinent question.

745

When parents talk about objects to their two-year-old
children, do they show a similar pattern: increased plural
productions for sets of identical rather than similar things
and for sets of four rather than two?

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Participants were sixteen parents of two year olds (mean
age = 26 months), none of whom had participated in
Experiment 1. They were randomly assigned to two
between-subjects conditions, P set size of two and P set
size of four.
Procedure
Stimuli sets, trials, and design were the same as in
Experiment 1; however the task and instructions differed.
On each trial, parent and child dyads were given an S set
and a P set. The parent was asked to play with and talk
about these objects with their children. Each trial lasted
approximately thirty seconds. There were no warm up
trials, no teddy bear, no queries from the experimenter,
and no mention that the experiment had to do with how
objects were labeled or the plural.
Results and Discussion
We counted the number of singular and plural nouns used
by parents to refer to the P set items. These scores were
submitted to a 2(set size) x 2(order-similar/identical first)
x 2(similarity) ANOVA. The analyses yielded only a
main effect of similarity, F(1, 12) = 16.85, p < .01. The
interaction between set size and similarity approached
significance, F(1, 12) = 3.92, p = .07. As shown in Table
2, parents were equally likely to use the plural to refer to
sets of two versus four. However, whereas they often
used the plural to refer to multiple identical instances,
they rarely used the plural when talking about nonidentical instances of the same category, and this was
somewhat (though not reliably) more likely for sets of
four things than for sets of two similar things.
Table 2: Frequency of parents’ productions occurring in
the plural form for target P sets in Experiment 2
Set Size Identical Trials
2
8.6
4
9.8

Similar Trials Total
6.8
15.4
3.9
13.7

General Discussion
The present results indicate that children’s early use of the
plural is limited in part by the properties of the sets being
labeled. Two year olds were more likely to use the plural
when the multiple instances of a category were identical

rather than merely similar and when there were four
rather than two instances. The English plural marks sets
of multiple instances of like kinds, and thus similarity and
number are relevant dimensions of meaning.
Both young children’s plural productions and their
parents’ plural productions depended on the similarity of
the multiple instances to each other. Thus, the same
psychological processes may underlie this effect at both
developmental levels. One likely key factor is that people
typically attend to (and thus talk about) the differences
among otherwise similar things, a bias that has been
documented in a variety of domains from perception, to
similarity judgment, to learning adjectives (Garner &
Sutliff, 1974; Tversky & Gati, 2004; Waxman & Braun
(2005); Sandhofer & Smith, 2004). In this way, the early
similarity limitation on children’s plural productions may
reflect fundamental psychological processes as to when
things should be treated as equivalent members of the
same class or as distinct things. Under this view, these
effects of similarity on plural production could
nonetheless be viewed as principally reflecting pragmatic
issues in the use of the plural. This surely is the case for
adults who know that a set of four individually distinct
dogs is called dogs even though in spontaneous speech
they prefer to talk not about the set but the individuals. Is
this also the case for children? This is less clear since
their task was not spontaneous production; instead they
were placed in a task that demanded a label for the set as
a whole – a label they were better able to provide when
the items were identical rather than when they were
merely similar.
At the same time, this effect of similarity may also be
revealing as to the nature of the conceptual work that
underlies the acquisition of the plural. The plural requires
that children represent the elements in a set in two ways,
as discrete individuals that therefore can be counted and
also as members of a single set that is being quantified.
Such dual representations are known to be particularly
difficult for two year olds (see DeLoache & Sharon, 2005;
Mix, 2002). For young children, and perhaps also for
adults, there may be a psychological tension between
conceptualizing
individuals
and
simultaneously
conceptualizing them as members of a unified set. The
former may be fostered by any factor that separates the
individuals, such as non-overlapping boundaries, space,
time, and perceptual differences (see Kellman & Shipley,
1992 and Barner & Snedeker, 2005 for relevant
discussions and data). The second may be helped by
factors, such as similarity, that highlight membership in a
single nameable set. The experimental study of the
interaction of these factors as a function of development
would be useful to a deeper understanding of the
conceptual underpinnings of the acquisition of the plural.
More plural productions for sets of size four than sets of
size two characterizes two year olds’ productions but not
those of their parents. Past research on early number

746

concepts provides ample evidence that infants and young
children quantify sets of size two (e.g, Wynn, 1990).
Thus deficiencies in this regard seem an unlikely
explanation of the observed pattern. Indeed, as Barner
and Snedeker (2005) proposed, children’s considerable
knowledge about and categorical apprehension of the
numerosity of small set sizes could limit their early
understanding of the plural. One possibility is that
children initially quantify sets as “one,” “two,” “three,”
and “more” (see Gelman & Gallistel, 1978; Ginsburg &
Opper, 1988; Wynn, 1990) and as a consequence have the
English plural more strongly linked to larger set sizes than
to “two” or “three.” A key question for future research is
whether it is specifically the link between the plural and
“two” (and perhaps three) that is dampened or whether
the plural is perhaps graded with respect to number for
young children and thus generally stronger for larger than
smaller numbers. The latter effect would be consistent
with evidence on children’s acquisition of dimensional
terms such as “big” and “little” which are often first
understood as applied to extreme values (e.g., Sera &
Smith, 1987; Smith, Cooney, & McCord, 1986).
In conclusion, the results provide new evidence on
children’s acquisition of the English plural, showing that
children’s early productions are not just limited by
knowledge of the noun and its plural form (Marcus et al.,
1992) but also is limited by properties of the labeled sets
in ways that are relevant to the underlying meaning of the
plural. From the present results, the key conceptual issues
being worked out by children as they learn the plural
appear to be: (1) the construal of instances both as
individuals and as members of a set and (2) the formation
of a category of “more than one” that includes already
distinguished number categories such as “two.”

References
Barner, D. & Snedeker, J. (2005). Quantity judgments
and individuation: Evidence that mass nouns count.
Cognition, 97(1), 41-66.
Berko, Jean (1958). The child’s learning of English
morphology. Word, 14, 150-177.
Brown, Roger. (1973). A First Language: The Early
Stages. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cazden, Courtney B. (1968). The acquisition of noun
and verb inflections. Child Development, 39, 433-448.
Clark, E. V. & Nikitina, T. (in press) One vs. more than
one: Antecedents to plurality in early language
acquisition. Linguistics.
DeLoache, J. S. & Sharon, R. (2005). Symbols and
similarity: You can get too much of a good thing.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 6(1), 33-49.
Garner, W. R. & Sutliff, D. (1974). The effect of
goodness on encoding time in visual pattern
discrimination. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(3),
426-430.

Gelman, R., & Gallistel, C. R. (1978). The child’s
understanding of number. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Ginsburg, H.P. & Opper, S. (1988). Piaget's Theory of
Intellectual Development. (3rd Ed.) Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Johnston, J. R., Smith, L. B., & Box, P. (1997).
Cognition and communication: Referential strategies
used by preschoolers with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
40(5), 964-974.
Kellman, P. J. & Shipley, T. F. (1992). Perceiving
objects across gaps in space and time.
Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 1(6), 193-199.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational
similarity. Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Kouier, S., Halberda, J., Wood, J., & Carey, S. (2006).
Acquisition of English number marking: The singularplural distinction.
Language Learning and Development, 2(1), 1-25.
Marchman, V. A., Plunkett, K, & Goodman, J. (1997).
Overregularization in English plural and past tense
inflectional morphology: A response to Marcus (1995).
Journal of Child Language, 24(3), 767-779.
Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M.,
Rosen, T. J., and Xu, F.. (1992). Overregularization in
Language Acquisition. (Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development). 57 (4, Serial No. 228).
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (2005). Nonintentional
similarity processing. In R. R. Hassin, J. S. Uleman & J.
A. Bargh (Eds.), The New Unconscious. (pp. 107-137).
Oxford University Press, New York, NY
Mervis, Carolyn B. & Johnson, Kathy E. Acquisition of
the plural morpheme: A case study. Developmental
Psychology, 27, 222-235.
Mix, K. S. (2002). The construction of number concepts.
Cognitive Development. Special Issue: Constructivism
today, 17, 1345-1363.
Mix, K. S., Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S. C. (2002).
Quantitative Development in Infancy and Early
Childhood. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Sandhofer, C. M. & Smith, L. B. (2004). Perceptual
complexity and form class cues in novel word extension
tasks: How 4-year-old children interpret adjectives and
count nouns. Developmental Science, 7(3), 378-388.
Schaeffer, B., Eggleston, V.H., & Scott, J. L. (1974).
Number development in young children. Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 57-379.
Sera, M. & Smith, L. B. (1987). Big and little:
“Nominal” and relative uses. Cognitive Development,
2(2), 89-111.

747

Smith, L. B., Cooney, N. J., & McCord, C. (1986). What
is “high”? The development of reference points for
“high” and “low”. Child Development, 57(3), 583-602.
Tversky, A., & Gati, I. (2004). Studies of similarity. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA: US.
Waxman, S. & Braun, I. (2005). Consistent (but not
variable names as invitations to form object categories:
New evidence from 12-month-old infants. Cognition,
95(3), B59-B68.
Winitz, H., Sanders, R., & Kort, J.
(1981).
Comprehension and production of the /schwa z/ Plural
allomorph. Journal of Psycholinguisitic Research,
10(3), 259-271.

Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s understanding of counting.
Cognition, 36, 155-193.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a National Institute of
Mental Health grant (R01 MH60200). The first author
was supported by a National Institute of Mental Health
grant (T32 HD 07475). We thank Jennifer Benson,
Elizabeth Dahlberg, Leah Dudderar, Alex Lavallo, and
McKenzie Skipper for assisting in data collection.

748

