UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Measuring Mathematic Formula Writing Competence: An Application of Graphical Protocol
Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9h93b0fr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Cheng, Peter C.H.
Rojas-Anaya, Hector

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Measuring Mathematic Formula Writing Competence:
An Application of Graphical Protocol Analysis
Peter C-H. Cheng (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
Hector Rojas-Anaya (h.rojas@sussex.ac.uk)
Representation and Cognition Research Group
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9QH, UK
Abstract

those studies participants memorised simple geometrical
patterns, sequences of numbers or word phrases. The stimuli were created with predetermined structure and the specific stimuli learning procedures ensured the participants
possessed chunks with those structures. A pause duration
for a given graphical element is the time between the lifting
of the pen at the end of the previous element and the placing
of the pen to begin the given element. During the graphical
production the pattern of pauses reflects the induced chunk
structure. This temporal chunk signal is apparent in data for
individual participants doing a single task/trial. Meaningful
patterns can be found without the need to aggregate data
over trials and participants. The strength and robustness of
the temporal chunk signal suggests that it has the potential
to be the basis for methods to probe the structure of chunks
when they are not known a priori.
Three different ranges of pause durations can be distinguished: long pauses typically indicate the inter-chunk recall and preparation to write a new chunk (L2); medium
length pauses corresponding to the intra-chunk production
of sub-chunks that are symbols within a chunk (L1); short
pauses occur with strokes within a particular symbol (L0),
such as the second line of a ‘=’ sign. In the previous study
with the drawing of simple geometric objects it was found
that L1≈410 ms and L2≈620 ms (Cheng, McFadzean &
Copeland, 2001). For the writing of simple number sequences L1≈280 ms and L2≈440 ms (Cheng & RojasAnaya, 2005). For familiar and unfamiliar word phrases
L1≈270 ms and L2≈400 ms (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2006).
The similarity between the pairs of times for the written
tasks is noteworthy. One possible explanation for the longer
pauses with the drawing tasks is the mode of graphical production used, i.e. drawing versus writing. Another explanation is a task difference, as the drawing of geometric objects
was cued by names of the object whereas the production of
the written sequences was through direct recall. Hence, the
greater duration, particularly for L1, may be due to the extra
step of retrieving the geometric pattern into working memory. The implication is that specific differences in the information processing steps needed for particular forms of
graphical production may results in diagnostically useful
differences in the inter- and intra-chunk pause durations,
which could be identified by GPA.
The overall goal of the present study was to demonstrate and extend the utility of GPA. It had three related
aims. First, it investigated the copying of meaningful
mathematical formulas rather than the production of arbi-

Graphical protocol analysis (GPA) is a novel method for
studying chunk-based cognitive performance using semiautomated analysis of a temporal chunk signal in writing protocols. This study applies GPA to the writing of mathematical equations by participants with different levels of expertise.
Multiple levels of competence can be distinguished on a single individual and single task basis.
Keywords: chunks, graphical protocol analysis, noviceexpertise difference, mathematical formulas.

Introduction
Chunking is a key theoretical concept in Cognitive Science.
It is well understood that temporal patterns in behaviour
may reveal the structure of chunks in memory (e.g., McLean
& Gregg, 1967; Egan & Schwartz, 1979; Chase & Simon,).
In particular, when a series of actions are executed the duration of the pause before a given action is typically taken to
be indicative of the amount of processing required to produce the output, with longer pauses indicating boundaries
between different chunks in memory. Such patterns of such
pauses can be a rich and valuable source of evidence to address many issues in cognitive science. However, the use of
this temporal signal is hampered by the laboriousness of
extracting and analysing pause data and the theoretical uncertainties of interpreting such data with respect to complex
task contexts.
The study reported here is a further step in an ongoing
research programme that is attempting to make the extraction and interpretation of such temporal chunking signals
more practical and reliable. The programme is developing
Graphical Protocol Analysis (GPA) as a method to identify
the structure of chunks in an individual’s memory by analysing the processes of writing and drawing. The potential
benefits of GPA include: the use of modern, economical,
simple to use graphics tablet technology; raw data that is
rich (hi-frequency), accurate and precise; automatic initial
extraction, analysis and coding of digital behaviour protocols by computer (although current tools are research prototypes); the capture and analysis of continuous extended behaviour sequences encompassing multiple chunks; the use
of relatively naturalistic tasks even in an experimental context.
Our previous work on GPA has demonstrated the existence of a strong and robust temporal signal that reveals the
structure of chunks in memory (Cheng, McFadzean &
Copeland, 2001; Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2005, 2006). In
869

Table 1. Target formulas
Group

Name

Standard formulas

Quadratic solution

1

Voltage divider

2

Quadratic

5

Cubic-1

7

Cubic-2

8

Bernoulli’s Eq. 1

3

Bernoulli’s Eq. 2

4

Jumbled quadratic

6

Cubic error 1

7

Cubic error 2

9

Cubic expansion

Cubic exp. 1/3
Cubic exp. 2/3
Cubic exp. 3/3

10
11
12

Cubic expansion error

Cubic exp. error 1/3
Cubic exp. error 2/3
Cubic exp. error 3/3

13
14
15

Bernoulli

Errors

Formulas

trary patterns or number/word sequences. Is the temporal
chunk signal strong and robust in this context? Copying
formulas presents a new challenge for GPA. They have
greater spatial and typographical complexity. Participants
with different levels of experience may chunk the formulas
in different ways and may even adopt quite different task
strategies. Copying not only involves graphical production
but also the initial reading and encoding of the stimuli.
Thus, patterns that correspond to a temporal chunk signal
could be masked by these perturbing factors.
Second, the study tested whether the temporal chunk
signal can be used to distinguish individuals with different
levels of expertise or competency in writing such formulas.
Can such differences be reliably shown at the level of single
participants?
The third aim of the study was to propose and evaluate
two different measures of individual competency/expertise
based on the temporal chunk signal. Such measures are
needed for GPA to be able to assess participant performance
in different tasks when the structure of chunks is not known
a priori, as would normally be the case and in contrast to
our previous demonstration studies. The measures exploit
the finding that inter-chunk pauses are longer than intrachunk pauses and take into account individual differences in

Task
order

drawing and writing behaviours that are apparent as variable
L1 and L2 durations across individuals. Hence, both measures use an estimate of L1 for each participant as a baseline
to individually calibrate the measures. The baseline was
obtained from the analysis of each participant writing their
own name on the presumption that it is one of the most
highly practiced things they write (see below). The first of
the two measures, Long Pause Count (LPC) is simply the
number of pauses, which are greater than some long-pausethreshold, in proportion to the number of between symbol
pauses (i.e., not including L0 pauses). The long-pausethreshold is equal to some multiple of the baseline, where
the multiplier of the baseline was investigated as part of the
study. The second measure is the Long Pause Duration
(LPD), which is the mean for all symbols of the ratio of the
difference between the pause duration and baseline to the
baseline itself.
On first sight LPD may seem the best measure because
it takes into account the actual magnitude of the pauses,
whereas LPC just considers the number of long pauses.
However, given the range of possible perturbing factors,
that may adversely affect the chunk signal, as mentioned
above, LPD may be noisy and less reliable than LPC.
Hence, it was valuable to consider both measures.
It was predicted that the more competent participants
will use fewer large chunks to complete the tasks, so they
will have smaller numbers of long pauses and hence the
LPC score will decrease with increasing experience. It was
also predicted that the LPD score will also follow a similar
pattern, because the mean duration of pauses will also increase with greater numbers of longer pauses.

Fig. 1. Quadratic Solution written by P3
870

#

(

#

(

a

a

+

b

+

b

)

)

^2

^2

=

a

=

a

^2

^2

+

+

2

2

a

a

b

b

+

+

b ^2

b ^2

Fig. 2. Temporal protocol graphs for copying the quadratic solution: (a) P1, top; (b) P4, bottom

#

N

N

N

N

N

N

S

S

S

S

S

S

- S

S

S

S

S

Fig. 3. Sample temporal protocol graphs for P2 writing their name
written at the beginning of each equation to ensure that the
writing process was well underway before the first element.
The order of copying is given in the ‘task order’ column.
A standard graphics tablet (Wacom Intuos2®) and specially designed drawing/writing analysis software, TRACE
(Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2004), were used to record the writing actions, to extract the pen positions and times, and to
analyse the duration of pauses between drawn elements. Fig.
1 shows a snapshot from the TRACE graphical recording
and analysis program, for the writing of the Quadratic solution. The small circles superimposed on each written symbol
indicate the beginning and end of the production of elements
in those symbols as the pen touches or leaves the paper.
The lines between the elements indicate transitions where

Method
Four volunteer participants, at the University of Sussex,
were chosen to represent four distinct levels of experience in
writing mathematical formulas. They were: a porter (P1)
with high school level education; two postgraduate students,
one in anthropology (P2) and one in electrical engineering
(P3); an experienced lecturer in electrical engineering (P4).
At the beginning of the experiment the participants
wrote their first name and family name. Table 1 shows the
16 targets formulas, which are arranged into five groups.
They were presented to the participants and after brief familiarization (≈2 minutes) they were asked to copy them
into blank boxes underneath each equation. A hash (#) was
871

LPC threshold

the pen is off the paper. Note the two pairs of dots on the
‘4’ as it was written in two parts.

The LPC measure counts of the number of long pauses as a
proportion of the total number of pauses for symbols. A
pause is taken to be long if its magnitude above the individuals’ baseline is greater than some threshold. Consider
possible thresholds that are multiples of the baseline. Fig. 4
shows values of LPC for the participants writing their
names using different integer multiples of the baseline for
the threshold. Given that participants are highly experienced at writing their own name, presumably at ceiling, a
multiple of the baseline above three is not suitable, as the
LPC values are varied. Some multiple of baseline below
two are also not appropriate, because LPC values are too
high, suggesting that about two in three pauses are long,
even though each part of the participants’ names have about
6 letters. A threshold of three times the baseline, rather than
the two, is chosen as this will be more conservative in its
classifying of pauses as long.

Results
Examples of protocol graphs
Fig. 2 shows graphs of the pause durations for the writing of
the quadratic solution, by the P1 and P4 who have the least
and most formula writing competence. The pattern of
pauses suggest that P4 writes this formula as small number
of chunks but that P1 is treating it as a large number of elements. Inspection of the graphs for all of the tasks and participant reveals similar patterns. This suggests that the temporal signal is manifest in the copying of formulas and different levels of competence may be distinguished.

Name and L1 base-line
Fig. 3 shows the pauses for each mark made by P3 as he
wrote his name. The letters on the x-axis correspond to
each letter of P3’s given name (N) and hyphenated surname
(S). Distinct peaks are apparent for the first letter of each
part of the name. The pauses for the other letters are much
shorter and approximately equal. Pauses for stokes within a
letter are even shorter. All participants show remarkably
similar patterns of pauses for writing their names with a
clear single chunk for each part of their name. This is in
marked contrast to the clear differences between participants
in overall patterns in the graphs for the writing of formulas,
(e.g., cf. Figs. 2a and b).
Hence, the durations of the pauses for each letter within
a name, which are intra-chunk L1 pauses, will be used as the
baseline for each participant. The median L1 pauses are
P1=109, P2=109, P3=94 and P4=148 ms.

Comparison of LPC and LPD measures
Figs. 5 and 6 show the LPD and LPC scores for each participant on each copying task. The figures also include the
respective values for the name writing. The data is presented in order of groups from Table 1. Inspecting the
graphs reveals that the overall order of increasing LPD and
LPC scores is P4<P3<P2<P1, consistent with the prediction
that they should decrease with greater competency. As the
data corresponds to single participants on single tasks, estimates of the significance of the pattern can be obtained by
using the Binomial distribution as a model. The most severe case of a participant’s score being out of order is P1 on
the LPC measure, Fig 6, in which there are nine cases out of
16 where the value is not the greatest. For a given task the
probability that a score for a participant is in the expected
position may be taken to be p=0.25 (e.g., P1 is the highest).
Considering all the copying tasks, the probability that nine
or more out of 16 cases has P1 in the expected rank position
is P=.007. Given that there are three other participants each
with better matches of scores to expect rank order, it is unlikely that the overall pattern is due to chance.
Comparing the patterns of participants LPC and LPD
scores across the tasks, the LPD measure more consistently
ranks the participants in order of expected competency. The
mean LPD for participants P1-P4 overall 16 tasks are 4.70,
3.18, 1.97 and 0.54, respectively. Similarly, the values for
just the five standard formulae are 4.24, 3.01, 1.63 and 0.69,
respectively. The LPD scores do not only distinguish the
relative order participants satisfactorily, but the magnitudes
of their scores are quite distinct.
Adding one to the LPD values and multiplying the results by the respective P1-P4 participants’ baselines gives
median pause durations, which are 632, 404, 228 and 223
ms, respectively.

Performance on each group of tasks
The consideration of the groups of tasks (Table 1) will focus
solely on LPD scores, Fig 5. The first set of five standard

Fig. 4. Thresholds for LPC for writing of names
872

Fig. 5. LPD values for the different tasks and participants.

Fig. 6. LPC values for the various tasks and participant
formulas includes those with which P3 and P4 would expect
to be familiar and P2 possibly familiar. The ranking of the
participants is as predicted with exceptions in the quadratic
and cubic-1 tasks. This pattern of orderings is unlikely to be
due to chance. Using the Binomial distribution, as above,
the probability that one score out of five tasks for a participant is out of place is P=.03, which applies to P1, P2 and
P4. Similarly, for two scores, with P3, it is P=.09. Hence,
an overall estimate of the probability, taking the product of
all the probabilities is P<.001.
The Bernoulli group has two versions of the multi-term
equations. None of the participants reported that they were
familiar with them. There is little to distinguish P1-P3, but
P4’s scores are substantially lower and comparable to his
scores in the standard formulas group, but just a little
higher. A tentative interpretation is that P4’s formula writing competency is robust and transfers well to novel items.

The Errors group of tasks contains three formulae that
are incorrect versions of the last three tasks in the standard
formulae group. The structure of the two Cubic-error equations is the same as the standard form of cubic formulas
except that the signs and/or values of the coefficients are
incorrect. The Jumbled quadratic is different in that symbols and operators have been mixed up systematically (e.g.,
‘(‘ replaces each occurrence of ‘a’). For all three tasks the
order of the participants’ corresponds to the predicted competency. Again, assuming the Binomial model the probability of the ranking occurring by chance is P=.016, given that
there are three cases and the rank is as expected in each one.
For each participant LPD scores for the Jumbled-quadratic
are longer than their LPDs for the standard quadratic, which
is a significant difference according to a one-tailed paired ttest: P=.04. There is no consistent pattern for the comparison of the Cubics (1 and 2) and their error versions, with t-

873

tests for cubic-1 versus cubic-error-1 P=.39 and cubic-2
versus cubic-error-2 P=.45. The difference between LPD
scores for the quadratic and the mean of the Cubics is not
significant (t-test, P=.43), but the difference between the
Jumbled-quadratic and the mean of the Cubic-error tasks is
(t-test, P=.01). The ‘mixing’ of the symbols in the Jumbledquadratic significantly degrades the quality of copying and
has a more deleterious effect than superficial errors in the
value and sign of the coefficients.
The Cubic-expansion group contains three lines of
working in which a cubic binomial is expanded. The corresponding Cubic-expansion-error-group includes formulas
that have superficial errors. The overall ordering of participants is consistent with the predicted ranking in terms of
competence for every one of the six lines in the two groups.
Depending on whether the lines are taken as sets of three
cases or one set of six cases, the probability of the pattern
being due to chance are P=.016 or P=.0002, respectively.
Comparing the two sets, the pattern of LPDs are clearly very
similar, despite the errors in the second group.
Overall, the analysis in terms of the groups of tasks reveals that the ranks of participants are consistent with the
predicted levels of participants’ competence. Various interesting patterns of differences with and between the groups
have been found.

participants. This implies that factors such as the additional
processes involved in copying may be entrained in the processing of chunks rather than acting independently. This is
an issue for further investigation and better theoretical justification. There seems more to the chunk signal in copying
than the merely effect of less competent writers using more
chunks. However, LPD does now provide the required empirical leverage to enable the investigation of the subprocesses that are involved in graphical production. Performance on different groups of formulas is a case in point.
There was little difference between individual performance
on correct formulas and ones containing simple errors, such
as sign and coefficient value changes. This suggests that the
participants were not checking that the formulas were correct during mere copying. This includes the expansion of
the cubic expansions. In contrast the Jumbled-quadratic
shows a marked rise in LPD scores by all participants,
which indicates that copying performance degrades when
the overall structure of the equations are not in recognisable
canonical forms.
It is noteworthy that the different level of competence
were successfully distinguished on the basis of single participants, without the need to aggregate data over multiple
individuals at the same level, or to aggregate data over several repetitions of each task. This implies that when the
temporal chunk signal is encapsulated in a measure like
LPD, the strength and robustness of the signal is maintained.

Discussion
The overall goal of this study was to show that it is feasible
to use Graphical Protocol Analysis (GPA) as a method to
investigate chunk-based cognitive processing. This has
been demonstrated for the task of copying mathematic equations. The temporal chunk signal appears to be strong and
robust despite the range of factors that could be expected to
substantially degrade the signal, such as the spatial and typographical complexity of the stimuli, the additional processes involved in copying compared to direct production
from memory, and the potential use of different task strategies by different participants.
Setting baselines for individual calibration of the measures by exploiting the individuals writing their names appears to be a satisfactory approach. The values of L1 pauses
obtained from participants writing their own names were
approximately half the magnitude of L1 pauses in the previous number sequences and word phrase experiments. This is
consistent with the greater level of familiarly of the names
and may represent a lower bound for L1. Although they
cannot be directly compared, it is noted that the median duration of pauses for P1 and P2 were comparable to the typical L2 value from the previous studies, whereas the values
for P3 and P4 were comparable to the L1 values. This suggests some interesting relations connecting writing from
memory and copying across different level of competence,
which may be explored in future work.
The LPD and LPC measures both successfully identified the appropriate rank ordering of the level of competence in formula writing for the four participants. The LPD
was better able to differentiate the competence levels of

References
Chase, W., & Simon, H.(1973). Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology 4,55-81.
Cheng, P. C.-H., McFadzean, J., & Copeland, L. (2001).
Drawing out the temporal structure of induced perceptual
chunks. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 200-205).
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erbaum.
Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2003). Writing out a
temporal signal of chunks: patterns of pauses reflect the induced structure of written number sequences. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 424-429). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, P.C-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2004). TRACE user
guide (Unpublished Representational Systems Laboratory
report).
Cheng, P. C.-H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2006). A temporal
signal reveals chunk structure in the writing of word
phrases. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Egan, D. E., and B. J. Schwartz (1979). Chunking in the
recall of symbolic drawings. Memory and Cognition,
7(2), 149-158.
McLean, R., & Gregg, L. (1967). Effects of Induced chunking on Temporal Aspects of Serial Recitation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 74(4), 455-459.

874

