UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Monitoring Affective Trajectories during Complex Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6p18v65q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
D'Mello, Sidney
Taylor, Roger s.
Graesser, Art

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Monitoring Affective Trajectories during Complex Learning
Sidney D’Mello (sdmello@memphis.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Roger S. Taylor (rstaylor@memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Art Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

A series of studies have recently explored the affective
states that occur during complex learning. Studies by
Graesser and his colleagues have collected online measures of
affect, such as observations by trained judges and emotealoud protocols, as well as offline judgments of emotions by
multiple judges (Craig, et al., 2004; D’Mello et al., 2006;
Graesser et al., 2006). These studies have revealed that the
basic emotions identified by Ekman and Friesen (1978),
namely anger, fear, sadness, joy, disgust, and surprise,
typically do not play a significant role in learning (see also
Kort Reilly, & Picard, 2001). Instead they documented a set
of affective states that typically do play a significant role in
learning, at least in the case of college students learning about
computer literacy with an intelligent tutoring system. These
affective states were boredom, flow (engagement,
Csikszentmihalyi, 1990), confusion, and frustration. They
also monitored the affective states of delight and surprise,
which occurred less frequently. While some of these affective
states might be viewed as purely cognitive in nature, our
position is that they should be classified as affective states (or
emotions) because these states are accompanied by significant
changes in physiological arousal compared with a “neutral”
state of no apparent emotion or feeling (Barrett, 2006; Meyer
& Turner, in press; Stein & Hernandez, in press).
Furthermore, affective-cognitive composites are particularly
relevant to higher-order learning.
The aforementioned set of affective states can be situated
within a broader perspective of emotion, in particular
Russell’s (2003) Core Affect framework. This perspective
holds that an affective state is composed of two integrated
components: valence (pleasure to displeasure) and arousal
(activation to deactivation). These components can be
depicted graphically with valence represented on the X-axis
and arousal on the Y-axis. Moving from left to right along the
X-axis (valence) would correspond to increasing feelings of
pleasure. Moving upward along the Y-axis (arousal) would
correspond to increasing feelings of activation and energy
(see Figure 1).
The affective states of boredom, flow, confusion, and
frustration will be the primary focus of this paper. These
affective states have been previously correlated with learning

Abstract
This study investigated the transitions between affective states
(i.e., boredom, flow, confusion, frustration, delight, and
surprise) during learning while college students were tutored in
computer literacy by AutoTutor, an automated tutoring system
with natural language dialogue. Videos of participants’ faces
and the interaction histories were recorded and then played
back for the participants to judge their own affective states. We
developed a metric to measure the relative likelihood of
transitioning from an affective state at time ti to a subsequent
affective state at time ti+1. Several significant trajectories
between affective states were identified. Instructional
implications are discussed in the context of an expanded
version of a cognitive disequilibrium model.
Keywords: Affective states; emotions; affect trajectories, affect
sequencing; emotion dynamics; AutoTutor; learning;
instruction.

Introduction
There is ample empirical evidence in the psychological
literature that emotions (or affective states) are systematically
influenced by the knowledge and goals of the learner, and
vice versa (Mandler, 1984; Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988;
Russell, 2003; Stein & Levine, 1991). As individuals interact
in the social and physical world, they attempt to assimilate
new information with existing knowledge schemas. When
new or discrepant information is detected, a mismatch
between input and knowledge occurs. Attention shifts to
discrepant information, the autonomic nervous system
increases in arousal, and the new information may modify the
individual’s goals and knowledge.
The learner experiences a variety of possible emotions,
depending on the context, the amount of change, and whether
important goals are blocked. However, this type of affective
arousal that accompanies learning is still not well understood.
For example, researchers have yet to narrow down the
emotions that accompany deep level learning of conceptual
material. The consequential impact of the emotions on
knowledge acquisition and transfer is still not well
understood.

203

transitions between the states of boredom, confusion, flow,
and frustration (see Figure 1 and Table 1).

(Craig et al., 2004) and were found to occur more frequently
than delight and surprise. These four affective states can be
systematically mapped onto Russell’s Core Affect
framework. Boredom has a negative valence and low level of
arousal. Flow has a positive valence and a moderate level of
arousal. Confusion has a negative valence and a moderate
level of arousal. Frustration has a high negative valence and a
high level of arousal.

Table 1. Predicted Affective Transitions
Affect at time ti+1
Affect at
Boredom Flow
Confusion Frustration
time ti
Boredom
?
Flow
+
Confusion
+
+
Frustration
+
?
Note. (+) indicates expected transition
(-) indicates that the transition is highly unlikely
(?) indicates no explicit prediction from model
It is important to note the correlations between affective
states and learning in order to fully understand some of the
predictions in Table 1. Boredom is negatively correlated with
learning, whereas confusion and flow are positively
correlated with learning (Craig et al., 2004; Graesser at al., in
review). Therefore, a bored learner is not expected to
transition directly into flow or confusion. In contrast,
transitions from confusion to flow and vice versa would be
expected because of (a) there is a positive correlation between
both of these emotions with learning and (b) an interplay
between these affective states has been explicitly predicted by
the cognitive disequilibrium model. Students in the state of
flow are continuously being challenged within their zones of
optimal learning (Metcalfe & Kornell, 2005) and
experiencing two step-episodes alternating between confusion
and insight. Transitions from confusion and flow to a state of
disengagement (boredom) would also be highly unlikely. On
the other hand, it is plausible that frustration may gradually
transition into boredom, a crucial point at which the learner
simply disengages from the learning process. Frustration is
not likely to transition into flow in short learning sessions,
whereas this may eventually occur over longer stretches of
time. It should be noted that the model does not make
predictions regarding likelihood of Boredom→Frustration or
Frustration→ Confusion transitions. However, it is
conceivable that these transitions might unfold if a learner is
in a state of boredom or frustration for a long period of time.

Figure 1 Russell’s Core Affect Framework (Links denote
transitions predicted to be greater than chance).
Students periodically change their affective states during
the course of a learning session, so the transitions between
these different affective states is a critical phenomenon to
explore. The current investigation monitored and recorded the
affective state transitions that individuals undergo while
learning about computer literacy with the AutoTutor learning
environment.
There currently is no widely accepted theoretical
framework that explicitly addresses the issue of transitions
between affective states during complex learning tasks. One
cognitive model emphasizes the importance of cognitive
disequilibrium (Graesser & Olde, 2003; Piaget, 1952) and can
be extended to provide some predictions regarding likely
affective state transitions. According to this theory, deep
comprehension is most likely to occur when learners confront
contradictions, anomalous events, obstacles to goals, salient
contrasts, perturbations, surprises, equivalent alternatives, and
other stimuli or experiences that fail to match expectations
(Jonassen, Peck, & Wilson, 1999; Mandler, 1976; Schank,
1986). Individuals in a state of cognitive disequilibrium have
a high likelihood of activating conscious and effortful
cognitive deliberation, questions, and inquiry that are directed
to restore cognitive equilibrium and result in learning gains.
Kort, Reilly, and Picard (2001) predicted that the affective
states of confusion, and perhaps frustration, are likely to
occur during cognitive disequilibrium, while affective states
such as boredom and flow would typically occur during
cognitive equilibrium. This extended cognitive disequilibrium
model would make a number of plausible predictions for the

Methods
Participants
The participants were 28 undergraduate students from a midsouth university who participated in this study for extra
course credit.

Materials
AutoTutor. AutoTutor is a computer tutor that simulates
human tutors and holds conversations with students in natural
language (Graesser et al., 1999; 2005). AutoTutor helps
students learn Newtonian physics and computer literacy by
presenting challenging problems (or questions) from a

204

Pr[Confusion|Confusion] is the probability that a learner stays
in the state of confusion.
Formally L[C→X] = Pr[X | C] = Pr[X ∩ C] / Pr[C].
Therefore, for each participant we simply counted the number
of times emotion X followed C and divided this by the
number of times emotion C was observed.
However, this method of computing the probability of
affective transitions (i.e. Pr[X | C]) is prone to error due to its
inability to account for the base rate of emotion X. For
example consider a learner where Pr[Boredom|Confusion] =
0.4 and Pr [Confusion|Confusion] = 0.6. On the basis of the
probabilities it is inappropriate to conclude that this learner
when experiencing confusion is more likely to remain
confused than transition into boredom, as indicated by the
conditional probabilities. This is because the conditional
probability does not factor in the base rate of the subsequent
emotions. For example, suppose this learner experiences
boredom 20% of the time and is confused for the remaining
80% of the tutoring session. In this case the prior probabilities
(i.e. baserates) associated with boredom and confusion are
Pr[Boredom] = 0.2 and Pr[Confusion] = 0.8. Therefore, even
though Pr[Boredom|Confusion] < Pr[Confusion|Confusion] it
is more likely for boredom to follow for a confused learner
than remaining in confusion. This is because the probability
of boredom following confusion is above and beyond the
base
rate
of
experiencing
boredom
(i.e.,
Pr[Boredom|Confusion] – Pr[Boredom] = 0.4 – 0.2 = 0.2). On
the other hand, Pr[Confusion|Confusion] – Pr[Confusion] =
0.6 – 0.8 = -0.2, indicating that the learner is less likely to stay
confused when the prior probability associated with
experiencing confusion is factored into the equation.
In order to adjust for baserate, the likelihood of emotion X
following emotion C was normalized by equation 1.

curriculum script and engaging in a mixed-initiative dialog
while the learner constructs an answer.

Procedure
The study was divided into two phases. The first phase was a
standard
pretest–intervention–posttest
design.
After
completing the pretest, participants used the AutoTutor
system for 32 minutes on one of three randomly assigned
topics in computer literacy (Hardware, Internet, Operating
Systems). During the tutoring session, a video of the
participants’ faces, their posture pressure patterns, and a video
of their computer screen were recoded. Lastly, after
completing the tutoring session, the participants completed a
36-item posttest assessment.
The second phase involved affect judgments by the
learner, a peer, and two trained judges. A list of the affective
states and definitions was provided for all judges. The states
were boredom, flow, confusion, frustration, delight, and
surprise. Judges were giving the option of making a neutral
judgment to indicate a lack of distinguishable affect.
The affect judging session proceeded by displaying video
streams of both the computer screen and the learner’s face,
both of which were captured during the AutoTutor session.
The judges made judgments on what affective states were
present at every 20-second interval (i.e., at the end of each
interval the video automatically paused), as well as any other
affective states they observed in between these intervals. Four
sets of emotion judgments were made for each observed
point. First, for the self judgments, the participant watched his
or her own AutoTutor session immediately after the learning
session. Second, for the peer judgments, participants came
back a week later to watch and rate another participant’s
session on the same topic in computer literacy. Finally, two
trained judges independently made judgments for the same
sample of observations. However, the present study focused
exclusively on the self-reported affect judgments.

Pr[ X ∩ C ]
− Pr[ X ]
Pr[C ]
L[C → X ] =
1 − Pr[ X ]

Data Treatment

(Equation 1)

Our dividing the conditional probability above the base rate
of emotion X (i.e. the numerator) by 1-Pr[X] normalized the
scores to range between -∞ and 1. If L[C→X] = 1, we can
conclude that emotion X always follows emotion C above
and beyond the prior probability of experiencing emotion X.
If, on the other hand, L[C→X] = 0, than X follows C at the
chance level. Furthermore, if L[C→X] < 0, then the
likelihood of emotion X following emotion C is much lower
than the base rate of experiencing emotion X.
This metric to assess the probability of an emotion
following another is equivalent to Cohen’s kappa in
computing agreement among raters (Cohen, 1960) (i.e., kappa
= [pobs - pexp] / [1-pexp], where pobs and pexp are observed and
expected agreement respectively. From a probabilistic
perspective equation 1 is consistent with computing Pr[X | C]
when events X and C are temporally related, and contrasting
this measure with the conditional probability when the events
are independent. This is because if X and C are independent
events then the conditional probability Pr[X | C] = Pr[X ∩ C]
/ Pr[C] = Pr[X] * Pr[C] / Pr[C] = Pr[X].

We are primarily concerned with transitions between
affective states, so we ignored observations that were
annotated as neutral. When aggregated across the 28
participants our results indicated that participants were
primarily either bored (23%), confused (25%), or in a state of
flow (28%). Frustration (16%) periodically occurred but
delight (4%) and surprise (4%) were less frequent..

Scoring Procedure. We developed a scoring procedure to
compute the transition likelihoods between affective states.
Formally, this can be represented as L[C→X], where C is the
current affective state at time ti, X is the next state (ti+1), and L
is some likelihood function. For example consider a learner
that only experiences two affective states: boredom and
confusion. If we approximate the likelihood function with
a conditional probability, then L[Confusion→Boredom]
= Pr[Boredom|Confusion] can be interpreted as the
probability of boredom following confusion while

205

based on the traditional negative connotations affiliated with
confusion. However, this result is disappointing from another
perspective: confusion has been shown to be positively
correlated with learning (Craig et al., 2004; Graesser et al., in
press).

Results
The metric specified in Equation 1 was used to compute six
data sets, one for each target emotion (boredom, flow,
confusion, frustration, delight, and surprise). The metric
permitted us to directly compare the relative likelihood that
individuals in an affective state at time ti, will remain in the
same state or change to another affective state at time ti+1.
Repeated-measures ANOVAs, with the participant as the unit
of analyses, were then computed to determine if there were
significant differences between the current affective states (ti)
and the states that immediately followed (ti+1).

Flow
A repeated measures ANOVA indicated that there were
statistically significant differences in the likelihood that the 6
affective states (including flow) follow flow, F(5, 135) =
2.20, MSe = .06, p < .05, one-tailed test. Learners in the zone
of flow are more likely to stay engaged (M = .08) or transition
to confusion (.06, see Figure 2b). In contrast, they rarely
experience frustration (-.06) or boredom (-.10). Transitions
from flow to delight (-.01) and surprise (0) occurred at chance
levels.
In contrast to the vicious cycle of the affective state of
boredom (i.e., being stuck in an affective state negatively
correlated with learning), learners in the affective state of
flow are in a virtuous cycle in which they are likely to stay in
the state of flow, which is positively correlated with gains in
learning (Craig, et al., 2004). Furthermore, individuals in the
state of flow are likely to transition to the state of confusion
(also positively correlated with learning) and are unlikely to
transition to the state of boredom (negatively correlated with
learning) or frustration (presumably a negative emotion).

Boredom
Figure 2a (on left) presents descriptive statistics (Means +
95% Confidence Interval, CI) for the likelihood that each of
the 6 affective states immediately follows boredom. The
ANOVA indicated that there were statistically significant
differences among the likelihoods that the 6 affective states
(including boredom) followed boredom, F(5, 135) = 5.55,
MSe = .05, (p < .05 in this and all subsequent analyses unless
explicitly specified). Tukey HSD Post-Hoc tests indicated
that a learner experiencing boredom is more likely to stay
bored (M = .17) than transitioning into confusion (.08),
delight (-.03), flow (-.01), or surprise (-.02).
The results are compatible with the interpretation that a
bored learner remains bored and transitions into frustration
(.07) at rates significantly greater than chance. On the other
hand Boredom→Confusion transitions are very rare; they are
significantly less than what could be attributed to chance.
Transitions into delight, surprise and flow, though low, are
not statistically different from the base rate.

Confusion
An ANOVA showed statistically significant differences in the
likelihood that the 6 affective states (including confusion)
followed confusion, F(5, 135) = 3.06, MSe = .06. A confused
learner is more likely to stay in confusion (M = .09) above
and beyond the base rate in experiencing this emotion (see
Figure 3a). Transitions from confusion to delight (0.0), flow
(.02), frustration (.01), and surprise (.02) occur at chance
levels. Confusion is rarely followed by boredom because the
transition is significantly less than chance (-.17). Tukey HSD
Post-Hoc tests confirm that confusion, flow, and surprise
have a significantly higher likelihood of following confusion
than does boredom.
Once again, confusion is sometimes viewed as an
experience harmful to learning, but there is the alternative
viewpoint that is compatible with cognitive disequilibrium.
The latter model predicts that confusion could sometimes be
beneficial to learning. Confusion may entice individuals to
think more deeply about the topic, as reflected in the reported
positive correlations with learning (Craig, et al., 2004;
Graesser et al., in press). Another encouraging result was the
finding that when learners are in the state of confusion, they
are less likely to become disengaged and transition to the state
of boredom, which is negatively associated with learning. It is
also intriguing to note that confusion is sometimes followed
by surprise. Perhaps this occurs when a learner identifies and
discards a misconception, or fills a significant gap in
understanding. Additional research is needed to explore these
possibilities.

Figure 2 Current State (ti): A: Boredom, B: Flow
Craig et al., (2004) reported that the affective state of
boredom is negatively correlated with learning gains. There
are noteworthy instructional implications of this finding and
the current analysis of transitions. Given that learners who
enter the affective state of boredom are likely to stay in that
state, entering boredom may trigger a vicious cycle that
prevents them from actively reengaging in the constructivist
learning process. An additional discouraging finding is that
bored learners are also significantly more likely to increase
their level of arousal and make the transition to the state of
frustration, which is also potentially detrimental to learning.
Lastly, learners are unlikely to make the transition to the
affective state of confusion. This may seem beneficial when

206

Discussion
Earlier we made several predictions (see Table 1 and Figure
1) regarding the likelihood of certain emotion transitions on
the basis of an extended version of the cognitive
disequilibrium model and correlations between the affective
states and learning gains. It appears that some of these
predictions have been validated while others are in the right
direction but not statistically significant. The supported
predictions include the transitions from the state of boredom
into confusion, flow into frustration, and confusion into
boredom which occurred significantly below chance. The
three predictions that had trends in the predicted direction, but
were not statistically significant include the unlikely
transition from flow into boredom and the likely transitions
from flow to confusion and frustration to boredom. While this
might be interpreted as evidence to support the extended
cognitive disequilibrium model some of our findings question
aspects of the model. In particular four predictions made by
the model were not supported. However, it is important to
note that in the current analyses we only considered 1-step
transitions that occurred over an approximately 10-40 second
period. It is reasonable to assume that some of the other
transitions may require a broader time window to unfold.
There were also two interesting findings that were not
addressed by the model. First, the transition from boredom
into frustration occurred significantly above chance. Second,
the transition from frustration into confusion occurred rarely,
was not significant, and had a high degree of variability. This
prompts speculation about how individual differences might
be especially relevant to this transition. Perhaps some
individuals disengage when frustrated, while others view the
situation as a challenge and become more energized – and
ultimately enter the confusion state while trying to resolve the
current misunderstanding.
This research is one of the first endeavors to systematically
investigate the manner by which learners dynamically
experience affective transitions during complex learning. We
acknowledge, however, that this research is preliminary and
does not offer a complete explanation of the factors that
“trigger” or promote certain affective transitions or inhibit
others. The next step in this research will analyze relations
between emotional transitions and personality traits, prior
knowledge, pedagogical strategies of tutors, and social
properties of animated conversational agents.
We are also currently investigating interactions between
prior knowledge, learning gains, and affective transitions.
However, of particular interest is the manner in which the
context of the instruction influences particular affective
trajectories. For example, we would like to determine the
extent to which contextual factors such as the topic, the
question, the number of attempts made by the student to
answer the question, the tutor’s assessments of the students’
understanding and progress, and the feedback provided by the
tutor to the students impacts the manner by which learners
cycle through their emotions.
In addition to providing insights into the complex interplay
between affective states and learning, the affective trajectories

Figure 3 Current State (ti): A: Confusion, B: Frustration

Frustration
An ANOVA showed no statistically significant differences in
the likelihood that the 6 affective states follow frustration,
F(5, 135) = 1.17, MSe = .37, (p = .326). However, the general
pattern does indicate that frustrated learners are equally likely
to remain frustrated (M = .05) or transition to boredom (.05)
than experience flow (0.0) or confusion (-.28, see Figure 3b).
This suggests that it might be very important for a tutor, either
human or artificial, to alleviate frustration via empathy or
with increased hints or prompts.

Delight
Our results suggest that learners experiencing delight are
more likely to stay delighted (M = .04), transition into flow
(.08), or be surprised (.04) then move into a state of
frustration (-.10). We also find that transitions from delight to
boredom (.05) and confusion (-.02) are statistically
indistinguishable from the base rate in experiencing these
emotions. These observations were confirmed by an ANOVA
F(5, 135) = 2.60, MSe = .04.
While delight was a relatively rare affective state (4% in
this study), the transitions from this state are encouraging.
Learners are more likely to transition from delight to flow
than to venture into frustration (Tukey HSD post hoc tests).

Figure 4 Current State (ti): A: Delight, B: Surprise

Surprise
An ANOVA showed no statistically significant differences in
the likelihood that the 6 affective states follow surprise, F(5,
135) = .776, MSe = .12, (p = .568).

207

Graesser, A. C. & Olde, B. (2003). How does one know
whether a person understands a device? The quality of the
questions the person asks when the device breaks down.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 524–536.
Graesser, A.C., P. Chipman, B. C. Haynes, and A. Olney.
(2005). AutoTutor: An intelligent tutoring system with
mixed-initiative dialogue. IEEE Transactions in Education
48: 612-618.
Graesser, A.C., McDaniel, B., Chipman, P., Witherspoon, A.,
D’Mello, S., & Gholson, B. (2006). Detection of emotions
during learning with AutoTutor. In R. Son (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meetings of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 285-290). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Graesser, A.C., Chipman, P., King, B., McDaniel, B., &
D’Mello, S. (in review). Emotions and Learning with
AutoTutor.
Jonassen D., Peck, K. & Wilson B. (1999). Learning with
technology: A constructivist perspective. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R. (2001). An affective model
of interplay between emotions and learning: Reengineering
educational pedagogy—building a learning companion. In
T. Okamoto, R. Hartley, Kinshuk, & J. P. Klus (Eds.),
Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technology: Issues, Achievements and
Challenges (pp. 43-48). Madison, Wisconsin: IEEE
Computer Society.
Mandler, G. (1976). Mind and emotion. New York: Wiley.
Mandler, G. (1984). Mind and body: Psychology of emotion
and stress. New York: Norton.
Metcalfe, J., & Kornell, N. (2005). A region or proximal of
learning model of study time allocation. Journal of Memory
and Language, 52, 463-477.
Meyer, D. K., & Turner, J. C. (in press). Reconceptualizing
emotion and motivation to learn in classroom contexts.
Educational Psychology Review.
Ortony, A., Clore, G. L., & Collins, A. (1988). The cognitive
structure of emotions. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence. New York:
International University Press.
Russell, J. A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological
construction of emotion. Psychological Review, 110, 145172.
Schank, R. C. (1986). Explanation patterns: understanding
mechanically and creatively. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stein, N. L., & Levine, L. J. (1991). Making sense out of
emotion. In W. Kessen, A. Ortony, & F, Kraik (Eds.),
Memories, thoughts, and emotions: Essays in honor of
George Mandler (pp. 295-322). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stein, N. L., & Hernandez, M. W. (in press). Assessing
understanding and appraisals during emotional experience:
The development and use of the Narcoder. In J.A. Coan,
J.J. Allen (Eds). Handbook of emotion elicitation and
assessment. New York: Oxford University Press

discovered in this research have facilitated a
reconceptualization of the manner in which we have
envisioned designing an emotionally-sensitive version of
AutoTutor. Our original intentions were to use various
unobtrusive measures (dialogue, facial expressions, body
posture) to diagnose the affect of the learner, and then to
modify AutoTutor’s pedagogical strategies to systematically
and quickly react to a learner’s affective and cognitive states
(D’Mello et al., 2005). However, it appears that learners
experiencing negative affective states, such as boredom and
frustration, are more likely to wallow in these states rather
than transition into positive states of flow, delight, or even
confusion. This suggests that a quick reactive policy of
simply attempting to foster transitions from these negative
states to emotions that have been positively correlated with
learning may not suffice. Instead, or in addition, there is
wisdom in including predictive measures to determine the
onset of these negative affective states coupled with proactive
pedagogical strategies to circumvent the incidence of negative
emotions.

Acknowledgments
We thank our research colleagues at the University of
Memphis and MIT. This research was supported by the
National Science Foundation (REC 0106965, ITR 0325428,
REESE 0633918). Any opinions, findings and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF.

References
Barrett, L. F. (2006). Emotions as natural kinds? Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 1, 28-58
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales, Educational and Psychological Measurement 20:
37–46, 1960.
Craig, S., A. Graesser, J. Sullins, & B. Gholson. (2004).
Affect and learning: An exploratory look into the role of
affect in learning. Journal of Educational Media 29:241250.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience. Harper-Row: NY.
D’Mello, S. K., Craig, S. D., Sullins, J., & Graesser, A. C.
(2006). Predicting affective states through an emote-aloud
procedure from AutoTutor’s mixed-initiative dialogue.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in
Education, 16, 3-28.
Ekman, P, & W. V. Friesen. (1978). The facial action coding
system: A technique for the measurement of facial
movement. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Graesser, A.C., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Wiemer-Hastings, P.,
Kreuz, R., & the TRG (1999). AutoTutor: A simulation of
a human tutor. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 1,
35-51.

208

