UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Numeral Classifiers in Specific Counting Systems: Cultural Context, Linguistic Principles, and
Cognitive Implications

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9n3383tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Bender, Andrea
Beller, Sieghard

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Numeral Classifiers in Specific Counting Systems:
Cultural Context, Linguistic Principles, and Cognitive Implications
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract

dating back some 6 000 years (Tryon, 1995), these languages
inherited a decimal number system supplemented by
numeral classifiers. Both, the number systems and the sets of
numeral classifiers were then adapted and extended according to cultural needs. Most of these languages also developed
specific counting systems, which applied a counting unit
diverging from 1 and were restricted to specific objects (e.g.,
Bender & Beller, in press; Clark, 1999; Lemaître, 1985). The
two language groups elaborated different components each:
Polynesian languages the specific counting systems, Micronesian languages the numeral classifier systems. But etymological and syntactic parallels between several numeral
classifiers and numerals used in the specific counting systems suggest that both types of systems are linked.
In order to analyze this link and explicate the cognitive
and numerical context of numeral classifiers, we will first
characterize the numeration principles of each type of system, before we focus on the role of numeral classifiers for
specific counting systems. In conclusion, we will discuss the
cultural and cognitive origins of this interaction.

Specific counting systems are characterized by a combination
of two features: They are based on larger counting units (multiplication function) and apply to certain objects only (object
specificity). This paper analyzes the constitutive role that
numeral classifiers may play for specific counting systems,
with instances from Polynesian and Micronesian languages.
Despite a considerable divergence in classifiers, objects of reference, and factors chosen, a common principle can be identified that sheds new light on the numerical context of numeral
classifiers and on the question of their cognitive status.
Key words: Numeral Classifiers, Numeral Cognition, Counting

Introduction
Classifiers are independent morphemes that group the associated nouns into classes according to some sort of salient
characteristics. The most common type of classifiers are
numeral classifiers, which are obligatory components of
counting constructions in many languages. A close counterpart in English are words like sheet in “two sheets of paper”.
Cognitive research on numeral classifiers has predominantly focused on their classifying function, that is on the
associated nouns and on the principles that underlie their
classification (e.g., Aikhenvald, 2003; Berlin & Romney,
1964; Craig, 1986; Dixon, 1986). Two general hypotheses
have been developed, arguing for a categorization based
either on perception (e.g., Allan, 1977) or on social function
of the respective objects (e.g., Denny, 1976; for a synthesis
see Lee, 1987). However, besides their classifying function,
numeral classifiers also have a quantifying function and a
numerical context in which they occur. The quantifying
function is required by the noun itself: In classifier languages, nouns refer to some kind of mass, and classifiers
give a unit to that mass. Classifiers can simply refer to an
individual instance of the mass (i.e., unit classifiers), but may
also express measures, groups or multiples, parts, and kinds
(Denny, 1986). Denny argues that classifiers establish two
kinds of quantifications: they define the sort of quanta (e.g.,
units, parts, multiples, measures or kinds), and they define
the class of such quanta to which it is restricted. For instance,
a “sheet” defines single pieces as quanta, and two-dimensional things as its class of reference.
A less well established function of numeral classifiers may
arise from their usage in actual counting. Focusing on this
context will shed more light on a cognitive aspect that has
been largely neglected so far.
A fairly well documented case is provided by number systems in Polynesian and Micronesian languages. Belonging to
the Oceanic subgroup of the Austronesian language family,

Characteristics of Polynesian and
Micronesian Number Systems
Compared to the English number system (e.g., Miller et al.,
1995), those in Polynesian and Micronesian languages are
fairly regular (Beller & Bender, 2005). They are (basically)
decimal, and therefore their higher numerals typically refer
to the powers of ten. Most power terms were developed
locally, but reached large numbers in both language groups:
On average, number systems extended up to 105 or 106, with
a range of 103 to 1010. In addition to the variation among
power terms, however, even cognate power terms may
denote different numbers: Not only may they refer to different power levels, but they may also refer to values that are
different from the pure powers of ten (cf. Table 1).
In a certain sense, these high numerals also reveal the
characteristics of the respective systems: In Polynesian languages, some of these numerals are part of specific counting
systems with apparently “mixed bases”, whereas in Micronesian languages, power terms are typically considered as a
particular type of numeral classifiers (Benton, 1968; Harrison & Jackson, 1984), as will be detailed now.

“Mixed Bases” and Specific Counting Systems
In 1906, Best published an article in which he argued that
Maori employed binary and (semi-)vigesimal systems of
numeration. Generalized for other Polynesian languages, this
opinion was widely shared by colleagues in his time (e.g.,
821

Table 1: Traditional numerals in general counting for the powers of the base in some Polynesian and Micronesian languages
(adapted from Bender & Beller, 2006a, 2006b). Numerals diverging in value from a strictly decimal pattern are shaded;
prefixes are put in brackets for easier comparison.

Power
level

Polynesian languages

Micronesian languages

Mangarevan Hawaiian NZ-Maori Tahitian

Tongan

101

rogo'uru

'umi

ngahuru

'ahuru

(hongo)fulu hulu

(te)bwiina (e)isek

(e)ngoon

(se)ig

102

rau

lau

rau

rau

(te)au

lau

(te)bubua

(e)pwiki

(e)pwúkú

(se)biugiuw

103

mano

mano

mano

mano

afe

mano

(te)ngaa

kid

(e)ngéréw

(sa)ngeras

104

makiu

kini

(tini)

manotini

mano

(se)mada

(te)rebu

nen

(e)kit

(se)n

105

makiukiu

lehu

rehu

kilu

(se)guli

(te)kuri

lopw

(se)lob

106

makore

nalowale

'iu

(se)loo

(te)ea

rar

(se)piy

107

makorekore

(se)ngaa

(te)tano

dep

(se)ngit

108

tini

(se)muna

(te)toki

sapw

(sa)ngerai

109

maeaea

(se)bugi

Nukuoro

Kiribati

Pohnpeian Chuukese

Woleaian

lik

(se)baga

1010

Large, 1902) and has influenced descriptions of traditional
number systems until recently. Indeed, many Polynesian languages do comprise a specific term for 20 (i.e., a reflex of
*tekau), and in some we find numerals for 200, 2 000 and so
on. However, a genuine vigesimal system requires not just an
emphasis on 20 itself, but its recurrence in powers, that is at
201 = 20, 202 = 400, 203 = 8 000, and so on. None of the
Polynesian languages yielded anything close to such a recurrence of powers. What can be found instead are cyclic patterns at 2·101 = 20, 2·102 = 200, and 2·103 = 2 000. A
number system containing such patterns might rather be
termed a “mixed-base” 2 and 10 system or a decimal system
operating with “pair” as the counting unit.
The principles of a mixed-base system and its usage in
Polynesian languages can be briefly illustrated for the case of
Maori (for more details see Bender & Beller, 2006a). Traditional Maori basically contained two different counting systems: a single mode and a pair mode. Counting in the single
mode applied reflexes of the Proto-Polynesian numerals for
1 to 10 and the power terms rau (102) and mano (103).
According to Best (1906), mano also set the limits for counting, while any amount beyond this was referred to as tini.
Counting in the dual mode basically applied the same
numerals as counting in the single mode. However, these
numerals were not used to refer to single items, but to pairs.
Counting in the single mode was the general way of counting, while counting in pairs was restricted to a few objects
such as fish, fowl and certain root crops. Nevertheless, proceeding in the single mode had to be made explicit, while
applying the pair as counting unit went without saying (Best,
1906).
Similar principles of mixed-base systems can be found in
several other Polynesian languages. These mixed bases
mainly involved one or more of the factors 2, 4, 10, and 20
and were, again, restricted to specific objects (Bender &
Beller, 2006a).

Although most of the contemporary Polynesian languages
comprise only residuals of numeral classifiers, these residuals play an important role for the specific number systems, as
can be illustrated with an example from Tongan. In traditional Tongan, a general system of counting was supported
by four distinct systems for specific objects (Bender &
Beller, in press). In these systems, the power terms
(hongo)fulu and (te)au are partly replaced by distinct lexemes—(te)tula, (te)kau, (te)fua, and (te)fuhi—which reflect
Proto-Polynesian classifiers. All terms imply a numerical
change, as they multiply the adjoined numeral by 2 or 20.
For instance, (te)kau refers to 20 pieces of either yams or
coconuts, (te)fuhi to 200 yams, and (te)fua to 200 coconuts:
[1] niu
'e
te- kau
coconut NUMBER PARTICLE 1 score (i.e., 20)
“20 coconuts”
[2] niu
'e
uo- fua
coconut NUMBER PARTICLE 2 10-scores (i.e., 200)
“400 coconuts”
Two aspects are particularly noteworthy here. First, these
apparently mixed-base systems are still decimal systems,
which only apply counting units diverging from 1. And second, these mixed-base systems accompany regular decimal
systems for general counting, while they themselves are
restricted to certain objects—a feature also constitutive for
numeral classifier systems.

Numeral Classifier Systems
Almost all Micronesian languages contain numeral classifiers, but variation is large with regard to the degree of differentiation. It ranges from a binary system in Kosraean to a
system of more than one hundred classifiers in Chuukese or
Kiribati (Harrison & Jackson, 1984). With regard to their
function, these classifiers can be sorted into three categories:
repeaters, qualifiers, and quantifiers. The semantic domains

822

Table 2: Woleaian pattern of qualifier (-mal) and power
classifiers (-ig, -biugiuw) in counting animates (adapted
from Bender & Beller, 2006b).

Table 3: Patterns of classifiers in power terms in Woleaian
and Kiribati (adapted from Bender & Beller, 2006b).
Woleaian

Kiribati

Power
level

others

coconuts

others

one-animate

101

(se-)ig

(se-)yaf

(te-)ngaun (te-)bwii(na)

riuwe-mal

two-animate

102

(te-)bubua (te-)ngaun

10

se-ig

one-ten

(se-)biugiuw (se-)ngaul /
(se-)ig

12

se-ig me riuwe-mal

one-ten and two-animate

103

(sa-)ngeras

(sa-)ngeras

(te-)ngaa

(te-)ngaa

20

riuwe-ig

two-ten

…

…

…

…

se-biugiuw

one-hundred

Number term
(components)

Literal translation

1

se-mal

2

Number

100

…

coconuts

used (see Table 3). Counting coconuts differs from this pattern: Bundles of 10 coconuts are counted with yaf; when
reaching the absolute number of 100 coconuts, ngaul (referring to ten groups of ten) is used instead of the general power
classifier biugiuw. Often, hundreds of coconuts were even
referred to with ig, the classifier indicating 10-general. From
1 000 onwards, the number words refer back to the total
number of nuts and no longer to their constituent groups of
ten. In other words: At least for amounts between 10 and
1 000, coconuts were counted with a specific system in
which the classifiers also had a multiplying function.
A similar pattern emerges in Kiribati where, again, coconuts are counted in groups of ten (see Table 3).

typically covered by the qualifiers are shape, nature, and
generality (Benton, 1968), while the remaining majority of
objects are placed into a general or unspecified category.
Power terms behave like numeral classifiers: Both are suffixed to numerals from 1 to 9, replacing each other, and both
are thereby themselves counted. Some scholars (e.g., Benton, 1968; Harrison & Jackson, 1984) argue therefore that
power terms should be considered as classifiers or, more precisely, as quantifiers. In counting, however, the category of
power classifiers cuts across the other categories, as from 10
onwards—with just a few exceptions—they replace other
classifiers in all compounds referring to power terms or their
multiples (for an instance from Woleaian see Table 2).
One of the most extensive systems of numeral classifiers is
documented for Chuukese (Benton, 1968). In addition to the
four power classifiers, Chuukese also contains 101 “real”
classifiers. For our comparison of specific counting and classifier systems, the category of quantifiers is of particular
interest, as it refers to enumerable or measurable quanta.
Besides encompassing classifiers that refer to units of
objects, this category also includes classifiers with a fixed
numerical value, namely the power classifiers, as well as others that seem to change the numerical value of the adjoined
numeral. In Chuukese, quantifiers typically refer to portions
of food and to other units of counting and measuring. Most
of these counting units are numerically imprecise (e.g.,
bunch), but five of them also imply a specific value; yáf, for
instance, refers to bundles of 10 coconuts.
The way in which this classifier is used in specific counting systems can be illustrated with an instance from Woleaian (which is part of the Chuukese dialect chain). Woleaian
yaf is used for counting globular things such as coconuts,
chickens, eggs, stones, coins, and valuable shells, and is
translated as a “grouping (of ten)” (Alkire, 1970). While
power classifiers typically replace other classifiers when a
power or one of its multiples is referred to, the power classifiers for ten may take different forms for certain objects.
Woleaian, for instance, encompasses three terms for ten:
ngaul with the restricted interpretation of “ten groups”, yaf
referring to tens of coconuts, and ig for tens of everything
else (Harrison & Jackson, 1984). However, they refer to different absolute numbers.
When counting objects other than coconuts, the numerals
ig for 10, biugiuw for 100, ngeras for 1 000, and so on are

The Role of Numeral Classifiers
for Specific Counting Systems
Numeral classifier systems and specific counting systems
with mixed bases share two important features. First, they
treat different types of objects differently when being
counted (“object specificity”). And second, at least some of
them change—in one way or another—the numerical value
of the adjoined numeral with regard to the absolute amount
of single items (“multiplying function”). In addition, nearly
all specific counting systems apply at least one numeral classifier to define the new counting unit. But despite these similarities, the composition of number words and counting
systems varies considerably.

Types of Classifier Usage
In Micronesian languages, general numerals are only used in
enumerating a series, that is in abstract or rapid counting.
The number words otherwise used are bimorphemic, always
consisting of a numerative prefix as the first component and
a classifier as the second component (N-C). In Polynesian
languages, on the other hand, this composition can vary and
is accompanied by changes in numerical value and sometimes by changes in meaning.
The common type in Polynesian languages is the C-N
compound in which the classifier precedes the numeral.
Classifiers allowing a C-N compound are often described as
having a multiplying effect, as they seem to indicate a counting by groups of ten. However, this effect only occurs for the
multiples of ten in an otherwise regular counting pattern.
According to Clark (1999), it should therefore be termed “10
823

Table 4: Types of number compounds in Samoan and
Micronesian constructionsa.

deletion” rather than multiplication. In N-C compounds, the
numeral precedes the classifier. With regard to their formal
properties, N-C classifiers can be grouped together with
power classifiers like *fulu (10) or *rau (100) (Clark, 1999;
Harrison & Jackson, 1984). Unlike most of their Micronesian counterparts, however, Polynesian N-C classifiers have
a consistent multiplying effect.
Let us exemplify the syntactical and numerical characteristics of Polynesian classifiers with instances from Samoan
(for more details see Bender & Beller, 2006b). Samoan contains 15 different classifiers, most of which explicitly distinguish between certain types of food. When counting the
respective objects, these classifiers are prefixed or suffixed to
the respective numerals according to one of three different
types (see Table 4).
Classifiers of type 1 always precede the numeral (C-N)
and are counted in a simple way.
Classifiers of type 2 change their syntactical order beyond
ten (from N-C to C-N): When suffixed to a numeral from 2
to 9 or when prefixed to 100s, the resulting term refers to the
number indicated by the numeral. However, when prefixed to
the numerals from 2 to 9, the classifier indicates “tens of …”
or 10-deletion. This process is complementary to the one in
Micronesian languages, where power classifiers replace
other classifiers. From 100 onwards, however, the numerals
indicate the proper power level, and therefore these number
words can—contrary to the Micronesian ones—involve two
classifiers: 'au selau (100 bunches), for instance, contains
both a qualifier ('au for coconuts) and a power classifier
(selau for 100).
Finally, classifiers of type 3 only allow an N-C construction and systematically change the numerical value of the
adjoined numeral due to an inherent factor that defines a
counting unit different from 1, namely scores (of coconuts),
tens (of skipjack), and pairs (of coconuts or young pigs).

classifiers, on the other hand, do not classify, but multiply.
They indicate a precise value—either the base of the number
system or one of its powers—that serves as a factor for the
adjoined numeral. As power classifiers replace other classifiers, they typically indicate the new counting unit independently of the object concerned. A few classifiers, however,
adopt both a classifying and a multiplying function: They
have a precise value and are restricted to certain objects indicating, for instance, “tens of coconuts”.
As these different types of classifiers are not evenly distributed in the respective languages, they also help to define
different types of counting systems:
Classifier Systems. In Micronesian languages, most classifiers simply classify the counted objects. Power classifiers are
used to reach larger numbers; most other quantifiers have
mainly blurred numerical value. Classifiers adopting both a
classifying and a multiplying function occur, but only rarely.
Mixed Systems. In Samoan and Rennellese, which contain
the largest set of classifiers in Polynesia, the Micronesian
pattern emerges most clearly. Most of the 15 classifiers in
Samoan are used only in their classifying function. Nine also
have the effect called 10-deletion in which the classifier
replaces the power classifier. Only three classifiers in
Samoan have a clear multiplying function, and these classifiers are then counted in the same way as power classifiers.
Composite Systems. In Tongan, on the other hand, five classifiers can be identified in addition to the power terms.
Although their etymology hints towards the specific objects
counted, none of them has a classifying function only.
Instead, they are used exclusively in the specific counting
systems, where they are suffixed to the numeral in a similar
way as the power terms and then counted in the same way.
They are employed to define or count new counting units and
thereby adopt both the classifying and the multiplying function. For instance, when counting coconuts, (te)kau defines a
new counting unit at the score, which is then counted (with
an N1-C20 construction) until ten such units are reached (cf.
instances [1], [2]). The power classifier for ten is replaced
then—and counted further—with (te)fua, indicating 10
scores of coconuts (i.e., ten score-units are labeled with NC200 instead of N-P1-C20).
Multiplier Systems. The type of specific counting systems
with the least involvement of classifiers can be identified in
Eastern Polynesian languages such as Tahitian. Here, we find
some of the most abstract specific counting systems. They
are still restricted to certain objects, but share reflexes of one
classifier only and only in a fossilized form (i.e., *tekau).
This term may originally have functioned as a classifier with
a blurred counting unit only (as in Samoan) and then developed into a multiplier.
As these examples show, specific counting systems are
composed in both language groups according to the same
principle, albeit with significant differences in details.

Types of Counting Systems

Composition Principle

Most classifiers simply classify the objects of reference.
Quantifiers also introduce a new—though in most cases
blurred—counting unit (such as group or bunch). The power

The specific counting systems do not merely differ with
regard to the involvement of classifiers. Although all of them
enabled different modes of counting, each did so in a different way. More precisely, we do not find congruence in any of

Samoan
Power
level

Classifier construction

General
numerals Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Micronesian
numerals

100

N

C-N

N-C

N-Cm

N-C

101

N-P1

C-P1

C-N

(P1-Cm)

N-P1

102

N-P2

(?)

C-P2
(C-N-P2)

(P2-Cm)

N-P2

a

Abbreviations: N = numeral (1-9), P = power term, with
subscribed number referring to the power level, C = classifier (other than power term), Cm = multiplying classifier.

824

numeral classifiers that define a higher counting unit. This
indicates that both the principle and its components may
have existed in Proto-Oceanic. The way in which these specific counting systems were constructed, however, differed in
most of the languages. The classifiers and counting units that
they picked for their specific objects of concern seem to be
largely arbitrary (although 2 or 5 are very reasonable counting units from a cognitive point of view). The extent to
which they applied specific counting systems, however, and
the range of objects for which they did so, most likely
resulted from cultural adaptations to various requirements or
constraints, such as the resources available in the respective
environment and salient in the respective culture or the size
of the population.

their characteristic components: counting unit, classifier, or
object of reference. From our survey of Polynesian and
Micronesian languages, we were able to extract counting
units defined by one or several of the factors 2, 4, 5, 8, 10,
12, 20, and 22, with the pair being the most popular (Bender
& Beller, 2006a). In addition, even though often referring to
the same objects, the classifiers that are linked to this multiplication function do differ across languages. And finally,
even with regard to the objects counted specifically, no consistent picture emerges, at least not on the level of concrete
objects. Coconuts, for instance, are of special concern in
most but not all languages.
And yet, on a more abstract level, these systems share two
characteristics: All of them are restricted to specific objects
that belong to a small category with common features
(“object specificity”), and in some cases, the process of
counting was enhanced by counting them in larger counting
units, thus changing the numerical value of the adjoined
numeral (“multiplication function”). How can we reconcile
this consistent pattern with the differences in terms of detail?
In Polynesian and Micronesian languages, the most limited number systems generally co-occur with largely reduced
classifier categories and/or specific counting systems
(Bender & Beller, 2006b; Harrison & Jackson, 1984).
Backed by this observation, our analysis encourages us to
assume that one of the main reasons for applying specific
counting systems was to extend the original number system
to large numbers.
The Polynesian and Micronesian instances reviewed in
this article show that a number system can be extended in at
least two dimensions: Classifiers can be added “in breadth”
in order to differentiate ways of counting for different
objects; classifiers can also be added at the end of a power
series (“in length”), thereby extending the range of counting.
A large number of classifiers is the result of the first extension, and high numerals are the result of the second. Combining the two creates a third—and for our purpose the most
interesting—variant: If classifiers are incorporated not on the
basic, but on a higher level, a new series of counting for the
respective objects is instantiated and extended, based on a
higher counting unit (“base substitution”). This creates a
specific counting system and enables an acceleration of
counting.
For the extension of the Micronesian number systems
beyond their original numerals of up to 103, it was sufficient,
as Harrison & Jackson (1984) argue, to have numeral classifiers, particularly quantifiers, as a grammatical category.
Power classifiers initiate a mathematical series of increasing
powers, but apart from yielding a mathematical interpretation only, they share all properties with quantifiers, particularly in that they themselves are counted. Consequently,
other quantifiers can also be incorporated into the power
series if the counting unit to which they refer is (re-)defined
as a power of the base. By incorporating new classifiers, the
system can be extended ad libitum.

The Cultural Context of Counting
An indigenous interest in large numbers, indicated by large
power terms, is also clearly attested ethnographically for precolonial times (e.g., Elbert, 1988). At least in Polynesia, this
interest might have been motivated by socio-economic reasons (Beller & Bender, 2005; Bender & Beller, 2006a, in
press). In general, both the extent of the number systems and
the number of counting modes increase with increased stratification. A concern with collecting and redistributing
resources was particularly strong in islands with powerful
chiefs or kings, such as Tonga or Tahiti, and obviously less
pronounced in societies with less centralized political forces
or small communities, such as Maori (e.g., Goldman, 1970;
Kirch, 1984). The category of resources frequently redistributed overlaps to a considerable extent with the category of
objects specifically counted. It consists of subsistence products that were both culturally significant and abundant, such
as fish, coconuts, the most prestigious starch food, and material for fabrics or thatch (Bender & Beller, 2006, in press). At
certain occasions, these objects were required in large
amounts, for instance, when collecting tributes, when supplying large numbers of people during war, or when accumulating wealth for competitive givings (e.g., Elbert, 1988).
The same might not hold for the smaller island cultures of
Micronesia, although even there, high numbers gained
importance with specific resources. On Woleai, for instance,
the local redistribution of more than 12 000 coconuts during
a funeral is documented (Alkire, 1970). Supra-island ties,
linking islands like Woleai with Yap, may have required similar amounts for shares and tributes.

The Cognitive Status of Numeral Classifiers
When redistribution was involved, it was calculation rather
than counting that was required, and when ceremonial purposes or prestige were involved, this had to be done very
carefully. Keeping track of the flow of objects was therefore
particularly important, but the respective calculations are difficult in the absence of external representations (Nickerson,
1988; Zhang & Norman, 1995). In this context, specific
counting systems could have served a second practical reason, namely to reduce the cognitive load of the calculators by
extracting a certain factor—actually the same factor inherent
in the counting unit. Larger absolute numbers were thus
reached faster and with less effort.

Conclusion
Micronesian and Polynesian languages alike adopted the
principle of establishing specific counting systems with

825

Several factors influence the ease, with which number systems are learnt and operated (e.g., Dehaene, 1997; Wiese,
2003). For their representation a one-dimensional system—
that is a system with a distinct lexeme for each number—
would, in principle, be sufficient. As numbers grow larger,
two-dimensional systems with base and power become more
advantageous: Cyclic patterns keep the number words compact while dramatically reducing the amount of lexemes
needed. For base size, however, Zhang and Norman (1995)
identified a cognitive trade-off: While large bases are more
efficient for encoding and memorizing big numbers, they
also require the memorization of larger addition and multiplication tables when operating with them.
Introducing a larger counting unit increases the dimensionality of the number system and thereby compensates this
trade-off: It facilitates encoding and memorizing of larger
numbers, and at the same time keeps base size comfortably
small for addition and multiplication. In providing these
advantages, numeral classifiers supported their users in difficult tasks of mental arithmetic. In a similar way, quantifiers
referring to parts could have facilitated division.
In conclusion, our research encourages us to suggest that
the indigenous interest in high numbers in Polynesia and
Micronesia inspired people to systematically incorporate
numeral classifiers into an originally regular decimal system.
In doing this, they not only developed innovative ways of
counting, but also designed an efficient strategy to cope with
the cognitive difficulties of accurately calculating in the
absence of a notation system. In turn, these results add a new
dimension to the research on the cognitive status of numeral
classifiers: not only as a basis for (noun) categorization, but
also as a cognitive tool in numerical cognition.

Bender, A. & Beller, S. (in press). Counting in Tongan: The
traditional number systems and their cognitive implications. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 7 (3/4).
Benton, R.A. (1968). Numeral and attributive classifiers in
Trukese. Oceanic Linguistics, VII (2), 104-146.
Berlin, B. & Romney, A.K. (1964). Descriptive semantics of
Tzeltal numeral classifiers. American Anthropologist, 66
(3), 79-98.
Best, E. (1906). Maori numeration: Some account of the single, binary, and semi-vigesimal systems of numeration
formerly employed by the Maori. Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute, 39, 150-180.
Clark, R. (1999). Proto-Polynesian numerals. In E. Zeitoun &
P. J-k. Li (Eds.), Selected papers from the Eighth International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics. Taipei:
Academia Sinica.
Craig, C. (Ed.) (1986). Noun classes and categorization.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Denny, J.P. (1976). What are noun classifiers good for? In
Proceedings of the 12th Regional Meeting of the Chicago
Linguistic Society. Chicago Linguistic Society.
Denny, J.P. (1986). The semantic role of noun classifiers. In
C. Craig (Ed.), Noun classes and categorization. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Dixon, R.M.W. (1986). Noun classes and noun classification
in typological perspective. In C. Craig (Ed.), Noun classes
and categorization. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Elbert, S.H. (1988). Echo of a Culture: A Grammar of Rennell and Bellona. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
Goldman, I. (1970). Ancient Polynesian society. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Harrison, S. & Jackson, F.H. (1984). Higher numerals in several Micronesian languages. In B.W. Bender (Ed.), Studies
in Micronesian Linguistics. Pacific Linguistics, C-80.
Kirch, P.V. (1984). The evolution of the Polynesian chiefdoms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Large, J.J. (1902). The vigesimal system of enumeration.
Journal of the Polynesian Society, 11, 260-261.
Lee, M. (1987). The cognitive basis of classifier systems. In
J. Aske et al. (Eds.), Berkeley Linguistics Society, Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Meeting. Berkeley: Berkeley
Linguistics Society.
Lemaître, Y. (1985). Les systèmes de numération en Polynésie orientale. Journal de la Société des Océanistes, 80, 313.
Miller, K., Smith, C.M., Zhu, J. & Zhang, H. (1995). Preschool origins of cross-national differences in mathematical competence: The role of number-naming systems.
Psychological Science, 6, 56-60.
Nickerson, R.S. (1988). Counting, computing, and the representation of numbers. Human Factors, 30, 181-199.
Tryon, D.T. (Ed.) (1995). Comparative Austronesian dictionary: An introduction to Austronesian studies; 4 vols. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wiese, H. (2003). Numbers, language, and the human mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, J. & Norman, D.A. (1995). A representational analysis of numeration systems. Cognition, 57, 271-295.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Annelie Rothe, Manuela Sibold, and
Simone Traber for support with the material, and to Lothar
Käser, Sarah Mannion, and Mario Spengler, for discussion
and valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Aikhenvald, A.Y. (2003). Classifiers: A typology of noun
classification devices. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Alkire, W. (1970). Systems of measurement on Woleai Atoll,
Caroline Islands. Anthropos, 65, 1-73.
Allan, K. (1977). Classifiers. Language, 53 (2), 284-310.
Beller, S. & Bender, A. (2005). The cognitive advantages of
counting specifically: An analysis of Polynesian number
systems. In B.G. Bara, L. Barsalou, & M. Bucciarelli
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Bender, A. & Beller, S. (2006a). “Fanciful” or genuine?
Bases and high numerals in Polynesian number systems.
Journal of the Polynesian Society, 115, 7-46.
Bender, A. & Beller, S. (2006b). Numeral classifiers and
counting systems in Polynesian and Micronesian languages: Common roots and cultural adaptations. Oceanic
Linguistics, 45 (2), 380-403.

826

