UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object Permanence as Relational Stability or How to Get Representation from the Dynamics
of Embodiment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vn2w030

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Luo, Jun

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object Permanence as Relational Stability or
How to Get Representation from the Dynamics of Embodiment
Jun Luo (jun.luo@utoronto.ca)
Cognitive Science Program, University College, University of Toronto
15 King’s College Circle, Toronto, ON M5S 3H7 Canada
reaches correctly. The same procedure is then done at the
other well (called ‘B’). The child makes an “A-not-B error”
if, during the ‘B trial’, they go back to search at A. Because
the child repeats their A-trial response in a B trial, the Anot-B error is also called the “perseverative response”. The
child outgrows such perseveration at about one year of age.
For Piaget this phenomenon marks a transitional stage between the beginning of a sense of “object permanence” (that
occluded objects persist) and a robust grasp of it: the child
can already retrieve a toy from a single hiding location, but
they cannot yet cope with its “visible displacement” among
multiple hiding locations. Many contemporary researchers
used this phenomenon to “showcase” their research programs: for Diamond (1990) it taps into the involvement of
the prefrontal cortex, for Munakata (1998) it reveals the
interplay of graded “active” and “latent” representation, for
Marcovitch & Zelazo (1999) it is a window into conscious
control, for Newcombe & Huttenlocher (2000) it illustrates
the developmental interaction of locomotion and spatial
coding. Thelen & Smith (1994) themselves already attempted an informal account of this phenomenon in their
book that launched the DSA in developmental psychology.
But, with the exception of Thelen & Smith, all such views
are couched in explicitly representational terms: spatial
code, location representation, conscious control, and so on.
Against this background, we may understand the weight
of the DSM for the DSA (Thelen et al 2001, p.2, e.a.):

Abstract
The dynamic systems approach is sometimes embraced in
conjunction with causal coupling and in opposition to representation-based explanation. The dynamic systems model of
the A-not-B phenomenon (Thelen et al, 2001) supposedly
epitomizes this anti-representation alternative. It is argued
here that this model fails to capture the crucial effects of body
rotation in the A-not-B task and that we need a notion of relational stability to account for these effects. Relational stability
outstrips causal coupling but may ground a renewed understanding of object permanence where representation is necessitated by and achieved through the dynamics of embodiment.
Keywords: embodiment; representation; dynamic systems
approach; A-not-B; object permanence; relational stability.

Introduction
Some advocates of the dynamic systems perspective in cognitive science take it to be an anti-representation alternative
(Thelen & Smith, 1994; van Gelder, 1998; Thelen et al.
2001). This anti-representation stance, however, is not
shared by many dynamic systems theorists of neural systems (e.g. Seung 1996, Zhang 1996, Eliasmith & Anderson
2002) or even by theorists explicitly embracing the “dynamic systems approach” (e.g. Elman, 1995; Beer, 1998).
For discussion I will use the acronym “DSA”, with deference to Thelen and Smith (1994), to mean the dynamic systems perspective (i) restricted to psychological explanation
solely in terms of causally coupled dynamic processes and
(ii) taken to be anti-representational, but reserve the unabridged “dynamic systems approach” for a general and
possibly inclusive emphasis on the value of dynamic systems analysis in cognitive science. The restriction to causal
coupling is a central tenet of the DSA: it is to both provide a
positive alternative to representation and steer it clear of the
oft-laid accusation that dynamic systems modeling describes
behavior without explicating the underlying mechanisms.
To deliver on the promise of the DSA, Thelen et al (2001)
offered a dynamic systems model of the A-not-B phenomenon (henceforth the DSM) from child development. Since
Piaget (1954) identified it, this phenomenon has attracted
the attention of generations of psychologists. Contemporary
A-not-B experiments typically use a hiding device with two
wells. The child (8- to 12-month-old) sits on the floor or in
the caregiver’s lap watching the experimenter hide a toy in
one of the wells. After hiding the toy, the wells are covered
and the experimenter withholds the device to impose a delay
of several seconds. The child is then allowed to reach and
retrieve the toy. Such a trial is repeated a few times at the
same well (called ‘A’ by convention) and the child typically

Our message is: if we can understand this particular infant task and its myriad contextual variations
in terms of coupled dynamic processes, then the
same kind of analysis can be applied to any task at
any age. If we can show that “knowing” cannot be
separated from perceiving, acting, and remembering, then these processes are always linked. There
is no time and no task when such dynamics cease
and some other mode of processing kicks in. Body
and world remain ceaselessly melded together.
The A-not-B task is representative of “any task at any age”
because it had been invariably taken to mark the beginning
of representational capacities for knowing that objects persist, remembering where they are, etc. Against this, the DSA
proposes to treat it solely in terms of causally coupled dynamic processes. The hope is: if the DSA were to succeed
on this task, it could deal with, solo, any task later in life,
whether or not it is traditionally viewed as representational.
I shall note that the DSA’s take on the A-not-B task itself
is also revisionary. While accepting the canonical design,

455

through a transient to the resting level that is offset by the
weak “task input” from A and B (i.e. visible covers at A and
B). With enough delay, BM influence on MP will dominate
and direct the system towards A to exhibit the perseverative
response of younger children. When the MP field is bistable
(high h), however, it can sustain a localized activation peak
derived from specific input from B to counteract the BM
bias for A. This way, the system can remain directed to B
and exhibit older children’s correct reach.

the DSA theorists emphasize that a hidden toy is unnecessary for the rise of perseverative reaching (Smith et al,
1999). This, they reason, shows that the task is not representational even in traditional terms because the behavior persists when there is nothing to represent. The point here is
not that occlusion makes no difference, but rather that it is
only one among the “myriad contextual variations” and not
essentially different from the others: in charting the complex
“dynamics of embodiment” that gives rise to the final reach
to A or B, we do not need to appeal to anything that is recognizably individuated representation of a hidden toy.
Below I will conduct a case study of the DSM. I will focus on whether it does justice to what the DSA wears on its
sleeves: the dynamics of embodiment. Specifically, I will
examine the DSM in light of the empirical evidence for the
effects of body rotation. Body rotation, I suppose, is bona
fide “dynamics of embodiment.” In doing so, I completely
accept the view that the dynamics of embodiment pervades
our cognitive life—and venture to raise it one, by following
it through to arrive at representation.

The Role of Body Rotation
In the A-not-B task, while the child sits on the floor or the
caregiver’s lap, their head and upper body are typically allowed to—and do—rotate. This raises a question: What
role, if any, do such upper body rotations play in the task?
When the upper body rotates, the upper-body-centered locations of potential targets shift (Figure 2). This does not
pose too big a challenge, however, if there is only a single
potential target (e.g. a covered well) that is constantly visible in the scene. In this case, so long as the child remains
motivated to reach after the delay, the unique visible target
can guide the actual reach. What makes the A-not-B task
difficult, as Piaget (1954) emphasized, is the presence of
multiple potential targets that have all become relevant due
to the toy’s “visible displacement” among them. The (first)
B trial is special precisely because it is the first time in the
task when cueing is at a second target. Moreover, because
the A and B targets typically look similar (e.g. with identical
covers), task input cannot sufficiently discriminate them.
One might thus expect that the choice of target must be
based on memory derived from earlier specific input.

How the DSM Works
The heart of the DSM (Figure 1) is a motor planning (MP)
neural field (Amari, 1977). Field locations are connected by
shift-invariant, locally excitatory and globally inhibitory
recurrent weights. The highest activation in the field after
the delay codes the body-centered direction in which the
child reaches. A parameter h controls interaction within the
field: high h allows activation at more field locations to go
above a threshold to strongly excite nearby ones and inhibit
distant ones and low h suppresses such interaction. With the
right h, localized activation peak can sustain itself in the
absence of input and inhibit the rise of new peak from further input. Since a uniformly unexcited state is also stable,
the bistability makes the Amari neural field good for modeling spatial memory: spatially-selective activation peak can
be induced by strong transient input and then sustained
stably by the field itself (e.g. Camperi & Wang, 1998).

visual field:

Figure 2: Relative shift of potential target locations
There is, however, a simpler “embodied strategy”: remain
fixated on the cued target during the delay. Since the child
mostly reaches to where they look (see below), if, throughout the delay, they fixate on B, they will be able to reach
correctly. With fixation doing the heavy-lifting of “target
selection”, memory derived from specific input is only
needed to facilitate the child’s motivation to reach. What is
good for single-location retrieval (Piagetian Stage 4 performance), namely keeping oneself motivated to reach after
delay at the target in front of oneself, would be sufficient for
success in the A-not-B task (Piagetian Stage 5 behavior).
The prediction, put bluntly, is: without delay-period body
rotation there will be no A-not-B error.
Empirical evidence supports this analysis. To minimize
straining to the correct well during delay, Diamond (1985)
instructed parents to hold tight the child’s upper body in her
A-not-B study; she also called the child to look at the center
so as to break their fixation on the correct well during delay.

Reach
Motor Planning

Sensory Preprocessing

Bodily Memory

Figure 1: The DSM of the A-not-B task. Dashed
borders indicate components assumed.
The DSM exploits bistability to model the A-not-B phenomenon. During the A trials, a “preshape” is formed in the
supra-trial bodily memory (BM) through integrating a
thresholded version of MP activity. This BM preshape is
highest for target A because the highest MP activity has
been directed to A in the A trials. During the B trial, the BM
preshape in turn biases MP activation in favor of A. When
the MP field is not bistable (low h), after the initial strong
“specific input” from B (i.e. cueing and hiding at B), it goes

456

child. Spatially-selective memory spanning the delay is thus
necessary for guiding the final reach. But if spatial memory
is needed, a further challenge arises: How is the correspondence maintained amid body rotations between targetselective spatial memory and relatively shifting targets? If
sustained spatial memory were not correctly updated to
compensate for body rotation, it would miss the target after
body rotation (Figure 3). With delay-period body rotation,
not only spatial memory is needed, so is a dynamic remapping of such memory that ensures its correspondence with
the target (Pouget & Sejnowski, 2002). Therefore, the presence or absence of memory remapping may in part explain
younger children’s failure and older children’s success.
Such a perspective on the A-not-B task was actually proposed a long time ago (e.g. Bremner, 1978). Recently, Newcombe (2001) specifically named dead reckoning as a possible mechanism behind older children’s success. Dead
reckoning, if we may recall, uses feedback about one’s own
movement to dynamically remap spatial memory so that one
remains correctly oriented to a target. This, according to our
analysis, is precisely something useful in the A-not-B task.
To sum up, body rotation is a central part of the A-not-B
phenomenon—without body rotation there won’t be A-notB error, but with body rotation correspondence between
memory and target needs to be dynamically maintained.

Since neither measure completely eliminated straining to or
fixation on the target, she analyzed their effects and found
that “when the infant’s strain or gaze was uninterrupted and
maintained throughout the delay, success rate was significantly higher than on comparable trials where strain or gaze
was not thus maintained” (p.873, e.a.). Similarly, Horobin &
Acredolo (1985) found that “infants who maintained visual
orientation only toward B after the toy was hidden in that
location were most likely to direct correct search there”
(p.125) but those who looked to A during B trial delay were
more likely to perseverate. Gratch & Landers (1971) found
that (i) if the child looked at A before the delay ended they
would reach to A and (ii) older children’s orientation to B
predicted their reaching to B. These results agrees with Harris’s (1973) finding that lowering a curtain at A at the beginning of delay led to A-not-B response and Smith et al’s
(1999) finding that tapping a rod at either A or B at the end
of delay increased the child’s reaching in that direction.
These last two studies did not report the child’s orientation,
but the perturbation presumably got them to turn to it.
In a related study of 9- and 16-month-old infants’ performance in a free-choice two-location hide-and-retrieve
task, Cornell (1979) found that when children maintained
gaze on the container with the hidden object, they were correct in 1254 of 1260 trials, but if they gave a glance to the
empty container before opening one of the containers, they
were correct in only 1176 among a total of 2580 trials.

Limitations of the DSM
The DSM, however, cannot account for the role of body
rotation because, first, its assumed static coupling between
BM activity (which in real baby is presumably in body-base
coordinates) and MP activity (which in real baby is presumably in upper-body coordinates) forces on it an implicit
conflation of upper-body and body-base coordinates, which
in turn bars it from even recognizing upper body rotation.
Moreover, if the child makes the A-not-B error, under
typical experimental design, there are at least two body rotations in that trial: first to B when cued and then to A; if the
child is called to the center during the delay as in Diamond
(1985), there will be three: first to B when cued, then to the
center when called, and then either to A (error) or to B (correct reach). Given what Thelen et al (2001; see also Smith et
al., 1999) convincingly argued—that motor planning for the
final reach happens continuously throughout the whole trial,
it follows that planning for the final reach overlaps in time
with planning for delay-period body rotations. This is supported by the empirical findings surveyed above that where
the child faces strongly predicts where the child reaches.
The DSM, however, ignores planning for the intervening
body rotations. Moreover, due to its bistability, the MP field
cannot subserve planning for these rotations if it is to also,
during the delay, sustain an activation peak that statically
corresponds to the target. Thus, the DSM’s MP field embodies a second conflation of two closely related yet crucially differentiable processes: motor planning and working
memory. Spencer & Schöner (2003, p.400)’s renaming the
MP field “working memory” seems to be a terminological
shift that betrays its ambiguous theoretical role.

(a)

visual field:
spatial memory:

(b)

Hi!

(c)

visual field:

visual field:

spatial memory
not remapped:

spatial memory
remapped:

Hi!

Figure 3: Child (a) turns to cued target at beginning
of trial and memory activation peak for target is
formed at center of memory field. Child is called to
center during delay: (b) without remapping the
memory peak now corresponds to center of scene;
(c) with appropriate remapping it remains corresponded to target on the right.
If uninterrupted gaze naturally leads to correct reach, why
is turning away, spontaneous or induced, so detrimental to
the child’s performance? One explanation is that it invalidates the embodied strategy of fixation: with body rotation,
the correct target is no longer always right in front of the

457

Bushnell et al (1995) found that 1-year-olds’ performance
in a locomotor search task was facilitated by “direct landmark” (a distinctively colored cushion directly covering the
toy) but not by “near landmark” (a distinctively colored
cushion near the cushion above the toy). Since well covers
in the A-not-B task are typically identical, we shall be primarily concerned with the use of near landmarks, which in
turn seems to be ruled out by Bushnell and colleagues’ finding. In general, as Gibson and Pick (2000, p.132) observed:
infants start using direct landmarks as their locomotor ability emerges and begin to use near landmarks only with considerable locomotor experience.
More importantly, even if near landmarks were used, that
does not seem to take away the need for dynamic remapping. Because cueing at A or B is specific to the current
trial, the validity of landmark-target association is also limited to it. Were near landmarks available, the child would
still need to, during a trial, specifically relate such landmarks to the intra-trial target cueing, which means selection
and tracking of the landmark must in turn be trial-specific.
If visual features do not uniquely distinguish the landmark,
we are back in square one with the child having to sustain
landmark selectivity during the delay and amid body rotations. If visual features do uniquely single out the landmark,
the child still needs to, (i) sustain a trial-specific preference
to these features, (ii) use these features to track the landmark, and (iii) relate in a trial-specific way the landmark
thus tracked to the target that is spatially separate from it.
These are very exacting demands for an infant and it is far
from clear that (ii) and (iii) will not be vulnerable to body
rotation if memory remapping is not already in operation.
Finally, neuroscience research has robustly identified in
animals remapping of remembered target or direction in
compensation for self-movement (Mays & Sparks, 1980;
Duhamel et al, 1992; Graziano et al, 1998; Baker et al,
2003). Several neural computation models, based on these
findings, have also been proposed (see Pouget & Sejnowski
2002 for a survey). These suggest that the dynamic remapping in question in the A-not-B task is not an isolated phenomenon, but has deeper roots and broader implications and
is neurologically plausible. An embodied movement model
of the A-not-B phenomenon that incorporates kinesthesisbased remapping (Zhang 1996) has been constructed (Luo
2004). Luo also showed that such remapping mechanism
can be learned with a variant of the algorithm proposed by
Stringer et al (2002) in a way that implicates locomotor development without presupposing landmark use.

The problem is really one of time scales. Body rotation
prompted by specific input (cueing) or perturbation (e.g.
calling) is towards what is now attention-grabbing but may
be of no persistent interest. Motor planning for it accordingly takes place on the fast time scale of orienting response. Planning for the final reach, in contrast, involves
tracking an earlier-cued target of lasting interest and takes
place on the slow time scale of working memory. The DSM
conflates these time scales and thus cannot accommodate
memory remapping, which must work on the fast time scale
of orienting response to protect the memory with its slow
dynamics from being invalidated by the orienting response.
Due to these limitations, the DSM can explain neither
why the child needs to turn away from B to make the A-notB error, nor how they may reliably succeed in spite of having, during the delay, turned away from the target.

Towards Relational Stability
To Remember or Not To Remember
Recall that the hidden toy is not necessary for perseverative
response to rise and the DSA theorists take this to show that
memory of a hidden toy is not needed to explain the data.
That much may be conceded. It might be further suggested
that the child’s sustained motivation to reach is not specific
to the toy either, but is instead directed at the visible target.
I.e., their interest in the toy after they remove the cover may
be a complete renewal upon its reappearance. This, too,
might be conceded. Either way, however, there are good
reasons for us to believe that the involvement of memory
with specific content is inevitable—so long as, to succeed,
the child has to sustain, during the delay, differential interest
or motivation towards the two visible potential targets.
What makes the A-not-B task challenging, again, is that
the toy’s “visible displacement” implicates multiple potential targets. Since differential selection of target after the
delay of a trial is here expected to be based on the experimenter’s differential manipulation of target (specific input)
before the delay of the same trial, trial-specific and targetselective memory must be involved for there to be systematic success. Memory of the toy may indeed be unnecessary,
but target-differentiating memory based on earlier specific
input is indispensable. Spatial gaps due to occlusion are not
the only factor necessitating memory. Temporal gaps—
whether or not they are also entangled with occlusion—are
after all what memory is in general supposed to span. If the
DSM has collapsed hiding a toy and waving the well cover
into “specific input”, it has also incorporated sustained target-selective MP activity to explain Stage 5 behavior.

To Represent or Not To Represent
The success condition on memory remapping is that the
sustained activation peak dynamically corresponds to the
correct target amid body rotations. I.e., the target must be
relationally stabilized even though both the activation peak
and the target move—the activation peak relative to the field
and the target relative to the rotating child. Such “relational
stability” contrasts with the attractor stability—strictly
speaking, line or continuous attractor stability (Seung 1996;
Trappenberg 2004)—exploited by the DSM and related

To Remap or Not To Remap
If target-selective memory is needed, correspondence between memory—whether or not of a hidden toy—and target
must also be maintained amid body rotations. The question
is how. One possible alternative to the dead-reckoning sort
of remapping is that the child uses landmarks. But there are
good reasons for us to think that this is not the case in such a
task at the age concerned.

458

work (Schutte et al, 2003), where the primary concern was
to keep the activation peak at a field location in the presence
of distracting inputs. In the face of body rotation, however,
pinning down the peak is precisely to miss the relatively
shifting target (Figure 3)! Amid the dynamics of embodiment, target tracking must be dynamically achieved, through
shifting the activation peak!
Crucially, memory remapping is here not causally driven
by the target “over there”. It is instead occasioned by and
coordinated with the self-movement “around here”: body
rotation both changes the spatial relation and generates the
feedback needed for the remapping. Task input may still
help sustain the memory. In this sense memory and its target
are still “coupled”. Correct dynamic correspondence, however, is not a result of this weak coupling because task input
does not differentiate the correct target from the incorrect
one. It is rather the other way around: task input from the
correct target can support the memory activation peak only
if their correspondence is dynamically maintained.
Neither is the remapping a passive, continuous evolution
of system dynamics from the early strong coupling when the
target was being cued. Rather the remapping is endogenous
and active. It requires the compensation mechanism to kick
in upon body rotation. But nothing in the environment or in
the child-environment coupling necessitates the kicking in
of this remapping. It is rather a matter of how the various
capacities of the child get dynamically and successfully coordinated. And this coordination is an architectural feature
of the child, not that of the coupling.
The point about the endogenous contribution to relational
stability really concerns a dynamic division of labor: when
the scene becomes quiescent, responsibility falls on the
child to remain correctly directed to the real target. Accordingly, the child must be equipped with appropriate memory
sustaining and remapping capacity. If the cueing were still
on-going, or the target were uniquely singled out by its visual feature, or the embodied strategy of fixation were not
upset, the environment could be shouldering much more of
the responsibility for successful target tacking.
I take it that the appropriately remapped activation peak,
diachronically individuated, represents the target, or more
accurately, something like “this over there now is where I
want to go.” This is because (i) the peak stands in for the
target’s being the right one in the absence of sufficient visual distinction of the target and (ii) it is also manipulated—
dynamically remapped—in lieu of specific input marking
out the target as the earlier specific input is no longer available for direct causal coupling with it. These dual features of
“standing in for” and “being manipulated in lieu of” make
the memory peak representational. Crucially, however, (ii)
is here prior to (i): remapping establishes a dynamic correspondence that allows the shifting peak to, during the delay,
stand in for the (relatively shifting) target. Such a representation, rather than presupposing a static or even atomic correspondence with its target as under the traditional, logicist
conception of representation, is subsequent to and constituted by dynamically achieved relational stability.

To Reduce or Not To Reduce
Parallel things can already be said about the sustenance of
memory peak in the DSM, where attractor stability allows
temporal gaps to be spanned so that the currently quiescent
scene may be treated in a way that is appropriate given previous cueing. The achievement of this diachronic relation
with the past, which we may even call “temporally relational stability”, is again endogenous: It is based on the appropriate architecture of the neural field. The memory is
here also manipulated—sustained—in lieu of causal coupling with the now bygone cueing and stands in for something like “this over there is where I want to go.”
The problem with the DSM is not that it is not representational, which it already is. It is rather that it is not dynamic
enough: the static correspondence assumed by the DSM is
ironically reminiscent of logicist representation! What the
DSM lacks is adequate recognition of both the challenge
from the dynamics of embodiment—that it can disrupt static
correspondence based on attractor stability, and the potential
in the dynamics of embodiment—that correspondence can
be established dynamically.
How about the DSA, then, if the DSM already does not
follow its script? With its exclusive commitment to explanation in terms of causal-coupling, the DSA (recall our convention with this acronym!) cannot even recognize relational stability as such, because neither the memory remapping nor the memory sustaining in question can be explained in terns of causal coupling with what the memory is
of. The point is not that the dynamic systems theory, which
the DSA uses, is irrelevant—after all the remapping mechanism in question has been fruitfully studied using dynamic
systems theory (e.g., Zhang 1996). The point is rather that
the relational stability needed for spanning intertwined temporal and spatial detachment cannot be reduced to dynamic
patterns of causal coupling because no causal coupling is
even possible across such detachment. The cognitive agent
may still be “ceaselessly melded” with the environment, but
just not the whole world, just not all at once.

Concluding Remarks
The notion of relational stability is akin to Brian Cantwell
Smith’s metaphor of “intentional acrobatics” for the dynamic achievement of reference (Smith, 1996). It also suggests an initial an answer to Nora Newcombe’s question
“What IS location at A?” (Newcombe, 2001), namely location representation presupposes embodied dynamic tracking
or localization. But maybe such tracking dynamics is also a
“dynamics of permanence” (Luo, 2004)? Maybe we can also
understand the development of object permanence as partly
a developmental achievement of relational stability? In the
end, uncovering the limitations of the DSM and the DSA is
just a step towards what seems to be an exciting alternative
understanding of object permanence and representation as
achieved relational stability that is necessitated by, accountable to, and made possible through the dynamics of
embodiment.

459

Marcovitch, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (1999). The A-not-B error:
Results from a logistic meta-analysis. Child Development,
70, 1297–1313.
Mays, L. E., & Sparks, D. L. (1980). Dissociation of visual
and saccade-related responses in superior colliculus neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 43, 207–232.
Munakata, Y. (1998). Infant perseveration and implications
for object permanence theories: A PDP Model of the Anot-B task. Developmental Science, 1(2), 161–184.
Newcombe, N. (2001). A spatial coding analysis of the Anot-B error: What IS “Location at A”? Commentary on
Thelen et al (2001). Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24,
57–58.
Newcombe, N., & Huttenlocher, J. (2000). Making space:
The development of spatial representation and reasoning.
Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child.
New York: Basic Books.
Pouget, A. & Sejnowski, T. J. (2002). Dynamical remapping. In M. A. Arbib (ed). The Handbook of Brain Theory
and Neural Networks, 2nd edition (pp.335-338). Boston:
MIT Press.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003). Testing
the dynamic field theory: Working memory for locations
becomes more spatially precise over development. Child
Development, 74, 1393–1417.
Seung, H. S. (1996). How the brain keeps the eyes still.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
93, 13339–44.
Smith, B. C. (1996). On the origin of objects. Cambridge,
MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Smith, L. B., Thelen, E., Titzer, R, & McLin, D. (1999).
Knowing in the context of acting: The task dynamics of
the A not-B error. Psychological Review, 106, 235–260.
Stringer, S. M., Trappenberg T. P., Rolls, E. T. & Araujo, I.
E. T. (2002). Self-organising continuous attractor networks and path integration: One-dimensional models of
head direction cells. Network: Computation in Neural
Systems, 13, 217–242.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 1–86.
Trappenberg, T. P. (2004). Continuous attractor neural network. In L. N. de Castro & F. J. von Zuben (Eds.) Recent
Developments in Biologically Inspired Computing. Idea
Group Publishing.
van Gelder, T. J. (1998). The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 1-14.
Zhang, K. (1996) Representation of spatial orientation by
the intrinsic dynamics of the head-direction cell ensemble: A theory. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 2112–2126.

References
Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateralinhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics, 27,
77–87.
Baker, J. T., Harper, T. M., & Snyder, L. H. (2003). Spatial
memory following shifts of gaze. I. Saccades to memorized world-fixed and gaze-fixed targets. Journal of neurophysiology, 89, 2564–2576.
Beer, R.D. (1998). Framing the debate between computational and dynamical approaches to cognitive science.
Commentary on van Gelder (1998). Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21, 630.
Bremner, J. G. (1978). Egocentric versus allocentric spatial
coding in nine-month-old infants: Factors influencing the
choice of code. Developmental Psychology, 14, 346–355.
Bushnell, E. W., McKenzie, B. E., Lawrence, D. A., &
Connell, S. (1995). The spatial coding strategies of oneyear-old infants in a locomotor search task. Child Development, 66, 937–958.
Camperi, M., & Wang, X.-J. (1998). A model of visuospatial working memory in prefrontal cortex: recurrent network and cellular bistability. Journal of Computational
Neuroscience, 5, 383–405.
Cornell, E. H. (1979). The effects of cue reliability on infants’ manual search. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 28, 81–91.
Diamond, A. (1985). Development of the ability to use recall to guide action, as indicated by infants’ performance
on A-not-B. Child Development, 56, 868–83.
Diamond, A. (1990). The Development and Neural Bases of
Memory Functions as Indexed by the AB and Delayed
Response Tasks in Human Infants and Infant Monkeys.
Ann. of the N.Y. Acad. of Sci., 608, 267–317.
Duhamel, J. R., Colby, C. L., & Goldberg, M. E. (1992).
The updating of the representation of visual space in parietal cortex by intended eye movements. Science, 255,
90–92.
Eliasmith, C., & Anderson, C.H. (2002). Neural Engineering: Computation, Representation and Dynamics. in
Neurobiological Systems. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Elman, J. L. (1995) Language as a dynamical system. In
Port, R.F. & van Gelder, T. (Eds.) Mind as Motion, pp.
195–225, MIT Press.
Gibson, E.J. & Pick, A.D. (2000). An Ecological Approach
to Perceptual Learning and Development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gratch, G., & Landers, W. F. (1971). Stage IV of Piaget’s
theory of infant’s object concepts: A longitudinal study.
Child Development, 42, 359–72.
Graziano, M., Hu, X., & Gross, C. (1997). Coding the locations of objects in the dark. Science, 277, 239–241.
Harris, P. L. (1973). Perseverative errors in search by young
infants. Child Development, 44, 29–33.
Luo, J. (2004). The Dynamics of Permanence. PhD dissertation, Indiana University.

460

