UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On-line Reference Assignment for Anaphoric and Non-Anaphoric Nouns: A Unified, MemoryBased Model in ACT-R

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0866x7d3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Pyke, Aryn
West, Robert L.
LeFevre, Jo-Anne

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On-line Reference Assignment for Anaphoric and Non-Anaphoric Nouns:
A Unified, Memory-Based Model in ACT-R
Aryn Pyke (aryn.pyke@gmail.com)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Robert L. West (rlwest@connect.carleton.ca)

Jo-Anne LeFevre (jlefevre@connect.carleton.ca)

Institute of Cognitive Science, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Department of Psychology, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada
Sengul, 1979; Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978; O'Brien, Plewes,
& Albrecht, 1990). In such strategic-search models, the
discourse might be mentally represented as a proposition
network, and the reader might systematically troll
backwards through it in search of the antecedent that
(according to some criterion) could constitute a match to the
current anaphor term. After all, how else could we account
for the fact that readers come across the right referent (i.e.,
the particular one mentioned earlier in the discourse)?
An answer to this “How else” question is furnished by the
memory-based view of text processing (see Gerrig &
O’Brien, 2005 for a review). According to the memorybased view, the successful retrieval of a referent need not
require (or constitute evidence of) a strategic, proactive
search, because passive general-purpose memory processes
often can automatically bring the intended referent to mind.
In particular, under the resonance model (e.g., Gernsbacher,
1989; Myers & O’Brien, 1998) current information in
working memory (i.e., the anaphoric noun) serves as a cue
that automatically boosts activation of other entities
throughout long-term memory -- including, ideally, the
intended referent -- in accord with their conceptual overlap
with the cue. Thus, at the time the anaphor ‘fruit’ in (2) is
encountered, the apple referent can be automatically reactivated via resonance in virtue of its conceptual overlap
with the anaphor (a pre-existing conceptual association).
Certainly higher-level and pragmatic processes may also
play a role in comprehension. However, to account for
readers’ frequent success at referent reactivation during
(first-pass) anaphor processing, we agree that there may be
“no need to invoke any process other than general memory
processing” (Gerrig & O’Brien, 2005, p. 230). The
computational model in the present paper constitutes an
existence proof that memory-based models are indeed
sufficient, not only in principle, but in practice, to account
for a high rate of success at first-pass referent retrieval.
The present paper and model also identify and address a
fundamental, but we believe, previously neglected and
under-estimated problem: The Anaphoric Classification
Problem. In particular, how (and how accurately) can
readers judge whether or not a noun is anaphoric during
first-pass processing? Our model demonstrates how the
memory-based view can be operationalized to address this
classification problem, and in particular, to predict when a

Abstract
The computational model in present paper confirms that
memory-based accounts are sufficient to account for a high
rate of success at first-pass referent retrieval for anaphoric
(and non-anaphoric) nouns. Because even definite noun
phrases can often be non-anaphoric (e.g., Poesio & Vieira,
1998), an adequate model must account for how a reader
makes an explicit or implicit decision about the anaphoric
status of a noun (herein: The Anaphoric Classification
Problem). We explain why we are inclined to reject the
conventional intuition that: the failure to find/retrieve a
referent within the discourse then, serially, leads to treating a
(possibly anaphoric) noun as a new referent. Instead, we
extend the memory-based account to address this
classification problem. We suggest that LTM contains both
generic referent types and specific referent tokens, which
simultaneously compete for retrieval via resonance. The
nature of what is retrieved (token vs. type) determines
whether the reader effectively treats a noun as anaphoric or
not. Our model predicts whether an anaphor in a given text
will be misinterpreted as a new referent during first-pass
processing. The influence of anaphor word choice is
explained, and encompasses metaphoric anaphors.
Keywords: noun anaphora; memory-based text processing;
resonance; reference assignment; cognitive modeling; ACT-R

Introduction
An anaphoric noun is one that denotes a referent that was
previously mentioned in the discourse, but possibly using a
different antecedent term. For example, in (2) “fruit” (or
“apple”) is used anaphorically to denote the referent
introduced by the antecedent “apple” in (1).
(1) John bought an apple.
(2) John enjoyed the fruit/apple.
Readers are often able to re-activate the intended referent 1
almost immediately after encountering an anaphoric noun
(Dell, McKoon, & Ratcliff, 1983; Sanford & Garrod, 1989)
that is, after the first-pass processing of the noun. To
account for this on-line ability, some models suggest that
when a reader encounters an anaphoric noun, he/she
undertakes a strategic search for an antecedent through a
representation of the discourse context (e.g., Clark &
1

The term ‘referent’ is being used here in the cognitive sense (as
in Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 2001) to mean the mental
representation of the entity (person or object) in question.
1403

particular anaphor will be initially misinterpreted as a new
referent. To foreshadow, we suggest that it is not the failure
to find/retrieve a referent that then, serially, leads to treating
a noun (non-anaphoric or anaphoric) as a new referent.
Rather, we suggest that retrieval, per se, typically always
succeeds, but the nature of what is retrieved (particular
referent token vs. referent type) determines whether the
reader effectively treats a noun as anaphoric or not. In our
model, generic type referents and specific discourse
referents simultaneously compete for retrieval.

automatic strategic-search accounts. Readers apparently
have no sure-fire local cue to determine when they should
expect -- and thus proactively search for -- an antecedent for
a given noun phrase. One could argue that a reader (and the
model) must make a default assumption of anaphoricity, at
least for definite NPs. Thus the reader would always launch
a strategic antecedent search upon encountering a DNP.
We have some reservations about this suggestion. First,
the referent assignment process will not be unified in the
sense that it will be different depending on whether the noun
is proceeded a definite article or an indefinite article (e.g.,
Just & Carpenter, 1987; Kintsch, 1998). While primarily a
cosmetic objection, if comparable performance can be
achieved by a simpler, unified model (as we hope to
demonstrate it can), then parsimony will argue for the
unified model. A second reservation about a model which
launches a strategic search for every DNP pertains to
cognitive efficiency. According to corpus studies (e.g.,
Poesio & Vieira, 1998), such nouns will frequently be nonanaphoric, and any time and effort invested in an antecedent
search will in vain. Under this account, non-anaphoric
nouns (or anaphoric nouns misinterpreted as non-anaphoric)
will presumably require two stages to process: 1) a strategic
search for an antecedent that should fail, followed by 2)
some method to initialize/associate a new referent to the
noun. However, when readers sometimes treated an
anaphoric noun as a new referent, Levine, Guzman and Klin
(2000) found no accompanying delay in sentence reading
time. Their results suggest that readers may not invest time
actively seeking an antecedent in the discourse before
resorting to a new referent interpretation.
Having outlined some limitations of the strategic-search
solution, we now turn to our positive proposal.

The Anaphoric Classification Problem
Anaphoric nouns are not a natural kind. Any noun in the
lexicon can serve in an anaphoric or non-anaphoric capacity.
So, how do readers determine whether or not a given
occurrence of a noun is anaphoric? The definite article “the”
is often assumed to indicate that the intended referent is
already familiar to the reader (e.g., Clark & Sengul, 1979;
Garnham, 1989; Just & Carpenter, 1987). However, corpus
analyses have established that definite noun phrases (DNPs)
are equally likely to introduce new referents into the
discourse as to denote referents that have already been
mentioned (Gundel et al., 2001; Poesio & Vieira, 1998).
Thus, readers are not privy to the anaphoric status of a noun
a priori, and may misclassify an anaphoric noun as nonanaphoric (and vice versa). In the literature, the reader’s
task is sometimes dubbed anaphor resolution, but this
terminology seems to under-represent the full scope of the
reader’s (and modeler’s) task.

Criteria for a Referent Retrieval Model
In view of the classification problem, a cognitive model of
the (first-pass) referent retrieval process for nouns must
meet the following criteria:
i)
It must account for how the reader explicitly or
implicitly makes an anaphoric/non-anaphoric
classification of a noun
ii)
In so doing it must serve to predict, for
particular texts and anaphors, when the reader
will be apt to: a) misclassify an anaphoric
noun as a new referent; and b) misclassify a
non-anaphoric noun as an anaphor.
The classification problem is addressed by some noncognitive Natural Language Processing algorithms (e.g.,
Bean & Riloff, 1999; Vieira & Poesio, 2000), however, they
involve multiple passes forward and backward through the
text, and do not directly speak to the development of a
cognitive model of on-line processing. We now describe
two possible solutions to the classification problem, which,
respectively, extend the strategic-search approach, and the
memory-based approach to meet the above criteria. The
second, memory-based approach is our positive proposal.

A (Non-ideal) Strategic-Search Approach
The statistical unreliability of the definite article to signal
anaphoricity raises further doubts about the plausibility of

A Unified Memory-Based Approach
Here we extend the memory-based view to provide a unified
procedural treatment applicable to both anaphoric and nonanaphoric nouns. We suggest that a preliminary
determination of anaphoric status is not based upon the
article preceding the noun, but is made implicitly, based on
the nature of what is activated by resonance. We, however,
acknowledge that the article may impact subsequent
verification, reanalysis, and pragmatic processes.
However, we propose that first-pass referent retrieval (and
implicitly, the anaphoric classification task) is driven by
general-purpose memory mechanisms. The referent initially
retrieved for a noun will simply be the one that is the most
accessible (i.e., most active), while that noun is being
processed. As discussed above, the noun itself exerts a
relatively immediate and important impact on the relative
accessibilities of referents via resonance. The impact of any
prior word or process (memory-based or otherwise) will be
entirely mediated by its lingering effect on the accessibility
of the referents in LTM. Thus, a referent’s accessibility
during first-pass noun processing owes to two components:
i) a resonance boost from the noun term currently being
processed; and ii) its ‘context dependent’ pre-noun

1404

activation level – the net effects of prior processing on
referent activations. An example of a known context
dependent influence is the recency of use of a referent (or
the distance in words or sentences between the anaphor and
antecedent, e.g., Duffy & Rayner, 1990)
Our treatment differs from conventional resonance
accounts in that it provides a more comprehensive,
quantitative and real-time operationalization of contextual
influences on the LTM referents’ pre-anaphor activation
levels. Importantly, our treatment also encompasses the
anaphoric classification problem. We suggest that a
classification decision about a noun’s anaphoric status may
be determined by the outcome of a competition for retrieval
between specific referents and generic referents (e.g.,
schemas/types) in LTM. Thus, we characterize the sources
of referent activation with an eye to their impact on the
relative accessibility of the specific intended referent, versus
the accessibility of the applicable generic referent.
Our implementation was developed using an extension of
the ACT-R cognitive architecture (Anderson et al., 2004), in
its python implementation (Stewart & West, 2006). ACT-R
was an appropriate development framework because its
memory system that can simulate real-time activation
fluctuation and decay for mental representations (“chunks”).

Generic versus Specific Referents
In our model, LTM contains two types of referents:
particular referents we've had prior experience (e.g., the
apple you had for lunch), as well as referent templates (e.g.
generic apple concept). To capture this type/token
distinction in the syntax of the model and this paper, generic
referents are given the identifier 0, whereas particular tokens
of referents in memory are individuated with unique, nonzero identifiers. For example the generic apple referent will
be designated [apple0], whereas the particular apple you had
for breakfast might be [apple7]. The working assumption
is that when we read about a new, unfamiliar apple -- as you
are, this instant, reading about the apple I have in my bag -we use the generic apple referent [apple0] to create a new
referent token for the new apple, and assign it a unique ID,
say [apple8]. We note that referents are conceptual, not
lexical, representations.
In general, when a reader encounters the noun “apple”,
this will resonate with all conceptually related referents in
LTM, be they generic or specific. Generic referents may
thereby ‘compete’ with specific referents for retrieval.
Consequently, if a generic referent is most accessible as the
noun is processed, it will be retrieved, and the noun will
effectively be interpreted as a new referent. If a specific
referent from the discourse is most accessible, the noun will
effectively be interpreted as anaphoric.
Ideally, generic referents are retrieved and used to
initialize new discourse referents for non-anaphoric nouns,
as [apple0] is used to token [appleANT] in (1). They can
also, however, compete with specific referents for retrieval
when processing anaphoric nouns, as [fruit0] will compete
for retrieval with [appleANT] while processing “fruit” in

(2). Thus it is not the absolute level of activation that the
intended referent achieves that is germane, it is its level of
activation relative to its generic competitor(s).

Memory-Based ‘Context Dependence’
We now discuss how the discourse context, up to and
including the referring noun, influences the present
accessibility levels of the generic and specific referents in
LTM. In our model, the referent retrieval process in play
during the first-pass processing of the anaphoric noun is
strictly memory-based (resonance), so the impact of prior
discourse processing will be entirely mediated by its
lingering effect on the accessibility of the various referents
in LTM. Thus, to model the first-pass processing of a noun,
we must also simulate the processing of the preceding
discourse, but only so far as is necessary to approximate the
accessibilities of the various referents in LTM at the time
the noun of interest is encountered. Some pre-anaphor
processes/effects are outlined below, along with supporting
empirical evidence. To situate these effects, we first provide
an overview of our full simulation.
Overview of Our Text-Processing Simulation
0. LTM is seeded with generic referents for various
discourse concepts, including, importantly the antecedent
concept and also (if different) the anaphor concept. For
example, [apple0] and [fruit0] will be placed in memory.
1. Words of a story are then read and processed serially.
2. Each content word (e.g., noun, adjective, verb) spreads
activation to both specific and generic referents according to
the conceptual similarity between the word and the referent.
3. If the current word is a referring term (noun, name,
pronoun), a referent is retrieved from memory (e.g., the
most accessible one, be it specific or generic). This referent
is thus boosted in activation, and so are its companion
referents from previous sentences (see below). If the
retrieved referent is generic, the generic referent is used to
create a new specific referent.
4. At the end of each sentence, during wrap-up,
participating referents are reactivated and associated.
In the simulation, the processing of each word takes about
150-200 ms/word, because only 3-4 basic operations (or
ACT-R “productions”) are required. Thus the time-course of
processing is psychologically plausible to better capture the
real-time decay of activation for the various referents.
Factors Affecting the Accessibility of Referents
1. Resonance with the Referring Noun. Each referent in
LTM (specific and generic) will receive an activation boost
in accord with its conceptual association with the current
noun. In this model (see also Budiu & Anderson, 2004), the
strengths of conceptual associations were estimated using
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) values (lsa.colorado.edu).
To produce LSA estimates, a large text corpus is analyzed
and each lexical concept is represented as a vector in a
multidimensional semantic space (Landauer, Foltz, &

1405

Laham, 1998). Similarity between concepts is computed as
the cosine of the angle between their vectors, so the
maximum similarity, of a concept to itself, is 1. We discuss
the impact of anaphor word choice more extensively later
on. The remaining factors below relate to pre-anaphor
‘context’ effects on the accessibilities of referents.
2. Spread of Activation from Pre-Anaphor Words. Just as
the anaphor resonates with, or spreads activation to,
referents, our model assumes that such activation spread
generally occurs as each content word in the discourse is
encountered. The activation boosts received by referents
may persist (as do lexical priming effects, e.g., Collins &
Loftus, 1975) even when the reader progresses on to the
next word. While such effects decay they may exert a
cumulative effect on a referent’s activation.

Dell et al. (1983, see also McKoon & Ratcliff, 1980), two
referents which have appeared in a common sentence are
called companions. The comprehension process appears to
forge a lasting association between companion referents in
memory, possibly during sentence wrap-up, such that when
a referent is subsequently encountered, its companion(s)
from prior sentences also become re-activated right away,
and to a comparable degree (Dell et al., 1983). In our model,
whenever a referent is retrieved (assigned), its companions
are also boosted in activation, thereby making them more
accessible as referent candidates for upcoming nouns.

How Our Memory-Based Approach Resolves
the Classification Problem

3. Recency and Frequency of Use. These general factors
affect any mental representation’s accessibility. Evidence
indicates that the further back that an antecedent is (in
sentences, and consequently in time), the more challenging
it is to process the anaphor (e.g., Clark & Sengul, 1979;
Duffy & Rayner, 1990; Levine, Guzman, & Klin, 2000). A
referent that was referred to many times in a text, and/or
was referred to in the sentence preceding the critical
anaphor should be more cognitively accessible, ceteris
paribus, than a referent mentioned only once several
sentences back. In the ACT-R cognitive architecture (and in
our model), the effect of recency and frequency of use on
the activation level of representation i is quantified by Bi,
where tj is the time since use j, and d is a constant whose
default value is .5 (Anderson et al., 2004).

(How) does our model account for the fact that we often
correctly interpret a noun as anaphoric or not, during firstpass processing? We’ll use example (1)-(2) to detail how
referent retrieval is influenced, and how anaphoric
classification is arbitrated, by the accessibility factors
described in the preceding section.

Interpreting Anaphoric Nouns

N

Will an anaphoric noun be correctly classified as such?
Let’s assume that when processing the antecedent term
“apple”, the reader created a specific referent [appleANT] in
memory. Ideally, this will be the referent retrieved when
processing the anaphor “fruit”. However, we suggest that
another possibility is that the word “fruit” might instead
bring to mind a generic fruit referent [fruit0]. If the generic
referent is retrieved, the reader will effectively have treated
(misclassified) the noun as non-anaphoric. In first-pass
processing, which referent is retrieved (generic or specific)
is determined by which is more accessible. In our model,
two activation components determine the relative
accessibilities of referents: i) the activation boost each
receives in virtue of resonance with the anaphor term
“fruit”, and ii) the influence of prior ‘context’ (e.g., recency
of use) on their relative accessibilities. We’ll see that the
resonance component of activation favours the generic
referent, whereas the context influence tends to favour the
specific referent. Thus, if the intended referent [appleANT]
is to be retrieved, the contextual influence on its activation
must more than compensate for its resonance disadvantage.

Bi = ln

∑

tj-d

j =1

4. Sentence Wrap-Up Effects. Just and Carpenter (1980)
suggested that integrative processes occur at sentence end,
which is why readers tend to spend relatively longer on the
final word in each sentence. These wrap-up processes may
result in sentence-end activation effects (Balogh, Zurif,
Prather, Swinney, & Finkel, 1998). Probe studies suggest
that a referent mentioned early in a sentence may also
produce facilitation effects at sentence end (e.g., Dell et al.,
1983; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1980). In our model, we assume
that integrative processes at sentence end result in an
activation boost (weight 1) of the specific referents
mentioned in the sentence.
5. Discourse Dependent Associations. In addition to preexisting associations like those we are modeling with LSA,
discourse dependent associations may be formed in
memory. Spread of activation through such associations
may produce intermittent (yet cumulatively significant)
activation contributions to an intended referent during preanaphor processing. For example, each sentence (and
proposition) in a discourse may contain several referents. In
1406

Resonance Boost from Anaphor. First consider the
relative resonance boosts provided by the anaphoric noun
“fruit” to the two discourse referents [appleANT] and
[John1]. Resonance boosts depend on (usually discourseindependent) conceptual associations. LSA estimates the
fruit-apple association at 0.47 and the fruit-John association
at 0.03. Thus, resonance arguably removes [John1] from
the running.
However, the [appleANT] is still not
necessarily retrieved, because there are other potential
competitors. In particuar, the noun (“fruit”) also boosts
activation of non-discourse referents in LTM such as the
generic fruit referent [fruit0], which would otherwise come
into play for non-anaphoric uses of the term “fruit” (e.g.

the graph designating [fruit0]. Letters (a)-(d) in the figure
flag pre-anaphor events of interest. When processing
“apple” at (a), our referent [appleANT] is mentioned (used,
boosted) for the first time. At (b) [appleANT] receives a
boost during the wrap-up of the first sentence, because it
was a referent in that sentence. At (c), referent John is
encountered (retrieved), however [appleANT] will also
receive a comparable boost in activation because it was a
companion of the referent John in the first sentence. In all,
the cumulative effects of (a) recent usage, (b) first sentence
wrap-up, (c) discourse-dependent companion association
and (d) resonance, render the intended referent [appleANT]
more accessible overall than the generic fruit referent (or the
generic apple referent). Thus our model predicts that the
correct referent will be retrieved (and thus that the correct
classification will be made) during the first-pass processing
of the anaphor “fruit” in this discourse. However, point (d)
illustrates that resonance alone produced a greater boost in
activation for the generic fruit referent than for the specific
apple referent.

“Sally gave Mark a piece of fruit”). In LSA, the fruit-fruit
association is 1, so the anaphor term, “fruit”, will actually
provide a larger boost of activation to [fruit0] than to the
specific apple referent [appleANT]. In principle, a noun
anaphor will always afford a relatively higher boost of
activation to its generic referent than to the specific referent
(initialized using a different antecedent concept). However,
the reader is not doomed to retrieve the generic referent,
because a referent’s net activation is also influenced by the
pre-anaphor processing (context).
Our example illustrates that resonance may play a big
role in giving a selective advantage to the intended referent
[appleANT] relative to other specific discourse referents.
However, contextual influences must in turn play the role of
outweighing the relative advantage that resonance gives to
the generic referent [fruit0] relative to the specific one.
(Even) when the anaphor and antecedent are the same
(“apple”), the resonating anaphor will spread comparable
activation to the generic apple referent [apple0] as to the
discourse specific one, so ‘contextual’ influences are still in
play to determine whether the generic [apple0] referent or
the specific intended referent [appleANT] is retrieved.

Interpreting Non-Anaphoric Nouns
Following the same memory-based, standard operating
procedure (i.e., to retrieve the most active referent after
resonance), our model also aptly handles the processing of
the non-anaphoric noun “apple” in the first sentence. Prior
to the noun “apple”, the referent for [John1] was most
active, due to its recent mention. The term “apple” resonates
strongly (LSA=1) with the generic apple referent [apple0] in
the LTM knowledge base, but has no strong pre-existing
association with the John referent (apple-John LSA is 0.09).
So, at point (a) in Figure 1, the generic referent [apple0]
becomes the most active referent, and is retrieved.
Consequently the noun “apple” is correctly interpreted as
non-anaphoric, and a specific referent [appleANT] is
tokened using the retrieved generic one. Thus, the same online process (i.e., retrieving the most active referent after
resonance) can account for referent retrieval (and correct
classification) for anaphoric and non-anaphoric nouns.

Pre-anaphor Contextual Influence on Activation. Some
sources of activation furnish a relative advantage to specific
discourse referents, to enable them to win out over a generic
referent. The frequency and recency of usage of specific
referents in the discourse will selectively bolster their
activation level (vs. their generic counterparts).
Furthermore, in our model, sentence wrap-up and discoursespecific associations (companion spreading) augment the
activation of specific referents but not generic ones.
Figure 1 presents the activation profiles produced by our
model for [appleANT], [John1], and the generic referents:
[fruit0] and [apple0]. When considering the classification
problem for the noun “fruit” in the second sentence, the
crucial contrast is between the solid line at the top
designating [appleANT], and the dotted line at the bottom of

Figure 1: Model Output - Activation Profiles for Specific and Generic Candidate Referents in Discourse (1)-(2)
1407

Misclassification and Anaphor Word Choice

References

The anaphoric status of “fruit” was correctly determined
above by our model. However, evidence suggests that
anaphors are sometimes misclassified (e.g., Levine et al.,
2000). Our model accounts for potential first-pass
misclassifications of an anaphor (i.e., retrieving a generic
referent). Misclassification occurs if contextual influences
fail to outweigh the relative advantage the anaphoric noun’s
generic referent gets from resonance. The anaphor term
determines the most competitive generic referent in play.
Consider the anaphors in (5), for the terrier [terrier1] in (3):
(3) John took his terrier1 to the park.
(4) (The sun shone).
(5a) The dog…
(5b) The monster…
In (5a) “dog” maximally boosts [dog0] and moderately
boosts [terrier1] (LSA=.72). In (5b) “monster” maximally
boosts [monster0] and modestly boosts [terrier1]
(LSA=.14), so context is relied upon more heavily in (5b) to
compensate for the resonance discrepancy. Our process
operates as normal for metaphoric anaphors, which was has
precedent (Budiu & Anderson, 2004; Lemaire & Bianco,
2003) but the Classification Problem was not addressed.
Here, if line (4) is omitted, our model correctly retrieves
[terrier1] in (5a) and (5b). Including (4) makes [terrier1]
less accessible (less recently active) and its activation falls
below that of the generic referent [monster0] in (5b), so
“monster” will be initially treated as a new referent. In
general, the greater the activation ‘head-start’ the specific
intended referent has due to pre-anaphor contextual
influences, the greater the latitude in anaphor choice (i.e. the
weaker the LSA anaphor-antecedent association can be,
before resulting in misclassification).

Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S., Lebiere,
C., & Qin, Y. L. (2004). An integrated theory of the mind.
Psychological Review, 111, 1036-1060.
Balogh, J., Zurif, E., Prather, P., Swinney, D., & Finkel, L. (1998).
Gap-filling and end-of-sentence effects in real-time language
processing. Brain and Language, 61, 169-182.
Bean, D. L. & Riloff, E. (1999). Corpus-based identification of
non-anaphoric noun phrases. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Meeting of the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics, 373-380.
Budiu, R. & Anderson, J. R. (2004). Interpretation-based
processing: a unified theory of semantic sentence
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 28, 1-44.
Clark, H. H. & Sengul, C. J. (1979). In search of referents for
nouns and pronouns. Memory & Cognition, 7, 35-41.
Dell, G., McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1983). The activation of
antecedent information during the processing of anaphoric
reference. J. of Verb. Learning and Verb. Behav., 22, 121-132.
Duffy, S. A. & Rayner, K. (1990). Eye-movements and anaphor
resolution - Effects of antecedent typicality and distance.
Language and Speech, 33, 103-119.
Gerrig, R., & O’Brien, E. (2005). The scope of memory-based text
processing. Discourse Processes, 39(2&3), 225-242.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1989). Mechanisms that improve referential
access. Cognition, 32, 99-156.
Gundel, J., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (2001). Definite
descriptions and cognitive status in English. Journal of English
Language and Linguistics, 5, 273-295.
Just, M. A. & Carpenter, P. A. (1987). The psychology of reading
and language comprehension. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc.
Kintsch, W. (1989). Comprehension: A Paradigm for Cognition.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W. & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 85, 363-394.

Concluding Remarks

Landauer, T.,Foltz, P.& Laham,D.(1998).An introduction to
latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes,25, 259-284

If LTM contains both generic (type) and specific (token)
referents, readers can retrieve appropriate referents for both
anaphoric and non-anaphoric nouns rapidly via resonance.
Resonance is memory-based. Any influence of prior context
is mediated by its impact on the activations levels of LTM
referents. Anaphoric nouns may be misinterpreted as new
referents (Anaphoric Classification Problem), if they prompt
the retrieval of a generic rather than a specific referent. So,
referent retrieval may be relatively immediate (Sanford &
Garrod, 1989, Just & Carpenter, 1980) but not necessarily
correct. The reader may subsequently revise this
misinterpretation while reading the remainder of the
sentence (beyond the current scope), so post-anaphor
processing delays may reflect such revision processes. Our
model was motivated by and is consistent with existing
empirical evidence, and systematic verification with
additional human data is currently being undertaken.

Acknowledgments

Lemaire, B. & Bianco, M. (2003). Context effects on metaphor
comprehension: Experiment and simulation. In Proceedings of
5th Int.Conf. on Cognitive Modelling (ICCM), 153-158.
Levine, W. H., Guzman, A. E., & Klin, C. M. (2000). When
anaphor resolution fails. J. of Mem. and Language, 43, 594-617.
McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1980). The Comprehension Processes
and Memory Structures Involved in Anaphoric Reference.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 16, 150.
Myers, J. L. & O'Brien, E. J. (1998). Accessing the discourse
representation during reading. Discourse Processes, 26,131-157.
O'Brien, E. J., Raney, G. E., Albrecht, J. E., & Rayner, K. (1997).
Processes involved in the resolution of explicit anaphors.
Discourse Processes, 23, 1-24.
O'Brien, E. J., Plewes, P. S., & Albrecht, J. E. (1990). Antecedent
retrieval-processes. JEP: LMC, 16, 241-249.
Poesio, M. & Vieira, R. (1998). A corpus-based investigation of
definite description use. Computational Linguistics, 24,183-216.
Sanford, A. J. & Garrod, S. C. (1989). What, when, and how?:
Questions of immediacy in anaphoric reference resolution.

Language and Cognitive Processes, 4, 235-262.

We thank Terry Stewart for his valuable advice. This
research was funded by NSERC.
1408

Stewart, T.C. & West, R. L. (2006) Deconstructing ACT-R. In
Proceedings of 7th Int. Conf. on Cognitive Modelling (ICCM).

