UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Peer Instruction as a Way of Promoting Spontaneous Use of Diagrams When Solving Math
Word Problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1xf9q095

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Uesaka, Yuri
Manalo, Emmanuel

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Peer Instruction as a Way of Promoting Spontaneous Use of Diagrams
When Solving Math Word Problems
Yuri Uesaka (yuesaka@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Department of Educational Psychology, Graduate School of Education
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Emmanuel Manalo (e.manalo@auckland.ac.nz)
The Student Learning Centre, The University of Auckland, New Zealand
Abstract

reasoning strategies when some prerequisite conditions are
met (e.g., Stern, et al., 2003; see also the review by Cox,
1999).
It appears, however, that school students do not
appreciate the efficiency that diagram use brings to problem
solving as much as teachers and researcher do. A number of
problems about students’ use of diagrams have been
reported, which include lack of spontaneity in their use (e.g.,
Ichikawa, 1993, 2000; Uesaka, Manalo, & Ichikawa, in
press), inappropriate construction (e.g., Cox, 1996; Uesaka
& Manalo, 2006), and failure to draw correct inferences
even when appropriate diagrams have been used (e.g., Cox,
1996).
These problems concerning students’ use of diagrams
have not been sufficiently examined in previous studies. The
present study focused on the lack of spontaneity with which
students use diagrams in math word problem solving: a
teaching method for promoting spontaneity was developed
and evaluated.

Although using diagrams is generally considered one of the
most effective strategies for solving math word problems,
research and educational practice reports indicate that
students lack spontaneity in their use of diagrams. In an
attempt to address this problem, the present study investigated
the hypothesis that creating situations whereby students have
to teach other students how to solve math word problems with
the use of diagrams would promote those students’
subsequent spontaneous use of diagrams. Experimental
classes were conducted with 57 8th-grade students for five
days. Participants in the experimental condition were all given
opportunities to explain to other students in their group their
way of solving the math word problems given. In contrast, in
the control condition, only some of the students were given
opportunities to make presentations in front of the class about
their way of solving the problems. In both conditions, the
teacher encouraged diagram use during the instructions
provided. The main finding was that, in the post-instruction
assessment, those in the experimental condition evidenced
greater spontaneous use of diagrams in attempting to solve the
math word problems given. This finding suggests that, as a
consequence of the peer teaching experience – which
provided opportunities for the use of diagrams as
communication tools – participants internalized diagrams as
tools for problem solving. The protocol of peer interaction
was also analyzed to better understand the mechanisms
involved in this effect.

1.1 Students’ Lack of Spontaneity in Diagram Use
Research reports relating to educational practices suggest
that students’ failure to spontaneously use diagrams occur
despite plenty of exposure to appropriate use of diagrams.
Ichikawa (1993), for example, reported in a tutoring case
study an 8th-grade girl who did not spontaneously use
diagrams in a test situation and failed to solve the problem
given – despite previously being taught how to solve similar
problems with the use of diagrams. Ichikawa (2000)
described the extent to which this problem is found among
students. Dufour-Janiver, Bednarz, & Belanger (1987) also
noted the lack of spontaneity in diagram use among students
and observed that this problem occurs even though math
teachers use a lot of diagrams in class. Uesaka, Manalo, &
Ichikawa’s (in press) empirical study confirmed this
tendency particularly among Japanese students.
If students do not (or cannot) use diagrams in situations
where they would be deemed appropriate, they (the
students) would clearly be disadvantaged. Although in some
educational contexts suitable diagrams are provided or
suggested, in the majority of cases – including ‘real world’
situations – students are required to construct and use
diagrams by themselves according to necessity. In light of
the previously identified problems, it would seem that
interventions additional to traditional classroom instructions

Keywords: Diagram Use, Math Word Problem Solving, Peer
Instruction

Introduction
Diagrams are generally considered as one of the most
effective tools in problem solving. For example, Larkin and
Simon (1987) showed that diagrammatic representations are
superior to sentential representations because they help
reduce mental computational loads associated with
searching and processing. Other studies have also
empirically demonstrated that diagrams effectively promote
the performance of many types of tasks (e.g., Ainsworth &
Th Loizou, 2003; Cheng, 2002; Koedinger & Terao, 2002;
Larkin & Simon, 1987; Mayer, 2003; Polya, 1945;
Schoenfeld, 1985; Stern, Aprea, & Ebner, 2003).
As a sub-category of diagrams, those that are selfconstructed are especially effective. Although some studies
have suggested that self-constructed diagrams do not always
promote success in problem solving (e.g., Van Essen &
Hamaker, 1990), the findings of recent studies mostly
indicate that self-constructed diagrams provide powerful

677

are necessary to effectively promote student use of diagrams
in problem solving.
However, most of the research studies that have been
done about diagrams have focused on their effects and
functions (e.g., Ainsworth & Th Loizou, 2003; Cheng, 2002,
2004; Koedinger & Terao, 2002; Larkin & Simon, 1987;
Mayer, 2003) and few have empirically examined possible
teaching methods that would promote spontaneity of their
use when problem solving. Uesaka (2003) is one exception
in that her report proposed an actual teaching method for
enhancing spontaneous use of diagrams. She found evidence
that diagram use can be promoted via a combination of two
interventions – verbal encouragement from the teacher (to
enhance students’ perceptions about the efficiency that
diagram use brings), and training in drawing (to improve
their diagram construction skills).
Although Uesaka (2003) succeeded in identifying
instructional components that promote the spontaneous use
of diagrams, the method she proposed requires a fair amount
of environmental control that is difficult to achieve outside
of experimental situations. Thus a necessary next step is to
develop a teaching method that can more naturally be
employed in real classroom teaching situations. This
constituted the main aim of the present study.

1.2 Diagrams as Communication Tools
Diagrams are effective tools not only for problem solving
but also for communication (e.g., Lyon, 1995; Tversky,
Lozano, Heiser, Lee, & Daniel, 2005; see also review by
Sacchett, 2002). For example, Lyon (1995) reported that
diagrams facilitated communication with adults who,
because of aphasia, found communication through verbal
means difficult. Moreover, as pointed out by Dufour-Janiver
et al. (1978), math teachers use a lot of diagrams for
explaining how to solve problems in class, and this practice
contributes to the promotion of students’ understanding of
the processes involved. Diagrams thus work equally well as
tools of explanation as they do as tools for problem solving.
Although previous studies have examined these two
aspects of diagram use separately, data gathered by Uesaka
et al. (in press) suggest the possibility that viewing diagrams
as tools of communication promotes spontaneous use of
diagrams when problem solving. Uesaka et al. found greater
use of diagrams among students in New Zealand compared
to Japan, and this difference appeared related to differences
in the students’ experiences about the use of diagrams as
communication tools. They pointed out that the New
Zealand school curriculum included the objective of
providing “opportunities for students to develop the ability
to think abstractly and to use symbols, notation, and graphs
and diagrams to represent and communicate mathematical
relationships, concepts, and generalizations” (New Zealand
Ministry of Education, 1992, p. 10). Such an objective is
absent from the Japanese school curriculum which focuses
primarily on the math content that students should acquire.
If the learning environment is such that students have to
use visual representations such as diagrams when providing

explanations (even in cases, for example, where they can
solve the problems given without the use of diagrams), other
benefits associated with the use of diagrams are likely to
follow. Firstly, as Ainsworth and Th Loizou (2003) pointed
out, explaining with the use of diagrams improves
understanding of the nature of the problem. It contributes to
enhancing students’ appreciation of the efficacy that
diagram use brings. Secondly, more experiences of
constructing diagrams from the math word problems given
would be provided and, as a result, diagram drawing skills
would be promoted. There is clear congruence therefore
between Uesaka’s (2003) finding that improving
perceptions and skills associated with diagram use promotes
actual diagram use, and the notion that if diagrams are seen
and employed as communication tools their use would
likewise increase.
A similar line of argument exists in the area of reading
strategy research: this suggests that using strategies during
collaborative learning situations promotes the spontaneous
use of those strategies when students subsequently work on
their own. For example, Palincsar and Brown’s (1984) study
on reciprocal teaching showed increases in students’
spontaneous use of reading strategies when their teacher
encouraged them to use those same strategies when listening
and attempting to understand explanations provided by other
students.
However, the applicability to natural settings of the two
instructional components that Uesaka (2003) identified has
not previously been examined; nor has the notion that
“using diagrams as communication tools leads to greater
appreciation of their benefits and thus increases in their
actual use” been properly investigated. The present study
therefore sought answers to the questions arising from these
through the use of experimental classes in which the “jigsaw
method” for learning (Aronson, 1978) was employed and all
students had to provide explanations to other students with
the use of diagrams. The main hypothesis of the present
study was that students who receive opportunities to explain
the use of diagrams to their peers would evidence increases
in their own spontaneous use of diagrams when solving
math word problems.

Method
2.1 Participants
Fifty-seven 8th-grade students (female = 25, male = 32),
who were recruited from public junior high schools in two
wards of Tokyo and a junior high school affiliated with the
University of Tokyo, participated voluntarily in this study.
Participants were assigned to one of the two conditions
(experimental and control) by using a randomized block
design, in which they were grouped according to their
achievements at school. Information about the participants’
achievements was collected from parents through the use of
a questionnaire that was mailed out to them.

678

2.2 Materials

table and then a graph according to information provided in
the form of sentences. Two versions of booklet were made,
each version being given to half of the participants in each
condition. The participants were allowed 5 minutes to work
on each of the two questions in the booklet.

Math Word Problems Used in Instruction Sessions. The
study was carried out over the course of six days, three of
which – Days 2 to 4 – were devoted to instruction. In each
of the instruction days, two math word problems, with
similar story contexts and requiring similar types of
diagrams for their correct solution, were used. ‘Arrangement
problems’, for which constructing both a table and drawings
to represent the situations described in the problems was
deemed helpful, were used on Day 2. ‘Mobile phone
problems’, for which the construction of graphs was deemed
effective towards arriving at their correct solutions, were
used on Day 3. ‘Area problems’, for which the use of tables
was effective, were used on Day 4. As illustrative examples,
the two problems that constituted the ‘mobile phone
problems’ are shown in Appendix 1. Examples of diagrams
constructed by participants are shown in Fig. 1.

(A) Arrangement Problem

2.3 Procedure
Data collection and instruction sessions were conducted
over 6 days at the University of Tokyo. Pre-instruction
assessment was carried out on the first day, and postinstruction assessment on the final two days. As noted
earlier, the instruction sessions were provided on the second
to fourth days. These instruction sessions lasted
approximately 50 minutes each day, and participants
assigned to the same condition took the classes together.
During the instruction sessions, the teacher presented two
math word problems each day and employed a consistent
teaching procedure for each group. Firstly, the teacher
encouraged the students to carefully read and think about
the problems given so that they would understand the nature
of these problems. During this time, the teacher asked the
students in the small group (of usually 4) to split into two
smaller groups and assigned one of the two problems to
each. Secondly, the teacher asked the students to solve the
problem they had been assigned by themselves. However,
prior to letting the students attempt solving the problem, the
teacher explicitly encouraged them to use diagrams –
pointing out their usefulness for solving problems.
Participants in the experimental condition were also told
that they would be asked to explain to another student later
and were encouraged to use diagrams when explaining.
During this period, the teacher also provided as much help
as the students needed. For example, the teacher encouraged
students who wanted to receive hints to gather in front of
the board where the teacher then provided hints, as well as
demonstrated steps leading to the correct solution of the
problem and the use of appropriate diagrams.
Thirdly, in the control condition, some of the participants
were asked to present their ideas about how to solve the
problem they were assigned in front of the class. This kind
of presentation of one’s ideas about how a problem might be
solved is quite common in typical Japanese classrooms. The
teacher contributed as necessary to each presentation to
ensure that it led to an appropriate approach to solving the
problem. In contrast, in the experimental condition, the
students were asked to explain to another student in the
group how to solve the problem they had been assigned.
After this, the teacher asked a student from the class to
present his or her idea for solving the problem to the class.
Like in the control condition, the teacher contributed to the
presentation as was necessary in each case.
On the final two days, the students’ spontaneous use of
diagrams in problem solving was evaluated by asking them
to individually solve some math word problems. All
representations, except words and equations, generated by
the participants were judged as ‘spontaneous diagram use’.

(B) Mobile Phone Problem

Fig. 1. Typical Diagrams Participants Produced during the
Instruction Sessions. (A) is for one of the arrangement
problems, and (B) for one of the mobile phone problems.
Math Word Problem Solving Assessment. A math word
problem solving assessment was administered at the end of
the experiment to examine the quantity and quality of the
diagrams spontaneously produced by the participants. In this
assessment, four more math word problems were used.
These problems were comparatively more difficult than the
ones used during the instruction sessions, and their level of
difficulty was intended to convey to the students the need to
use visual representations (e.g., diagrams) when attempting
to solve them. Solving two of the problems (‘tile problem’
and ‘pentagon problem’) would have been facilitated by the
use of tables, and the other two problems (‘water problem’
and ‘travel problem’) would have been facilitated by the use
of graphs. Examples of the problems used are shown in
Appendix 2. The participants were given a total of 45
minutes to work on the problems.
Four university
colleagues, including a qualified math teacher,
independently considered the most effective kinds of
diagrams to use in attempting to solve these problems, and
all concurred on the kinds of diagrams noted above.
Basic Skills Assessment. The basic skills assessment was
administered on the first day of the study to check the
equivalence of the participants in the experimental and
control conditions as far as their skills in constructing tables
and graphs were concerned. The assessment consisted of
two questions which required the participants to construct a

679

Results

'

Only participants who attended all sessions were included in
the analyses. The final number of participants included in
the analyses was 42 (for the experimental condition, n =21;
for the control condition, n =21).

&"#
&

9:).45;.+,-<
6*+=5,5*+
6*+,4*<
6*+=5,5*+

%"#
%
$"#

3.1 Math Word Problem Solving Assessment
Findings

$
!"#
!

The students’ spontaneous use of diagrams in the math word
problem solving assessment was analyzed. Before
conducting the analyses, the participants’ responses to the
problems were scored. A diagram was defined as any
representation of the problem other than words (on their
own), sentences, or numerical formulas. Tables were also
counted as diagrams for the purposes of this study and
defined as a depiction of at least a pair of values arrayed to
represent two related variables. If a participant constructed
at least one diagram when solving a problem, the
participant’s response to that problem was coded as “used
diagrams (1)”. Otherwise, the response was coded as “no
diagram (0)”.
A t-test was used to compare the average numbers of
problems in which participants “used diagrams” in the two
conditions. As depicted in Fig. 2, the result indicates
significantly more spontaneous use of diagrams in the
experimental condition compared to the control condition
(t(40) = 2.86, p < .01). This finding supports the main
hypothesis of this study.
An analysis was also undertaken to compare the quality
of diagrams produced by participants in the two conditions.
A diagram was categorized as “appropriate” if it matched
the type of diagram (i.e., table, or graph) the four colleagues
(noted earlier) considered most appropriate for the problem
given. Otherwise the response was categorized as being
“inappropriate”.
Again a t-test was used to compare the average number
of problems in which the participants constructed
“appropriate diagrams” in the two conditions. The result,
also depicted in Fig. 2, indicates that the participants in the
experimental condition produced significantly more
appropriate diagrams compared to those in the control
condition (t(40) = 4.36, p < .01). Together, these findings
suggest that explaining how to solve math word problems to
other students (with the use of diagrams), promotes not only
the spontaneous use of diagrams in subsequent attempts at
solving problems, but also the construction of better – more
appropriate kinds of – diagrams.

()*+,-+.*/0120.

3))4*)45-,.167*58.

Fig 2. The Mean Number of Problems in which Diagrams
Were Spontaneously Used (left), and in which Appropriate
Diagrams Were Constructed (right) in the Math Word
Problem Solving Assessment.
Water Problem

Pentagon Problem

Diagrams
Deemed as
Appropriate

Diagrams
Deemed as
Inappropriate

Fig 3. Examples of Diagrams Produced During the PostInstruction Sessions.
mistake was given partial credit (1 point), and the rest were
given no credit (0 point). The participants’ total scores for
the two questions were compared using a t-test. No
significant differences were found between the two
conditions (t(40) = .62, n.s). This finding suggests that
participants in the two conditions were equivalent in their
diagram construction skills at the beginning of the study.

3.3 Example of Protocol During Classes
The findings of this study suggest that using diagrams as
tools for explanation subsequently promoted the
spontaneous use of diagrams as tools for problem solving.
However, the kind of mechanism involved in this process
was not clear. Therefore, the present study also analyzed the
typical protocol of the experimental condition and
considered the instructional features that the participants in
these groups received via the manipulations made.
An example of protocols during the explanation time in
the instruction sessions provided is shown in Fig. 4. In this
protocol, S1 and S3 tried to explain how to solve “mobile
phone problem 2” with diagrams to S2 who was earlier
assigned to do the other problem (“mobile phone problem
1”; see the Appendix 1). Firstly, S1 explained her idea about

3.2 Basic Skills Assessment Findings
To check the equivalence of the experimental and control
conditions at the beginning of the experiment, participants’
responses to the basic skills assessment that was
administered on the first day (prior to any instructions being
provided) were analyzed and compared. For each question,
a perfectly correct answer was given full credit (2 points),
an answer which was mostly correct but contained a small

680

Discussion

how to solve the problem using diagrams she sketched, and
S2 questioned her. S3 afterwards participated in this
communications in order to add information to address the
question that S2 asked. They communicated with each other
with the use of diagrams. Actually S3 originally did not use
diagrams for solving the problem (when he was working on
his own), but he constructed diagrams to explain how to
solve the problem to S2.
This case – and many others like it observed during the
study – suggests the possibility that encouraging students to
explain how to solve math word problems to other students
promotes the likelihood that participants would actually
construct diagrams. It is unlikely that, in the example
protocol described, S3 would have constructed diagrams if
they had not been asked to explain to another student how to
solve the problem (which he could solve correctly without
the use of diagrams). He constructed the diagram because he
experienced difficulty in explaining to S2 how to solve the
problem with the use of only words. The experimental
manipulation used here of asking students to explain to
other students increases the likelihood of students ‘needing’
to use diagrams – and therefore promotes diagram
construction and the enhancement of skills associated with it
(e.g., drawing, thinking, communicating).
It is also possible that the opportunities to explain to
others helped the participants to understand and appreciate
better the efficiencies that diagram use brings. Responses
written on the review sheets (which, among other things,
asked participants what they learnt in the classes they
attended) suggest this. S2, for example, noted that “when a
graph is drawn, the problem becomes dramatically easier”.
S1 also commented that “graphs and tables are convenient
tools for solving problems”.

The main finding of the present study was that students in
the experimental condition, who were given opportunities to
teach their peers how to solve the math word problems they
were assigned, evidenced greater spontaneous use of
diagrams in subsequent assessment compared to those in the
control condition. There were also higher proportions of the
diagrams produced by those in the experimental condition
that matched the kinds of diagrams deemed most
appropriate for use with the problems given. These findings
suggest that two functions of diagrams – as tools for
problem solving and as tools for communication – which
have been viewed separately in the past, may in fact be
related.
The possibility of the differences found between the
experimental and control groups coming from some other
variable other than the instruction sessions provided is
clearly minimal in light of the students’ performance on the
basic skills assessment. This assessment, which was
administered at pre-instruction, clearly showed that there
were no significant differences between the experimental
and control groups in their abilities to construct diagrams –
more specifically, graphs and tables – at the beginning of
the study, prior to any instructions being provided.
The examination of the protocols during the student-tostudent teaching/explanation sessions suggested that
teaching other students provided more practice in
constructing and using diagrams, as well as possibly more
opportunities to consider and appreciate the efficiencies and
other benefits that diagram use brings. As noted earlier, the
value of practice and appreciation of the benefits of diagram
use were similarly identified in Uesaka (2003). As the
examination of the protocols involved in the peer
explanation/teaching sessions undertaken in this study was
only at an exploratory level, a more thorough and systematic
investigation into these processes is needed in future studies.
Such an investigation would need to address the actual
nature of the relationship between using a tool like diagrams
for communication purposes and incorporating the tool into
one’s personal repertoire of problem solving skills.
One important contribution of the present study to math
education is that it suggests what appears to be a viable and
effective method for promoting students’ use of diagrams in
math word problem solving – a method that can easily be
adopted in natural, real-life classroom settings. The findings
suggest that the commonly-used method (in some countries
like Japan) of simply asking students to make short
presentations about their ideas in front of the class is not as
effective in promoting the desired behaviors – in this case
using diagrams. However, giving students opportunities to
explain to other students appears to promote the desired
behavior. This finding is congruent with earlier findings
about the benefits of peer tutoring and collaborative learning,
and it highlights the various components of learning that are
facilitated
(e.g.,
reflection,
comparison,
insight,
understanding, practice) when such procedures are used –
not only for the tutee, but most importantly also for the tutor.

S1: Up to the 100th minute, it takes 1500 yen. After that,
the cost would gradually increase as shown in this
diagram (she pointed to a diagram she had drawn).
S2: I know we can explain only with diagrams.
S1: Yes.
S1: Until this point, plan B is cheaper. But after this point,
the cost gradually increases and plan C becomes a little
bit cheaper after this crossing point … Moreover, after
this next crossing point, plan B becomes cheaper
again.
S2: It looks like plan C is cheaper only for such a short
period …?
S1: Yes, only this period.
S2:Very short …
S1: Don’t worry about that.
S3: Well, actually, this diagram shows this period is very
short, but actually the period is much longer (he
pointed to his diagram which was more accurately
drawn compared to S1’s, on a sheet of grid paper. His
graph was shown as an example in Fig. 1).
Fig 4. Example of Protocols During the Instruction Session
in the Experimental Condition.

681

References
Aronson, E. (Ed.). (1978). The Jigsaw Classroom. Calif: Sage.
Ainsworth, S., & Th Loizou, A. (2003). The effects of selfexplaining when learning with text or diagrams. Cognitive
Science, 27, 669-681.
Cheng, P. C. H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
Principles for complex representational systems. Cognitive
Science, 26, 685-736.
Cox, R. (1996). Analytical reasoning with multiple external
representations. Unpublished PhD Thesis. The University of
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Cox, R. (1999). Representation construction, externalized
cognition and individual differences. Learning and Instruction, 9,
343-363.
Dufour-Janiver, B., Bednarz, N., & Belanger, M. (1987).
Pedagogical considerations concerning the problem of
representation. In C. Janvier (Ed.), Problems of representation in
the teaching and learning of mathematics (pp. 110-120).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ichikawa, S. (1993). Suugakuteki na kangaekata' wo megutte no
soudan to sidou [Case report of cognitive counseling in
'mathematical thinking]. In S. Ichikawa (Ed.), Gakusyuu wo
sasaeru ninnti-kaunsering -sinnrigaku to kyouiku no
aratanasettenn [Cognitive counseling that supports learning: A
new approach bridging psychology and education](pp. 36-61).
Tokyo: Brain Press.
Ichikawa, S. (2000). Benkyou-hou ga kawaru hon [A book about
changing the approach to learning] Tokyo: Iwanami Press.
Koedinger, K. R., & Terao, A. (2002). A cognitive task analysis of
using pictures to support pre-algebraic reasoning. In C. D.
Schunn, & W. Gray (Eds.), Proceedings of the twenty-fourth
annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 542–
547). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11,
65-99.
Mayer, R. E. (2003). The promise of multimedia learning: Using
the same instructional design methods across different media.
Learning and Instruction, 13, 125-139.
New Zealand Ministry of Education. (1992). Mathematics in the
New Zealand curriculum. Wellington, New Zealand: Learning
Media.
Palinscar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal Teaching of
Comprehension-Fostering
and
Comprehension-Monitoring
Activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117-175.
Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical
method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sacchett, C. (2002) Drawing in aphasia: moving towards the
interactive. Human-Computer Studies, 57, 263-277.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Stern, E., Aprea, C., & Ebner, H. G. (2003). Improving crosscontent transfer in text processing by means of active graphical
representation. Learning and Instruction, 13, 191-203.
Tversky, B. Lozano, S., Heiser, J., Lee, P., & Daniel, M. (2005).
Explanation in diagram, word, and gesture. Paper from the 2005
AAAI Spring Symposium Technical Report SS-05-06,105-107.
Uesaka, Y. (2003). Suugakutekimondainioite zuhyounoriyouwo
unagasu kainyuuhohouno kentou [How to promote the
spontaneous use of diagrams when solving math word problems].
Paper for the Annual conference of Japanese Educational
Psychology, 500.
Uesaka, Y., & Manalo, E. (2006). Active comparison as a means
of promoting the development of abstract conditional knowledge

682

and appropriate choice of diagrams in math word problem
solving. In D. Barker-Plummer, R. Cox, & N. Swoboda (Eds.),
Diagrammatic representation and inference (Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence 4045) (pp. 181–195). Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Uesaka, Y., Manalo, E., & Ichikawa, S. (in press). What kinds of
perceptions and daily learning behaviors promote students' use of
diagrams in mathematics problem solving? Learning and
Instruction.
Van Essen, G., & Hamaker, C. (1990). Using self-generated
drawing to solve arithmetic word-problems. Journal of
Educational Research, 83, 301–312.

Acknowledgement
The authors are grateful to Shin’ichi Ichikawa and Yoshio
Kaburagi for their helpful comments during the planning of
this study. This study was supported by a grant from the
Center of Research for Core Academic Competences,
School of Education, the University of Tokyo.

Appendix 1: Examples of Math Problems Used
in the Instruction Sessions
Mobile Phone Problem (1)
You are a clerk in a mobile phone shop which sells two types of
mobile phone plans. When a customer asks your advice, which
plan would you recommend as being cheaper depending on calling
time?
Plan A: The basic fee is 4500 yen, and no extra cost is charged.
Plan B: There is no basic fee, and no free calling time. The cost
of calls is 30 yen per minute.

Mobile Phone Problem (2)
In another shops, two different types of mobile phone plans are
sold. When a customer asks your advice, which plan would you
recommend as being cheaper depending on calling time?
Plan B: There is no basic fee, and no free calling time. The cost
of calls is 30 yen per minute.
Plan C: The basic fee is 1500 yen including 100 minutes of free
calling time, with 80 yen per minute charged thereafter.

Appendix 2: Examples of Math Problems
Administered at Post-Instruction Assessment
Water Problem
The head of a company asked Taro to find out which of three
countries – A, B, or C – would be best for establishing a factory
which uses water. The different charging methods of each country
are described below. Please imagine you are Taro, and come up
with an explanation for the head of the company.
Country A: 1000 yen is charged as a basic fee, but you can use
water without additional charge up to 100 litres. After
100 litres, 40 yen/litre is charged.
Country B: There is no basic fee. Water cost is 20 yen/litre.
Country C: In addition to 2400 yen as a basic fee, there is a
charge of 4 yen/litre of water used.

Pentagon Problem
There are many sheets of paper in the shape of a regular pentagon,
with each side being 1 cm. These sheets are arranged one by one
with the rule that a new sheet shares only one side with already
arranged sheets. Find the circumference when arranging 1, 5, 10
and 20 sheets.

