UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Penetrating the Geometric Module: Catalyzing Children's Use of Landmarks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7pg4c989

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Twyman, Alexandra
Friedman, Alinda
Spetch, Marcia

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Penetrating the Geometric Module: Catalyzing Children’s Use of Landmarks
Alexandra Twyman (atwyman@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Alinda Friedman (alinda@ualberta.ca)
Department of Psychology, 217 Biological Sciences Bldg, University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2E9 CANADA

Marcia Spetch (mspetch@ualberta.ca)
Department of Psychology, 217 Biological Sciences Bldg, University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2E9 CANADA

geometric cues exclusively. Cheng hypothesized that rats
reoriented by using representations encoded in a geometric
module, which essentially records metric information about
the shape of the environment. Information about landmarks
near the target was hypothesized to be “glued” onto the
metric frame provided by the geometric module. Subsequent
researchers have assumed that such nongeometric features are
encoded and represented in separate modules (see Cheng &
Newcombe, 2005, for review).
Hermer and Spelke (1994, 1996) extended Cheng’s (1986)
work to human children and found that younger children
(between 2 and 4 years of age) behaved identically to the rats.
Choices were divided evenly between the rotationally
equivalent corners of a small rectangular room, even though a
blue wall – a landmark – could have been used to improve
accuracy. Hermer­Vasquez, Moffet, and Munkholm (2001)
demonstrated that children are able to integrate landmark
information with geometric information at about the same age
as they are mastering spatial language, particularly “left” and
“right”.
However, Learmonth, Nadel, and Newcombe (2002)
challenged the modular view by contrasting performance of
5­year­old children in small (4 x 6ft.) and large (8 x 12ft.)
rooms. The children in the small room replicated Hermer and
Spelke’s (1996) findings: they failed to use the blue feature
wall. In contrast, children were able to integrate both feature
and landmark information successfully in the large room.
Thus, children are able to use feature information before the
mastery of spatial language in some cases. By age 6, children
were able to succeed regardless of room size. Learmounth et
al. (2002) proposed three explanations for why room size
would matter. First, younger children may fail to generalize
what they know about navigation in large spaces to the small
experimental space. With more experience, older children
may learn that color can be a useful cue regardless of the size
of the search space. Second, the task demands of the two
spaces may have been different. The last, and related,
possibility is that the blue wall was used as a heading cue in
the large room, but may not have been perceived as a useful
heading cue in the small room. The fragility and variability of
landmark use with room size argues against an encapsulated
representation of geometric information. It is difficult to

Abstract
We examined whether 4­5 year old children could be trained to
use landmark features to relocate goals after disorientation. In
Experiment 1, half of the children were pretrained in a small
equilateral triangle shaped room with different colored walls.
These children and a control group were tested in a small
rectangular room with a feature wall. Children with pretraining
responded more frequently to the correct corner than to the
diagonally congruent corner on their first set of four trials in the
rectangular room whereas the children in the control group used
geometric cues exclusively. Three additional groups of children
(Experiment 2) showed that the use of landmark features – both
salient and subtle – can be learned in as few as four practice
trials in a small rectangular room. The data support the view
that both geometry and landmark features are combined in the
same representation.
Key Words: children; feature; learning; single representation

Introduction
The ability to orient oneself in space is a fundamental skill
that has evolutionary and ecological significance for all
mobile organisms. Virtually all species tested encode
geometric properties of the environment (see Cheng &
Newcombe, 2005, for review). While children under 6 years
of age (Hermer­Vasquez, Moffet, & Munkholm, 2001;
Hermer & Spelke, 1996) appear to use geometric cues
exclusively, many species are able to conjoin geometric and
feature cues, including pigeons, (Kelly, Spetch, & Heth,
1998) rhesus monkeys (Gouteux, Thinus­Blanc, & Vauclair,
2001) chicks, (Vallortigara, Zanforlin, & Pasti, 1990) and fish
(Sovrano, Bisazza, & Vallortigara, 2002).
Cheng (1986) first proposed the existence of an
encapsulated geometric module devoted to the task of
orienting (and reorienting) in space. In a working memory
task, rats used geometric information exclusively even when
the corners of the space were completely disambiguated by
various non­geometric landmarks. In a reference memory
task, the rats learned to use featural information to locate the
target within 30 trials. However, when the featural
information was removed from the target corner, the rats were
unable to use the remaining cues and reverted to using

671

understand how such a module could be active under one
circumstance but not another.
The main goal of the present study was to challenge the
modularity hypothesis further by examining whether 4­ and
5­year­olds can learn to use landmark features in a small
space. If children can generalize navigational skills to the
experimental space after a relatively small amount of training,
it would argue against the existence of an encapsulated
geometric module. The influence of such a module should not
be rapidly overshadowed. In addition, if 4­year­olds can learn
to use landmark features in a reorientation task, spatial
language should not be necessary for a flexible integration of
geometric and non­geometric cues (Hermer­Vasquez, Moffet,
& Munkholm, 2001; Hermer­Vasquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson,
1999). If the task is fundamentally different in the two room
sizes, then training should not alter the use of landmark
features.

keep their eyes closed, or want to continue playing. The
remaining 24 participants had an average age of 58 months.
There were twelve 4­year­olds (average = 52 months; range =
49 ­59 months) and twelve 5­year­olds (average = 65 months;
range = 61 ­ 71 months).
Apparatus and materials. The triangular and rectangular
rooms were located in adjacent rooms. Both rooms were
constructed out of 180 cm tall office dividers stabilized with a
wooden frame and exterior brackets. Vapor barrier sheets
provided a ceiling that allows light in without external cues.
The interior of the dividers were covered with cotton fabric.
The equilateral triangle walls were 224 cm in length, creating
a 2.17 m² search space. Each wall was completely covered
with red, yellow, or blue fabric. The entrance between the
blue and yellow wall was a flap of fabric 120 cm high that
could be secured with Velcro.
The rectangular room was 180 cm long and 122 cm wide,
creating a search space of 2.20m². Three of the walls (two
long and one short) were covered with off­white fabric. The
remaining short wall was covered with either off­white or
yellow fabric hung from a rectangular plank. The door was
again a fabric flap located between two white walls and could
also be fastened with Velcro.
The search stimuli were
21.5 cm white squares of laminated paper placed on the floor
in both rooms. All of the squares looked identical from the
back. The front of one card had a picture of one the characters
from the movie Madagascar (DreamWorks Animation LLC,
2005), including a hippopotamus, a lion, a zebra, a penguin,
and a giraffe.

Experiment 1
To examine the malleability of children’s search choices, half
of the children practiced the task in a room shaped like an
equilateral triangle. This shape prevents geometric cues from
being used to solve the relocation task. However each wall of
the triangular room was a different color to provide unique
landmarks and the target is presented in the center of one
wall. If the children trained in the triangular room learn to use
the yellow wall to solve the task, they should choose the
correct corner more often than the geometrically congruent
corner when transferred to the rectangular room with the
yellow wall, and more often than the group who was not
trained.
If children can learn to attend to and encode landmark
features, then the training should help in two ways. The
importance of color is emphasized, both in general and to the
particular reinforced color (yellow). As the target is in the
middle of the wall, left­right sense relations are irrelevant.
This ensures that training does not merely teach children the
correct answer (i.e., left of the yellow wall). If children are
learning only the correct color, they should respond equally
often to both yellow corners in the rectangular room.
Alternatively, if geometry is compulsory, then children
should revert to geometry when they are transferred to the
rectangular layout. But if the training merely “reminds”
children that color can be used as a heading cue or as a means
of reorienting, then this should transfer to the rectangular
room instantly. When children in the training group are tested
in the absence of features, they should revert to responding on
the basis of geometry.

Design and Procedures. Children were tested with a
reference memory paradigm. All children received eight trials
in the rectangular room. The first four trials were with a
yellow wall where the correct corner was one of the two
adjacent to the feature. The second four trials were tested with
all white walls. The correct corner was the same for each
child, and counterbalanced across children within groups.
Half the children received pretraining in the equilateral
triangle room with an area approximately equal to that of the
rectangular room. The correct choice was in the centre of the
yellow wall. The criterion for mastering the triangular room
was three correct choices in a row. All children reached the
criterion (mean = 6.2 trials; range = 3 – 12 trials). The cards
were placed in the middle of the walls of the triangular room
and in the corners of the rectangular room. After obtaining
consent, children were familiarized to the surroundings and
the experimenter. It was emphasized at the start and after the
first trial that the child could stop participating at any time.
Once in the room, children were shown the cards on the floor
and were told that one was hiding an animal. The cover story
was based on the movie Madagascar. In essence, the children
were told that one of the animals had escaped from the zoo
and they could try to find the animal with the help of a special
fort.

Method
Participants. Twenty­nine children were recruited from
daycare centers and YMCA facilities. Parents were given an
honorarium. Equal numbers of 4­ and 5­year old girls and
boys were randomly assigned to either the control group or to
the triangle pretraining condition. The data from 5 were
discarded because they either did not spin, count out loud,

For each trial, the experimenter turned over the card with
the character and the children were asked to remember where

672

12.64, p < 0.01 and age, F(1, 20) = 4.74, p = 0.04. Across the
control and pretraining groups the 4­year­olds showed a
greater tendency than the 5­year­olds to choose the correct
corner over the diagonally opposite corner during both the
first and second set of four trials: For the 4­year­olds the
difference between corners was 42% on the first set of trials
and 29% on the second set, and for the 5­year­olds the
differences were 23% and 15%, respectively. No effects
interacted with age and no other effects were significant.

the character was hiding. Then they were asked to close their
eyes, spin in a circle, and count their footsteps audibly. While
the child was rotating, the experimenter circled in the
opposite direction. After rotating at least four times, the child
was asked to stop, facing the middle of a different wall for
each trial. The child was then allowed one choice to find the
character. If incorrect, the experimenter flipped over the
correct card.
When the children in the pretraining group had reached the
criterion of three correct in a row, they were told that they
were “getting so good at finding the animals that we are going
to go to a new fort.” Then they were taken to the rectangular
room. After the first four trials, the child was led out of the
room and the yellow wall was changed to a white wall. The
target corner remained in the same location for all eight trials
in the rectangular shaped room.

First 4 Trials Yellow Wall
F

R

Figures 1 and 2 show the proportion of responses made at
each corner for the pretraining group and the control group.
The participants trained in the triangular room successfully
used the yellow wall as a landmark feature from the
beginning of their transfer trials, whereas the untrained group
used geometric cues exclusively during the initial four trials.
Planned comparisons showed that for the first set of four
trials the pretrained group went to the correct corner 71% of
the time and to the diagonally opposite corner 16% of the
time; F(1, 11) = 10.75, p < 0.01. In contrast, during the
second four trials, which had all white walls, they went to
these corners 38% and 35% of the time, respectively, F(1, 11)
< 1.00. The group that received no pretraining went to the
correct corner 44% of the time and to the diagonally opposite
corner 33% of the time, F(1, 11) < 1.00 during their first four
trials with the yellow wall. Curiously, during the second set
of trials with all white walls, this group went to the correct
corner 56% of the time and to the congruent corner 15% of
the time, F(1, 11) = 10.58, p < 0.01.

F

R

.06

.71

.16

.06

N

F

R

.13

.38

.35

.15

.33

.13

C

N

F

R

.17

.56

.15

.13

C

N

Experiment 2

4 Trials White Wall (Gap)
C

.44

Figure 2: Mean number of searches at each corner for the
control group. One of the white walls had a small (4 cm) gap
between the carpet and the edge of the fabric.

Results

First 4 Trials Yellow Wall

.10

4 Trials White Wall (Gap)

C

N

Figure 1: Mean number of searches at each corner for the
triangle pretraining group (C= correct corner, R= reversal
corner, N= near error, F= far error). Bolded numbers indicate
a significant difference between the correct and reversal
corner, indicative of landmark use.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) with group (training vs.
no training) and age (4 and 5) as the between­subjects factors
and corner (correct vs. diagonally opposite) and half (first vs.
second four trials) as within­subject factors yielded the
expected group by corner by half interaction, F(1, 20) =
14.98, p < 0.01, as well main effects of corner, F(1, 20) =

673

The first experiment provided evidence that a small amount
of training in an enclosure lacking geometric cues facilitated
the immediate use of features during a transfer test. But, there
was one aspect of the procedure and one aspect of the data
that warranted caution. From the procedural standpoint, the
pretraining group received more trials overall than the control
group (from as few as 3 to as many as 12 pretraining trials).
Consequently, the fact that children in the control group did
not use the yellow wall during their first four trials in the
rectangular enclosure might reflect a general lack of practice
rather than a lack of specific training with the feature wall. To
examine the possibility that practice alone might facilitate the
use of features to reorient, we tested a group of children in the
rectangular room with the yellow wall present for all eight
trials and analyzed the data separately for the first and second
set of four trials. We will refer to this group as the “yellow­
wall” group. From the results of Experiment 1, we anticipate
that the data for the second set of four trials in the yellow­wall
group should replicate the data from the first set of four trials
for the group pretrained in the triangular room in Experiment
1. The second issue was raised by the data themselves. The
children in the control group of Experiment 1 appeared to use
some sort of feature during the second set of four trials when,
ostensibly, there should have been none. Inspection of the
rectangular room showed that the fabric on the removable
white wall that replaced the removable yellow wall had a gap
of approximately four cm between the bottom of the fabric
and the floor, leaving visible the grey fabric on the room
divider. It was possible that this was treated as a feature. If so,
the children in the control group may have started to learn to
use the yellow wall as a landmark feature by the end of the
first four trials and then, when the yellow wall was switched
to the white wall with the gap, they noticed and were able to
use the gap. The triangle group, on the other hand, may have
been overtrained with the yellow wall. This may have

prevented them from immediately noticing the gap in the
white wall on their second four trials in the rectangular room.
To test this idea, we ran two additional groups of children.
For the “white­wall­gap” group we tested the children for
eight trials in the original rectangular room with the white
wall that contained the 4 cm gap between the fabric and the
floor. If they were able to use this gap as a feature, then they
should respond to the correct corner more frequently than to
the geometrically congruent corner during the second set of
four trials, and thus replicate the data for the second set of
trials in the original control group (Figure 1b). For the “white­
wall” group we constructed a new rectangular room that was
identical in size to the original, except that all four white
walls were covered with fabric that abutted the floor. Thus,
there was no unique feature that could be used to respond and
we expected that this group would use geometry exclusively
during both the first and second set of four trials.

First 4 Trials
F
(a)

Second 4Trials

.06

.50

.40

.04

R

C

F

N

R
Second 4Trials

C

F

First 4 Trials
F
(b)

.13

.28

.41

.19

R

N
First 4 Trials

F
(c)

R

Method

0

.73

.20

.06

C

N

.16

.53

.16

.16

R

C

N

Second 4Trials

.06

.47

.41

.06

C

N

F

R

0

.44

.47

.09

C

N

Figure 3: Mean number of searches in the small space for the
(a) yellow wall group, (b) white wall gap group and (c) white
room group. Numbers in bold indicate a significant difference
between the correct and reversal corner.

Participants. For the yellow wall group, 7 girls and 6 boys
participated. The data from one girl were discarded because
she did not count aloud. The remaining 12 participants were
eight 4­year­olds (average age = 54 months; range = 51­58
months) and four 5­year­olds (average age = 66 months,
range = 61 ­ 70 months). There were 3 girls and 5 boys in the
white­wall­gap group. The average age of the three 4­year­
olds was 54 months (range = 50 ­ 59 months), and the
average age of the five 5­year­olds was 64 months (range =
61 ­ 72 months). There were 4 girls and 4 boys in the white­
wall group. The average age of the three 4­year­olds was 52
months (range = 49 – 54 months), and the average age of the
five 5­year­olds was 66 months (range = 61­70 months).

An ANOVA with age as the between subjects factor and
corner and half as the within subjects factors showed no
main effect or interactions with age, but the expected half
by corner interaction approached significance, F(1, 10) =
4.14, p = 0.07. Similar to the results for the yellow­wall
group, for the white­wall–gap group, there was no
difference in proportion of responses to the correct or
diagonally opposite corner on the first set of four trials (28%
vs 41%, respectively, F(1, 7) = 1.17, p = .32), but there was
a difference on the second set of trials (53% vs. 16%,
respectively, F(1, 7) = 9.00, p < 0.02). The data on the
second set of trials for this group nicely replicated the data
for the second set of trials for the control group of
Experiment 1 (Figure 1b), as predicted. The ANOVA with
age as a factor yielded only the expected half by corner
interaction, F(1, 6) = 8.95, p < 0.02. In contrast to the data
for the children in the yellow wall and white wall­gap
groups, the children in the white wall group responded
solely on the basis of geometry for both the first and second
set of trials, F(1, 7) < 1.00 in both cases.

Apparatus and materials. The apparatus for the yellow­wall
group and the gap group was the same as Experiment 1. The
apparatus for the new white­wall group was identical in size
to the original rectangular room.
Design and procedures. The procedure for all participants
was identical to the control condition of the first experiment.
This included a 3 min break between the trials 4 and 5.

Results
Figure 3 confirms that participants learned to attend to a
feature during the first four trials in the yellow­wall and
white­wall­gap groups but not in the white­wall group.
Planned contrasts showed that for the yellow­wall group,
there was no difference in proportion of responses to the
correct or diagonally opposite corner on the first set of four
trials (50% vs. 40%, respectively, F(1, 11) < 1.00), but there
was a large effect of corner during the second set of four trials
(73% vs. 20%, respectively, F(1, 11) = 12.21, p < 0.01). In
fact, the data for the second set of four trials in the yellow
wall room were nearly identical to the data for the first set of
trials in that room for children in the pretraining group of
Experiment 1.

Discussion
Remarkably, four out of five groups of young children
rapidly learned to use landmarks to relocate a hidden object
in a small room. One group was trained to find the object in
the middle of a yellow wall of a small room shaped like an
equilateral triangle and then transferred this strategy to a
small rectangular room in which the landmark was still a
yellow wall, but the object was in a corner. The remaining
three groups received no specific training outside of the
environment they were to perform in, yet each was able to
use landmark information – either the yellow wall or a even
a 4 cm gap– to respond correctly after only four practice
trials.

674

The sole group that did not use landmark cues was the
group that had none to use.
In some ways, the most interesting data are from the
original control group. The children in this group received
four trials in the small rectangular room with a yellow wall as
a landmark and then four trials in the same room with a white
wall that, inadvertently, had a gap between the bottom of the
fabric and the floor. Eight of the 12 children responded more
frequently to the correct corner than to the diagonally
opposite corner during the second set of four trials. Thus, not
only were these children able to use landmarks after four
practice trials, they generalized what they had learned during
the first four trials to a completely new type of landmark cue
which, arguably, was a much more subtle one. The similarity
between the data from the second set of four trials in the
original control group and the second set of four trials in the
new gap group is striking: 7 of the 8 children in the gap group
responded more frequently to the correct corner than to the
congruent corner during the second set of trials.
Equally striking is the similarity between the data from the
group who received pretraining in the triangular room and the
group who started out in the rectangular room immediately
and had 8 trials with the yellow wall present. The data for the
first four trials of the pretrained group are nearly identical to
the data for the second four trials of the “untrained” control:
Nine of the 12 children in the pretraining group and 8 of the
12 children in the yellow­wall control group responded
significantly more to the correct corner (86.1% and 87.5%,
respectively) than to the geometrically opposite corner (3.1%
vs. 6.3%, respectively). For children trained in the triangular
room this performance implies that they not only learned that
color was important, but were able to make immediate use of
sense (left­right) information to find the correct corner when
they were transferred to the rectangular room. Notably, these
children could not have been using the yellow wall merely as
a beacon. For the children who started out in the rectangular
room, it took a mere four trials for them to achieve this level
of performance. Further, all of the children were young
enough to preclude spatial terms of “left” and “right” to have
played a major role in their success.
Given how readily the original control group and the gap
group learned to use the gap as a landmark, it may appear odd
that the group trained in the triangular room, who so
successfully and immediately transferred to using the yellow
wall as a landmark in the rectangular room reverted to
geometry when the yellow wall was changed to the white
wall with the gap. However, the group trained in the
triangular room had an average of 6 training trials (range = 3
to 12) in which the yellow wall cued the correct response, and
then four more trials in the rectangular room with the yellow
wall. Assuming that color is a reasonably salient landmark, it
may be that color overshadowed the more subtle gap cue after
the yellow wall was removed. In addition, the children trained
in the triangular room still had to learn to use sense cues
when they were transferred to the rectangular room; perhaps
separating these two aspects of landmark use (the “value” of
the landmark itself and its relation to other features of the

environment) during training actually worked against the
children in the experimental group when they were
transferred. Distinguishing between these theoretical
possibilities – the role of overshadowing, the relative salience
of landmarks, and the functional traits for a landmark – is an
area for future research.
Learmonth et al.’s (2002) participants successfully used a
colored wall as a landmark in a large room but did not
transfer this behavior to a small room with the same
landmark. One important difference between their study and
ours is that the participants in our study who successfully
switched from one kind of situation or landmark to another
(the triangle training group, the original control group, the
yellow­wall group, and the white­wall­gap group) were all
either trained or practiced in small rooms that were almost
identical in area to begin with. We have already hypothesized
that training in the triangular room emphasized the
importance of color which was then easy to transfer to the
rectangular room (and difficult to “unbind” when the yellow
wall disappeared). The other three groups began in a small
rectangular room; effectively, we gave them four practice
trials in this room and then four additional test trials. As
hypothesized by Learmonth et al., (2002), it may be that there
is something about a small room that is at least initially
unique. For example, Newcombe (2005) recently
hypothesized that it may be difficult to engage spatial
orientation mechanisms when motion is limited; also,
landmarks are more likely to be used when they are far from
an observer. Nevertheless, as children in our study rapidly
became accustomed to the small space; we presume that had
Learmonth et al. (2002) continued testing their children in the
small space they would have found similar results.
In a recent review of the spatial orientation literature,
Cheng and Newcombe (2005) noted that (a) all vertebrate
species tested thus far used geometry to respond when
continuous surfaces form the geometric properties, (b) all
species tested used feature information under some
circumstances, and (c) all mammals made systematic
rotational (geometric) errors under some circumstances, so all
mammals occasionally fail to use feature information. They
proposed three possible process models to account for the
way in which geometric and featural information are used to
orient, and to reorient, in any environment. In two of these
models geometric information is presumed to be represented
modularly (Fodor, 1983); in the third both types of
information are combined in the same representation.
Our data support the third type of model. This model
assumes that there is no reason to believe that geometric
information is encapsulated; rather, there is much support for
the idea that geometric and landmark information are
combined (and bound to) the same representation of space.
Indeed, once processed at input, this model assumes that
geometric and featural information are always put together in
the same representation. The representation can be used for
spatial orientation and reorientation, and in principle, for
other tasks as well. Newcombe (2005) and Newcombe and
Ratliff (2006) have called this type of process “adaptive

675

combination” (see also Newcombe & Huttenlocher, 2006),
and our data support the idea that many types of information
are combined into a single representation. In real­world
navigation, all kinds of information are used to orient and to
reorient if needed, including geometry, landmarks, proximal
and distal cues, and so on. Although these different types of
information might have different developmental trajectories,
from a functional standpoint it makes sense that they should
bind to the same representation. A child’s learning history
would naturally affect the weighting given to different sorts
of information; indeed from an adaptive combination
viewpoint it is natural to suppose that experience will
influence the weightings in some sort of integrative process.
Because the children in the present study learned to
combine geometric and landmark cues in only four trials, it
seems likely that their abilities to attend, encode, remember,
and successfully use landmark features are not being learned
“from scratch.” Similarly, because Cheng’s (1986) rats
learned to use landmark features in a reference memory task
in 30 trials, they, too, were unlikely to have been learning the
constellation of cognitive functions underlying this behavior
from scratch. Rather, the ability to use landmarks and
combine them with geometric cues must be extant in the
organism(s), needing only a little practice to become
functional. It would benefit the organism to have as many
representations of a food location as possible to augment the
chances of finding the location at a future date. That this is so
should not be surprising; from an ecological standpoint, the
type of landmarks that are functional for navigation or used to
signal a food supply would rarely change locations with
respect to the geometry of the environment.
Our results add to evidence suggesting that children as
young as four years are fully capable of combining featural
and geometric information. They do so even in a small room,
within a few trials. Nevertheless, our results are also
consistent with the notion that for young children, the use of
features is not as automatic as, the use of geometry. Using
geometry to reorient appears to occur instantly whereas use of
features needs to be catalyzed by experience.

Cheng, K., & Newcombe, N. (2005). Is there a geometric
module for spatial orientation? Squaring theory and
evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 1­23.
Fodor, J.A. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gouteux, S., Thinus­Blanc, C., & Vauclair, J. (2001).
Rhesus monkeys use geometric and nongeometric
information during a reorientation task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 505­519.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1994). A geometric process for
spatial representation in young children. Nature, 370, 57­
59.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1996). Modularity and
development: The case of spatial reorientation. Cognition,
61, 195­232.
Hermer, L., Spelke, E., & Katnelson, A. (1999). Sources of
flexibility in human cognition: dual task studies of space
and language. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 3­36.
Hermer­Vasquez, L., Moffet, A., & Munkholm, P. (2001).
Language, space, and the development of cognitive
flexibility in humans: The case of two spatial memory
tasks. Cognition, 79, 263­299.
Kelly, D.M., Spetch, M.L., & Heth, C.D. (1998). Pigeons’
encoding of geometric and featural properties of a spatial
environment. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 112,
259­269.
Learmonth, A.E., Nadel, L., & Newcombe, N.S. (2002).
Children’s use of landmarks: Implications for modularity
theory. Psychological Science, 13, 337­341.
Newcombe, N.S. (2005). Evidence for and against a
geometric module: The roles of language and action. In J.
Rieser, J. Lockman, & C.A. Nelson (Eds.), Action as an
organizer of learning and development, Minnesota
Symposia on Child Psychology, Volume 33 (pp. 221­241).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Newcombe, N.S., & Huttenlocher, J. (2006).
Development of spatial cognition. In W. Damon & R.
Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of Child Psychology, Sixth
Edition, D. Kuhn & R. Siegler (Eds.), Volume Two:
Perception, Cogniton, & Language.
Newcombe, N.S., & Ratliff, K.R. (in press). Explaining the
development of spatial reorientation: Modularity­plus­
language versus the emergence of adaptive combination.
In J. Plummert & J. Spencer (Eds.), Emerging landscapes
of mind: Mapping the nature of change in spatial
cognitive development. Cambridge: Oxford University
Press.
Sovrano, V., Bisazza, A., & Vallortigara, G. (2002).
Modularity and spatial reorientation in a simple mind:
encoding of geometric and nongeometric properties of a spatial
environment by fish. Cognition, 85, B51­B59.
Vallortigara, G., Zanforlin, M., & Pasti, G. (1990).
Geometricmodules in animals’ spatial representations: A
test with chicks (Gallus gallus domesticus). Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 104, 248­254.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grants to Friedman and
Spetch from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada. We would like to thank Mark Holden,
Isaac Lank, John Twyman, and David Delancey for help in
constructing the small rooms and Kirsten Williams and
Bowie Lui for help in soliciting the participants and scoring
the data. We are especially indebted to the parents and
children who took the time and effort to participate in this
study.

References
Cheng, K. (1986). A purely geometric module in the rat’s
spatial representation. Cognition, 23, 149­178.

676

