UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Phonological Similarity Effects Without a Phonological Store: An Individual Differences Model

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2kz8v1g7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Bearman, C. Philip
Neath, Ian
Surprenant, Aimee M.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Phonological Similarity Effects Without a Phonological Store:
An Individual Differences Model
C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Reading
Earley Gate, Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AL UK

Ian Neath (ineath@mun.ca)
Department of Psychology, Memorial University of Newfoundland
St John’s, NL, Canada A1B 3X9

Aimée M. Surprenant (asurprenant@mun.ca)
Department of Psychology, Memorial University of Newfoundland
St John’s, NL, Canada A1B 3X9
studies of young children’s memory, (Hitch & Halliday,
1983; Hulme, Thomson, Muir & Lawrence, 1984), or in
recall of supra-span lists which might be interpreted as
requiring longer-term memory storage (Baddeley, 2000a) or
implicating the existence of an alternative form of episodic
short-term storage (Baddeley, 2000b). However, as noted by
Logie and colleagues (Della Sala & Logie, 1997; Logie, Della
Sala, Laiacona, Chalmers & Wynn, 1996) although the effect
is robust at the group-level of analysis, it is routinely absent
from the recall protocols of a minority of normallyfunctioning individuals. The current study aims to examine
whether a particular model of immediate memory, the feature
model of Nairne (1990) can account for variation in
immediate memory performance and in the appearance of the
PSE.
The feature model was chosen for this study for a number of
reasons: Firstly, it is an extant model of immediate memory
that has not previously been applied to individual differences
data. In this it is not unique. To our knowledge, only the
ACT-R list memory simulation (Anderson, Reader &
Lebiere, 1996) has been applied to model individual data,
although models have been applied to neuropsychological
data (e.g., Brown, Della Sala, Foster & Vousden, in press).
Secondly, the feature model, unlike other models eschews a
dedicated phonological store and instead represents
information in terms of abstract “features” including, but not
restricted to, phonological features. Thirdly, the model has no
strategic rehearsal mechanism. Any individual differences
predicted by the model must therefore be a straightforward
effect of mnemonic efficiency, rather than a by-product of the
efficacy of one particular rehearsal or other maintenance
strategy. Fourthly, the predictions of the model are based
upon running multiple trials (typically 2-5000) and reporting
the average performance as “the” prediction of the model.
Like many models in which performance is simulated rather
than calculated, the ontological status of individual trials or
runs of the model has always been ambiguous. Here we
suggest that individual simulation runs can be examined as if
they were individual experimental trials. Averaging over a

Abstract
The feature model of immediate memory (Nairne, 1990) is
applied to an experiment testing individual differences in
phonological confusions amongst a group (N=100) of
participants performing a verbal memory test. By simulating the
performance of an equivalent number of “pseudo-participants”
the model fits both the mean performance and the variability
within the group. Experimental data show that high-performing
individuals are significantly more likely to demonstrate
phonological confusions than low performance individuals and
this is also true of the model, despite the model’s lack of either
an explicit phonological store or a performance-linked strategy
shift away from phonological storage. It is concluded that a
dedicated phonological store is not necessary to explain the
basic phonological confusion effect, and the reduction in such
an effect can also be explained without requiring a change in
encoding or rehearsal strategy or the deployment of a different
storage buffer.
Keywords: Short-term
Individual differences.

memory;

Cognitive

modeling;

Individual Differences in Immediate Memory
Research into immediate verbal memory is now sufficiently
well-advanced that a number of phenomena are taken to
typify the functioning of immediate memory. In particular,
the phonological similarity effect (PSE), the simple empirical
observation that verbal items, whether visually or auditorily
presented, are more likely to become confused on immediate
recall tests if they sound alike (Conrad, 1964), is taken as
prima facie evidence for the existence and utilization of a
short-term phonological store (Baddeley, 1986, 2003). By
extension, the lack of a phonological similarity effect is
frequently interpreted as the absence of a phonological store,
for example in neuropsychological case studies of braindamaged individuals (Della Sala & Logie, 1997; Vallar &
Baddeley, 1984; Vallar & Shallice, 1990). In less severe cases
the appearance of a reduced PSE is interpreted as the failure
to make use of the store, for example in developmental

89

series of such runs will provide data representing the
performance of a “pseudo-participant” in a computational
experiment (cf., Cooper, Yule & Fox, 2003; Hintzman, 1986).

s (i, j ) = e

(2)
Equation 2’s similarity metric is used to calculate the
probability that a particular secondary memory trace SMj will
be “sampled” given a particular primary memory cue PMi.
The probability of sampling a particular item is given by a
similarity-based choice rule (Equation 3).

Backgound to the feature model.
The basic idea behind the feature model is that recall is
guided by a set of “Primary Memory” (PM) cues of varying
effectiveness in identifying the target item from a search set
defined within “Secondary Memory” (SM), or memory
proper. The major function of PM is to hold a variety of cues
indicating which items were recently presented. Cues do not
decay but are subject to a process of interference that renders
the cues less accurate and comprises the basic mechanism for
memory limitations. Formally, items in PM and SM comprise
sets of internally-generated modality-independent (MI) and
externally generated modality-dependent (MD) features
organized as row vectors. For simulation purposes, feature
values are randomly generated. The main source of forgetting
in the model is retroactive interference: If feature x of item
n+1 is identical to feature x of item n, then the value
representing feature x of item n is lost and cannot be used as a
recall cue. A simplifying assumption is that only immediately
adjacent items interfere.
In the feature model, order information is represented as a
point in multidimensional space and this point can perturb (or
drift) along the relevant dimension as described by Estes
(1972). The probability that a cue’s encoded representation
will perturb along the position dimension during a particular
time interval is given by the parameter θ, which is held
constant at .05. The probability that an item, i, will occupy a
particular position p during the next time interval is therefore
given by the probability that no perturbation occurred (1- θ)
and the item was already in position p plus the probability
that a perturbation occurred and the item was one position
away from position p. Recall begins by determining, for each
cue in primary memory, which was most likely to occupy
position 1 originally. To recall the second item, the cue that
was most likely in position 2 is used, and so on (see Neath,
1999a for a full explanation). The relative number of features
available to cue the item in SM then dictates recall
performance. The probability that a particular SM trace SMj
will be retrieved for a particular PM cue PMi is calculated
according to Equation 1. The value Mk is equal to 1 if the
feature at position k of PM cue i does not match the feature at
the corresponding position of SM representation j, and is 0
otherwise. The number of feature mismatches (the numerator
of Equation 1) is divided by the value N (the number of
features in each of the vectors) and the results summed. The
parameter a is a scaling parameter representing overall level
of attention.

d ij = a ∑

Mk
N

− d ij

P( SM j | PM i ) =

s (i, j )
no of vectors

∑ s(i, l )

(3)

l =1

Next, the probability of recovering a sampled item is given
by Equation 4, where c is a constant and r is the number of
times the sampled item has already been recalled on this trial.
This equation, and the r parameter, are used to reduce the
likelihood of recalling the same item on multiple occasions,
which avoid doing even when the same item is repeated
within the to-be-recalled list (the “Ranschberg effect”,
Jahnke, 1969). If two attempts at recovery are unsuccessful,
an omission error is recorded.

Pr=e-cr

(4)

Calculating the PSE
The PSE is a difference score between recall levels for
phonologically dissimilar items and recall levels for
phonologically similar items, calculated (following Logie et
al., 1996 and Neath et al., 2003) as a proportion of the mean
performance in the dissimilar condition according to the
following equation:
PSE = (D-S) / D
(5)
Where D is the mean performance in the dissimilar condition
and S is the mean performance in the similar condition.
Performance of the model will be compared to experimental
data using this metric.

Experiment
Experimental data were obtained from an undergraduate
sample asked to reconstruct the serial order in which
sequences of phonologically dissimilar, or similar, items were
presented. Phonological similarity is implemented in the
model by varying the number of modality-independent
features with common values for each of the list items and
keeping all other parameters constant.

Method.
Participants. One hundred undergraduates of Purdue
University participated in exchange for course credit. All
were native US English speakers. For the modeling analog of
this sample, results were generated for one hundred pseudoparticipants, using the parameter values given in the
Appendix.

(1)

Next, the difference between the PM and SM items is
transformed to provide a similarity metric (Equation 2).

Stimuli. The to-be-remembered items were 64 one-syllable
words previously employed in Surprenant, Neath &

90

LeCompte’s (1999) study of PSE. An example similar list is
vote, boat, float, note, coat. An example dissimilar list is
break, sick, vote, greet, rat, fun. All participants saw the same
words in different random orders.

Distributions of effect sizes for the PSE were also
calculated. The mean PSE was 0.173 (lower quartile = 0.091;
median = 0.198; upper quartile = 0.262; S.D. =0.128; range =
-0.143 to 0.442) and the distribution did not differ from
normal (Kolmogorov-Smirnov Z = 0.813, n.s.). However, in
this basic fit, only 3 pseudo-participants showed greater recall
for similar than dissimilar words, fewer than in the human
sample (Figure 2).

Procedure. The to-be-remembered stimuli were shown, in
20-point upper-case Helvetica, for 1.5 s each. Following the
presentation of the final stimulus word, 6 response buttons
became active, labeled with the 6 words in alphabetical order.
Participants were asked to indicate the order in which the
words had been presented by clicking on the appropriately
labeled buttons using a mouse. Participants were presented
with 20 lists, half with dissimilar items and half with similar
items. The order of the dissimilar and similar items was
separately and randomly determined per participant.
Participants were tested individually and the experimenter
remained within the room throughout. Pseudo-participant
performance was based on 20 trials per pseudo-participant,
half with similar and half with dissimilar items exactly as
with the experimental participants.

Data

Frequency

40

20

0
-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

PSE

Results.
Model

Participants correctly recalled more dissimilar than similar
items (F(1,99) = 101.89, MSE = 0.052, p < .05) and there was
also a main effect of serial position (F(5,495) = 156.88, MSE
= 0.015, p < .05) which interacted with similarity, (F(5,495) =
5.94, MSE = 0.014, p < .05). A basic fit to the data was also
obtained by running 100 pseudo-participants and calculating
the results for this group in the same manner as for the
experimental participants. Figure 1 shows the serial position
curves obtained for participants (upper panel) and pseudoparticipants (lower panel).

Frequency

40

0
-0.4

Proportion Correct

0.8
0.6

Dis
Sim

0.4

0
4

5

6

Serial Position

Model

Proportion Correct

1
0.8
0.6

Dis
Sim

0.4
0.2
0
1

2

3

4

0.2

0.4

0.6

For the basic fit shown in Figures 1 and 2, no parameters
were varied between pseudo-participants. These Figures
indicate that chance, rather than strategy, variation may be
sufficient to account for the individual differences in
displaying the effect. Figure 3 shows the results of a more
principled approach to modeling the distribution within the
experimental sample. Whereas Figures 1 and 2 show how
random variation within the pseudo-participant sample affects
the serial position function (Figure 1) and the distribution of
effect sizes (Figure 2), Figure 3 shows fits of the model to the
mean and variance of the experimental sample, again
employing a sample of pseudo-participants but this time
randomly varying the attentional scaling parameter, a, across
pseudo-participants. For each pseudo-participant, a was
increased (or decreased) from its standard setting by sampling
randomly from a normal distribution with mean 0 and s.d. 4.
This parameter was varied as is the only parameter (not
linked to stimulus characteristics) that affects overall
performance levels (Beaman, Neath & Surprenant, 2007). As

0.2
3

0

Figure 2: Distribution of effect sizes for the experimental
sample and for a randomly generated sample of pseudoparticipants.

1

2

-0.2

PSE

Data

1

20

5

6

Serial Position

Figure 1: Proportion correct per serial position (averaged
over participants or pseudo-participants) for data and model

91

the figure demonstrates, attempts to fit either mean or
variance for a PSE experiment produce a more accurate
estimate of the number of reversals in the sample
(phonologically similar lists recalled better than dissimilar
lists) but have little effect on other features of the data. The
upper panel of Figure 3 shows a fit to the mean values from
the experimental data, the lower panel represents the values
obtained when the simulation run represents a fit to the
variances from the same data-set.

lower quartile of overall performance, and there is a lower
mean PSE score although also more variability amongst this
group. A Pearson’s correlation confirms a significant positive
association between overall performance and size of the PSE,
r = 0.259, N = 100, p = 0.01, consistent with Logie et al.
(1996). It is also significant that both larger PSE amongst the
upper quartile and more reversals amongst the lower quartile
are predicted by the pseudo-participant simulation (as
illustrated in Figure 4). The model also provides a significant
positive association between overall performance and size of
the PSE, r = .589, N = 100, p = .001. Both data and model
also show the same patterns when the absolute size (D-S) of
the PSE is calculated rather than a proportion (r = .360 and
.648 respectively, N =100, p < .001 in both cases).

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
sa
ls

Proportion

1

R
ev
er

PS
E

ila
Si
m

D
is
si
m

r

Data
Model

ila
r

Value

Means Fit

Data

Model

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Upper Quartile

s
sa
l

PS
E

Lower Quartile

Figure 4: Sample performance divided into highest- and
lowest-scoring quartiles on the dissimilar list condition for
both participants and pseudo-participants. The values on the
y-axis represent proportion correct for dissimilar and similar
lists, proportion value of the PSE and proportion of the
sample showing “reversals”. Error bars are standard error.

R
ev
er

is
si
D

Si
m
ila
r

Data
Model

D

is
si
m
ila
Si r
m
ila
r
PS
R
ev E
er
sa
ls

D

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
m
ila
r

Value

Variances Fit

is
si
m
ila
Si r
m
ila
r
PS
R
ev E
er
sa
ls

0

Figure 3: Fits of the model to means (upper panel) and
variances (lower panel). Values on the y-axes represent the
proportion correct for dissimilar and similar lists, the
proportion value of the PSE calculated according to equation
5 and the proportion of the sample showing “reversals”;
superior performance on phonologically similar lists. Error
bars are standard error.

Overall, the model slightly under-predicts performance
amongst the most able human participants and slightly overpredicts performance amongst the least able. It is noteworthy
that neither the successful fit to PSE and reversals nor this
potential failing of the model would be apparent from
attempts to fit only mean performance data.

In addition to fitting the means and distributions of the PSE
it is also possible, using the pseudo-participant technique, to
examine how the PSE varies as a function of overall
performance. Figure 4 shows the means and incidence of PSE
and “reversals” amongst the upper and lower quartiles of the
human participants and a pseudo-participant sample. These
values came from the same simulation run that resulted in the
best match to the observed variance. As this figure
demonstrates, participants scoring in the upper quartile, based
upon their performance in the dissimilar condition, are also
showing the greatest PSE in both the data and the model with
very few reversals in the data and none in the simulation.
Surprisingly, more reversals appear in the human data in the

Discussion.
The experiment reported here confirms the general pattern of
results reported by Logie et al. (1996). A sizeable minority of
participants either failed to show a PSE (9% or the total
sample) or showed a reverse PSE (7%). These zero and
negative effects were replicated using a model designed to
show detrimental effects of phonological similarity on
average. Furthermore, the model successfully accounts for
these data, and other measures of variability, without the need
to implement any qualitative changes in its operation.
Previously, it has been suggested that a diminished effect of
phonological similarity might reflect a change in strategy or
type of encoding, for example from shorter- to longer-term

92

memory (Baddeley, 2000a; Salamé & Baddeley, 1986) or to a
different type of short-term memory (Baddeley, 2000b). The
simulations reported here demonstrate that a merely
quantitative change is sufficient to recreate such variation in
effect sizes without the need to hypothesize alternative
memory systems. The simulations also show that the feature
model is capable of simulating group variation by means of
computational experiments employing “pseudo-participants”.

diminishment of the PSE as memory-load increases might,
contrary to previous suggestions (Baddeley, 2000a; Salamé &
Baddeley, 1986) reflect a drop in attentional capability rather
than a tendency to switch strategies as list length increases.
Preliminary evidence already exists that the feature model is
capable of accurately reproducing the effects of manipulating
list-length (Beaman, 2006).
Conclusions. Given that the attention parameter is the only
parameter explicitly varied to obtain our variance fits, it also
seems that this is sufficient to shift from a high-performing
(pseudo-) participant showing phonological similarity a
effects to a lower-ability participant for whom such effects
are both smaller in size and more variable in appearance. This
observation has a number of implications.
Firstly, and most generally, it suggests that purely
quantitative variations in a single performance factor could
appear, within the experimental data, as qualitative shifts in
performance characteristics. The example explored here is
that of the phonological similarity effect, but there is no a
priori reason why the same might not hold true for other wellknown immediate memory effects (e.g., word-length,
concurrent articulation or irrelevant sound). This observation
provides support for the claim that quantitative computational
simulations are a productive method for testing (often
implicit) theoretical assumptions that might otherwise go
untested (Lewandowsky, 1993; Neath, 1999b).
Secondly, more specifically, the results imply that the
deployment of particular storage buffers (Baddeley, 2000a,
b), is not necessary to explain reductions in phonological
similarity effects amongst individuals undertaking immediate
memory tasks. The feature model predicts this pattern of
results using only a single primary memory “store” and no
maintenance rehearsal.
Thirdly, since the feature model is essentially a model of the
recall process that views memory as a discrimination activity
(e.g., Nairne, 2002), it is possible that individual variation
amongst human participants might likewise be a consequence
of variation in capability to discriminate at recall rather than a
difference in either encoding strength or maintenance activity.

Post hoc fits versus theoretical predictions. The current
study demonstrates that the phonological similarity effect,
previously considered the empirical “signature” of the
phonological store of working memory (Jones, Macken &
Nicholls, 2004; Jones, Hughes & Macken, 2006) might be
expected to vary as a function of quantitative changes in
participants abilities regardless of their strategy choice. The
question arises, however, whether the simulations reported
here represent post-hoc fits between the model and the data or
a genuine, and novel, prediction. The serial position functions
and distributions reported in Figures 1 and 2 reflect neither a
post-hoc parameter fitting exercise nor a theoretically
motivated prediction as they act simply as an existence-proof
that the model can, when sampled using a random selection
of pseudo-participants, reproduce approximately the pattern
of performance obtained when a group of experimental
participants are likewise recruited using an opportunitysampling recruitment procedure. In contrast, the fits to the
mean and variance data shown in Figure 3 are the result of
post-hoc parameter fitting as employed by numerous
cognitive modeling studies and, although they again
demonstrate the capability of the model to match the data,
these post-hoc fits also lack something in the way of
explanatory power. The subsequent splitting of the samples
into high and low performance groups, however, was carried
out after the parameters had been determined and thus
comprises a novel and genuinely theory-driven prediction of
how the data from the experimental participants should
appear: a larger PSE amongst the higher-performing
individuals is a necessary prediction of the model.
The reason for this observed pattern of performance, which
was not obvious a priori, lies with the attention parameter.
Aside from a few randomly varying features, which cannot
plausibly account for the positive Pearson’s correlation
between the appearance of the PSE and overall performance,
the only parameter that varies between low and high
performance pseudo-participants is the attention parameter.
Close inspection suggests that it is the role of the attention
parameter in magnifying the distance scores between
mismatches and potential matches (Equation 1) that
magnifies the appearance of the PSE in high-performance
pseudo-participants relative to low-performance pseudoparticipants. Thus, a single, potentially quantifiable, resource,
the value of which is represented in the feature model by the
attentional parameter, necessarily alters the pattern of
immediate memory effects observed. This has a number of
consequences for within-participant experimental designs as
well as for between-participant differences. For example, the

Acknowledgments
Portions of this research were carried out whilst the second
and third authors were at Purdue University, Indiana, USA,
and also whilst they were visiting professors at City
University, London, UK.

References
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Lebiere, C. (1996). Working
memory: Activation limitations on retrieval. Cognitive
Psychology, 30, 221-256.
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Baddeley, A. D. (2000a). The phonological loop and the
irrelevant speech effect: Some comments on Neath (2000).
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 403-423.

93

Lewandowsky, S. (1993). The rewards and hazards of
computer simulation. Psychological Science, 4, 236-243.
Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory.
Memory & Cognition, 18, 251-269.
Nairne, J. S. (2002). Remembering over the short-term: The
case against the standard model. Annual Review of
Psychology, 53, 53-81.
Neath, I. (1999a). Modeling the effects of irrelevant speech
on order. International Journal of Psychology, 34, 410-418.
Neath, I. (1999b). Computer simulations of global memory
models Behavior Research Methods, Instruments &
Computers, 31, 74-80.
Neath, I., Bireta, T. J., & Surprenant, A. M. (2003). The timebased word length effect and stimulus set specificity.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 430-434.
Salamé, P., & Baddeley, A. (1986). Phonological factors in
STM: Similarity and the unattended speech effect. Bulletin
of the Psychonomic Society, 24, 263-265.
Surprenant, A. M., Neath, I., & LeCompte, D. C. (1999).
Irrelevant speech, phonological similarity and presentation
modality. Memory, 7, 405-420.
Vallar, G., & Baddeley, A. D. (1984). Fractionation of
working memory: Neuropsychological evidence for a
phonological short-term store. Journal of Verbal Learning
& Verbal Behavior, 23, 151-161.
Vallar, G., & Shallice, T. (1990). Neuropsychological
impairments of short-term memory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Baddeley, A. D. (2000b). The episodic buffer: A new
component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4, 417-423.
Baddeley, A. D. (2003). Working memory: Looking back and
looking forward. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 4, 829239.
Beaman, C. P. (2006). The relationship between absolute and
proportion scores of serial order memory: Simulation
predictions and empirical data. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13, 92-98.
Beaman, C. P., Neath, I., & Surprenant, A. M. (2007). On
abandoning the phonological store. Paper presented to the
joint meeting of the Experimental Psychology Society and
the Psychonomics Society, Edinburgh, UK.
Brown, G. D. A., Della Sala, S., Foster, J. K., & Vousden, J.
I. (in press). Classical amnesia within a unitary model of
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Conrad, R. (1964). Acoustic confusions in immediate
memory. British Journal of Psychology, 55, 75-84.
Cooper, R. P., Yule, P., & Fox, J. (2003). Cue selection and
category learning: A systematic comparison of three
theories. Cognitive Science Quarterly, 3, 143-182.
Della Sala, S., & Logie, R. H. (1997). Impairments of
methodology and theory in cognitive neuropsychology: A
case for rehabilitation? Neuropsychological Rehabilitation,
7, 367-385.
Estes, W. K. (1972). An associative basis for coding and
organization in memory. In: A. W. Melton & E. Martin
(Ed.s), Coding processes in human memory (pp. 161-190).
Washington, DC: Winston.
Hintzmann, D. L. (1986). “Schema abstraction” in a multipletrace model. Psychological Review, 93, 411-428.
Hitch, G. J., & Halliday, M. S. (1983). Working memory in
children. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series B, 302, 325-340.
Hulme, C., Thomson, N., Muir, C., & Lawrence, A. L.
(1984). Speech rate and the development of short-term
memory. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 38,
241-253.
Jahnke, J. C. (1969). Output interference and the Ranschberg
effect. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 8,
614-621.
Jones, D. M., Hughes, R. W., & Macken, W. J. (2006).
Perceptual organization masquerading as phonological
storage: Further support for a perceptual-gestural view of
short-term memory. Journal of Memory & Language, 54,
265-281.
Jones, D. M., Macken, W. J., & Nicholls, A. P. (2004). The
phonological store of working memory: Is it phonological
and is it a store? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 656-674.

Appendix
Table: Parameter values for reported simulations. Values are
shown in the “Similar” column only when they differed from
those for the “Dissimilar” condition. For the “variance”
simulation, attention (a) was set to 13.5.

MI Features
Number
Range
No. guaranteed similar
MD Features
Number
Range
No. guaranteed similar
Attention (a)
No. of perturbation opportunities
Recovery Constant (c)
No. of recovery attempts (r)

94

Dissimilar

Similar

20
4
0

8

2
4
0
10
5
2
2

1

