UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Posture as a Predictor of Learner's Affective Engagement

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7hs9v2hr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
D'Mello, Sidney S.
Chipman, Patrick
Graesser, Art

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Posture as a Predictor of Learner’s Affective Engagement
Sidney D’Mello1 (sdmello@memphis.edu)
Patrick Chipman2 (pchipman@memphis.edu)
Art Graesser2 (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
1

Department of Computer Science, 2Department of Psychology
University of Memphis, Memphis TN, 38152, USA.

Abstract

An exciting new alternative involves the use of emotionsensitive intelligent tutoring systems (ITSs). These tutoring
systems attempt to incorporate the learner’s emotions (or
affective states) into their pedagogical strategies in order to
enhance engagement, motivation, and learning (D’Mello,
et al., 2005; Forbes-Riley & Litman, 2004; Kort, Reilly, &
Picard, 2001). A fundamental challenge in the development
of an emotion-sensitive ITS involves reliably measuring the
affective states of the learner. This requires the development
of a user model that captures the manner in which learners
intentionally or implicitly exhibit affect in a naturalistic
learning environment. With the user model in hand, the next
step is to develop a computational system to automatically
diagnose and incorporate the emotions of learner into the
pedagogical strategies of the ITS.
This paper addresses these challenges by an in-depth
analysis of body posture, a dimension that has been rarely
investigated by cognitive scientists. We identified the
manner in which learners express particular emotions by
modulating their gross body language. We used automated
posture tracking hardware and software instead of human
coders. This allowed us to develop automated algorithms to
identify learner emotions on the basis of the detected patterns
between posture and affect.
The use of posture to infer affect is interesting because it
is rarely the case that posture is intentionally monitored by
humans. The significance of nonverbal behaviors in expressing
affect is widely acknowledged, but the vast majority of the
scientific literature is restricted to the monitoring of facial
features (Ekman & Friesen, 1978), speech contours (Ang et al.,
2002), and physiological signals such as electromyography,
heart rate, and skin conductance. Our rationale for expecting
posture features to be diagnostic of affect in learning
environments is motivated by embodied theories of cognition
(Clark, 1997; Glenberg, Havas, Becker & Rinck, 2005; de
Vega, 2002). Theories of embodied cognition postulate that
cognitive processes are constrained substantially by the
environment and by the coupling of perception and action.
If the embodied theories are correct, then the cognitive
and emotional states of a learner are manifested in their
body language. An added advantage of monitoring posture
patterns is that these motions are ordinarily unconscious,
unintentional, and thereby not susceptible to social editing, at
least compared with facial expressions and gestures. Ekman
and Friesen (1969), in their studies of deception, have coined

This research demonstrates the utility of automatically
monitoring a student’s posture to track the affective states
of boredom (low engagement) and flow (high engagement),
which have been shown to influence learning. After a tutoring
session with AutoTutor, the affective states of the student
were rated by the learner, a peer, and two trained judges. Our
results indicated that the affective state of flow was manifested
through heightened pressure exerted on the seat of a pressure
sensitive chair. Boredom, in turn, was associated with an
increase in the pressure exerted on the back coupled with a
rapid change in pressure on the seat, perhaps indicative of a
state of restlessness. We also investigated the diagnosticity of
each of the posture features and the reliability of a computer
automatically discriminating episodes of boredom versus flow,
which is a major discrimination in any affect-sensitive tutoring
system.
Keywords: Posture patterns; affective states; emotions;
learning; AutoTutor; classifying affect; Intelligent Tutoring
Systems

Introduction
The task of maintaining a student’s engagement in
educational activities is extremely challenging. Establishing
and maintaining the engagement of learners is especially
critical in situations with high degrees of learner control,
such as in distance education, computer-based tutoring, and
informal learning environments. For instance, with webbased instruction, individuals are one-mouse-click-away
from ending the session. Several traditional approaches
have directly addressed this problem, such as collaborative
learning (Palincsar & Brown, 1984), apprenticeship learning
(Rogoff, 1990), educational games and simulations (Ferrari,
Taylor, & VanLehn, 1999), and inquiry learning (Chinn &
Malhotra, 2002). All of these approaches both promote active
learning and offer scaffolding to sustain motivation and
engagement. They also structure the learning environment
so that it matches a student’s zone of proximal development
(Brown, Ellery, & Campione, 1998) and learning rate
(Metcalfe & Kornell, 2005). Determining the appropriate
level of difficulty is a non-trivial task, however. It is not
obvious what metrics accurately scale the relative difficulty
of complex topics such as those in undergraduate science
courses. Each individual has his/her own specific zone of
proximal development which changes over time in response
to instruction. The goal of providing training that hits this
‘moving target’ is exceptionally difficult.
905

the term nonverbal leakage to refer to the increased difficulty
faced by liars, who attempt to disguise deceit, through less
controlled channels such as the body when compared to
facial expressions.
A few studies have documented the importance of posture
in expressing affect (e.g. Coulson, 2004; Schouwstra &
Hoogstraten, 1995; Wallbott, 1998). However, the impetus
of these investigations has been directed towards “basic”
emotions (i.e. anger, fear, sadness, enjoyment, disgust,
and surprise, Ekman & Friesen, 1978). While these basic
emotions are ubiquitous in everyday experience, there is a
growing body of evidence that suggests that they rarely play
a significant role in learning (D’Mello, et al. 2006; Graesser
et al., 2006; Kort, Reilly, & Picard, 2001). In particular, the
prominent affective states during tutoring are boredom, flow,
frustration, and confusion (Graesser et al., 2006).
Some of these emotions (i.e., affect states) might be viewed
as being cognitive states rather than emotions by some
colleagues, whereas other researchers would classify them as
either emotions or affect states (Barrett, 2006; Meyer & Turner,
in press). Our position agrees with the latter group because
these states are accompanied by enhanced physiological arousal
(compared with neutral) and affect-cognition amalgamations
are particularly relevant to complex learning.
Within the context of engagement, the two most relevant of
these affect states are boredom and flow. Craig et al. (2004)
reported that increased levels of boredom were negatively
correlated with learning (r = -.39) while students learned about
computer literacy topics with an intelligent tutoring system.
In contrast, the flow experience (i.e., high engagement,
Csikszentmihalyi, 1990) was positively correlated with
learning (r = .29).
Therefore, our first step in exploring body posture and
emotions during learning examined the affective states of
boredom (low engagement) and flow (high engagement),
viewing them as approximate endpoints on a continuum of
engagement. Perhaps the most relevant research involving
the monitoring of posture patterns to infer engagement
was conducted by Mota and Picard (2003). They analyzed
temporal transitions of posture patterns to classify the interest
level of children while they performed a learning task on a
computer. Children are much more active than the college
students we investigated, so the algorithms to detect affective
states might be more subtle than their temporal transitions.

al, 1999). AutoTutor helps students learn Newtonian physics
and computer literacy by presenting challenging problems (or
questions) from a curriculum script and engaging in a mixedinitiative dialog while the learner constructs an answer.
Body Pressure Measurement System (BPMS). The BPMS
system, developed by Tekscan™ (1997), consisted of a thinfilm pressure pad (or mat) that could be mounted on a variety
of surfaces. The pad was paper thin with a rectangular grid of
sensing elements. Each sensing element provided a pressure
output in mmHg. Our setup had one sensing pad placed on
the seat of a Steelcase™ Leap Chair and another placed on
the back of the chair (see Figure 1).

Leap Chair

Pressure Mats

Back Pressure

Seat Pressure
Figure 1: Body Pressure Measurement System

The output of the BPMS system consisted of 38x41 matrix
(rows x columns) with each cell in the matrix monitoring the
amount of pressure as reported by the corresponding sensing
element. Therefore, in accordance with our setup, at each
sampling instance (1/4 second), matrices corresponding to the
pressure in the back and the seat of the chair were recorded
for future, offline analyses.

Procedure
The study was divided into two phases. The first phase
was a standard pretest–intervention–posttest design. The
participants completed a pretest with multiple-choice
questions, then interacted with the AutoTutor system for
32 minutes on one of three randomly assigned topics in
computer literacy (Hardware, Internet, Operating Systems),
and then completed a posttest. During the tutoring session,
the system recorded a video of the participants’ face, their
pressure patterns, and a video of their computer screen.
The second phase involved affect judgments by the learner,
a peer, and two trained judges. A list of the affective states
and definitions was provided for all judges. The states were
boredom, confusion, flow, frustration, delight, neutral and
surprise. The selection of emotions was based on previous
studies of AutoTutor (Craig et al., 2004; D’Mello et al., 2006;
Graesser et al., 2006) that collected observational data and
emote aloud protocols while college students learned with
AutoTutor.
The affect judging session proceeded by displaying
video streams of both the learner’s screen and face, which

Methods
Participants
The participants were 28 undergraduate students from a midsouth university who participated for extra course credit.

Materials
AutoTutor. AutoTutor is a fully automated computer tutor
that simulates human tutors and holds conversations with
students in natural language (Graesser et al., 2005; Graesser, et
906

were captured during the AutoTutor session. The raters were
instructed to make judgments on what affective states were
present in each 20-second interval; at these points the video
automatically paused for their affect judgments. Four sets
of emotion judgments were made for the observed affective
states of each participant’s AutoTutor session. First, for
the self judgments, the participant watched his or her own
AutoTutor session immediately after having interacted with
it. Second, for the peer judgments, participants came back
a week later to watch and rate another participant’s session
on the same topic in computer literacy. Finally, two trained
judges independently rated all of the sessions. These judges
had been trained on how to detect facial action units according
to Ekman’s Facial Action Coding System (Ekman & Friesen,
1978) and on characteristics of dialogue.

Data Selection. Three data sets were constructed by
temporally integrating the 4 posture features with the emotion
judgments of the raters. Specifically, the four posture features
(independent variables) were assessed in predicting the
emotion of the learner (dependent variable). The first two
models consisted of posture features aligned with judgments
of the affective states of boredom and flow provided by the
self (NBOREDOM = 483; NFLOW = 593) and the peer (NBOREDOM
= 582; NFLOW = 605). The third model was constructed by
considering affect ratings where both trained judges agreed
on whether the learner was experiencing boredom or flow
(NBOREDOM = 268; NFLOW = 224).

Data Treatment

Figure 2 presents descriptive statistics (mean + 95%
confidence interval, CI) of an item-level analysis for each of
the posture features, segregated by boredom and flow. The
results indicate that boredom is accompanied by an increase
in the pressure exerted on the back of the chair (see Figure
2a). This pattern was statistically significant for the data sets
in which the affect judgments were provided by the peer
(F(1,1185) = 8.51, p < .01) and the trained judges (F(1,490)
= 9.53) but not the self judgments (F < 1.6). In contrast,
the affective state of flow appears to be manifested by a
heightened pressure exerted on the seat of the chair (Figure
2b). This relationship was statistically significant across all
three data sets, FSELF(1,1076) = 13.78; FPEER(1,1185) = 5.44, p
< .05; FJUDGES(1, 490) = 52.47.

Results
Relating Posture with Boredom and Flow

Analysis of Agreement among Judges. Interjudge reliability
was computed using Cohen’s kappa for all possible pairs of
judges: self, peer, trained judge1, and trained judge2. There
were 6 possible pairs altogether. The kappas were reported
in Graesser et al. (2006): self-peer (.08), self-judge1 (.14),
self-judge-2 (.16), peer-judge1 (.14), peer-judge2 (.18), and
judge1-judge2 (.36). These kappa scores revealed that the
trained judges had the highest agreement, the self and peer
pair had lowest agreement, and the other pairs of judges were
in between. It should be noted, however, that the kappa scores
increase substantially [self-peer (.12), self-judge1 (.31), selfjudge2 (.24), peer-judge1 (.36), peer-judge2 (.37), and judge1judge2 (.71)] when we focused on observations in which the
learner declared they had an emotion, as opposed to many
random points when they were essentially neutral. The kappa
scores are on par with data reported by other researchers who
have assessed identification of emotions by humans (e.g. Ang
et al., 2002; Forbes-Riley & Litman, 2004).
Extraction of Posture Features. At each sampling point
(1/4 second) the BPMS system provides a spatial map of
the pressure exerted on the seat and the back of the chair.
By averaging across each of the 1558 sensing elements on
the back and seat pads one obtains the back net pressure
and the seat net pressure. However, since we are primarily
interested in posture patterns during an emotional experience
(as indicated by the self, peer, or 2 trained judges) these
features were only computed when an emotional episode was
recorded.
We also considered two additional features that attempted
to measure the rate of change in pressure exerted by the
learner on the back and seat of the chair during an emotional
episode. That is, by computing the rate of change in pressure
2 seconds before and 2 seconds after the learner was judged to
have experienced an emotion, we were able to operationally
define a measurement of the amount of body activity of
the learner when he or she experienced an emotion. These
features are termed the back pressure change and the seat
pressure change.

(a) Back Net Pressure

(b) Seat Net Pressure

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.25

Self

Peer

Judges

(c) Back Pressure Change

Self

Peer

Judges

(d) Seat Pressure Change

0

0.15

0

0.1

0

0.05

0

0

Self

Boredom

Peer

Judges

Self

Peer

Judges

Flow

Figure 2: Descriptive Statistics for Posture Features
Segregated by Boredom and Flow
It appears that the change in pressure exerted on the back
of the chair is quantitatively similar for boredom and flow.


907

0

0.2

p < .01 in all analyses unless specified otherwise.

0

Therefore, this feature does not appear to be very useful
in discriminating these emotions (Figure 2c). However,
Figure 2d indicates that boredom is typically accompanied
by heightened level of activity on the seat of the chair (i.e.,
fidgeting). This trend was observed for the data sets where
the affect judgments were provided by the peer (F(1,1185)
= 13.41) and the trained judges (F(1,490) = 7.43) but not the
self judgments (F < 1).
The above mentioned relationships between the posture
features and the affective states of boredom and flow can be
aligned within a proclivity-arousal framework. One can think
of heightened pressure in the seat as resonating with a tendency
to position one’s body towards the source of stimulation (i.e.,
high proclivity for inclining toward the AutoTutor interface,
or a short distance between the nose and the screen). On
the other hand, an increase in pressure on the back of the
chair suggests that the learner is leaning back and detaching
himself or herself from the stimulus (low proclivity). On the
basis of these operational definitions of proclivity to a stimuli,
our results are in the expected directions. Specifically, the
affective state of flow is being manifested by an increased
pressure on the seat of the chair, which would be indicative
of high proclivity to the tutoring stimulus during periods
of engagement. However, during episodes of boredom the
learners seem to lean back, presumably disengaging from the
learning environment.
Our results also indicate that boredom is accompanied
by an increase in the rate of change of pressure exerted on
the seat. Heightened arousal is associated with the boredom
experience, as learners mentally disengage from the tutor and
divert their cognitive capabilities to fidget around and alleviate
their ennui. This pattern of increased arousal accompanying
disengagement (or boredom) replicates the general findings
by Mota and Picard (2003), where they monitored activity
related posture features and discovered that children fidget
when they were bored while performing a learning task on a
computer.

feature provides is estimated. Hence, features that yield a
higher information gain achieve greater diagnostic power and
are subsequently used as branching nodes (seat net pressure)
before features with lower information gain (back net pressure
and seat pressure change).
Seat Net Pressure
Low

High
Back Net Pressure

B

High

Low

Seat Pressure Change
High

Low

F

F

B

B-Boredom; F-Flow

Figure 3: Decision Tree to Discriminate Boredom and Flow

Discriminating between Boredom and Flow
The next important step is to investigate how well a computer
can automatically discriminate between boredom and flow
on the basis of the learner’s posture patterns. The analyses
proceeded by first expanding the set of posture features to
include small changes in the pressure exerted on the back and
the seat before and after the learner’s emotional experiences.
Specifically, we computed the difference between the net
pressure exerted three seconds before and after an emotional
episode. We also measured the difference between the net
pressure exerted on the back and the seat during emotion
Et and Et-1 (i.e., the net pressure for the previous emotional
episode). Finally, two features that examined the net pressure
coverage on the back and the seat were included. These
variables measure the proportion of non-negative sensing
units on each pad.
We investigated the reliability by which three, theoretically
distinct, machine learning techniques could discriminate
between engagement (flow) and lack thereof (boredom).
These included a Bayesian model, a neural network, and a
simple nearest neighbor classifier.

Diagnosticity of Posture Features
Our discovery, in summary, is that the level of pressure in the
seat and the back of the chair, and the level of activity in the
seat are the main posture features that discriminate boredom
from flow, two ends of the engagement continuum. This
raises the question as to which of these features is the most
diagnostic of engagement. We conducted a small computer
simulation in which the C4.5 algorithm (Quinlan, 1993) was
used to construct a decision tree capable of discriminating
between boredom and flow. For ease of interpretation, each
posture feature was dichotomized (i.e. low vs. high) and we
only present the decision tree obtained from the data set in
which the two trained judges agreed on the learner’s emotion
(Figure 3).
The C4.5 algorithm operates by first computing the
entropy (noise or impurity) associated with the data. Then,
the information gain (the reduction in the entropy) that each

Table 1. Classification Accuracy (Kappa Scores)
Affect
Judge
Self
Peer
Judges
Mean

Notes.

Overall
K B N
.37 .27 .28
.55 .27 .35
.48 .35 .40
.47 .29 .34

Boredom
K B N
.36 .01 .19
.52 .00 .20
.39 .16 .37
.42 .05 .25

K
.38
.58
.57
.51

Flow
B
.53
.56
.54
.54

K: Nearest Neighbor, B: Bayes, N: Neutral Network

N
.37
.49
.43
.43

The reliability (kappa scores) associated with each of
the aforementioned classifiers was computed for each of
the 3 data sets. K-fold cross-validation (k = 10) was run
in tests with training and testing components. In k-fold
cross-validation the data set (N) is divided into k subsets of
908

approximately equal size (N/k). The classifier is trained on
(k-1) of the subsets and evaluated on the remaining subset.
Accuracy statistics are measured after the process is repeated
k times. The overall accuracy is the average of the k training
iterations. Goutte (1977) has shown k-fold cross-validation
to be superior to other techniques for small data sets. The
Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA,
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/) was used to perform
the requisite computation.
Table 1 presents overall kappa scores as well as individual
accuracy metrics in assessing the reliability by which the
three machine learning schemes discriminated between
boredom and flow when the affective states of a learner were
categorized by three different judges. The results indicate
that the classifiers were successful in discriminating between
boredom and flow at rates significantly higher than chance.
The simplest strategy of assigning emotion categories by
consulting the neighbors of a test instance yielded performance
scores that were quantitatively higher than algorithms that
attempted to construct an explicit model from the data (i.e.,
Bayesian Classifiers and Neural Networks). Classifiers that
were trained and evaluated with the data sets of peers and
trained judges were on par and higher than those obtained
by the self judges. This might be because the differences
associated with back pressure (Figure 2a) and the changes in
seat pressure (Figure 2d) were not significant when emotion
judgments were provided by the self judges.

Uncertainty remains as to what exactly should be the
gold standard for deciding what emotions a learner is truly
having. Should it be the learner, a peer, or the trained judges?
We are uncertain about the answer to this question, but it is
conceivable that some emotions may best be classified by
learners and others by peers or trained judges. One possibility
is “social desirability;” self judgments are less accurate when
posture indicates boredom because learners do not want to
admit feeling bored. An alternative position is that the self
judges were utilizing internal cues (such as recollection from
episodic memory) in judging their emotions. These were
obviously unavailable to the other judges. Therefore, the peer
and trained judges were forced to rely on bodily measures in
inferring the learner’s affect. Perhaps a composite score from
all viewpoints is most defensible.
This research has highlighted the efficacy of monitoring
bodily measures of a learner as a viable channel to infer
complex mental states. Some researchers have challenged
the role of non-verbal behaviors in communicating affect
(Trimboli & Walker, 1987). They argue that experiments
that extoll the virtues of non-verbal communication of affect
are typically plagued by problems related to experimenter
bias (i.e., the nature of the stimuli or the intention of the
experimenter are not camouflaged). However, our research
on body movements and those of others (Mota & Picard,
2003) were conducted in ecologically valid settings in which
no actors are used and no attempts were made to intentionally
invoke affect.
Many questions remain unanswered in this exploration of
body movements, emotions, and learning. Are the significant
relationships between cognition and bodily movements
predicted by the various theories of embodied cognition
(Clark, 1997; Glenberg, 2005; de Vega, 2002)? To what
extent can affect and cognition individually predict bodily
activity? Does a combination of these channels increase their
predictive power? Do relationships between cognition, affect,
and bodily movement generalize above and beyond individual
differences in experiencing and manifesting affect? Answers
to these questions will help us explore theories of embodied
cognition in addition to the synchronization of emotions with
complex learning.

Discussion
This exploratory research provides new findings on the
relationship between a learner’s posture and the affective states
related to engagement. Our results indicated that boredom
is manifested in two distinct forms. The first is consistent
with the preconceived notion of boredom in which a learner
stretches out, lays back, and simply disengages. However, a
counter-intuitive finding is that boredom was associated with
a form of restlessness manifested by rapid changes in pressure
on the seat of the chair. It is not clear as to whether these
two bodily expressions of boredom are isolated, combine, or
interact during experience. Finer grained analyses would be
required to tease apart these alternatives.
The affective state of flow was associated with a heightened
pressure in the seat of the chair with minimal movement. This
may imply that the learner is mentally engaged in absorbing
the material and thereby devotes a smaller amount of cognitive
processing towards trivial bodily motion as explained by the
proclivity-arousal framework.
It is interesting to note that posture predicts affect even
though posture information was not on the radar of the judges
during their ratings of the learners’ affect states of the learners.
Perhaps some basic bodily movement could conceivably be
inferred from the video of the participants’ faces. It is also
unclear why the posture patterns associated with the peer and
trained judges’ affect ratings were more synchronous than the
self judgments.

Acknowledgments
We thank our research colleagues at the University of
Memphis and MIT, as well as Steelcase Inc. for providing
us with the Tekscan Body Pressure Measurement System at
no cost. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation (REC 0106965 , ITR 0325428, REESE 0633918).
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of NSF.

References
Ang, J., Dhillon, R., Krupski, A., Shriberg, E., & Stolcke, A.
(2002). Prosody-based automatic detection of annoyance
909

and frustration in human-computer dialog. In J. H. L.
Hansenet al (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP’02)
(pp. 2037-2039). Denver.
Barrett, L. F. (2006). Emotions as natural kinds? Perspectives
on Psychological Science, 1, 28-58
Brown, A. L., Ellery, S., & Campione, J. C. (1998). Creating
zones of proximal development electronically. In J. G.
Greeno and S. V. Goldman (Eds.), Thinking practices in
mathematics and science learning (pp. 341-367). Mahway,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Chinn, C. A., & Malhotra, B. A. (2002). Epistemologically
authentic inquiry in schools: A theoretical framework for
evaluating inquiry tasks. Science Education, 86:2-175218.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain body and world
together again. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Coulson, M. (2004). Attributing emotion to static body
postures: recognition accuracy, confusions, and viewpoint
dependence. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 28, 117-139.
Craig, S., Graesser, A., Sullins, J. & Gholson, B. (2004).
Affect and learning: An exploratory look into the role of
affect in learning. Journal of Educational Media 29:241250.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience. Harper-Row: NY.
de Vega, M. (2002). Del significado simbólico al significado
corpóreo. Estudios de Psicología, 23, 153-174. [From
symbolic meaning to embodied meaning].
D’Mello, S. K., Craig, S. D., Gholson, B.; Franklin, S., Picard,
R., & Graesser, A. C. (2005). Integrating affect sensors in
an intelligent tutoring system. In Affective Interactions:
The Computer in the Affective Loop Workshop at 2005
International conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 713. New York: AMC Press.
D’Mello, S. K., Craig, S. D., Sullins, J., & Graesser, A. C.
(2006). Predicting affective states through an emote-aloud
procedure from AutoTutor’s mixed-initiative dialogue.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
16, 3-28.
Ekman, P. & Friesen, W.V. (1969). Nonverbal leakage and
clues to deception. Psychiatry, 32, 88-105
Ekman, P, & W. V. Friesen. 1978. The facial action coding
system: A technique for the measurement of facial
movement. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. (1972). Constants across culture in
the face and emotion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 17, 124–129.
Ferrari, M., Taylor, R., & VanLehn, K. (1999). Adapting
Work Simulations for Schools. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 21 (1), 25-53.
Forbes-Riley, K. and D. Litman. 2004. Predicting Emotion
in Spoken Dialogue from Multiple Knowledge Sources.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference of the North American Chapter of the

Association for Computational Linguistics, 201-208.
Boston, MA.
Glenberg, A. M., Havas, D., Becker, R., & Rinck, M. (2005).
Grounding Language in Bodily States: The Case for
Emotion. In R. Zwaan and D. Pecher (Eds.) The grounding
of cognition: The role of perception and action in memory,
language, and thinking. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press (2005)
Goutte, C. (1997). Note on free lunches and cross-validation.
Neural Computation, 9, 1211-1215.
Graesser, A. C., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Wiemer-Hastings, P.,
Kreuz, R., & the TRG (1999). AutoTutor: A simulation of
a human tutor. Journal of Cognitive Systems Research, 1,
35-51.
Graesser, A. C., P. Chipman, B. C. Haynes, and A. Olney.
2005. AutoTutor: An intelligent tutoring system with
mixed-initiative dialogue. IEEE Transactions in Education
48: 612-618.
Graesser, A.C., McDaniel, B., Chipman, P., Witherspoon,
A., D’Mello, S., & Gholson, B. (2006). Detection of
emotions during learning with AutoTutor. In R. Son (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meetings of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 285-290). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kort, B., Reilly, R., & Picard, R. (2001). An affective model
of interplay between emotions and learning: Reengineering
educational pedagogy—building a learning companion.
In T. Okamoto, R. Hartley, Kinshuk, & J. P. Klus (Eds.),
Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technology: Issues, Achievements and Challenges
(pp. 43-48). IEEE Computer Society.
Metcalfe, J., & Kornell, N. (2005) A Region of Proximal
Learning Model of Study Time Allocation. Journal of
Memory and Language, 52, 463-477.
Meyer, D. K., & Turner, J. C. (in press). Reconceptualizing
emotion and motivation to learn in classroom contexts.
Educational Psychology Review.
Mota, S. & Picard, R. W. (2003). Automated Posture Analysis
for Detecting Learner’s Interest Level. Workshop on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition for HumanComputer Interaction, CVPR HCI, June, 2003.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of
comprehension-fostering and comprehension –monitoring
activities. Cognition and Instruction 1(2), 117-175
Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive
development in social context. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Schouwstra, S., & Hoogstraten, J. (1995). Head position and
spinal position as determinants of perceived emotional
state. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 81, 673-674.
Tekscan (1997). Tekscan Body Pressure Measurement System
User’s Manual. Tekscan Inc., South Boston, MA, USA.
Wallbott, N. (1998). Bodily expression of emotion European
Journal of Social Psychology, 28, 879-896.
910

