UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Priming and Conservation Between Spatial and Cognitive Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/61r3k81k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Hills, THomas T.
Todd, Peter M.
Goldstone, Robert L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Priming and Conservation Between Spatial and Cognitive Search
Thomas T. Hills (thills@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
1101 E. 10th St., Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405

Peter M. Todd (pmtodd@indiana.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science
1101 E. 10th St., Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
1101 E. 10th St., Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, 47405
Significant evidence from various fields suggests that
this relationship between spatial foraging and internal
cognitive search is not just a consequence of convergent
evolution, but one of evolutionary homology (Hills, 2006).
Research from neuroscience, genetics, and human pathology
provide evidence that molecular and neural mechanisms that
developed over evolutionary time for the purpose of
modulating between exploration and exploitation in spatial
foraging have subsequently been exapted for the purpose of
modulating attention. A key observation is that similar
dopaminergic processes are used to modulate goal-directed
behavior and attention in multiple behavioral modalities
across species (Floresco et al., 1996; Watanabe et al., 1997;
Wang et al., 2004; Schultz, 2004). Furthermore, numerous
pathologies of goal-directed cognition (e.g., attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder—ADHD, drug addiction, and
obsessive-compulsive disorder) involve dopaminergic defects
or respond to dopaminergic drugs in ways that are consistent
with dopaminergic effects on spatial movement behavior, as
in, for example, the nematode and the fruit fly (Berke et al.,
2000; Nieoullon, 2002; Schinka et al., 2002; Hills et al., 2004;
Kume et al., 2005).
These observations suggest that spatial search in physical
space and abstract search in a cognitive space share a
common basis in the brain and may therefore share key
control features. While prior work has shown that animal
foraging theory can be successfully applied to human search
behavior (Pirolli & Card, 1999; Wilke, 2006), these efforts
have been made based on arguments for optimality or robust
decision heuristics. An argument based on a common
biological basis for goal-directed cognition, however, would
mean that spatial and abstract foraging are not simply similar
because of similar selective forces in the environment, but
are, in fact, themselves constrained by similar underlying
physiologies. Given this, if the search mechanisms for
different domains are not independent of one another, then
activity in one ‘environment’ may influence activity in
another. In such a case, we would expect that differences in
individual foraging behavior could be primed across spatial
and abstract contexts. That is, prior experience with resource
distributions in a spatial environment could prime foraging
behavior in an abstract environment. Similarly, we would

Abstract
There is compelling molecular and behavioral evidence that
human goal-directed cognition is an evolutionary descendent of
animal foraging behavior. A key observation is that similar
dopaminergic processes are used to modulate between
exploratory and exploitative foraging behaviors and control
attention across animal species. Moreover, defects in these
processes lead to predictable goal-directed cognitive
pathologies in humans, such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder and Parkinson’s disease. However, the cognitive
relationships between exploration in space and exploration in
the mind have not been examined. Using a spatial foraging task
with two treatment conditions (clumpy and diffuse), followed
by a word search task involving patches of words to be found in
letter sets, we show that individuals who experienced clumpy
resource distributions in space behave as if resources are more
densely clumped in the word search task, relative to those who
experienced the diffuse spatial treatment. We show this is not a
function of general arousal but is consistent with longer givingup times in the word search task, which is a qualitative
prediction of optimal foraging theory. We also show that
behavioral tendencies during search are conserved within
individuals: Those who explore more of the physical space
leave letter sets sooner. Along with the biological evidence, our
results support a general search process underlying cognition,
which operates both in external and internal environments.
Keywords: Goal-directed behavior; attention; animal foraging;
foraging; dopamine; search; spatial search; word search;
priming; individual differences; ADHD; Parkinson’s.

Introduction
More than a hundred years ago William James noted “We
make search in our memory for a forgotten idea, just as we
rummage our house for a lost object” (James, 1890, p654).
This relationship is anecdotally supported by the fact that
cognitive representations of spatial and semantic knowledge
are often characterized as maps or networks (Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2005; Tolman, 1948). Though these internal
representations are specific to particular contexts, the search
processes required to navigate them may not be. In all cases,
cognitive navigation relies on appropriate modulation of
attention between exploration and exploitation in ways
fundamentally similar to the behavioral ecology of animal
foraging (Kareiva & Odell, 1987; Walsh, 1996).

359

No participant used the stop key more than 1% of the time.
To get familiarized with the controls, participants first had to
navigate a two-dimensional maze. Then in the foraging
treatment, participants saw a blank screen, 200x200 pixels in
size, with their search icon in the center. They were told to
move the icon to find as many hidden 'resource' pixels as they
could in the allotted time, indicated by a sweeping clock-hand
in the upper-right screen corner (clock units are in number of
remaining steps, where a step is equal to one pixel of
movement). Participants were randomly assigned to one of
two resource distributions, ‘clumpy’ or ‘diffuse’, consisting
of 3124 resource pixels in either 4 patches of 781 pixels each
or 624 patches of 5 pixels each, respectively. Figure 1 shows
the resource distributions for the two spatial foraging
treatments and also presents typical participant foraging paths
for each treatment. Resource pixels were not visible to
participants until they were encountered, nor was their path
visible (except where they had previously moved over
resource pixels). Participants experienced five foraging trials,
each two minutes long, and each with a different random
arrangement of patch locations.
We measured spatial exploratory behavior for each
individual by overlaying a 3-pixel grid (half the size of the
minimal possible path loop that could be made by movement
of the icon) on the spatial arena and determining how many of
the grid squares each participant entered. Turning angles were
also measured at 0.3s intervals by taking the angle between
the last 0.3s line and the penultimate 0.3s line.

expect that an individual’s exploratory behavior in a spatial
environment could be indicative of that individual’s
exploratory behavior in an abstract environment.
As a first step towards investigating the relationship
between spatial and cognitive navigation, we had participants
forage in external and internal search spaces. The external
search space was represented by a two-dimensional field on a
computer screen, over which participants foraged by
controlling the movement of an animated icon. For the
internal search, we focused on a specific aspect of mental
search—namely search by manipulation in working memory
of letter cues in a series of jumbled anagram-like letter sets
(e.g., find words that can be created with four or more of the
letters in “SULMPA”—Wilke, 2006; Wilke, Hutchinson, &
Todd, 2004). Because each letter set can form multiple words,
the letter cues provide a means of anchoring and constraining
a depleting internal resource space composed of English
words. Participants only gain access to this solution space via
abstract manipulation of letters in the letter set (they were not
allowed to write anything down). When participants decide
they have sufficiently foraged in a given letter set, they can
move to a new letter set. This allows us to create an abstract
space analogous to a patchy spatial foraging environment. We
used both of these tasks to address two questions concerning
the conservation and priming of navigation strategies between
spatial and abstract search domains: 1) Will differences in the
way resources are distributed in space prime individuals to
stay for longer or shorter durations in each patch in the word
search task? 2) Will individuals who explore more in space
show similar tendencies to explore more in the word search
task?

Internal Word Search Task
In the internal search
task, participants were asked to find words (anagrams) made
up of at least four letters from each of a sequence of letter sets
(e.g., the letter set "SULMPA" can be used to form, among
other words, "SLAP" and "PLUM"). Following visual display
of each letter set, participants could type in as many words as
they wanted, or press a button at any time to move to the next
set. Letter sets were constructed using only the twenty most
common letters in the English alphabet (i.e., excluding
K,V,X,Z,J, and Q), as previous work has shown participants
in this task to be sensitive to letter frequency (Wilke, 2006),
and we did not want obvious cues to the number of possible
words for each letter set. Correct and incorrect entries were
signaled to the participant after each word submission. There
were on average 14.7 (SD = 5.5) valid words per letter set,
judged according to the wordsmith.org anagram dictionary.
Participants could leave a letter set at any time but had to wait
fifteen seconds after indicating their desire to switch before
the next letter set was shown. After leaving a letter set,
participants could not visit it again. Participants received
instructions and training on one letter set before moving to the
pretest session. In the pretest, participants went through four
letter sets and were given no directions on how many words
to find before moving on to the next letter set. The pretest
session ended when participants left the fourth letter set. In
the post-test word search phase (following the spatial
foraging treatment), participants were told that they needed to
find a total of 30 words across any number of letter sets to
finish the experiment, that they could spend as much time as

Methods
Participants
Forty-one English speaking undergraduate university students
at Indiana University participated in the experiment. All
participants were recruited on a volunteer basis and there was
no financial reward for their participation.

Materials and Procedure
Participants were seated in front of a computer and asked to
follow written instructions that appeared on the screen.
Instructions guided participants through a series of three
activities, beginning with a training and pretest session in the
word search (anagram) task, followed by a spatial foraging
task, and then a post-test session in the word search task. All
participants saw the same sequence of tasks and letter sets in
the same order, however, participants were randomly
assigned by the computer to either of the spatial foraging
treatments described below (in a between participants
fashion; n = 19 clumpy and n = 22 diffuse).
External Foraging Task Participants controlled the
movement of a foraging icon using the 'I', 'J', 'L', and 'K' keys
representing 'Go', 'Left', 'Right', and 'Stop', respectively. Left
and right keys initiated turns of 35 degrees per step, and
forward (‘go’) speed was approximately 20 pixels per second.

360

they liked on any given letter set, and that they should
allocate their time appropriately so as not to stay too long or
too short in any given letter set.

Figure 2: Mean turning angle when participants were on
resources. Error bars show standard errors of the mean.

Priming of Abstract Exploratory Behavior by
Experience in Spatial Resource Distributions
To test the potential priming effects of spatially correlated
resources on patch-leaving times in a subsequent abstract
search task, we compared the mean time each participant
spent in a letter set ‘patch’ before and after the foraging
treatment. As expected, in the pretest phase the mean letter set
times were not significantly different between the two spatial
environment conditions (p = 0.66) and shared a mean of 85.7
seconds. However, in the post-test after the spatial foraging
task, the two treatment groups were significantly different in
the corresponding changes in their mean letter set times
(Figure 3). Individuals who were first primed for goaldirected exploitation in the clumpy spatial resource
environment stayed in letter sets approximately 17.1 seconds
longer than they did in the pretest, while individuals who
experienced
diffuse
resource
distributions
stayed
approximately 16.3 seconds shorter than they did in the
pretest (t(39) = 2.65, p = 0.011). This is consistent with the
biological and behavioral evidence described above,
supporting a common ‘foraging’ cognition across external
and internal domains. However, other possible explanations
exist, which we now test.
It is possible that our attentional priming effects are a
consequence of the total resources received during foraging
and are therefore due to a greater anticipation of reward in
general. To test this hypothesis, we used a linear regression of
spatial resources found on the mean difference in letter set
times. The number of resources found was not a significant
predictor of mean changes in letter set time (p = 0.26).
However, to be thorough, we also included resources found
as a covariate in an ANOVA containing treatment condition.
Again, treatment condition was a significant predictor, F(1,
37) = 6.4, p = 0.017, but both the main effect of resources
found and the resources found by distribution treatment
interaction were not significant (p = 0.23 and p = 0.42,
respectively).
Another alternative explanation is that individuals in the
clumpy (or diffuse) trials were in a higher state of arousal
because they may have pressed the keyboard response keys
more frequently. A test of key presses between the two

Figure 1: (a) Examples of clumpy and diffuse resource
distributions. Black pixels represent resources. (b) Example
paths for two participants in the clumpy and diffuse
treatments. Grey circles are positioned over the pixels where
participants found a resource.

Results
The conventional patch model of optimal foraging formalizes
the optimal allocation of time to stay in individual resource
patches (Stephens & Krebs, 1986). When resource patches
are depleted sooner and travel times between patches are
shorter (e.g., our diffuse spatial treatment), then foragers
should leave patches sooner than when patches are dense and
further apart. In our foraging task, this means individuals in
the clumpy task need to turn more frequently when on
resources because found resources indicate more resources
nearby, whereas individuals in the diffuse condition should do
the opposite, turn less, to avoid revisiting areas where they
have already depleted the available resources. A genetic
algorithm showing this result for resource distributions
similar to those used here was described by Hills (2006).
Consistent with this, Figure 2 shows that participants’ turning
angle immediately after encountering resources was
significantly lower for those in the diffuse treatment than for
those in the clumpy treatment (t(39) = 2.72, p < 0.01). Thus,
participants were sensitive to the spatial correlations in the
two environments, and any differences we find in behavior
between the treatments are potentially a consequence of this
sensitivity (though we also test other hypotheses below).

361

groups, however, shows that the two groups did not
significantly differ in the number of total key presses during
the foraging sessions (t(39) = 1.26, p = 0.21). Furthermore, if
one group were in a higher state of arousal, we should expect
the overall word submission rates in the anagram task to be
different between the two treatment groups. However,
treatment groups did not significantly differ in mean time to
submit correct or incorrect words (t(39) = 1.61, p = 0.12 and
t(39) = 1.27, p = 0.21, respectively). This suggests that
arousal state, as measured by key presses and word
submission rates, is not the cause of the greater times spent
exploring each letter set following clumpy spatial foraging.

Figure 4: Latencies to switch (in seconds) to the next letter
set following the last word submitted. Error bars show
standard errors of the mean.

Individual Sensitivity to Spatial Priming
Regression analyses of the individual sensitivities to our
spatial foraging treatments reveal that individuals in the
diffuse treatment were far more likely to reduce their mean
letter set time if their mean set time in the training session
was long than if it was short (regression coefficient = -0.68, p
< 0.001, R-squared = 0.55). However, the clumpy treatment
group did not show a similar sensitivity (p = 0.12). This may
suggest that external cues to reduce perseveration are more
effective than cues to increase perseveration, but more work
is needed to validate and understand this difference.

Figure 3: Mean difference in letter set times in seconds (posttest – pretest). Error bars show standard errors of the mean.
Another way to measure patch exploitation is in terms of
giving-up time (GUT), which is the time between when the
last resource item is encountered and when the forager
actually leaves the patch. Using optimal foraging theory,
McNair (1982) showed that organisms should use longer or
shorter optimal giving-up times when patches are better
(clumpier) or worse (more diffuse), respectively. In the word
search task, GUTs are analogous with the latencies to switch
(the time between the last word submitted and the switch to a
new letter set). If participants who foraged in the spatially
clumpy treatment—where longer GUTs would be adaptive—
are acting as if letter sets in the post-test are also clumpier,
then their latencies to switch in the post-test should be longer
than participants who experienced diffuse spatial resources.

Conservation Between Spatial and Abstract
Foraging
Our second focus regards the individual consistency in
exploration between spatial and abstract environments. The
biological and behavioral basis for general search processes
would suggest that if individuals are prone to perseverative
search strategies—exploiting found resources—in one
environment, they should apply similar strategies in new
environments. This prediction of individual search differences
conserved across environments, however, must be modulo the
individual’s sensitivity to feedback from interactions with
new environmental conditions; this sensitivity may vary
across types of environments and may be independent of the
underlying search processes. Nonetheless, evidence for
conserved individual search differences, based for instance on
different individual sensitivities to dopamine levels, would be
consistent with our argument that the underlying biological
basis of goal-directed behavior leads to common search
tendencies across task domains.
In the spatial foraging task we measured exploration as the
proportion of the total surface area explored. Our hypothesis
here is that individuals who explore more in the spatial
foraging task (within a treatment condition) should leave
patches earlier and submit words at a faster rate. One caveat is

Figure 4 shows that the latencies to switch in the word
search post-test are indeed significantly longer for individuals
in the spatial clumpy treatment than those in the diffuse
treatment (t(39) = 2.238, p = 0.031). This further supports our
hypothesis that individuals in the word search task are
influenced by their expectations regarding the distribution of
resources in patches and that those expectations can be
formed with prior experience in spatial distributions.

362

that the proportion of the area explored by participants was
significantly influenced by the treatment (t(39) = -4.70, p <
0.001), with individuals in the clumpy treatment exploring
less than individuals in the diffuse treatment. To control for
this effect, but still maintain our statistical power, we
included in an ANOVA on mean letter set time, the
proportion of spatial coverage, the treatment condition, and
the interaction between the two. This effectively controls for
the variance in exploration due to the treatment condition and
reveals that exploratory behavior was a significant predictor
of letter set leaving times (F(1,37) = 10.25, p = 0.003).
Participants who explore more in space spend less time in
letter sets (individual regressions are shown in Figure 5).
Using a similar analysis, controlling for treatment and the
interaction with treatment, we find a similar effect for mean
time to submit both correct and incorrect words (F(1,37) =
5.40, p = 0.026 and F(1,37) = 4.68, p = 0.037, respectively).
In both cases, more exploration means a faster submission
rate (data not shown).
While we cannot claim that exploration in a spatial
environment is a strong predictor of departure times or word
submission rate in the word search task, nonetheless, the
behaviors are correlated, despite the fact that the two
environments are quite different.

and spatial goal-directed cognition (Hills, 2006). Moving to a
new task leaves intact local-to-global strategies for
exploration or persistence fostered by an earlier task even if
the two tasks involve domains that are traditionally conceived
to be highly dissimilar. The present study, however, only
explores these effects in a specific pair of task domains, and
represents a starting point for future research on the
interactions between resource distributions and cognitive
search processes.
Recent neural studies have shown modulation from
global brain activation during learning to more localized
activation following learning (Jog, Kubota, Connolly,
Hillegaart, & Graybiel, 1999; Qin et al., 2003). This is
consistent with spreading activation theories of semantic
processing (Collins & Loftus, 1975; Neely, 1977), which also
appear to operate via local-to-global modulation. Our results
may imply that these focus-shifting cognitive processes are
potentially influenced by prior experience in physical space.
If our interpretations of the biological evidence are correct—
and the research described here supports that interpretation—
then exploratory spatial movement may be tightly linked with
problem solving, memory retrieval, the general control of
attention, and other cognitive functions. The general search
processes of exploration and exploitation capture
commonalities that underlie cognition across these domains.
The verification and limitations of these processes
require substantial future research. In the present study, the
word search task is still more stimulus driven than other
conceivable tasks (e.g., “name all the cities you can think of
in a given state”, where states represent depleting patches that
cannot be revisited). We chose the word search task
specifically because it allows for fairly direct control of the
possible solution set and because it is unlikely to be
influenced by previous experience with any given letter set.
To generalize these results, we must investigate other search
domains.
In general and across species, increasing extracellular
dopamine increases behaviors associated with exploitation of
resources, while reductions in extracellular dopamine leads to
more exploratory (or inattentive) behavior (reviewed in Hills,
2006). Though our present study does not directly measure
dopamine, our research may provide insight into clinical
disorders of attentional focus, such as ADHD and
schizophrenia, by showing how cognitive tendencies for
attentional persistence may be revealed in tasks involving
spatial exploration. Furthermore, tasks that modulate attention
in space may alter the persistence of attention in subsequent
nonspatial tasks. If such spatial tasks could be made to have
long-lasting effects, for example by giving individuals
exposure to them during development, then they may provide
useful hints towards non-pharmacological treatments for
disorders of attention.
Generalized search processes of the sort we have
described here have clear adaptive importance, helping
organisms accrue necessary resources in an efficient manner.
Moreover, most search tasks, including those we have studied
in this paper, are conceptually synonymous with attentional
processes, which themselves must explore and exploit

Figure 5: Proportion spatial coverage versus mean letter set
time (seconds). Filled circles represent participants in the
clumpy spatial treatment; open circles represent participants
in the diffuse treatment. The regression lines are for each
treatment group independently (solid = clumpy, dotted =
diffuse).

Discussion
The present study examined the search strategies of
individuals as they moved from a concrete spatial foraging
task to an abstract word search task. The main findings were
that spatial foraging tasks are capable of priming abstract
word search tasks and that individuals conserved their search
strategies as they moved between the two tasks.
These results strongly suggest that there are general
search processes underlying cognition that are used to search
both in space and in abstract cognition. This fits well with the
evidence supporting a common basis in the brain for abstract

363

Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless spreading
activation and limited capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology (General), 106, 226-254.
Nieoullon, A. (2002). Dopamine and the regulation of
cognition and attention. Prog Neurobiol, 67(1), 53-83.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1999) Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 29(3), 343-373.
Qin, Y., Sohn, M. H., Anderson, J. R., Stenger, V. A., Fissell,
K., Goode, A., et al. (2003). Predicting the practice effects
on the blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD)
function of fMRI in a symbolic manipulation task. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 100(8), 4951-4956.
Schinka, J. A., Letsch, E. A., & Crawford, F. C. (2002).
DRD4 and novelty seeking: results of meta-analyses.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, Neuropsychiatric
Genetics, 114(643-648).
Schultz, W. (2004). Neural coding of basic reward terms of
animal learning, game theory, microeconomics and
behavioral ecology. Current Opinions in Neurobiology,
14(139-144).
Stephens, D. W., & Krebs , J. R. (1986). Foraging theory.
Princeton, NJ; Princeton University Press.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208.
Walsh, P. D. (1996). Area-restricted search and the scale
dependence of patch quality discrimination Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 183, 351-361.
Wang, M., Vijayraghavan, S., & Goldman-Rakic, P. S.
(2004). Selective D2 receptor actions on the functional
circuitry of working memory. Science, 303, 853-856.
Watanabe, M., Kodama, T., & Hikosaka, K. (1997). Increase
of extracellular dopamine in primate prefrontal cortex
during a working memory task. J Neurophysiol, 78(5),
2795-2798.
Wilke, A. (2006) Doctoral Dissertation, Free University of
Berlin.
[accessible
online
at
www.diss.fuberlin.de/2006/14/indexe.html]
Wilke, A., Hutchinson, J.M.C., and Todd, P.M. (2004).
Testing simple rules for human foraging in patchy
environments. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, and T. Regier
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p. 1656). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

external cues to guide behavior. The biological evidence
regarding search processes could be taken to support a
historical constraint on cognition; in part, cognition is the way
it is because of where it came from, evolutionarily speaking.
The fact that we can find priming between search in two very
different types of environments, external and internal,
provides a valuable window onto the cognitive mechanisms
that may underlie both types of search.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of Health,
T32 Grant # HD 07475, Department of Education, Institute of
Education Sciences grant R305H050116, and NSF REC grant
0527920.

References
Berke, J. D., & Hyman, S. E. (2000). Addiction, dopamine,
and the molecular mechanisms of memory. Neuron, 25,
515-532.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading activation
theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 82,
407-428.
Floresco, S. B., Seamans, J. K., & Phillips, A. G. (1996). A
selective role of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens of the
rat in random foraging but not delayed spatial win-shiftbased foraging. Behavioral Brain Research, 80, 161-168.
Hills, T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of goaldirected cognition. Cognitive Science, 30, 3-41.
Hills, T., Brockie, P. J., Maricq, A. V. (2004) Dopamine and
glutamate control area-restricted search behavior in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Journal of Neuroscience 24(5),
1217-1225.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. New York:
Holt.
Jog, M. S., Kubota, Y., Connolly, C. I., Hillegaart, V., &
Graybiel, A. M. (1999). Building neural representations of
habits. Science, 286(5445), 1745-1749.
Kareiva, P., & Odell, G. (1987). Swarms of predators exhibit
“preytaxis” if individual predators use area-restricted
search. American Naturalist, 130, 233-270.
Kume, K., Kume., S., Park, S. K., Hirsh, J., Jackson, F. R.
(2005) Dopamine as a regulator of arousal in the fruit fly.
Journal of Neuroscience 25(32), 7377-7384.
McNair, J. N. (1982) Optimal giving-up times and the
marginal value theorem. American Naturalist 119, 511529.

364

