UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processing Function Words in Artificial Languages: Effects of Function Word Presence and
Perceptual Cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7dc1x7mx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Hufnagle, Dan
Curtin, Suzanne

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Processing Function Words in Artificial Languages:
Effects of Function Word Presence and Perceptual Cues
Dan Hufnagle (dghufnag@ucalgary.ca)
Department of Psychology, 2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4 Canada

Suzanne Curtin (scurtin@ucalgary.ca)
Departments of Psychology and Linguistics, 2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4 Canada
Abstract
Language learners use function words as indicators of
structure. Across languages, function and content differ
phonologically and acoustically, and learners may use these
cues to help organize an emerging lexicon into categories. We
tested three versions of an artificial language: no differences
between function and non-function words, reduced vowels for
function words, and no onsets for function words. Counter to
expectations, learners of the language with no cues to
category membership performed best on grammaticality
judgments. At test, the presence of function words was also
manipulated. There is an interaction between presence of
function words in test sentences and the type of pattern being
tested, indicating that function words help learners process
some patterns, but are detrimental for others.
Keywords: Artificial language learning; function words;
syntax acquisition.

Introduction
Function words and morphemes have a number of
characteristics that make them special in language. They
serve as the scaffold around which the meaning in a
sentence is built. They organize sentences, providing
structure within phrases as well as connections among
phrases. Function words are a closed class: new function
words rarely enter a language and constitute a small part of
the lexicon relative to non-function words. Despite their low
type frequency, function words have high token frequency.
Experiments using artificial languages have explored the
role of function words in acquisition. Learners can form
categories quite rapidly by calculating distributions of cooccurrences (Mintz, 2002) and can use those distributions to
determine which elements are predictive of other elements
(Saffran, 2001). When predictive elements in artificial
languages act to reliably signal whole classes of other
elements that occur in the language, they become analogous
to function words in natural language. Thus, when learners
have access to distributional information about cooccurrence, learners can induce categories in artificial
languages that play the role of function words, even when
words in those languages are not tied to meaning.
Artificial languages that include function words are
learned better than languages that do not include predictive
elements or languages with similar elements that are not
predictive (Green, 1979). This advantage for predictive

elements only holds when the relative frequency of
predictive to non-predictive elements is high (Valian &
Coulson, 1988): learners of an artificial language with a low
ratio of function words to non-function word (mimicking
natural language) learned the language faster and at a deeper
level than learners who learned a language with a higher
ratio of function to non-function words.
Whether or not function words are optional also affects
acquisition. Hudson Kam and Newport (2005) exposed
learners to a simple, meaning-based artificial language and
used a number of tasks to measure the effects of the
proportion of exposure sentences that contained function
words. While the researchers framed the experiment in
terms of regularizing patterns from inconsistent input (i.e.,
creolization), their experiments also show how people differ
in learning languages with required versus optional function
words if the input is taken as faithful to the target language.
Adults’ productions and sentence ratings mirrored the
function word characteristics of the input language: when
function words were presented in all contexts (i.e., required
by the language), learners recognized the requirement.
When function words were variable in the input, learners
recognized the optionality, either dropping them altogether
or used them variably. Clearly people can use function
words, even when those words compete with meaningful
words for cognitive resources.
Together, this research underscores the importance of the
distributional properties of function words in the acquisition
of language. Another question involves the use of function
words in processing the grammatical structure of sentences.
In a language with optional function words, does their
presence in a given sentence help or hinder processing? Our
hypothesis is that because function words act as markers of
structure, sentences with more function words will be easier
to process than sentences with fewer function words.
In order to test this hypothesis, we varied the presence
and absence of function words within the test phase for each
language in the experiment. If function words act as
syntactic anchors, and people are able to learn which words
of the grammar are function words, then ungrammatical
sentences should be easier to detect in the trials that make
greater use of function words, leading to higher scores on a
grammaticality judgment task.

1103

In addition to distributional information about cooccurrence, function words in natural language can be
differentiated from lexical words along a number of
phonological and acoustic dimensions (Shi, Morgan &
Allopenna, 1995). In an examination of Mandarin and
Turkish mothers’ speech to their children, Shi and
colleagues found that not only were frequency and position
information useful distinguishing categories, but a number
of phonological and acoustic dimensions, including vowel
duration, syllable count and the presence of a syllable coda
or diphthong, were informative when determining the
category of a word. Monaghan, Chater and Christiansen
(2005) found other phonological cues that distinguish
function and non-function words in English, including word
length in phonemes, presence of stress, and the presence and
complexity of initial consonant clusters. However, the
existence of cues does not require their use in learning the
fundamental distinction between lexical and function words.
Confirmation of the idea that people use these cues lies in
research that provides evidence that grammatical categories
are distinguished before those categories can be
differentiated on the basis of meaning. Early in language
acquisition, children can distinguish function and lexical
words. Six-month-old infants prefer listening to lexical
words over function words, indicating early discrimination
(Shi & Werker, 2001). At 8 and 11 months of age,
segmentation is facilitated by the use of high frequency
function words; however, at 8 months the segmental
makeup of the function word is irrelevant (Shi, Cutler,
Werker & Cruickshank, 2006). Between 11 and 13 months,
infants notice when function words are altered by changing
one segment to another, indicating the emergence of richly
detailed phonological and grammatical representations of
words that do not yet have meanings attached (Shi, Werker
& Cutler, 2006).
In order to investigate how phonetic cues to grammatical
category influence the manner in which people acquire and
use function words, we tested languages that either included
cues or lacked such cues. The hypothesis is that languages
that include cues to function versus non-function category
membership help learners to establish categories and acquire
language patterns better. Essentially, the cues allow
categories that are available immediately (e.g., words with
initial consonants) to act as shortcuts to grammatical
categories. To test this hypothesis, we compared how people
learned a baseline language that includes no cues to word
category, a language with shortened vowels in function
words, and a language in which function words lack syllable
onsets (initial consonants). These cues were chosen because
they have correlates both in English and other languages
(Monaghan et al., 2005).
It is crucial to note that methods are not currently
available to judge directly whether adults group words
together into higher-level categories (e.g., the broad
category of function words). Rather, we test a variety of
patterns that occur in the languages to determine indirectly
how learners process specific function word categories.

Experiment
Method
Participants Seventy-six students enrolled in psychology
courses at the University of Calgary participated in this
experiment in exchange for course credit.
Materials To test our hypotheses about the acquisition and
use of function words, we created 3 varieties of a language
that differed in whether and how they included phonetic
cues to grammatical category. The Control language was
adapted from one used by Saffran (2001) and made to
conform to the structure of Korean. All varieties of the
language included 4 lexical categories (4 subjects, 4 objects,
3 transitive verbs and 3 intransitive verbs) and 4 function
categories (See Table 1).
Table 1: Artificial language lexicon.

Category
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
&

Words in
Natural Language
Control/Short
Counterpart
Vowel
meeb rud pell
Subject
shoke
lum neb sheeg
Object
tuke
Subject Marker
mun
Intransitive Verb sem gung hep
Transitive Verb tupp hool loke
Object Marker
doot
Postposition
jeck
Conjunction
ket

Words in No
Onset
meeb rud pell
shoke
lum neb sheeg
tuke
un
sem gung hep
tupp ket loke
oot
eck
ool

Other than the conjunction, function words were
deterministic predictors of non-function word type. Unlike
English, the language requires non-function words to
precede function words. See Table 2 for the phrase structure
rules that generated the language. Note that non-function
words, particularly C, are not deterministic predictors, as
they can occur in multiple sentence roles. No category is
anchored to a single serial position within a sentence.

1104

Table 2: Phrase structure rules for the artificial language.
Optional elements are in parentheses.
Phrase Type
Sentence
AP
HP
BP
GP
Conjunction

Rewrites as
(HP) AP BP or AP (HP) BP
A(D)
CH
GP F or E
C(G)
xP & xP

The test phase consisted of 84 trials, with 12 trials for
each of 7 patterns tested (see Table 3). Each trial required a
grammaticality judgment. On each trial, participants heard
two sentences in which the only difference was the pattern
violation (i.e., lexical items and overall structure were held
constant), and then indicated which of the sentences they
thought was correct by button press. For each sentence,
either ONE or TWO was displayed on the screen to indicate
which sentence was playing. Test sentences were 3 to 6
words long. In addition, within each pattern 6 trials included
function words in all present contexts up to the six word
limit (Max Function), while 6 other trials presented function
words only when required by the grammar (Min Function).
Each Max Function trial was created by matching the
category structure of a Min Function trial and inserting
additional function words. For example, a Min Function
trial with the category structure ACF would be
reconstructed as ADCGF for the Max Function condition,
using different lexical items in order to avoid effects of
repetition. Inevitably, sentences that maximized function
words were longer: there were 5.2 words per sentence in the
Max Function trials versus 4.0 words per sentence in the
trials that minimized function words. However, the
conditions were controlled for complexity, such that there
was no difference in the number of phrases per sentence,
with an average of 3.1 phrases per sentence for both trial
types. With the exception of the experimentally manipulated
characteristics of function words, test and exposure
sentences were identical across languages and participants.

The complete language results in over 90,000 sentences if
conjunctions are limited to one per sentence. Non-function
words did not appear more than once in sentences presented
to participants (e.g., the cat chased the cat), though a given
function word can occur more than once. Subject and object
markers, which are optional in the language, were presented
to participants in half of their possible contexts. The
optional H-phrase was present in one-third of sentences.
Two-thirds of verbs were transitive.
Lists consisting of five repetitions of a word read by a
female speaker were recorded. Sentences were constructed
by splicing words from the lists according to their serial
positions in the sentence. The resulting sentences were
characterized by a natural-sounding, list-like intonation,
with approximately 250 ms of silence between each word.
Sentence final words were characterized by a rapidly falling
end-of-list intonation contour and were followed by 500 ms
of silence and signaled the end of each sentence. List-like
intonation and equal spacing of words were used because
they could not serve as cues to grammatical structure. The
lexicon was constructed so that phonemes and phonetic
features were evenly distributed across all category types.
In the Control language, all words were CVC (consonantvowel-consonant) single syllables, with no phonetic cues to
word category. In the Short Vowel variety of the language,
sound editing software was used to shorten the vowels in all
function words by 40%. This change mirrors one aspect of a
cue found in English: function words are frequently
unstressed, resulting in shorter vowels, among other
differences. In another variety of the language, sound
editing software was used to remove the onset (initial
consonant) from all function words. In order to make sure
that function words were maximally distinguishable from
one another, we switched ket with hool in the lexicon of the
No Onset language, preventing the barely distinguishable et
and eck from occurring in the lexicon. Exposure and test
sentences were otherwise identical across languages.
Procedure For the Control language, 24 participants were
tested, 27 for the Shortened Vowel language, and 25 for the
No Onset language. Before the experiment, participants
were told that they would listen to an artificial language and
then answer questions to determine their knowledge of the
language. During training, participants listened to a list of
280 sentences from one of the artificial languages. Training
sentences varied between 3 and 8 words. The list of
sentences was identical across languages, with only the
characteristics of function words varying between
languages. Sentences were presented aurally. In order to
encourage implicit learning and alleviate boredom,
participants also performed a picture-copying task in which
they were to copy a series of four drawings using markers
and paper. Participants were told that their drawings would
be used in analysis in order to ensure that they were engaged
in the task. The training phase of the experiment lasted
approximately 24 minutes.

Table 3: Patterns tested.
Pattern

Description

AP/BP

Subject phrases precede verb phrases

A exists

Sentences must have subjects

Conjunction

Conjunctions only join phrases of the
same type

Double

Non-function categories may not be
doubled without a conjunction

E/F exists

Sentences must have verbs

Function

Function words must be matched with
the appropriate non-function category

Transitive

Transitive verbs require objects and
intransitive verbs must not have objects

Results

1105

A 3 x 2 x 7 mixed-model analysis of variance was
conducted with a between-participant factor of Language
(Control, Short Vowel, and No Onset) and withinparticipant factors of Function word presence (Max and
Min) and Pattern type (AP/BP, A exists, Conjunction,
Double, E/F exists, Function, and Transitivity).
The main effect of Language was marginally significant,
F(2, 73) = 2.50, p = .089. None of the interactions involving

challenge this idea but may better serve to demonstrate the
complex dynamics between learning categories and learning
relationships among categories.
0.8

–Function

0.7
Proportion correct

+Function

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.6
Proportion Correct

vi
ty

n

sts

tio

Tr
an
sit
i

Fu
nc

Ex
i

bl
e

E/
F

D
ou

n
io
nc
t

nj
u
Co

A

0.7

Ex
ist
s

P/
B

P

0

A

language were significant: Pattern x Language, p = .858;
Function presence x Language, p = .834; and Pattern x
Function presence x Language, p = .729 (all Fs < 1).
Planned follow up comparisons found marginally
significant differences between the Control and No Onset
languages, p = .087, Bonferroni corrected. The Short Vowel
language fell between the other two (see Figure 1). Counter
to our hypothesis, participants who heard the control
language, in which there was no phonetic distinction
between function and non-function words, obtained the best
performance on the grammaticality judgment task.
Performance was above chance for all languages. Control:
t(23) = 9.26, p < .001; Short Vowel: t(26) = 5.74, p < .001;
No Onset: t(24) = 4.93, p < .001.

Pattern

0.5

Figure 2: Proportion correct by pattern and minimal or
maximal function word presence. Error bars represent
standard error.

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Control

Short Vowel

No Onset

Language

Figure 1: Proportion correct by language type. Error bars
represent standard error.
The main effects of the within-participant factors and
their interaction were significant. The factors Function
Presence: F(1,73) = 4.28, p = .042; Pattern F(6, 438) =
27.82, p <.001; and Pattern x Function Presence interaction,
F(6, 438) = 16.36, p <.001 were all significant. Some
patterns were easier to acquire than others. Overall, trials
with fewer function words were more accurately judged for
grammaticality. For the interaction, minimal function words
helped for A exists, Conjunction, and E/F exists, did not
significantly help or impede grammaticality judgments for
#AP/BP# and Transitivity, and hindered the ability to make
judgments for the Double and Function patterns (see Figure
2).

Discussion
Phonetic cues to grammatical category The ability to
distinguish function words from non-function words early in
the acquisition of a language should facilitate learning
because the learner needs to devote fewer resources to
uncovering the distinction during learning. Furthermore, this
distinction can act as a bootstrap for the acquisition of more
complex structures that rely on the distinction between the
already-known categories. Our data initially appear to
1106

While the distinction between function and lexical words
is an important one that holds across languages, knowing
this distinction does not by itself indicate greater knowledge
of the patterns that govern a grammar. If our cues
encouraged participants to devote resources to learning the
broader categories of function and non-function, then fewer
resources were available to learn dependencies among
words classes at a level below the function versus nonfunction distinction. Though distributional learning
mechanisms are able to take advantage of many kinds of
patterns, they are guided and constrained by the information
that they are given (Gómez, 2002).
With respect to our manipulations of the phonetic
characteristics of function words, it is possible to gain
insights from our underwhelming results. The effect of
language type was marginally significant, though not in the
direction that we predicted. Post hoc analysis determined
that learners of the Control language performed
significantly better than learners of the No Onset language.
Cues to category may have guided learners to construct
categories on a broad-based division between function and
non-function word categories. Learning this division would
likely prove helpful in acquiring the grammar over the long
term in terms of generalizing as new lexical items are
introduced. This knowledge would not help for the patterns
that were used in this experiment, which tested participants’
knowledge of the relationships between intermediate-level
categories (e.g., A versus C, both members of the broader
non-function word category). We raise the possibility that
when function words are perceptually distinguishable from
non-function words learners are encouraged to attend to
different kinds of information than they would in a language
that does not cue the distinction between function and nonfunction words phonetically. Though methods are available

Table 4: Proportion correct by language, pattern and presence or absence of function words. Asterisks denote performance
significantly above chance. Daggers indicate significant differences between minimum and maximum function word trials.
Language

Function
Presence
Mean
Max
Min
Difference

AP/BP
72.2*
72.9*
71.5*
1.4

A Exists
59.0*
54.2
63.9*
-9.7

Conjunction
51.4
41.7
61.1*
-19.4†

Pattern
Double
48.6
59.7*
37.5
22.2†

E/F Exists
74.7*
69.4*
79.9*
-10.5

Function
58.3*
63.2*
53.5
9.7

Transitive
53.5
47.2
59.7*
-12.5†

Short Vowel

Mean
Max
Min
Difference

71.3*
74.7*
67.9*
6.8

55.6
49.4
61.7*
-12.3†

53.4
42.0
64.8*
-22.8†

49.1
61.1*
37.0
24.1†

67.9*
61.1*
74.7*
-13.6†

55.6*
59.9*
51.2
8.7

52.5
51.2
53.7
-2.5

No Onset

Mean
Max
Min
Difference

71.0*
68.0*
74.0*
-6.0

56.0
53.3
58.7
-5.4

46.7
37.3
56.0
-18.7†

48.0
54.0
42.0
12.0

63.3*
59.3*
67.3*
-8.0

52.7
55.3
50.0
5.3

52.7
50.7
54.7
-4.0

Mean Difference

4.9

-9.1†

-20.3†

19.4†

-10.7†

7.9†

-6.3

Control

to determine whether infants distinguish broad function
and non-function word categories (e.g., Shi & Werker,
2001), currently there are no comparable methods for
adults.
Participants who heard the Shortened Vowel language
did not differ from either of the other languages. It is
possible that the vowel length differences were not
perceptible and, thus, could not contribute to
differentiating function words from non-function words.
However, performance on the Short Vowel language was
numerically between the Control and No Onset languages
for five of the seven patterns tested, making it plausible
that the less salient cue yielded a smaller effect size that
was not captured by the statistical power of this
experiment.
On the other hand, listeners may not have perceived the
vowel difference: First, in English vowel length is not
contrastive, though it contributes to the perception of
stress differences in English, along with pitch and
intensity. By dissociating vowel length from these other
cues in the Shortened Vowel language, it is possible that
we made it difficult for participants to perceive function
words similarly to the way that they treat unstressed
words. In addition to the problems of dissociating vowel
length from stress for adult speakers of English, the
within-category variation of vowels in the Shortened
Vowel language was larger than the between-category
variation. For example, while the /E/ in non-function
words was longer than the /E/ in function words, it was
still shorter than the /u/ in function words. Therefore,
vowel length variability patterns were complex (though
this variability follows the pattern found in English for
stressed and unstressed words), the result of an interaction
of grammatical category and vowel type. This, combined
with the dissociation of vowel length variability from

stress, likely reduced the perceptibility of the vowel length
differences.
If the overall effect of phonetic cues to function words is
that they are not helpful, than perhaps cues were at least
helpful for the Function pattern. This was not the case:
learners of the Control language outperformed those who
learned the No Onset language by 5.6 percent on this
pattern. Moreover, learners of the No Onset language did
not perform significantly above chance on the Function
pattern. Clearly, while phonetic differentiation of the types
used in this experiment was not helpful to learners for the
experimental tasks, more research is required, as the
phonetic differences between languages did cause
differences in learning. If phonetically differentiating
function from non-function words impedes learning, then
languages would not continue to exhibit this characteristic.
Further research is needed to understand exactly how
function words help language learners.
Function word presence The significant function word
presence by pattern interaction reflects the complex nature
of the role of function words in language processing.
While our prediction was that more function words would
enhance performance across patterns, the data show that
learners performed significantly better on Max Function
trials on only two patterns: Double and Function. They
performed significantly better on Min Function trials for
three other patterns: A Exists, Conjunction, and E/F Exists,
leaving no differences in the remaining two patterns. This
pattern of results was replicated across all three of the
languages that were tested (See Table 4).
Though there was a negative overall effect for function
words, the significant interaction is the critical finding:
predictive elements are helpful in processing some
grammatical structures and interfere with processing for
other patterns. One possible explanation is that function

1107

words require cognitive resources in processing. For some
patterns, the results of function word processing will be
helpful in determining structure (and therefore yield better
grammaticality judgments), and for others it will not. In
either case, resources that would have gone to process
other words in sentences were used to process function
words, reducing the amount or quality of processing of
non-function words. If this is the case, then there are two
sources of the overall utility, or lack thereof, of the
presence of function words. First, there is the direct
consequence of function words: they can help processing
of other words by reinforcing or assigning category status
to other words in a sentence, allowing that knowledge to
bolster efforts to determine a sentence’s structure. This
effect should be positive in cases where structure is
ambiguous or should be null when other cues allow the
learner to determine structure. Second, including more
function words has the indirect consequence of not
allowing as many resources for processing other words in
a sentence. If a pattern involves subtle differences between
grammatical and ungrammatical sentences, then the
reduction in resources for non-function words may cause a
catastrophic loss of the ability to detect violations. If
violations are salient, the negative effect could be
negligible. The effects captured in this experiment were
the result of a combination of these factors, and future
research should attempt to disentangle them and determine
how they interact.
We suggest that function words have a complex and
dynamic effect on language learning. This effect, for
various tasks at certain points in development, is not
always positive. In our experiment, designed to replicate
aspects of early language development, the presence of
function words hurt performance on grammaticality
judgments involving some patterns, but helped on others.
This finding corresponds to results from natural language
research in infants in which non-function words are
preferred over function words, even though function words
help learners in critical tasks.
In the languages used in this experiment, most of the
function words were optional. While this may have made
the learning situation more difficult for our participants,
the optionality of certain function words was meant to
mirror natural languages. Korean, which the current
grammar was based on, frequently omits subject and
object markers. Even though they were optional, the token
frequencies of function words were greater than those of
non-function words. Because function word presence
appears to interact with a number of other factors, future
research should vary the ratio of function to non-function
words in the lexicon as well as the proportion of contexts
in which a given function word can appear.

References
Gómez, R. L. (2002). Variability and the detection of
invariant structure. Psychological Science, 13, 431-436.
Green, T. R. G. (1979). The necessity of syntax markers:
two experiments with artificial languages. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 481-496.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child
language learners in language formation and change.
Language Learning and Development, 1, 151-195.
Mintz, T. H. (2002). Category induction from distributional
cues in an artificial language. Memory and Cognition, 30,
678-686.
Monaghan, P., Chater, N., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005).
The differential contribution of phonological and
distributional cues in grammatical categorisation.
Cognition, 96, 143-182.
Onnis, L., Christiansen, M. H., Chater, N., & Gómez, R.
(2003). Reduction of uncertainty in human sequential
learning: evidence from artificial grammar learning.
Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Onnis, L., Monaghan, P., Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N
(2004). Variability is the spice of learning, and a crucial
ingredient for detecting and generalizing in nonadjacent
dependencies. Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Saffran, J. R. (2001). The use of predictive dependencies in
language learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 44,
493-515.
Shady, M. E. (1996). Infants’ sensitivity to function
morphemes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, State
University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY.
Shi, R., Cutler, A., Werker, J., & Cruickshank, M. (2006).
Frequency and form as determinants of functor sensitivity
in English-acquiring infants. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119, EL61-EL67.
Shi, R., Morgan, J. L., & Allopenna, P. (1995).
Phonological and acoustic bases for earliest grammatical
category assignment: a cross-linguistic perspective.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 169-201.
Shi, R., & Werker, J. F. (2001). Six-month-old infants’
preference for lexical words. Psychological Science, 12,
70-75.
Shi, R., Werker, J., & Cutler, A. (2006). Recognition and
representation of function words in English-learning
infants. Infancy, 10, 187-198.
Valian, V., & Coulson, S. (1988). Anchor points in
language learning: the role of marker frequency. Journal
of Memory and Language, 27, 71-86.

1108

