UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pronoun Interpretation as a Side Effect of Discourse Coherence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9738n5wf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Rohde, Hannah
Kehler, Andrew
Elman, Jeffrey L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pronoun Interpretation as a Side Effect of Discourse Coherence
Hannah Rohde (hannah@ling.ucsd.edu)
Andrew Kehler (kehler@ling.ucsd.edu)
Department of Linguistics; University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0108, USA

Jeffrey L. Elman (jelman@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science; University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0515, USA
Abstract

over Sources) and an event-structure hypothesis (a bias to
focus on the end state, where the Goal is assumed to be
more salient than the Source in transfer passages). Rohde et
al.’s aspect manipulation distinguished between these two
explanations because the thematic roles remain the same in
(1) and (2), but the perfective verb in (1) describes a
completed event, which is compatible with end state focus,
while the imperfective verb in (2) describes an ongoing
event that lacks an end state. They found that perfective
sentences yielded more Goal continuations than
imperfective sentences, thereby supporting Stevenson et
al.’s event-structure hypothesis.
Rohde et al.’s work further supports a model which
incorporates deeper discourse-level factors. Specifically,
they found that the influence of event structure was
observed only in passages in which certain relationships
could be inferred to hold between the two clauses (see
Arnold 2001 for similar results). These results predict that a
shift in the distribution of such relationships (henceforth
‘coherence relations’) ought to induce a shift in the
distribution of pronoun interpretations. If people mainly
process ambiguous pronouns using surface-level biases, one
might expect their continuations to expose these biases since
they are free to write continuations that are consistent with
the preferred interpretation. If, on the other hand,
participants are sensitive to coherence-driven factors that
allow them to generate predictions about where a discourse
is going, they may use the pronoun differently depending on
the context.
In this paper, we present two experiments that manipulate
the coherence distribution in story continuations by making
only minimal changes to Rohde et al.’s original stimuli. Our
results show that the pattern of pronoun interpretation
corresponds directly to the distribution of coherence
relations. No model of interpretation that relies entirely on
surface-level cues can account for these results. From the
story continuations, we derive estimates for the likelihood
that a pronoun refers to a specific referent given a coherence
relation and discuss how conditional probabilities
(p(referent|coherence)) can lay the groundwork for the an
expectation-driven model of pronoun interpretation.

Recent story completion studies (Arnold 2001, Rohde et al.
2006) show that passages exhibiting different coherence
relations yield different patterns of pronoun interpretation.
These results predict that a shift in the distribution of
coherence relations in participant responses ought to induce a
shift in the distribution of pronoun interpretations.
Experiment 1 manipulates the coherence distribution by
varying the direct object in Rohde et al.’s original stimuli. We
find that the likelihood of a pronoun referring to a specific
referent varies by relation and that the conditional
probabilities (p(referent|coherence)) remain consistent across
conditions. In Experiment 2, we vary only the instructions,
having participants write continuations that answer either the
question ‘Why’ (Explanation relation) or ‘What happened
next?’ (Occasion). As predicted, both pronoun interpretation
and the coherence distribution differ significantly by
instruction type, and the pattern of pronoun interpretation
corresponds directly to the distribution of coherence relations.
Models of pronoun interpretation that ignore discourse
coherence relationships cannot account for results like these.
Keywords: discourse processing, pronoun interpretation

Interpreting Ambiguous Pronouns
Whereas previous work on pronoun interpretation has
appealed to surface-level cues like subjecthood, firstmention, recency, and parallelism, recent work suggests that
interpretation should be analyzed in part as a byproduct of
deeper discourse-level comprehension processes. Rohde,
Kehler, & Elman (2006) mimicked the design of a story
continuation study by Stevenson, Crawley, & Kleinman
(1994) in order to show that pronoun interpretation differs in
transfer-of-possession passages that vary by verbal aspect.
(1) JohnSOURCE handed a book to BobGOAL. He __________.
(2) JohnSOURCE was handing a book to BobGOAL. He ______.
The context sentences in (1) and (2) contain two possible
referents for the pronoun, one that appears in subject
position and fills the Source thematic role, and one that
appears as the object of a prepositional phrase and fills the
Goal thematic role. Stevenson et al.’s work, based on
stimuli like (1), showed that participants wrote just as many
continuations that corresponded to a Goal interpretation for
the pronoun as to a Source interpretation. Two explanations
were considered: a thematic-role preference (favoring Goals

617

The Role of Coherence

Experiment 1: Object Type

Coherence relations (Hobbs 1990, Kehler 2002) describe the
relationship that is inferred to hold between adjacent clauses
in a discourse. For instance, consider the Occasion relation:

In an attempt to shift the distribution of coherence relations
in participant responses, we modified Rohde et al.’s stimuli
to include different types of objects of transfer, anticipating
that certain objects might change how participants chose to
continue the passage. We paired each normal object from
Rohde et al.’s original stimuli with a bizarre, surprising,
gross, or taboo object—an irrelevant manipulation for any
surface-cue theory. As such, the structure of the transfer-ofpossession event remains unchanged and the grammatical
positions of the Source and Goal referents remain constant.
The only difference is the normality of the object of transfer.

OCCASION: Infer a change of state for a system of
entities in S2, establishing the initial state for this system
from the final state of S1. (adapted from Hobbs 1990)
(3) Miriam sent a fruitcake to Rachel. She ate it
voraciously.
[Occasion (Goal)]
Establishing Occasion relations requires that a state of
affairs be inferred as a point of connection between the two
eventualities expressed by two clauses, i.e., that the initial
state of the second eventuality be identified with the final
state of the first. Since receiving something is a precondition
to eating it, such inference supports interpreting the pronoun
in (3) to refer to the Goal Rachel. Rohde et al. report that
perfective context sentences were followed most frequently
by continuations that resulted in an Occasion relation. The
fact that end state salience is a natural consequence of the
definition of an Occasion relation explains the large number
of Goal continuations observed in those contexts.
On the other hand, Rohde et al. report that context
sentences with imperfective verbs were followed more
frequently by Explanation and Elaboration relations.

(6) NORMAL TRANSFER OBJECT
John gave a book to Bob. He ________________.
(7) ABNORMAL TRANSFER OBJECT
John gave a bloody meat cleaver to Bob. He ___.
We predicted that abnormal objects would elicit more
continuations that explained the event in the first sentence.
Our hope was that the increase in (Source-biased)
Explanations would be at the expense of (Goal-biased)
Occasion relations, which were the most frequent relation
following mundane objects in Rohde et al. As such, we
expected to find an increase in the number of Source
interpretations in continuations following abnormal objects.

EXPLANATION: Infer P from the assertion of sentence S1
and Q from the assertion of sentence S2, where QP.
(4) Miriam was sending a fruitcake to Rachel. She
heard it was a nice thing to do. [Exp (Source)]

Participants
Sixty-nine monolingual English-speaking
undergraduates at UC San Diego participated in the study
for extra credit in Linguistics courses.
Materials The experimental stimuli, taken directly from
Rohde et al., consisted of twenty-one transfer-of-possession
context sentences followed by an ambiguous pronoun
prompt. Participants saw each transfer verb only once,
paired with either a normal or abnormal object of transfer
and using perfective or imperfective aspect. We included the
same twenty-nine fillers from Rohde et al.’s stimuli. Fillers
consisted of context sentences with transitive or intransitive
non-transfer verbs in the perfective or imperfective. The
transitive verbs varied in active and passive voice. Adverbs,
names, or gender-unambiguous pronouns served as prompts.

ELABORATION: Infer the same proposition P from the
assertions of S1 and S2.
(5) Miriam was sending a fruitcake to Rachel. She
packed it up and went to UPS. [Elab (Source)]
Establishing an Explanation relation requires that the hearer
draw a chain of causal inferences that connect the two
eventualities that are being related, where the second clause
describes the cause of the eventuality in the first. Such
inference supports interpreting the pronoun in (4) to refer to
the Source Miriam. (Another relation, Result, is similar to
Explanation but the cause precedes the effect.) The
sentences in Elaboration relations, on the other hand,
describe the same event (typically where the second
sentence provides more detail than the first), supporting a
Source interpretation in (5). Rohde et al. report a Source
bias for both Explanation and Elaboration relations.
Given these biases, we predict that increasing the number
of Explanation or Elaboration relations will result in a
corresponding increase in the number of Source
continuations. Similarly, an increase in the number of
elicited Occasion or Result1 relations ought to increase the
number of Goal continuations. These predictions follow
Kehler’s suggestion that pronoun interpretation may be in
part a side effect of the process of establishing coherence.

Task
Participants were instructed to imagine a natural
story continuation, writing the first continuation that came
to mind and avoiding humor. In this task, participants create
a mental model of the event in the context sentence and then
write a continuation that reflects their expectations about
where the story is going. As such, the task involves both
interpretation and production. The pronoun constrains the
surface realization of their continuation, but the continuation
depends on their expectations about how the discourse will
proceed and which individual will be mentioned again.
Evaluation and Analysis Following Rohde et al., two
trained judges assessed the participants’ intended pronoun
interpretation. Judges were instructed to err on the side of
categorizing a pronoun as ambiguous if the pronoun could

1

Although the numbers were small, Result relations were also
reported to exhibit a Goal bias in Rohde et al.’s experiment (2006).

618

be interpreted plausibly as coreferential with either referent.2
Disagreements were resolved through discussion, following
Stevenson, Knott, Oberlander, & McDonald (2000), and
ambiguous cases were set aside. Judges identified the
coherence relation that held between each context sentence
and continuation. Passages were annotated for six relations
including the four already mentioned (Occasion,
Explanation, Elaboration, and Result) as well as two others:
Violated Expectation (another cause-effect relation) and
Parallel (which patterns most closely with Elaboration). The
coherence relations were defined as in Kehler (2002).
For the analysis, we measured the effects of two withinsubjects factors (object type and verbal aspect) on two
dependent variables (the two-valued pronoun interpretation
and the six-valued coherence relation). Analyses of variance
were conducted on the assessed pronoun interpretations with
tests for main effects of verbal aspect and object type, as
well as an interaction between the two. The distribution of
coherence relations was modeled using a mixed-effects
multinomial logistic regression (Bates 2006). These models,
like any linear regression, attempt to fit a linear model to a
set of data by estimating parameter values for each predictor
in the model. They allow us to simultaneously model
subjects and items as random factors, and they allow us to
test for effects on an unordered noncontinuous dependent
variable, the coherence relation.3 Like other regressions, the
model is evaluated by its ability to predict the dependent
variable; the effects of individual factors are measured with
p-values that represent the likelihood of a model generating
a non-zero factor coefficient if the true coefficient were
zero. We report the coefficient and p-value for each factor in
a model fitted to the observed coherence distribution.

% Continuations

100%

Exp

Exp

80%
60%

Elab
V-E
Res

40%
20%

Occ
Par

0%

Normal

Elab
V-E
Res
Occ

Abnormal

Figure 1: Effect of object type on coherence relations
As predicted, abnormal objects did yield more
Explanation relations and fewer Occasion relations than
normal objects – but there were other shifts in the coherence
distribution as well. The first column of numbers in Table 1
shows the interpretation biases Rohde et al. found for each
coherence relation: Elaboration/Explanation/ViolatedExpectation are Source-preferring; Occasion/Result are
Goal-preferring.5 Factoring together these biases and the
coherence distribution in Figure 1 results in no net increase
in the proportion of Source-biased relations: The proportion
of Explanation relations increased at the expense of another
Source-biased relation, Elaboration, and the proportion of
Occasions decreased as the number of Results, another
Goal-biased relation, increased. If the biases in this
experiment are like those in Rohde et al., which one would
expect, then we predict similar proportions of Source and
Goal interpretations following normal and abnormal objects.

Results and Interpretation
As in Rohde et al., the distribution of pronoun interpretation
and coherence relations differed following perfective and
imperfective context sentences (significant effect of aspect
on interpretation: by subject: F(1,68)=94.459, p<0.0001; by
item: F(1,20)=98.222, p<0.0001; in logistic regressions,
aspect was a significant factor for modeling interpretation:
2.001, p<0.0001 and modeling coherence: 1.299, p<0.0001).
As predicted, the coherence distribution also differed by
object (object coefficient in regression: 0.574, p<0.05).4
Figure 1 shows the coherence breakdown of continuations
following context sentences with different object types.

Table 1: Conditional probabilities collapsed across conditions
Coherence relation
Elaboration
Explanation
Violated-Expectation
Occasion
Result

Prob(Source | Relation)
Rohde et al. 2006
Exp 1
.98
.99
.75
.82
.91
.81
.19
.17
.16
.05

As the second column of probabilities in Table 1 shows,
the interpretation biases are consistent with Rohde et al.,
meaning that we predict essentially no difference in the
number of Source interpretations. As Figure 2 shows, this is
borne out: object type was not a significant factor for
modeling pronoun interpretation (F<1 by subject and item;
object type coefficient in regression: 0.434, p<0.391).6
There were no interactions (F<1 by subject and item).

2

Our use of judges follows Arnold (2001). Stevenson et al. (1994)
had participants circle their intended referents after completing the
passages, but they nonetheless found it necessary to rely on judges
to verify participants’ circling.
3
ANOVA is inappropriate because our dependent variable has six
unordered categorical outcomes. Chi-square can be used to
compare distributions, but our repeated-measures design
necessarily includes multiple observations from each subject,
thereby violating the chi-square assumption of independence.
4
The traditional, but in this case inappropriately applied, chisquare test also shows the coherence distribution differing by
object (χ2 =28.810, p<0.0001) and aspect (χ2=44.109, p<0.0001).

5

Here and in Rohde et. al’s experiment, there were too few cases
of Parallel relations (n<15) to allow for generalization.
6
All reported analyses represent a conservative treatment of the
data, excluding cases that were judged to be ambiguous by at least
one judge (23% of the total for Experiment 1).

619

Results and Interpretation

% Interpretation

100%

The manipulation of instruction type succeeded in altering
the distribution of coherence relations. In a logistic
regression of the distribution of coherence relations, the
between-subject factor of instruction type was significant
(coefficient -1.886, p<0.0002).7 As Figure 3 shows,
participants who answered the question ‘What happened
next’ wrote more Occasion relations, Violated Expectations,
and Elaborations, while those who answered the question
‘Why’ wrote mostly Explanations.8

80%

Source
Goal

60%
40%
20%
0%

Normal

Abnormal
100%

Elab
% Continuations

Figure 2: Effect of object type on interpretation
Given these results, we sought an alternative means of
creating a shift in the relevant coherence relations.
Experiment 2 uses the original stimuli from Rohde et al.
unchanged in two conditions. The two conditions differ
instead by one sentence in the instructions. This
manipulation is again irrelevant to surface-cue theories, but
we find that the pattern of interpretation differs in a way that
is fully predictable given the distribution of coherence
relations and the probabilities summarized in Table 1.

80%

Exp

V-E
Res

60%
40%

Exp

Occ

20%

Par

0%

Elab

What next?

Why?

Experiment 2: Instruction Type

Figure 3: Effect of instruction type on coherence relations

Aside from the instructions, Experiment 2 directly mimics
Rohde et al.’s original study. Depending which group they
were assigned to, participants were instructed to write a
continuation that answered either the question “Why” or
“What happened next” – the aim being to elicit Explanation
and Occasion relations, respectively. Given the
interpretation biases from Experiment 1, we predicted that
these two types of relations would correspond to very
different patterns of pronoun interpretation, making
instruction type a good predictor of interpretation.

And as predicted, the shift in coherence relations is
accompanied by a corresponding shift in the distribution of
pronoun interpretations (F(1,40)=23.302, p<0.0001 by
subject; F(1,20)=48.364, p<0.0001 by item). Instruction
type was a significant factor in a logistic regression of
interpretation (coefficient: -1.206, p<0.03). Given the biases
already noted for each coherence relation, the large number
of Occasion relations in the ‘What next’ condition and the
large number of Explanations in the ‘Why’ condition predict
more Source interpretations in the ‘Why’ condition than in
the ‘What next’ condition, as shown in Figure 4.

Participants
Forty-two monolingual English-speaking
undergraduates at UC San Diego participated in the study
for extra credit in Linguistics courses.

% Interpretation

100%

Materials The twenty-one experimental stimuli and the
twenty-nine fillers were taken directly from Rohde et al.
Task
As before, participants wrote continuations for
fifty passages. Depending on the instruction condition, they
were asked to imagine a natural continuation that answered
either the question “Why” or “What happened next”.

80%

Source
Goal

60%

40%

20%

0%

Evaluation and Analysis
Again, two trained judges
assessed the participants’ intended pronoun interpretation
and the coherence relation that held between the context
sentence and the continuation. For the analysis, we were
interested in measuring the effects of one between-subjects
factor (instruction type) and one within-subjects factor
(verbal aspect) on two dependent variables (the two-valued
pronoun interpretation and the six-valued coherence
relation). For mixed-model repeated measures analyses like
this, a logistic regression can again be used to fit the data
and identify significant parameters.

What next?

Why?

Figure 4: Effect of instruction on pronoun interpretation

7

Again, the chi-squared test shows significant differences in the
coherence distribution by instruction type (χ2=734.122, p<0.0001).
8
As before, all reported analyses represent a conservative
treatment of the ambiguous data, excluding cases that were judged
to be ambiguous by at least one judge (11% of total).

620

There were also significant interactions between
instruction type and aspect (for pronoun interpretation,
F(1,40)=27.499, p<0.0001 by subjects and F(1,20)=41.187,
p<0.0001 by items, instruction×aspect coefficient: 2.022,
p<0.0001; for modeling the distribution of coherence
relations, instruction×aspect coefficient: 2.568, p<0.0001).
These interactions can be seen in Figures 5 & 6.

sentences yielded a majority of Goal continuations, whereas
the responses following imperfective context sentences
yielded a majority of Source continuations. The point is that
the interaction corresponds directly to the differences in the
coherence distributions. In contexts in which the coherence
distribution was more mixed (‘What next’ following
imperfective context sentences), the interpretation pattern is
also more mixed.
These subpatterns within the data show that different
environments yield different distributions of coherence
relations. No model of interpretation that ignores discourse
coherence can account for these results, since the stimuli
were identical between conditions. These results lay the
groundwork for a predictive model in which knowing the
coherence breakdown in a given context can help us predict
the distribution of pronoun interpretations for these stimuli.

% Continuations

100%

Exp
Elab
V-E
Res
Occ
Par

80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

What
next?

Why?
Perfective

What
next?

Why?

General Discussion
The results reported here support the development of a
predictive model of pronoun interpretation that incorporates
information about coherence relations. In what follows we
illustrate how such a model could use interpretation biases
calculated from one dataset to predict interpretation patterns
observed in another dataset. The idea is that, given a
coherence distribution for these stimuli, we can predict the
distribution of pronoun interpretations because we already
have estimates for the interpretation biases of each
coherence relation.9 Equation (8) calculates the percentage
of Source resolutions in a context j using the interpretation
biases calculated from a separate context i.

Imperfective

Figure 5: Effect of verbal aspect and instruction type
on coherence relations
% Interpretation

100%
80%

Source
Goal

60%
40%

(8) Predict observed percentage of Source Resolutions in j
with probabilities generated from i

20%
0%

What
next?

Why?

Perfective

What
next?

Prob j (SR) =

Why?

∑

%coh j * pi (SR | coh)

coh

= %elab j * pi (SR | elab) + %exp j * pi (SR | exp) +

Imperfective

%occ j * pi (SR | occ) + %par j * pi (SR | par) +
%res j * pi (SR | res) + %v e j * pi (SR | v e)

Figure 6: Effect of aspect and instruction on interpretation €

In (8), we multiply the proportion of each coherence
relation observed in a corpus j by the probability of
observing a Source resolution given that coherence relation
€
in corpus
i, and then sum over all coherence relations. We
can use equation (8) to estimate the percentage of Source
resolutions in Experiment 2 (ProbEXP-2(SR)), using the
coherence breakdown from Experiment 2 (%cohEXP-2) and
the interpretation biases calculated from Experiment 1
(pEXP-1(SR|coh)). Table 2 shows the result.

Figure 5 shows how the effect of instruction type on the
coherence distribution differs depending on the verbal
aspect of the context sentence. The question ‘Why’ yielded
predominantly Explanations across the board; the question
‘What happened next’, however, yielded mostly Occasions
following perfective context sentences but a larger variety
of relations following imperfective context sentences. This
variation may stem in part from the lack of a salient
endpoint in events described with imperfective
aspect—making Occasion relations less appropriate and
thereby yielding a wider range of alternative continuations.
These different coherence distributions impact the
pronoun interpretation patterns, as shown in Figure 6. The
question ‘Why’ yielded continuations that consistently
referred to the Source regardless of aspect; the question
‘What happened next’ yielded pronoun interpretation
patterns that differed by aspect. Responses to the question
‘What happened next’ following perfective context

9

In neutral contexts, we would expect these stimuli to yield
distributions of coherence relations that are correspondingly
skewed toward the distributions previously reported, but as this
paper shows, the distributions can be shifted by changing the
context. One could imagine a context that yielded a corpus
dominated by Elaboration relations, for example. In that case, the
distribution of pronoun interpretations is predicted to be consistent
with the interpretation bias observed for Elaboration relations in
other contexts.

621

Table 2: Predicting % observed Source Resolutions (SR)

Gernsbacher, M.A., & Hargreaves, D.J. (1988). Accessing
sentence participants: The advantage of first mention.
Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 699-717.
Hobbs, J. R. (1990) Literature and Cognition. CSLI Lecture
Notes 21. Stanford, CA.
Kehler, A. (2002) Coherence, reference, and the theory of
grammar. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.
Kertz, L., Kehler, A., & Elman, J. (2006) Grammatical and
coherence-based factors in pronoun interpretation. In the
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, July 26-29, 2006.
Rohde, H., Kehler, A., & Elman, J. (2006) Event Structure
and Discourse Coherence Biases in Pronoun Interpretation.
In the Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, July 26-29, 2006.
Sheldon, A. (1974) The Role of Parallel Function in the
Acquisition of Relative Clauses in English. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 272-281.
Smyth, R. H. (1994). Grammatical determinants of
ambiguous pronoun resolution. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 23, 197-229
Stevenson, R., Crawley R., & Kleinman D. (1994).
Thematic roles, focusing and the representation of events.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 9, 519–548.
Stevenson, R. Knott, A., Oberlander, J., & McDonald, S.
(2000). Interpreting pronouns and connectives:
Interactions among focusing, thematic roles, and
coherence relations. Language and Cognitive Processes,
15(3), 225-262.
Wolf, F., Gibson, E. & Desmet, T. (2004) Coherence and
pronoun resolution. Language and Cognitive Processes,
19(6), 665-675.
Appendix

Instruction
‘What next’
‘Why’
Observed SR across Exp 2

49.7%

82.3%

Predicted SR [probabilities
generated from Exp 1]

45.4%

82.5%

As we have already mentioned, models that rely
predominantly on surface-level cues (subject/first-mention
preference: Gernsbacher & Hargreaves 1988, Crawley,
Stevenson, & Kleinman 1990; grammatical parallelism:
Sheldon 1974, see also Smyth 1994, Chambers & Smyth
1998; thematic role preference: Stevenson et al. 1994) do
not similarly predict the variation between conditions. Our
results suggest that even where pockets of data show
evidence of grammatical-role, thematic-role, or event-level
biases, these biases can and should be understood within a
much richer model of discourse comprehension. These
results also point to the importance of controlling for
coherence factors when investigating surface-level or
information-structural preferences (see Wolf, Gibson, &
Desmet 2004; Kertz, Kehler, & Elman 2006).

Conclusions
Our story continuation experiments show that a shift in the
distribution of coherence relations leads to a predictable,
corresponding shift in pronoun interpretations even in cases
in which stimuli are near-identical (Experiment 1) or entirely
identical (Experiment 2). Our manipulations of object type
and the experimental instructions are less important than the
fact that one can alter the discourse environment and see a
shift in pronoun interpretation. We sketched a predictive
model of pronoun interpretation in which the salience of
possible referents is linked to discourse-level expectations
about the direction the discourse is likely to take.

Stimuli pairs: transfer verb & normal/abnormal object
1. bring a glass of water/a horse
2. carry a tray/a 40-pound turnip
3. chuck a wrench/an urn full of ashes
4. deliver a subpoena/four dozen lightbulbs
5. fax a resume/a picture of a panda
6. fling a frisbee/a stolen wallet
7. forward an email/a Viagra SPAM email
8. give a sweater/a hand grenade
9. hand a book/a medieval sword
10. kick a soccer ball/a pair of dirty sneakers
11. lob a football/a wet dog
12. mail a letter/a bloody meat cleaver
13. pass a sandwich/an empty jar of mayonnaise
14. roll a toy truck/a barrel of rancid pickles
15. send a fruitcake/a strand of dental floss
16. serve chili/stewed prunes
17. ship a package/a small lizard
18. throw a hat/a toilet plunger
19. toss a dish towel/a condom
20. transmit a message/a Shakespearean sonnet
21. wire money/one million dollars

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NIH Training Grant
T32-DC000041 to the Center for Research in Language at
UCSD, NIH grant HD053136, and the UCSD Kavli
Institute for Brain and Mind. We thank Roger Levy for
helpful discussion and for help recruiting subjects.

References
Arnold, J. E. (2001). The effects of thematic roles on
pronoun use and frequency of reference. Discourse
Processes, 31(2), 137-162.
Bates, D. (2006). Linear mixed model implementation in
lme4. CRAN-R Package lme4.
Chambers, G. C. & Smyth, R. (1998) Structural parallelism
and discourse coherence: A test of Centering Theory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 593-608.
Crawley, R., Stevenson, R., & Kleinman, D. (1990). The use
of heuristic strategies in the interpretation of pronouns.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 4, 245-264.

622

