UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Psychological Reality of Grammars: Devitt's 'Ignorance of Language'

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2gz9t5s4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Slezak, Peter

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Psychological Reality of Grammars:
Devitt’s ‘Ignorance of Language’
Peter Slezak (p.slezak@unsw.edu.au)
Program in Cognitive Science,
School of History & Philosophy of Science
University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052 AUSTRALIA

Abstract

intuitions do not reflect information supplied by the
language faculty … that there is little or nothing to the
language faculty … (2006b, vi)

Devitt makes a sustained critique of Chomskyan linguistics,
articulating persistent complaints about the “psychological
reality” of generative grammars. I suggest these complaints are
merely terminological and that Devitt fails to appreciate the
status of Chomsky’s computational formalisms found
elsewhere in cognitive science. Devitt ascribes an intentional
conception of representations that Chomsky repudiates and
that is independently implausible. I argue that Devitt’s
proposed alternative “linguistic reality” constituted by physical
symbol tokens neglects the problems of tokens as opposed to
types and he misses the force of Chomsky’s case against
Behaviourism and nominalism. I suggest that Devitt’s case
against intuitions as data misunderstands their standard role
throughout perceptual psychology. I argue that Devitt’s
position exemplifies pervasive errors concerning mental
representation seen throughout cognitive science.

In his recent book Ignorance of Language, Michael Devitt
(2006b) has mounted an extended, scathing critique of the
generative enterprise and compares the situation to quantum
physics where there are not only successful explanatory
theories but also controversy about foundations. Devitt says
in linguistics, by contrast, “There is not a similar controversy
about how to “interpret” these theories but I think that there
should be.” However, on the contrary, there has been just
this controversy from the earliest days of generative
linguistics, and Devitt is simply rehearsing the most
persistent objection to the “psychological reality” of
grammars as internal representations (see Quine 1972, Stich
1972, Searle 1980b, Ringen 1975, Botha 1980). By 1978,
one philosopher remarked that “More has been written,
much of it exasperatingly shallow, about the confusions
surrounding the concept of competence and knowledge-ascompetence than almost any other topic in recent
philosophy” (Nelson 1978, 339).
Devitt’s verdict is a calamitous judgment on Chomsky’s
conception of his linguistics:

Devitt’s critique rests on two pillars: his negative arguments
against Chomsky’s psychological realism regarding
grammars, and his positive case for an alternative conception
of a “linguistic reality” that grammars are about. Thus, in
part, Devitt’s book depends on attributing a certain doctrine
concerning mental representation to Chomsky despite
Chomsky’s explicit rejection of it. As an exegetical
principle, beyond a certain point, such severe uncharitability
is itself a symptom of mistaken attributions and we must ask
how such errors of substance and interpretation are possible.
Answering this question provides insight into deep and
pervasive philosophical puzzles. Devitt’s work may be seen
as a case study in what Rorty (1979, 60) has called “the
original sin of epistemology” – to model knowing on seeing
(1979, 146). In a telling metaphor, Devitt suggests “If we
could look into the brain and simply “see” if there were
representations of this and that, as we can look in a book and
see if there are representations …, then that would of course
settle the matter” (2006b, 51).
A certain “Representational Thesis” (discussed below) is
attributed to Chomsky not only in the face of Chomsky’s
repudiation, but also despite the familiar merits of his quite
different computational conception found elsewhere
throughout cognitive science. In this way, Devitt’s rejection
of Chomsky’s psychological, computational conception and
his own alternative program entails nothing less than
undoing the mentalism of the “cognitive revolution” in a
return to certain nominalistic aspects of Skinnerian,
Bloomfieldian behaviourism – the second pillar of Devitt’s
book. Devitt is concerned with what he regards as a
“linguistic reality” – the real subject matter of grammars –
constituted by the “outputs/products” such as “physical
sentence tokens” and “the spoken, written, etc., symbols that
speakers produce” (2006a 483). We may recall Chomsky’s
(1965) remarks on “this rather idle controversy” being
revived by Devitt. In a lengthy footnote to his famous
methodological chapter of Aspects he wrote:

I urge that linguistics is not part of psychology; that the
thesis that linguistic rules are represented in the mind is
implausible and unsupported; that speakers are largely
ignorant of their language; that speakers’ linguistic

In fact, the issue of mentalism versus antimentalism in
linguistics has to do only with goals and interests, and
not with questions of truth or falsity, sense or nonsense.
(1965, 193)

Keywords: Linguistics; grammar; competence; psychological
reality; behaviorism; nominalism; Chomsky; Devitt.

Rather Idle Controversy

647

incomprehension of Descartes’ critics for several centuries.
Of specific relevance here is Cecilia Wolf-Devine’s (2000)
treatment of Descartes’ analogy of a blind man holding two
sticks whose separation and angle permits him to know the
distance of an object. Wolf-Devine takes this account of
knowing to invoke a homunculus, despite Descartes’ explicit
disavowal of such question-begging pseudo-explanations
and despite the manifest virtues of the proposed
computations on their own. The parallels with Chomsky’s
critics are noteworthy. Wolf-Devine draws attention to
Descartes’ use of the verbs savoir and connaître to suggest
that Descartes is guilty of “a hopeless overintellectualization of perception” (2000a, 513). These
complaints are striking to a modern reader familiar with the
interminable disputes surrounding Chomsky’s use of the
words “know” or “cognize” to characterise his generative
grammars. We will see that these worries are a constant
refrain in the chorus of criticism that Devitt joins.

Remarkably, it remains apt to characterise Devitt’s work in
Chomsky’s (1967) words forty years ago as “a paradigm
example of a futile tendency in modern speculation about
language and mind.”
For Fodor (1968) the generative approach provided a
model for psychological explanation of the sort also
articulated in Pylyshyn’s (1984) seminal work – namely, the
computational view of cognition that “presupposes that we
take seriously such distinctions as those between
competence and performance.” A decade earlier, Pylyshyn
(1972, 1973) gave important analyses of the notions of
“psychological reality” and competence in psychology in
which he explained above all, “One reason why the notion of
competence is particularly important is that it is the first
clear instance of the influence of … mathematical
imagination on the study of cognition,” referring to studies
by Turing, Gödel, Church and others in the foundations of
mathematics and the theory of computation. Chomsky has
referred to his approach in this regard as Galilean and
Pylyshyn explains the allusion as reflecting the fact that, like
the great advances in physics, “Chomsky’s work is
permeated with the belief that the secrets of the universe
(both physical and psychological) are, as Galileo said,
“written in the language of mathematics.” The extraordinary
persistence of the same disputes suggest that their underlying
sources are deep ones that deserve to be diagnosed. I suggest
that these misunderstandings are not unique to linguistics but
pervasive throughout cognitive science and philosophy of
mind since the 17th century (Slezak 2006).

The “Natural” Interpretation of Chomsky
In seeking to reconstruct Chomsky’s views, Devitt chooses
to depart from Chomsky’s own terminology and to insist
upon terms and conceptions that Chomsky has explicitly
repudiated, namely the philosophical ideas of intentionality
and propositional attitudes. Devitt (2006b, 5) persists in his
semantic, intentional sense of ‘representation,’ indeed,
remarkably, illustrating it with the very example of a picture
that Chomsky (2003, 276) uses to distinguish it from his
own. Devitt characterises Chomsky’s view of linguistic
knowledge as “propositional knowledge of syntactic rules”
(2003b, 108), using the philosophical idiom which entails
that speakers have access to the linguists’ theories. Indeed,
Devitt (2006b, 69) suggests that Chomsky has made the
elementary confusion of a theory and its object. However,
for Chomsky, the rules are not the intentional object of the
speaker’s knowledge, but rather constitute this knowledge.
Chomsky’s frequent comparisons with insects and bird-song
could hardly make sense on any other interpretation. Aside
from the intrinsic implausibility of the idea that naïve
speakers might “have propositional knowledge of syntactic
facts,” Devitt ascribes to Chomsky the very errors he has
been careful to warn against. Devitt defends this
interpretation of Chomsky as the most “natural” one because
it “takes his talk of ‘knowing that’, ‘propositional attitudes’,
and ‘representation’ at face value” (2003b, 109). However,
what appears as “face value” to a philosopher steeped in
scholastic subtleties may not appear as “face value” to
cognitive scientists. Thus, the doctrine that Devitt ascribes to
Chomsky is characterised as follows: The Representational
Thesis (RT): A speaker of a language stands in an
unconscious or tacit propositional attitude to the rules or
principles of the language, which are represented in her
language faculty. (Devitt 2006a, 482, 2006b, 4). Devitt
asserts “Many linguists, including Chomsky, seem to believe
RT” (2006a, 482) and “The natural interpretation attributes
RT to Chomsky” (Devitt 2006b, 7). It is telling that Rey
(2003b) uses the same curious expression “the natural

Savoir and Connaître
Devitt (2006a, b) dubs a certain view of our intuitions about
language “Cartesian” – because of the introspective
immediacy and certainty such evidence seems to possess.
However, the characterisation is perhaps more apt than
Devitt intends. Beyond the notion of privileged access to our
mental states, Descartes also held views concerning our
inaccessible “tacit knowledge” – views that are remarkable
anticipations of contemporary conceptions in cognitive
science and linguistics. Specifically, in his Dioptrics
Descartes proposes that in binocular vision the mind
determines the distance of an object by means of an implicit
triangulation or parallax calculation based on the separation
of the eyes and their orientation. Descartes says “this
happens by an action of thought which, although it is only a
simple act of imagination, nevertheless implicitly contains a
reasoning quite similar to that used by surveyors, when, by
means of two different stations, they measure inaccessible
places.” (Descartes 1637/1965, 106) This is, of course, just
Chomsky’s conception of a competence theory that captures
our tacit knowledge – a formal, mathematical, computational
model describing what we know unconsciously and
underlying our intuition or “simple act of imagination.”
Devitt’s critique of Chomsky is not only rehearsing
objections that have been made and answered repeatedly for
several decades recently, but he is also echoing the

648

interpretation” as if we are dealing with hermeneutics of the
Dead Sea Scrolls and doctrines whose author’s intentions are
obscure or unavailable. By any reasonable measure, the
natural interpretation is clearly the one that Chomsky has
repeatedly articulated and insisted upon in specific response
to the very construals offered by Devitt and Rey. The only
sense in which Devitt’s RT is the “natural” interpretation of
Chomsky is one that ignores what he says and appears so to
a philosopher enmeshed in irrelevant philosophical notions
of intentional representation.

competence/performance distinction as though he has
advanced some novel insight.
Rey accuses Chomsky of inconsistency or insincerity
because he sees Chomsky’s (1980a, 102) illustrative
examples as essentially involving intentional, referring
representations. The difficulty arises in part because,
undoubtedly the cases cited do have referential properties,
but these are entirely irrelevant to Chomsky’s specific
theoretical interest in them. It is as if one were to insist that
billiard balls have a colour that is an intrinsic property, even
though a Newtonian explanation of their behaviour will not
refer to these aspects of the phenomena of interest. Rey
(2003b, 158) reports Chomsky’s comparisons with
immunology, physics and insect navigation in order to
illustrate his notion of representation that is not conceived as
intentional in the philosophers’ sense. However, Rey
dismisses such illustrations with sarcasm, accusations of
disingenuousness, and the evidence of his colleagues’ shared
incomprehension (Rey 2003b, 160 fn 19). Not surprisingly,
like Devitt, Rey sees an alternative that he considers more
plausible than the idea that the ant represents “the system of
vector algebra itself.” (2003b. 157). Instead, Rey suggests
“That system is, at best, merely implemented somehow in
the ant’s nervous system” (2003b 157). However, as we
have seen, terminology aside, this is not an alternative to
Chomsky’s conception but precisely his view, since to be
implemented in the nervous system is to be represented in
the relevant sense.

Simply embodied
For Chomsky, the rules and representations of a grammar are
taken to be real in the usual sense applicable in any other
scientific inquiry – namely, when they are posits of our best
explanatory theory. Devitt says “One is left uncertain of
Chomsky’s position” (2006b 71) and, not surprisingly, finds
a deep paradox in the fact that Chomsky allegedly “has no
worked out opinion about, or even much interest in, how that
grammar in the head plays a role in language use” (2006b,
71). However, on the contrary, Chomsky has repeatedly (see
1980, 197) suggested plausibly that his abstract, idealized
approach is the best way to discover underlying
neurological, processing correlates of grammars. Far from
lacking interest in the question, Chomsky is simply
responding to the obvious fact acknowledged in Devitt’s
own words that “we don’t even know enough about what to
look for” (2006b 52) or, in Fodor’s words quoted
approvingly by Devitt, “there isn’t one, not one, instance
where it’s known what pattern of neural connectivity realizes
a certain cognitive content” (Fodor 1998, 145 quoted in
Devitt 2006b, 52). Thus, Chomsky expresses exactly
Devitt’s own sentiment, saying “we might go on to suggest
actual mechanisms [underlying abstract rules], but we know
that it would be pointless to do so in the present stage of our
ignorance concerning the functioning of the brain”
(Chomsky 1980, 206,7). Nevertheless, Devitt discovers a
supposed anomaly in Chomsky’s approach: “What is
puzzling about this is that a strong commitment to RT seems
inappropriate in the absence of a well-supported theory of
language use that gives RT a central role” (2006b, 71;
emphasis added). That is, Devitt foists a view onto Chomsky
that he doesn’t hold and is then mystified by his failure to
take it seriously.

Devitt’s Philosophie Als Ob1
Devitt holds that a system might behave “as if” it is
following rules but for all that, it might not be governed by
represented rules at all. We will see that the entire “debate”
might be settled if the term “psychological reality” is ceded
to the critics and understood to mean “processing
mechanism” since Chomsky’s critics on this issue appear to
be almost exclusively motivated by this concern. Devitt’s
articulation of his position is striking for its precise
recapitulation of Chomsky’s own position under the illusion
that an alternative view is being proposed – a point also
noted by Laurence (2003, 87). This charge is easy to
substantiate, as we can see from Devitt’s statements:
It is not enough to know that there is something-weknow-not-what within a speaker that respects the rules of
her language … We would like to go beyond these
minimal claims to discover the ways in which the
competence of the speaker … respect these rules.
(2006b, 38)

The Birds and the Bees
The decisive evidence of Devitt’s failure to understand
Chomsky is Devitt’s own articulation of what he takes to be
a possible alternative to the “most natural” reading of
Chomsky’s words. On this alternative construal, he is taken
to hold that language rules are merely embodied “without
being represented” (2006b, 7, 63; 2003b, 109). However,
given Devitt’s stipulation of how “representation” is to be
used, this is simply an arbitrary terminological matter of no
theoretical interest. Indeed, as we will see, from another
point of view Devitt is merely re-stating Chomsky’s own

Chomsky writes:

1

Hans Vaihinger’s (1911) book The Philosophy of ‘As If’ argued
that we can never know the underlying reality of the world that
behaves “as if” it corresponds with our models.

649

… we are keeping to abstract conditions that unknown
mechanisms must meet. We might go on to suggest
actual mechanisms, but we know that it would be
pointless to do so in the present stage of our ignorance
concerning the functioning of the brain. … If we were
able to investigate humans as we study other, defenceless
organisms, we might well proceed to inquire into the
operative mechanisms … (1980, 197)

Methodological Preliminaries sets out the key ideas of a
competence theory including the following warning. Far
from seeming uninterested in the difference between theory
and its object, Chomsky made the same clarification in
Language and Mind (1972), where he noted “The term
“grammar” is often used ambiguously to refer both to the
internalised system of rules and to the linguist’s description
of it.” (1972, 116). The same point had been explained in
Chomsky’s (1975, 37) Introduction to his Logical Structure
of Linguistic Theory. Thus, it should be needless to say that
Chomsky does not suggest that the formalisms of a grammar
themselves are in the head, just as Descartes did not propose
that Euclidean theorems are literally inscribed in the brain.

Chomsky’s phrase “abstract conditions that unknown
mechanisms must meet” is precisely Devitt’s much-vaunted
“Respect Constraint” and Chomsky’s acknowledgment that
a grammar might be realized in as yet unknown ways is just
Devitt’s point about what he calls “psychological reality”. It
should be evident that there is nothing of substance left over
besides terminological disagreement between Devitt and
Chomsky. Sufficient evidence of the oddity of Devitt’s
polemic is the fact that, terminology aside, Chomsky’s point
concerning the competence-performance distinction might
well be encapsulated in Devitt’s own supposed challenge:
“A grammar may have nothing more to do with
psychological reality than comes from meeting the Respect
Constraint” (2006b, 37).

Marr’s Computationalism
Chomsky’s grammars illustrate the functionalist conception
of mind – the modern statement of what it means to do
psychology and to attribute internal representations. Devitt’s
reservations amount to dissenting not only from Chomsky’s
views, but from the entire enterprise of modern psychology.
Chomsky’s functionalist view is unmistakable in his Aspects
(1965), where he writes:
The mentalist … need make no assumptions about the
possible physiological basis for the mental reality he
studies. … it is the mentalistic studies that will ultimately
be of greatest value for the investigation of
neurophysiological mechanisms, since they alone are
concerned with determining abstractly the properties that
such mechanisms must exhibit and the functions they
must perform. (Chomsky 1965, 193, fn. 1)

“Cognize”
Chomsky (2000, 94) suggests that in its modern guise we
can trace the argument about “psychological reality” of
grammars back to Quine’s distinction between “fitting” and
“guiding”, the latter term supposedly only appropriate to
conscious application of rules. Where rules are not “guiding”
and followed consciously in this manner, it is widely held
that we may only speak of behaviour “fitting” or conforming
with rules in the way that a planet obeys Kepler’s Laws.
Devitt’s main criticism of Chomsky is just an elaboration of
this Quinean distinction between “fitting” and “guiding”
rules. Clearly, the “debate” has long ago degenerated into a
ritual talking past one another. Chomsky and Katz (1974,
363) replied to Stich’s (1972, 817) “projectile” argument
saying: “At best, it is an open question whether more than an
uninteresting issue of terminology is involved.”
We may note the irony of Devitt’s accusation of a certain
“looseness of talk of ‘knowledge.’ ” Devitt says “I think that
linguistics would do better to avoid the talk” and “I think
that we should drop talk of knowledge from serious science”
(2006b, 5). However, it was precisely because of the
misleading connotations of the term “know” that Chomsky
(1986, 265) himself suggested that it might be replaced with
the neologism “cognize.”

It is particularly surprising that Devitt wishes to deny that
linguistics is psychology since accounts of this kind
articulate what constitutes psychological explanation in the
information processing ‘paradigm’.2 Chomsky (1982, 10)
has repeatedly cited the work of Marr (1982) as
exemplifying this approach, just as Marr (1982, 28), in turn,
cites Chomsky’s (1965) competence/performance distinction
as the appropriate methodological analysis of his
computational theory of vision.

“R - E - S - P - E - C - T: Find out what it
means to me” (Aretha Franklin)
Since Devitt refuses to take seriously Chomsky’s
idealization that abstracts from any possible realization of
the rules, not surprisingly, Devitt says “it is hard to see how
it [a grammar] could be a theory at the computational level”
(2006b, 66). Even where Devitt acknowledges the purely
mathematical sense of the notion of “generate” he fails to
appreciate the precise force of this conception (2006b, 68).
The term “generate” is used in the clear sense in which one
says that an axiom system generates its theorems and has
nothing whatever to do with actual mechanisms or causal
processes. Above all, the formal sense of the term ‘generate’

Theory and Object
Devitt attributes implausibly naïve errors to Chomsky such
as “a certain use/mention sloppiness” and a neglect of the
crucial, elementary distinction between a theory and its
object. There could be no clearer indication of Devitt’s own
sloppiness here, for he has failed to appreciate Chomsky’s
explicit warning about the systematic ambiguity of the term
“grammar”: In his Aspects (1965, 25), the first chapter on

2

650

See Chomsky 1966, 91; 1980, 201; 1980, 206,7.

is not “merely metaphorical” in any sense, as Devitt seems
to think.
Devitt illustrates his analysis with the case of chess
moves which are “rule-governed in that something counts as
a chess move at all only if it has a place in the structure
defined by the rules of chess” (2006b, 18). Devitt labels
these rules “structure rules” in order to distinguish them
from “the rules governing the psychological process by
which [a player] … produces chess moves.” Aside from
Devitt’s irrelevant characterization of the latter as
“interesting,” this analysis simply restates Chomsky’s
competence/performance distinction. That is, the first pillar
of Devitt’s book – his critique of Chomsky – collapses into a
verbal quibble. Devitt seems to appreciate the point in a
footnote: “I do not take it [a grammar] to be real simply in
virtue of its meeting the Respect Constraint. But this
difference may be just verbal.” (2006b, 67). Arguably, this
footnote vitiates the rest of Devitt’s book.

be construed in the manner of a grammar representing tacit
knowledge of conceptual structures. Indeed, David Gil
(1983) has argued that the intuitionist or conceptualist
account of mathematics takes intuitions in essentially the
same way that a linguist does, namely, as data to be
explained by a formal theory
Despite Devitt’s animadversions against intuitions, this
form of evidence is commonplace and uncontroversial
elsewhere throughout psychology. Nevertheless, Devitt
explicitly rejects the analogy of linguistic intuitions with
perceptual experience (2006b, 112). However, Devitt’s
objection to the analogy is surprising because he draws
precisely the wrong conclusion from his own allusion to
Fodor’s (1983) account of the visual module. Ironically,
Fodor illustrates his point with Ullman’s (1979) algorithmic
theory, – exactly the example used by Chomsky (1986, 264)
to illustrate the nature of his own computational theory. The
perceptual judgments that are relevant in the visual case are
emphatically not “what is seen” in the “success” sense of
such terms, but in the psychological sense of what seems to
be the case. The distinction is, after all, well known to
philosophers (Ryle 1949, 152), though Devitt relies
irrelevantly on the veridical or “achievement” conception of
“what is seen” (2006b, 114). The visual module doesn’t
provide the truth about the distal stimulus but only a
perceptual judgment that Ullman’s algorithm purports to
explain, just like Chomsky’s grammar.
The familiar perceptual phenomena that form a large part
of the data for the psychology of vision include such things
as the various “constancies,” ambiguous figures such as
Necker Cube, duck-rabbit and faces-goblet, anomalous
figures such as the Penrose Triangle, Kanizsa illusory
contours, and the ubiquitous Müller-Lyer Illusion, inter alia.
The phenomena of interest in all such cases are the percepts
of normal viewers – the judgments or construals – that
constitute the data to be explained by theories of visual
processing. The two interpretations of the Necker Cube
known intuitively to a “visual virtuoso” (Hoffman 1998) are
closely analogous to the two meanings of an ambiguous
sentence known as the percepts of a native speaker.
Chomsky writes:

Intuitions
Devitt (2006a, b) devotes special attention to the vexed
question of the status of intuitions and suggests that, rather
than being “the voice of competence”, linguistic intuitions
are “opinions resulting from ordinary empirical
investigation, theory-laden in the way all such opinions are”
(2006b, 98). Moreover, Devitt argues that “speakers’
intuitions are not the main evidence for linguistic theories”
(2006b, 96) and do not support the claims for grammars as
mentally represented. However, Lerdahl and Jackendoff
(1983) have developed a grammar of music saying: “We
believe that our generative theory of music can provide a
model of how to construct a competence theory (in
Chomsky’s sense)” (1983, xi). In particular, Lerdahl and
Jackendoff write: “We take the goal of a theory of music to
be a formal description of the musical intuitions of a listener
who is experienced in a musical idiom.” (1983, 1) They
explain that they are adopting “a stance analogous to that
taken in the study of language by the school of generativetransformational grammar” (1983, 5). Music cognition
serves to illustrate Chomsky’s point concerning the nature of
the enterprise. Since music has no content or reference to the
world, these factors need not give rise to the irrelevant
intentionalist attribution of RT. Thus, as I. Giblin (2007) has
persuasively shown, despite parallel, spurious objections, we
may say that a music grammar is internally represented in
exactly the same sense as a language – tacit knowledge
captured by the rules of a formal generative theory. In
particular, we see that Devitt’s “Representational Thesis” is
utterly irrelevant in the case of musical cognition. Of course,
one could defend something like Devitt’s position by
claiming that the formalisms of a generative theory of music
were not “psychologically real” and not about a mental
reality underlying musical intuitions, but about something
else, perhaps a “musical reality” or about the heavenly
spheres.
In his efforts to clarify his view, Chomsky (1982, 16) has
drawn an analogy with mathematics which, like music, can

A grammar is a system of rules that generates an infinite
class of “potential percepts”, … In short, we can begin
by asking “what is perceived” and move from there to a
study of perception. (Chomsky 1972, 168,9)
From such remarks we can see that the place of intuition in
grammars hardly deserves to be controversial, unless the
whole of perceptual psychology is also open to the
difficulties alleged to arise for linguistics. Thus, Chomsky
explained the interest of his famous pair ‘John is easy/eager
to please’ saying that introspective “data of this sort are
simply what constitute the subject matter for linguistic
theory. We neglect such data at the cost of destroying the
subject” (Chomsky 1964, 79).

651

References

Gil, D. 1983: Intuitionism, Transformational Generative
Grammar and Mental Acts. Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science, 14, 3, 231-254.
George, A. (ed) 1989): Reflections on Chomsky. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Hoffman, D.D. 1998: Visual Intelligence: How We Create
What We See. New York: Norton and Company.
Laurence, S. 2003: Is Linguistics a Branch of Psychology?
In A. Barber (ed) Epistemology of Language. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lerdahl, F. and Jackendoff, R. 1983: A Generative Theory of
Tonal Music. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Marr, D. 1982: Vision. New York: Freeman.
Nelson, R.J. 1978. Competence-Performance Distinction in
Mental Philosophy, Synthese, 39, 337-381.
Pylyshyn, Z. 1972, Competence & Psychological Reality,
American Psychologist, 546-552.
Pylyshyn, Z. 1973, The Role of Competence Theories in
Cognitive Science, Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
2,1, 21-50.
Pylyshyn, Z. 1984. Computation & Cognition, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Quine, W.V. 1972: Methodological Reflection on Current
Linguistic Theory. In D. Davidson & G. Harman (eds),
Semantics of Natural Language, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Rey, G. 2003a: Chomsky, Intentionality, and a CRTT. In
L.M. Antony and N. Hornstein (eds) Chomsky and his
Critics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Rey, G. 2003b: Intentional Content and a Chomskian
Linguistics. In A. Barber (ed) Epistemology of
Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ringen, J.D. 1975: Linguistic Facts, In D. Cohen and J.R.
Wirth (eds) Testing Linguistic Hypotheses. Washington,
D.C.: Hemisphere Publishing Corporation.
Rorty, R. 1979: Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ryle, G. 1949: The Concept of Mind. London: Hutchinson.
Searle, J. 1980: Rules and Causation: Reply to Chomsky.
Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 3, 37-38.
Slezak, P. 2006. Cartesian ‘Ideas’ and the First (C17th)
Cognitive Revolution, R. Sun ed., Proceedings of the
28th Conference of Cognitive Science Society, NJ:
Erlbaum, 798-803
Stich, S. 1972: Grammar, Psychology, and Indeterminacy.
The Journal of Philosophy, 69, 22, December, 799-818.
Wolf-Devine, C. 2000a. Descartes’ theory of visual spatial
perception, in S. Gaukroger, J. Schuster, J. Sutton, eds.,
(2000) Descartes’ Natural Philosophy, London:
Routledge, 506-523.

Botha, R. 1980: Methodological Bases of a Progressive
Mentalism. Synthese 44, 1-112.
Chomsky, N. 1959: Review of Skinner’s Verbal Behavior.
Language, 35, 1, 26-58; reprinted in L.A. Jakobovits and
M. S. Miron (eds) Readings in the Psychology of
Language. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Chomsky, N. 1964: Current Issues in Linguistic Theory. In
Structure of Language, J. A. Fodor and J.J. Katz (eds)
New York: Prentice-Hall
Chomsky, N. 1965: Aspects of the Theory of Syntax.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. 1972: Language and Mind. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Chomsky, N. 1975: The Logical Structure of Linguistic
Theory. New York: Plenum Press.
Chomsky, N. 1980. Rules and Representations, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. 1986: Knowledge of Language: Its Nature,
Origin and Use. New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, N. 2000: New Horizons in the Study of Language
and Mind. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky, N. 2003: Replies. In L.M. Antony and N.
Hornstein (eds) Chomsky and his Critics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. & Katz, J.J. 1974: What the Linguist is
Talking About. Journal of Philosophy. 71, 12, 347-367.
Descartes, R. 1637/1965: Discourse on Method, Optics,
Geometry, and Meteorology. Translated by Paul J.
Olscamp. New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Devitt, M. 2003: Linguistics is not Psychology. In A. Barber
(ed) Epistemology of Language. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Devitt, M. 2006a: Intuitions in Linguistics. British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 57, 481-513.
Devitt, M. 2006b: Ignorance of Language. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Fodor, J.A. 1968. Psychological Explanation, New York:
Random House.
Fodor, J.A. 1983: The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Fodor, J.A. 1998: In Critical Condition. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
George, A. (ed) 1989: Reflections on Chomsky. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Giblin, I. 2007: Music and Cognition: Why music is better
than its sounds, doctoral dissertation, University of New
South Wales.

652

