UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Recognition of Pictures May Not Require Central Attentional Resources

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7hh2h8r6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Green, Collin
Johnston, James C.
Ruthruff, Eric

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Recognition of Pictures May Not Require Central Attentional Resources
Collin Green (cgreen@arc.nasa.gov) & James C. Johnston (jcjohnston@arc.nasa.gov)
Human-Systems Integration Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035

Eric Ruthruff (ruthruff@unm.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131
behavior, is (typically) highly practiced. Thus, it is reasonable to hypothesize that memory retrieval (particularly, recognition: see Jacoby, 1991) might not be subject to the central bottleneck. Two special cases have previously been investigated with different outcomes. The central bottleneck
was found to block the implicit memory retrieval required
for word identification (McCann, Remington & Van Selst,
2000) but not for letter identification (McCann & Johnston,
1992) perhaps reflecting greater practice for component
letters.
The only test of whether an explicit memory task is subject to the central bottleneck was reported by Carrier and
Pashler (1995). They tested whether explicit recall and recognition of word list items is subject to the central bottleneck; they concluded that it is. The method used in Carrier
and Pashler’s (1995) work, and in our experiment, will be
discussed in the next section.

Abstract
Carrier and Pashler (1995) concluded that memory retrieval is
indeed subject to the central bottleneck. Using locus-of-slack
logic in a dual-task paradigm, they reported that memory retrieval on Task 2 was delayed until after central operations on
a tone discrimination Task 1 had been completed. Here, we
present an experiment that extended Carrier and Pashler’s
method to memory for pictures rather than words. Our results
suggest that recognition of pictures is not subject to central resource limitations, at least when instructions and feedback encourage participants to employ parallel-processing strategies
and when preferred stimulus-response modality pairings (visual to manual and auditory to vocal) are used.
Keywords: attention, memory, dual-task, psychological refractory period, recognition, familiarity

Introduction
Sensory systems can process several stimuli in parallel, especially when those stimuli are presented in different modalities (Treisman & Davies, 1973). However, evidence
suggests that human cognitive architecture typically does
not permit deeper processing for several stimuli at the same
time (Pashler, 1984, 1994). One theory holds that many
processing stages require capacity-limited central resources
that can work on only a single task at any time, resulting in
a cognitive processing bottleneck (see Pashler & Johnston,
1998 for a review). It remains controversial whether the
processing bottleneck is confined to selecting responses to
stimuli (cf. Pashler & Johnston, 1989) or includes stimulus
analysis and classification. Bottleneck delays have been
reported even with simple go/no go tasks that require minimal response processing (Van Selst & Johnston, submitted),
and perceptual classification has been reported to be delayed
by the central bottleneck (Johnston & McCann, 2006).
Whether a processing stage is subject to the central bottleneck may depend on whether it is accomplished by cognitive systems specialized to operate autonomously. Processes might bypass the central bottleneck if they depend on
specialized circuits at lower levels of the nervous system
(including reflexive stimulus-response loops) or when they
are highly practiced (Lien, Ruthruff, & Johnston, 2006).
Here, we examine whether memory retrieval processes
are blocked by the central bottleneck. Memory retrieval
arguably meets the criteria laid out by Lien, Ruthruff, and
Johnston (2006): presented with a familiar stimulus, one
cannot help but recognize it (Jacoby, 1991); the human
brain includes specialized structures dedicated to memory
functions (Scoville & Milner, 1957; Squire & Zola-Morgan,
1991); and memory retrieval, as a recurrent component of

Dual-Task Methodology
A common hypothesis in cognitive psychology is that a task
can be decomposed into a sequence of discrete processing
stages. For example, a tone discrimination task (where participants indicate which of two tones they heard) can be
decomposed into a perceptual stage that classifies the tone, a
response selection stage that decides what action is to be
performed, and a response execution stage that translates the
selected response into motor action and executes that action.
While there is a consensus that response selection is subject
to the central bottleneck, there is less agreement about other
stages.
Evidence about the central bottleneck comes mainly from
the Psychological Refractory Period (PRP) paradigm, which
requires participants to perform two tasks at the same time.
This requirement produces delayed response times (RTs) for
at least one task, usually the second task. One explanation of
this result is shown in Fig. 1, following Pashler & Johnston
(1989). Suppose that a tone discrimination task (task 1) and
a light discrimination task (task 2) must be performed together. The stimuli for the two tasks are presented in rapid
succession at a varying stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA).
Each of the tasks is shown decomposed into a perceptual
stage not requiring central resources, a response selection
stage that does require central resources, and a response
execution stage not requiring central resources. At short
SOAs, the perceptual stages occur in parallel (see Figure 1).
However, task 2 response selection cannot start until the
completion of task 1 response selection, resulting in a delay.
This delay lengthens task 2 RT at short SOAs (where the
task demands overlap in time) relative to long SOAs (where
317

task 2 RTs for short SOAs (see Figure 4, left panel) is
known as absorption into cognitive slack. If we now consider a task 2 difficulty manipulation that lengthens a central
stage that occurs at or after the start of the bottleneck, absorption into slack cannot occur at any SOA. Here, the task
2 manipulation will increase task 2 RT by the same amount
for all SOAs, producing an additive pattern (See Figure 3,
upper and lower right panels and Figure 4, right panel).

they do not), as shown in Figure 2. The dual-task delay of
task 2 responses is commonly called the Psychological Refractory Period (PRP) effect.

Figure 1. A simple processing stage model shows how the
PRP effect results from a delay in response selection on task
2. (White boxes represent information processing stages
that do not require central resources; Grey boxes represent
stages do require central resources).
The basic dual-task PRP paradigm can be adapted, using
the locus-of-slack method (McCann & Johnston, 1992), to
assess whether a processing stage in task 2 occurs before or
after the start of the bottleneck. To use the method, one
manipulates the duration of the stage of interest (for instance,
in a visual task, the perception stage can be lengthened by
reducing stimulus contrast). If we lengthen the duration of a
task 2 stage prior to the bottleneck, at short SOAs one expects the added time to occur in parallel with task 1 response selection, and therefore not to lengthen overall task 2
RT (see Figure 3, upper left). However, at long SOAs, the
lengthened stage is on the critical path for task 1, so the
added time should lengthen task 2 RT (Figure 3, lower left).
The disappearance of the effect of Difficulty of Retrieval on

Figure 2. Response time data from a hypothetical dual-task
experiment. Responses to task 2 are significantly slower at
short SOA than at long SOA.
Thus, by adding time to a particular stage in task 2 and
observing whether the added time shows up equally across
all SOAs or disappears at the shorter SOAs, we can determine whether that stage occurs before or after the bottleneck
onset. This tells us whether the stage requires limited central
resources hypothesized to cause the bottleneck.

Figure 3. Upper left: At a short SOA, lengthening a processing stage that occurs prior to the bottleneck has little or no effect
on task 2 RT. Lower left: At a long SOA, lengthening a processing stage that occurs prior to the bottleneck produces a
measurable increase in task 2 RT. Upper right: At a short SOA, lengthening a processing stage that occurs at or after the bottleneck produces a measurable increase in task 2 RT. Lower right: At a long SOA, lengthening a processing stage that occurs
at or after the bottleneck produces a measurable increase in task 2 RT.

318

that emphasized both speed and accuracy. On each of the
tasks, we used preferred input-output modality pairings, and
we eliminated a possible response modality conflict (Green,
Johnston, & Ruthruff, 2005).
While those did suggest that Carrier and Pashler’s (1995)
methods might have limited their ability to observe parallel
processing, the pattern of results was not clearly indicative
of absorption into cognitive slack. Here we explore the possibility that memory for different stimuli (pictures) may
yield a more definitive result. One reason to believe that
picture memory will produce clearer results than word
memory is that pictures are more unique to the participants’
experience, allowing a purer episodic memory retrieval than
memory for comparatively well-studied words. In addition,
if participants used any sub-vocalization in doing the tone
discrimination task 1, then this might have interfered with
linguistic processing of the work memory task 2 stimuli.

Memory Retrieval and the Processing Bottleneck
Carrier and Pashler (1995) applied locus-of-slack logic to
determine whether memory retrieval requires limited central
resources. In their Experiment 2, task 1 required participants
to indicate by key press whether an audible tone was high or
low. Task 2 required them to indicate by key press whether
a printed word appeared on a study list presented shortly
prior to the current block of dual-task trials. They manipulated the duration of Task-2 memory retrieval by varying the
number of times a word was studied (1 vs. 5). Responses to
the memory task were substantially slowed when the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA) for the two tasks was short (a
normal PRP effect). More importantly, the memory task
manipulation had an (approximately) equivalent effect at all
SOAs, suggesting that memory retrieval required central
resources and therefore cannot proceed in parallel with the
response selection stage of another task.

Method
Participants 32 participants were either students from local
colleges working for course credit, or volunteers working
for ten dollars per hour of participation. Eight participants
were excluded from analysis because they did not follow
instructions or did not meet a criterion accuracy level (70%
accurate on both tasks), leaving data from 24 participants to
be analyzed.
Materials and Apparatus The experiment was run on PC
computers with 22-inch color monitors, standard keyboards,
headphones, and cardioid microphones. Each participant sat
in a dimly lit, acoustically shielded room at a viewing distance of about 60 cm from the screen.
A fixation cross (presented in black on a white background at the center of the screen) was used to orient the
participant before each trial
The picture stimuli were 260 black on white line drawings
from Snodgrass and Vanderwort (1980). For each participant, 20 pictures were practice items and 240 were experimental items. Half of the pictures were designated study
items (to be studied) and half were designated as lure items
(not to be studied). The assignment of individual pictures to
these conditions was randomized across participants.
The number task used randomly selected integers ranging
from one to 20 (inclusive), presented on the screen in black
font. The error signal used for the number task was a 200 ms
atonal buzzer sound.
Tones were 200 ms in duration. The high tone was a pure
1000 Hz tone; the low tone was a pure 500 Hz tone. These
tones were played at a comfortable and clearly audible volume over the participant’s headphones. The error signal
used for the tone task was the same buzzer sound used for
the number task. During test trials, the stimulus tones were
equally divided between high and low pitch tones. High
and low tones occurred equally often with studied items and
lure items, and equally often at different SOAs.
The error message used in the memory task appeared
horizontally centered on the bottom half of the screen in red,
bold, capitalized font on a white background. The message

Hard
Easy

RT2

SOA

SOA

Figure 4. Hypothetical response time data for hard and easy
versions of task 2 in a dual-task experiment. Left: pattern
expected when a difficult manipulation affects a processing
stage prior to the bottleneck. Right: pattern expected when
the affected stage occurs at or after the bottleneck.
One limitation of Carrier and Pashler (1995) is that they
studied central resource limitations on memory retrieval
only for words. Other stimuli (for example, pictures) might
be retrieved without being subject to central resource limitations. Our experiment examined this possibility.

The Present Experiment
Carrier and Pashler (1995) noted that their data are at
odds with prior work indicating that memory retrieval is not
subject to dual-task interference. As those authors point out,
Jacoby (1991) provided evidence that familiarity judgments
may not be subject to the same central resource limitations
that affect conscious recall. To the extent that recognition
memory requires assessing familiarity more than it requires
recollection of a particular episode, it is surprising that Carrier and Pashler (1995) obtained the result that they did.
One possibility is that methodological details of Carrier
and Pashler’s method limited their participants’ ability to
perform memory retrievals concurrently with another task.
In a previous study, we replicated Carrier and Pashler’s
(1995) Experiment 2 with a few other modifications to their
method to that should have maximized the possibility that
participants would be willing and able to do the two tasks in
parallel. Specifically, we used instructions and feedback
319

over the headphones to indicate the error. A 500 ms ITI followed each number task trial.
After the number task, the dual-task test phase began. In
each block, participants completed 40 PRP trials. In each
trial, the participant was required to make two responses: a
tone discrimination and a recognition judgment. Each trial
began with the presentation of a fixation cross for 500 ms.
500 ms after the offset of the fixation cross, a tone was
played over the participant’s headphones. Participants were
required to indicate which tone was played as quickly and
accurately as possible by saying “high” or “low” aloud into
the microphone. If the participant responded incorrectly to
the tone, or failed to respond within 1500 ms of the tone
onset, a short buzzer was played over the headphones to
indicate the error. High and low tones occurred equally often with all combinations of test item and SOA.
Either 50, 150, or 1100 ms after the onset of the tone, a
picture appeared on the screen. Participants were required to
indicate, as quickly and accurately as possible, whether or
not the picture was presented during the study phase. Participants pressed the “Z” key to indicate that the picture was
in the studied set, or pressed “M” to indicate that the picture
was not in the studied set. If the participant responded incorrectly to the picture, or failed to respond within 2000 ms of
the picture onset, a message was displayed on the screen
indicating the error. The content of the message was dependent on the nature of the error (see the materials section).
After each block, accuracy feedback was provided for both
the tone task and the memory task. After a short break, participants pressed a key to initiate the next block.

read “WRONG” for incorrect responses, “TOO SLOW” for
responses that after the task deadline, and “INVALID RESPONSE” when the participant pressed a key that was not a
valid response option.
Procedure The experiment included one practice block and
six experimental blocks. Each block included a picture study
phase, a “buffer” number task, and a test phase. Before the
experiment began, participants read written instructions for
all phases of the experiment, emphasizing that all responses
should be made as quickly and accurately as possible. The
instructions for the test trials did not specify a specific response ordering, but did emphasize that each response
should be made as soon as possible after the appearance of
the associated stimulus.
Each block began with a study phase where participants
were presented with a set of 20 different pictures to be remembered for a later test. Half of the pictures were presented a single time during the study phase, and half were
presented five times (a total of 60 study trials). As in Carrier
and Pashler (1995), the study set was constructed so that the
interval between the final study trial for one-study items and
five-study items was equated. Study trials began with a fixation cross that remained on the screen for 500 ms. 500 ms
after the offset of the fixation cross, a picture appeared on
the screen and remained visible for 500 ms. There was a
1000 ms inter-trial interval (ITI) following the offset of the
picture.
After the study phase, participants completed 40 trials of a
number task wherein they indicated whether a presented
integer was odd or even. This task was included to prevent
participants from rehearsing memory items between the
study phase and test trials. Each trial began with a fixation
cross presented for 500 ms. 500 ms after the offset of the
fixation cross, an integer was presented. Participants indicated that the integer was odd or even by pressing “1” or
“2” on number pad, respectively. For this task, participants
were instructed to respond as quickly and accurately as possible. When the participant gave an incorrect response or
gave no response within 1500 ms, a short buzzer was played

Results
Mean response times are presented graphically in Figure 5
and means and standard errors are also presented numerically in Table 1. Data were analyzed for correct trials only
and we excluded trials on which lure items were used for
task 2 (all critical comparisons concern just Old 1 and Old 5
memory items).

Figure 5. Data from our experiment involving a picture recognition task as task 2.
320

As illustrated in Figure 3, absorption into slack occurs
only when the lengthened processing stage comes prior to
the point when task 2 requires limited central resources.
Thus, our data indicate that memory retrieval does not—at
least for the picture memory case we studied—require limited central resources. Because we did find a PRP effect for
the picture memory task, we conclude that a stage subsequent to memory retrieval (response selection is the obvious
candidate) still required bottleneck resources.
Our results differed from those of Carrier and Pashler
(1995), who found no absorption into slack, and thus concluded that memory retrieval is part of the bottleneck. There
are three explanations for the different conclusions.
First, it is possible that both conclusions are correct for
the retrieval of the different types of material studied. Pictures are surely processed in different brain regions than
words and it is plausible that some of these could be more
autonomous from central cognition than others.
Secondly, it is possible that some of the methodological
changes we made—we thought of them as improvements—
were critical. It is possible that if Pashler & Carrier’s experiment was repeated with our pairings of input and output
modalities, even retrieval from word lists might be found to
bypass the central bottleneck (cf. Lien et al, 2006). In addition, if their task involved sub-vocal verbal processing, that
could have interfered with processes needed for word memory retrieval. If so, Carrier and Pashler’s result could have
been caused by a specific resource conflict distinct from the
central bottleneck.
Thirdly, the difference between our results and those from
Carrier and Pashler (1995) might arise because our participants did not actually recollect the study list episode(s) associated with pictures during dual-task trials, but made fast
judgments of familiarity. Carrier and Pashler (1995) anticipated that such cases might occur. This hypothesis is also
consistent with Jacoby’s (1991) evidence that recollection
requires central executive resources while judgments of
familiarity do not. Indeed, recent work has demonstrated
differences in the neural systems that support remembering
an episode and knowing that a stimulus is familiar (Eldridge,
et al., 2000). Specifically, remembering (recollecting the
specific temporal and spatial context of an episode) is associated with increased activity in the hippocampus, while
knowing is not. Given that these processes have (at least
somewhat) different neural underpinnings, it would not be
surprising if they placed different demands on limited central resources.
Whether our modifications to Carrier and Pashler’s (1995)
method merely removed a resource conflict that arose because both their tasks required linguistic processing or fundamentally changed the task from one of remembering the
study episode(s) to one of judging the familiarity of specific
stimuli is an open question. The difference in stimuli might
have subtly changed how participants approached their task
in our experiment. For instance, our picture stimuli were
presumably unique in a particpants’ experience allowing a

Table 1. Means and standard errors for response times (ms)
on both tasks
New
Task

SOA

M

Old 1
SE

Old 5

M

SE

M

SE

Task 1
50
150
1100

643 ms
626
599

19 ms
23
20

643
645
591

21
24
21

654
616
599

24
19
22

50
150
1100

885
821
681

27
26
13

863
842
697

32
30
20

860
800
647

31
26
16

Task 2

Task 1 (Tone Discrimination Task) There was a main
effect of SOA on task 1 RTs, F(2, 46) = 14.501, p < 0.01.
RTs in the 50 ms SOA condition (647 ms) were significantly longer than those in both the 150 ms SOA condition
(629 ms) and in the 1100 ms SOA condition (596 ms), t(24)
= 2.02, p < 0.05 one-tailed; t(24) = 4.94, p < 0.05 one-tailed,
respectively. RTs in the 1100 ms SOA condition were also
significantly shorter than those in the 150 ms SOA condition, t(24) = 4.22, p < 0.05 one-tailed. There was no main
effect of Difficulty of Retrieval on task 1 RTs, F(2,23) =
0.262, p > 0.50. There was also an interaction of these factors with respect to task 1 RT, F(2, 46) = 3.373, p < 0.05.
Task 2 (Picture Recognition Task) Examining RT2 only
for studied items revealed a main effect of Difficulty of Retrieval, F(1,23) = 12.801, p < 0.01, and a significant interaction of SOA and Difficulty of Retrieval, F(2, 46) = 3.323, p
< 0.05. Planned pairwise comparisons examined the difficulty effects in more detail. There was no significant effect
of Difficulty of Retrieval on task 2 RT at the 50 ms SOA
(the difference between Old 1 and Old 5 items was 3 ms),
t(24) = 0.18, p = 0.43 one-tailed. However, there were significant difficulty effects at the 150 ms SOA (a 42 ms effect), t(24) = 2.18, p < 0.02 one-tailed, and at the 1100 ms
SOA (a 50 ms effect), t(24) = 6.056, p < 0.01 one-tailed.
Further, a planned comparison found Difficulty of Retrieval
had a significantly smaller effect at the 50 ms SOA (3 ms)
than it did at the 1100 ms SOA (50 ms) , F(1,95) = 55.04, p
< 0.001.

Discussion & Conclusions
Our experiment examined the hypothesis that memory retrieval might not require the central resources responsible
for the central bottleneck. Our use of the locus-of-slack
method yielded a straightforward answer: The difficulty
effect of 50 ms at the longest SOA shrank to only 3 ms at
the shortest SOA. At the same time, there was substantial
overall PRP effect. Hence, the data show clearly that the
memory retrieval task encounters the Central Bottleneck,
but only subsequent to the stage at which the difficulty
lengthens processing. We see no alternative except the obvious one, that memory retrieval has already returned a result for old items in parallel with task 1 central stages. This
is strong evidence that memory retrieval of pictures can
proceed without the central resources that cause the Central
Bottleneck.
321

“never seen it” versus “ever seen it” criterion not useful
with word lists). A related hypothesis is that activating
LTM with a retrieval cue and receiving a general signal
whose intensity reflects stimulus familiarity requires no
central resources, but that refining the information returned
from LTM in order to reconstruct a specific episode does
require central resources. We are currently exploring this
topic in the lab.
It must not be lost that our data (like those from Carrier &
Pashler, 1995) do show an overall delay in responses when a
memory task is performed simultaneously with another task.
Even when memory retrieval per se is not the source of PRP
effects in memory experiments, memory tasks will typically
include response selection as a component stage, producing
PRP delays whether or not memory retrieval itself is the
source of those effects. Clearly, to fully understand the resource requirements of human memory, the methods used
here need to be extended to a wider variety of memory tasks,
sampling the great diversity of stimuli which human can
retrieve from memory. Research to date has barely begun to
sample that diversity.

Acknowledgments
Part of this research was conducted while the first author
held a National Research Council Research Associate
Award at NASA Ames Research Center. The authors thank
Joel Lachter, Susannah Paletz, Roger Remington, and ShuChieh Wu for their insights regarding this work. We thank
Jamie Carlson, Naomi Philips, Scott Heckenlively, and Natalya Kurilovich, Shane Sestito, and Eric Landrum for their
work in the laboratory and Xander Mathews for his assistance with programming. Finally, thanks to Mark Carrier
for providing materials from Carrier and Pashler (1995).
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Collin Green, NASA Ames Research Center, MS
262-4, Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000. Direct electronic
mail to cgreen@arc.nasa.gov.

References
Carrier, L.M., & Pashler, H. (1995). Attentional limits in
memory retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 21(5), 1339-1348.
Eldridge, L.L., Knowlton, B.J., Furmanski, C.S., Bookheimer, S.Y., & Engle, S.A. (2000). Remembering episodes: a selective role for the hippocampus during retrieval. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1149-1152.
Green, C., Johnston, J.C., & Ruthruff, E. (2005). Attentional limits on memory retrieval—revisited. Poster presented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic
Society.
Hazeltine, E., Ruthruff, E., & Remington, R. W. (in press).
The role of input and output modality pairings in dualtask performance: Evidence for content-dependent central
interference, Cognitive Psychology.

322

Jacoby, L.L. (1991). A process dissociation framework:
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30(5), 513-541.
Johnston, J.C., &McCann, R. (2006). On the Locus of
Dual-Task Interference: Is There a Bottleneck at the
Stimulus Classification Stage? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 694-719.
Lien, M.-C., Ruthruff, E., & Johnston, J.C. (2006). Attentional limitations in doing two tasks at once: The search
for exceptions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(2), 89-93.
McCann, R.S. & Johnston, J.C. (1992) . The locus of the
single channel bottleneck in dual-task interference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 1992, 18, 471-484.
McCann, R. S., Remington, R. W., & Van Selst, M (2000).
A dual-task investigation of automaticity in visual wordprocessing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 26, 1352-1370.
Pashler, H. (1984). Processing stages in overlapping tasks:
Evidence for a central bottleneck. Journal of Expermental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10,
358-377.
Pashler, H. (1994). Dual-task interference in simple tasks:
Data and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 220-244.
Pashler, H. & Johnston. J.C. (1989). Chronometric evidence for central postponement in temporally overlapping
tasks. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
41A, 19-45.
Pashler, H. & Johnston, J.C. (1998). Attentional limitations
in dual-task performance. In H. Pashler (Ed.): Attention,
(pp. 155-189). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Schumacher, E. H., Seymour, T., Glass, J. M., Fencsik, D.E.,
Lauber, E. J., Kieras, D. E., & Meyer, D. E. (2001).
Virtually perfect time sharing in dual-task performance.
Psychological Science,12(2), 101-108.
Scoville, W.B. & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory
after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20, 11–21.
Shaffer, L.H. (1975). Multiple attention in continuous verbal tasks. In P.M.A. Rabbitt & S. Dornic (Eds.): Attention
and Performance V, New York: Academic Press.
Snodgrass, J. & Vanderwort, M. (1980). A standardized set
of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
6, 174-215.
Squire, L.R. & Zola-Morgan, S. (1991). The medial temporal lobe memory system. Science, 253(5026), 1380–1386.
Treisman, A., & Davies, A. (1973). Dividing attention to
ear and eye. In S. Kornblum (Ed.): Attention and Performance IV, (pp. 101-117). New York: Academic Press.
Van Selst, M. & Johnston, J.C. (submitted). The central
bottleneck includes stimulus discrimination and response
selection: Evidence from go/no-go PRP. Submitted to
Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology.

