UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reuniting Categories, Language, and Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87f55005

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Lupyan, Gary

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reuniting Categories, Language, and Perception
Gary Lupyan (glupyan@cnbc.cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
has been replicated with a variety of stimuli, e.g., upright vs.
rotated numbers and familiar upright “live” vs. upside-down
“dead” elephants (Wolfe, 2001).
While the character И is unfamiliar to English-speakers,
for someone familiar with the Cyrillic alphabet, И is a familiar letter. One may therefore predict that familiarity with
the Cyrillic alphabet would lead to efficient search for a N
among И’s. This is indeed the case (Malinowski & Hubner,
2001). But notice the confound. For English-speakers, N is
not just a familiar percept. Rather, it has meaning as the
letter “N.” The symbol И is not only unfamiliar perceptually, it is also meaningless. Among the bilinguals tested by
Malinowki & Hubner, both N and И were familiar, and both
were meaningful as letters with sounds /n/ and /i:/ respectively. If the difficulty English-speakers have searching
through И’s arises from a lack of experience, then performance can improve with additional exposure (in effect making the stimuli familiar). If, on the other hand, the difference
is due to categorical status (a difference in meaningfulness),
then simply getting participants to treat the unfamiliar symbols as members of a category, can lead to more efficient
search. The first aim of the present work is tease apart these
alternatives by using a classic perceptual task (visual search)
and manipulating category membership while controlling
for perceptual novelty.

Abstract
Familiar objects are more easily processed than unfamiliar objects. Familiar objects are also generally meaningful, and
comprise members of named categories. Previous work examining familiarity effects in visual processing has confounded
perceptual experience with meaningfulness and with nameability. The present experiments use the visual search paradigm to (1) manipulate category membership while controlling for novelty and perceptual similarity, and (2) investigate
the role of on-line linguistic labels on visual perception.
Search performance is dramatically improved when participants are simply told to think of novel stimuli as members of
a familiar category. Search performance is further improved
when targets or distractors are named compared to trials on
which target and distractor identity is known, but the stimuli
are not verbally labeled.
Keywords: categorization; visual perception; visual search;
language; labeling

Introduction
Familiar stimuli are not simply perceived, but are quickly
categorized as members of meaningful categories (e.g.,
Grill-Spector & Kanwisher, 2005). It might therefore seem
surprising that theories of visual perception have for a long
time ignored the possible contributions of conceptual categories to visual perception (Wolfe & Horowitz, 2004 for
discussion). One reason for this seeming oversight is that
familiarity and category membership are correlated. Stimuli
that are conceived as being members of a category are generally also ones that participants have experienced before.
Conversely, unfamiliar stimuli are not only perceptually
unfamiliar, but also meaningless. Finding that participants
are poorer at processing unfamiliar stimuli may be merely
the function of their novelty. Alternatively, poor performance on unfamiliar stimuli may be due to a failure to represent them as meaningful category members. Discriminating
between these alternatives can help us understand the nature
of bottom-up and top-down processes in perception.
An example helps to clarify this distinction. Frith (1974)
found that searching for the unfamiliar target И among N’s
is very efficient, while searching for the familiar N among
unfamiliar И’s is quite difficult (see also Wang, Cavanagh,
& Green, 1994). If the distractors are unfamiliar (И), search
is hard. If they are familiar (N), search is easy.1 This result
1

Additional work has shown that the major determinant of search
efficiency in tasks like these is familiarity of the distractors, with
the status of the target having minimal effect (Rauschenberger &
Yantis, 2006). The most obvious reason why distractor identity is

Categories and Perception
The impact of categorization on perception has been explored most thoroughly in the aptly named field of categorical perception. The most common finding is that practice
discriminating between stimuli by placing them into separate categories increases between-category perceptual differences, and sometimes decreases within-category differences (Goldstone, 1994; 1998). While this work has shown
how perceptual representations can be shaped by experience, less effort has been made to understand the contribution of conceptual categories to perception, controlling for
perceptual familiarity.
The question whether category membership affects performance in visual search, the paradigm used here, has generally taken the form of manipulating the categorical relationship between targets and distractors. Most famously,
Jonides and Gleitman (1972) demonstrated that “O” labeled
as an “oh” is easier to find among numbers than letters,
while the reverse is true for a “O” labeled as a “zero.” This
finding, however, has failed multiple attempts at replication
(Duncan, 1983; cf. Taylor & Hamm, 1997). More generally,

1247

more important than target identity is that there is at most one target, but numerous distractors.

finding of faster search rates when targets and distractors
belong to different conceptual categories than when they
belong to the same conceptual category, is most often confounded by perceptual variables. For instance, efficient
search for an artifact among animals can be distilled to perceptual rather than conceptual differences—pictures of manmade artifacts tend to be more rectilinear than pictures of
animals (Levin, Takarae, Miner, & Keil, 2001; but see
Wolfe, Stewart, Friedmanhill, & Oconnell, 1992).

Categories and Language
Just as it is useful to categorize frequently encountered
stimuli (e.g., see Harnad, 2005), it is also useful to name
them. On seeing the symbol “5” we not only recognize it as
a member of a familiar category (that can be perceptually
instantiated using a wide variety of forms, e.g., V, 5), but
we also know its name. That is, in addition to whatever semantics we have associated with “5,” also associated with it
is the name of the category to which it belongs. Why is
naming useful? The answer that comes to mind first—
communication—may seem too obvious to warrant discussion. However, a number of proposals have been made that
extend the function of words to domains beyond communication. For instance, it has been argued that words stabilize
abstract ideas in working memory and make them available
for inspection (Clark, 1997; James, 1890; Rumelhart,
Smolensky, McClelland, & Hinton, 1986). This general
hypothesis has been explored using computational simulations that have found that augmenting perceptual information with category labels improves categorization performance by enhancing differences between the representations
while at the same time collapsing across within-category
differences (Cangelosi, Greco, & Harnad, 2000; Lupyan,
2005). Lupyan, Rakison & McLelland (in press) have found
that equating for categorization experience, participants who
learn names for novel stimuli learn to categorize them more
quickly and show more robust category knowledge than
those who perform the identical categorization task without
verbal labels.
One way to account for such a finding is to view perception and categorization as interactive processes, combining
bottom-up perceptual information, with top-down conceptual information. Because a learned category label becomes
strongly associated with features that are most diagnostic (or
typical) of the named category, using the label can in effect
make an object a “better” object by augmenting its idiosyncratic perceptual features with features typical to the named
category. A labeled stimulus might therefore produce a perceptual representation that is more influenced by top-down
conceptual information than a stimulus that is not named.
Perhaps because dominant theories of visual search
(Duncan & Humphreys, 1989; Treisman & Gelade, 1980)
have focused on purely perceptual variables, there have
been few attempts to isolate and examine involvements of
language in perceptual tasks such as visual search. Some
exceptions are the studies of Spivey and colleagues (Spivey,
Tyler, Eberhard, & Tanenhaus, 2001), that have shown that

linguistic delivery of target information (“find the green
vertical”) can make an inefficient conjunction search efficient if the dimensional adjectives are delivered concurrently with the search display rather than immediately prior
to it. The authors suggested that hearing “green” followed
by “vertical” effectively divided the conjunction search into
two simpler feature searches, allowing the items to first
compete on the “green” dimension and then on the “vertical” dimension. This division of labor was seemingly not
possible in the absence of the verbal information.

Aims and Hypotheses
The present work has two aims. First, I examine the influence of meaningfulness on visual performance while controlling for perceptual experience. Experiment 1 presents
participants with unfamiliar stimuli and examines what happens when participants are told to consider them as members of a particular category. It was hypothesized that in
instructing participants to treat perceptually unfamiliar symbols as members of familiar categories would facilitate visual processing as revealed by shallower search slopes.
If search is more efficient when items are categorized, and
verbal labels, by virtue of their strong association with category exemplars, make object representations more categorical, then hearing a category label may further facilitate
performance. In experiments 2a and 2b, the distractors or
the target were labeled on some trials, and performance was
compared to trials on which no labeling occurred (but participants knew the identity of the target/distractors). It was
hypothesized that labels would further facilitate search even
though they contributed no additional information to the
participants.

Experiment 1
Subjects
Sixty-one subjects, 18-22 years old volunteered for the experiment in exchange for course credit or $7. None of them
had previously participated in any visual search experiments
with similar stimuli.

Stimuli
The stimuli used in Experiment 1 were the symbols
. The characters were white on a black background
and
and had a visual-angle size of .7o x .8o. The characters were
arranged along the circumference of an imaginary circle
having a diameter of 7o around a fixation cross (.5o diameter). The placement of the target and distractors was random
with the stipulation that the same number of items were present on the left and right sides of the display.

1248

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
groups. Participants in the number group were told to think
of the targets/distractors as rotated 2s and 5s. This instruction was omitted for participants in the symbol group. In one

1700
(Self) Labeled
Inconsistently

1600

Did Not Report Labeling

1400

Labeled Consistently

slow

1300
1200

Did Not Report Labeling
(Self) Labeled
Consistently

*

1100
1000

fast

Reaction Time (ms)

1500

900

Number Instructions

800

Symbol Only

700

Display Size

600

4
2700
2600
2500
2400
2300
2200
2100
2000
1900
1800
1700
1600
1500
1400
1300
1200
1100
1000
900

6

10

Target Absent
Number Instructions
Symbol Only

(Self) Labeled
Inconsistently

Did Not Report
Labeling
(Self) Labeled Consistently
Labeled Consistently
Did Not Report Labeling

slow

For the symbol group, the responses fell into three categories. First, participants who consistently self-labeled the
stimuli, either as rotated 2s/5s, or thought of them as other
(often creative) symbols/symbol combinations (N=14). For
/
as NU /
instance, several participants thought of
UN, respectively. Second, participants who labeled the
stimuli inconsistently (i.e., only part of the time) (N=11).
Third, participants who did not report labeling the stimuli
(N=16). Participants in the number condition fell into two
categories: those who reported consistently thinking of the
stimuli as rotated 2s and 5s, as instructed (N=15), and those
who although instructed to do so, did not report labeling the
stimuli (N=5).
The mean proportion of misses was 8% and did not differ
among conditions, F(1,60)<1. The false alarm rate, however, was greater in the symbol condition (M = .05) than the
number condition (M = .01), F(1,60) = 4.74, p < .05. Reaction time (RT) analyses that follow include only correct
responses and exclude RTs shorter than 150 ms. as anticipa-

Target Present

1800

*

fast

Results

tions. Response times greater than 3 standard deviations of
participants’ means were also excluded. Analyses were conducted using ANOVAs with display size as a withinsubjects factor, and instruction-condition as a betweensubject factor. Figure 1 shows target-present trials (top) and
target-absent trials (bottom). Analyses for target-present
and target-absent trials closely paralleled each other, so only

Reaction Time (ms)

part, participants were instructed to find a
among
.
During the other part, the target and distractor identity was
reversed (with the order counterbalanced between participants). At the start of each part the target was shown on the
screen accompanied with a reminder that it should be
viewed as a rotated number (number condition). For the
symbol group, the target was shown by itself.
Each part consisted of 20 blocks of 6 trials (target-present
vs. target-absent x 3 display sizes—4, 6, or 10). Trial order
was random with the target present on exactly half the trials.
Participants gave 2-alternative target present / absent responses using a gamepad controller. Participants were instructed to respond as quickly as possible without compromising accuracy. If the accuracy dipped below 92% for 24
trials, participants saw a display asking them to try to be
more accurate. Response mapping (left hand present vs.
right-hand present) was counterbalanced between participants. Each part began with 12 practice trials. The inter-trial
interval was 750 ms. Feedback in the form of a buzzing
sound was provided for incorrect responses.
After completing the experiment, participants were given
a written questionnaire that asked whether they thought of
the symbols
/
as any kind of number or letter, and if
so which one(s)? Participants were also queried about their
consistency of label use. A question asked, “did you use this
label at the beginning / middle / end of the experiment (circle all that apply).” Consistency was coded based on
whether participants claimed to use labels throughout the
task (consistent group), or only for part of the task (inconsistent group).
The questionnaire was necessary because participants in
the symbol condition may have considered the stimuli as
meaningful on their own without external experimenterprovided instructions. Conversely, participants in the number condition may have failed to conceive of the stimuli as
rotated numbers despite the instruction to do so.

Display Size

Figure 1 Search performance as a function of instruction
and reported use of labels.

target-present analyses will be presented here.
Initial analysis with instruction-condition as the betweensubject factor revealed significantly slower responses for the
symbol group, F(1,60) = 7.31, p < .01. The condition × display-size interaction was not significant, F(2, 60) < 1. Correlating performance with questionnaire responses made it
apparent that participants’ judgments of whether they
thought of the characters in terms of any familiar symbols
predicted performance. Using the 5 groups derived from the

1249

questionnaire responses as the between-subjects variable
revealed a significant main effect F(4, 57) = 6.47, p <.0005,
and a significant group × display size interaction, F(5,57) =
2.26, p < .05. Participants in the symbol condition who reported consistently thinking of the characters in terms of
familiar categories had mean RTs that were statistically indistinguishable from participants who were explicitly told to
think of the characters as numbers, whether or not the latter
reported thinking of the characters as numbers, F(2,32) < 1.
These three groups were collapsed for the subsequent analysis (the “fast” group in Figure 1). Participants in the symbol
group who reported either inconsistently labeling the stimuli, or not labeling them had mean search times were not
significantly different, F(1,25) < 1. The search slopes also
did not differ, F(2,25) = 1.54, p > 2. These two groups were
therefore collapsed into the “slow” group shown in Figure 1.
A mixed ANOVA with display-size as a within-subjects
factor and collapsed groups (“slow”/“fast”) as a betweensubjects factor revealed a highly significant difference in
mean search times, F(1,60) = 26.36, p <.0005, and a significant group × display-size interaction, F(2, 60) = 3.77, p <
.05. Search slopes for all experiments are listed in Table 1.

Table 1: Search slopes (ms/item) for Experiments 1-2 for target-present and target-absent trials. Data for Experiment 1 are
collapsed into two groups, indicated on Figure 1 as “fast” and
“slow.”
Experiment

Experiment 1

Condition

“Fast” group
“Slow” group

Experiment 2a

“ignore…”

Upright Trials

Labeled
Not Labeled
Labeled
Not Labeled

Rotated Trials
Experiment 2b

“find the…”

Upright Trials

Labeled
Not Labeled
Labeled
Now Labeled

Rotated Trials

Discussion
Instructing participants to consider novel stimuli as instances of a familiar category significantly improved mean
search times and search efficiency. The benefit of representing perceptually novel items as members of meaningful
categories was also observed in individuals who reported
consistently self-labeling the stimuli without being told to
do so. While finding faster search through familiar (and
hence meaningful) distractors
is nothing
new
(Rauschenberger & Yantis, 2006), the current experiments
show that having participants ascribe meaning to unfamiliar
stimuli dramatically improves visual processing.

Target
Present

Target
Absent

ms/item
47
66

ms/item
110
153

34
47
35
48

65
81
80
85

37
39
51
53

70
70
95
83

Subjects
Forty-eight subjects, 18-22 years old volunteered for the
experiment in exchange for course credit. They were naïve
to the task. Half the subjects participated in Experiment 2a
and half in Experiment 2b.

Stimuli

Experiments 2a-b

Four distinct stimuli were used in the search trials: upright
and
,and rotated numbers:
and
. To
numbers:
assess the impact of auditory labels, a recording of the
words “ignore” (Experiment 2a) and “find the” (Experiment
2b) was spliced with the words “two”, “five”, and a segment
of white noise, creating 6 audio clips—Experiment 2a: “ignore five”, “ignore two”, “ignore [noise].” Experiment 2b:
“find the five”, “find the two”, “find the [noise]”. All auditory stimuli were adjusted to be of the same intensity and
length (1000 ms).

Experiment 1 revealed a facilitation of visual search performance by conceptual knowledge in the absence of any
perceptual differences. Over the course of using words to
refer to categories, the two become linked such that hearing
a label for a familiar item may augment its perceptual information with information associated with the category.
This augmentation may lead to increased processing fluency
by, for instance, increasing the effective similarity between
similarly named distractors. If labels affect visual processing through their association with visual forms, then their
effects should be greater for stimuli more strongly associated with the label (i.e., more typical stimuli) than for stimuli used in Experiment 1 leading to a further prediction: the
effect of hearing a category label should be strongest for
more typical category exemplars. Because manipulations of
distractors leads to greater effects than similar targetmanipulations (Rauschenberger & Yantis, 2006), labels
were applied to the distractors in Experiment 2a. Experiment 2b extended the labeling manipulation to targets.

1250

Procedure
Procedure was identical to Experiment 1 with the following key differences. First, there were two types of trials:
those involving upright numbers, and those involving rotated numbers. Upright and rotated trials were intermixed.
Second, all participants were told to think of all symbols as
the numerals 2 and 5. Third, prior to the appearance of each
search display, participants heard a sound clip label the distractor identity on half the trials (e.g., “ignore 5”)—the label
condition, or a sound clip in which the distractor label was
replaced by white noise (“ignore [noise]”)—the no-label
condition (Experiment 2a). Experiment 2b was identical
except that target identity was named. Prior to each search

more efficient search only on upright trials, F(2, 23) = 3.63,
p < .05.

trial, participants heard “find the 2 (5)” or “find the [noise].”
The search display appeared 600 ms after the end of the
sound-clip.
As in Experiment 1, target and distractor identities were
blocked. Consequently, participants always knew ahead of
time what the target and distractors were going to be—the
linguistic label did not tell them anything they did not already know and thus could not guide search directly. As in
Experiment 1, participants searched for a 2 among 5s and
then for a 5 among 2s, with the order of the two parts counterbalanced. While target and distractor identities were
blocked, orientation and labeling conditions were intermixed within each block.
This design created 24 types of trials: target present/absent × display size (4, 6, or 10) × orientation (upright
or rotated) × label or no-label. Participants completed 10
blocks for a total of 240 trials searching for 2s and 240
searching for 5s. Each block began with 15 practice trials.

Target Present
1300
Labeled Trials

Reaction Time (ms)

1200

Unlabeled Trials

1100
1000
900
800
700

Display Size

600
4
1700

10

6
Target Absent

1600

Experiment 2a Results
Reaction Time (ms)

Search performance was analyzed using a within-subject
ANOVA with display size, orientation (upright or rotated),
and labeling (with-labels, without-labels) as within-subject
variables. Analysis of errors revealed a significant effect of
orientation, F(1,23) = 13.82, p < .001, with rotated numbers
producing more errors (8%) compared to upright numbers
(6%). Labeling did not significantly affect accuracy, F(1,23)
= 2.31, p > .13.
Reaction time analyses included correct responses only
and excluded RTs less than 150 ms and greater than 3 standard deviations above the mean. Analyses will focus on the
target-present trials. First, consistent with the findings of
Wang et al. (1994), RTs were longer on trials that involved
searching for the rotated targets, F(1, 23) = 42.12, p <.0005.
Unlike Wang et al’s (1994), the display-size × orientation
interaction here was not significant, F(2, 23) < 1, further
confirming the facilitatory effect of treating perceptually
unfamiliar objects as members of a familiar category.
There was no overall effect of labeling on RTs, F(1, 23) =
2.02, p > .16, but search slopes were reduced for labeled
trials as revealed by a highly significant labeling × displaysize interaction, F(2, 23) = 5.76, p < .01. There was also a
significant orientation × labeling interaction, F(1, 23) =
6.52, p < .025 suggested that the effect of labels was mediated by orientation. Analyzing the upright and rotated trials
separately clarified effect of labels. For the upright trials,
hearing the distractors labeled with their category resulted in
both faster overall search, F(1, 23) = 8.1, p < .01, and more
efficient search (i.e., shallower slopes), F(2, 23) = 3.27, p <
.05. On rotated trials, labels did not reduce overall search
F(1, 23) < 1, but again produced shallower slopes, F(2, 23)
= 4.07, p < .025 (Figure 2). It therefore appears that labels
had a larger facilitating effect on upright compared to rotated trials. The target-absent trials mirrored these orientation × labeling interactions. Search was much slower, but
not less efficient on rotated trials, and labeling produced

1500

Labeled Trials

1400

Unlabeled Trials

1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600
4

6

10

Figure 2 Experiment 2a search times for labeled vs.
unlabeled upright and rotated trials. Labeling and orientation are intermixed (manipulated within each block).

Experiment 2b Results
The overall pattern of performance was very similar to
Experiment 2a, except that the effect of labeling was now
limited to reducing overall search times and not on search
slopes. Errors were again higher for the rotated trials (9%)
compared to upright trials (5%), F(1, 23) = 8.30, p < .01.
There were no other accuracy effects. Search on rotated
trials was performed more slowly, F(1, 23) = 64.43, p <
.0005, but not less efficiently, (2, 23) = 2.14, p > .12.
Labels had an overall effect of speeding search, F(1, 24) =
5.15, p < .05, but this effect was limited to the upright trials,
F(1, 23) = 5.59, p < .05. Labels did not have a significant
effect on rotated-trial performance, F(1, 23) = 2.49, p > .13.

1251

Discussion
Although participants always knew the identity of targets
and distractors, hearing the distractors (and to a lesser extent, the target), labeled by their basic-level names facilitated perceptual processing. This effect was most pronounced for the more typical (upright) stimuli, suggesting
that it is specific to stimuli that most resemble members of

the named category rather than being a general effect of
hearing the name. While search times for the rotated stimuli
were longer, efficiency was comparable (see Table 1), and
similar to those in the number condition of Exp. 1. In contrast, Wang et al. (1994) found a twofold difference in
search slopes between upright and rotated stimuli. So, while
search for rotated numbers is minimally affected by on-line
labeling, it is nevertheless influenced by having participants
think of the unfamiliar symbols as rotated numbers.

General Discussion
Together, these experiments argue for a reassessment of
theories of visual processing that do not take meaningfulness into account (Duncan & Humphreys, 1989; e.g.,
Treisman & Gelade, 1980). The argument that perceptual
processing in visual search depends on more than visual
similarity has been recently made by Rauschenberger &
Yantis (2006) who argued that perceptual encoding depends
on stimulus redundancy. For instance, not all combinations
of a circle and a line are equally redundant. Combinations
that create the letter Q are processed more efficiently. A Q,
being a member of an implicit set of size 1, is highly redundant compared to the harder-to-process

—a member of a

(Garner & Clement, 1963). Inless redundant set
sofar as the redundancy framework is useful, it is clear that
redundancy cannot be reduced to visual features, but must
take meaningfulness into account. The present work shows
that controlling for all perceptual variables, meaningfulness
in its own right affects perceptual processing.
The dynamic nature of perceptual processing is further
highlighted by Experiment 2. Even though the upright numerical stimuli were both meaningful and familiar, on-line
presentation of labels further facilitated performance on the
search task. What is a possible mechanism by which entirely
redundant verbal information affects visual performance?
Numerous studies have shown that attention has an objectbased component (O'Craven, Downing, & Kanwisher, 1999;
Shomstein & Behrmann, 2006). Category labels, through
their associations with visual features typical of the named
category, may facilitate the response of object-selective regions of cortex which in turn can guide attention to the
members of the named category, possibly in parallel and
throughout the visual scene.

References
Cangelosi, A., Greco, A., & Harnad, S. (2000). From robotic toil to
symbolic theft: grounding transfer from entry-level to higher-level
categories. Connection Science, 12, 143-162.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting brain, body, and world together
again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Duncan, J. (1983). Category Effects in Visual-Search - A Failure to
Replicate the Oh-Zero Phenomenon. Perception & Psychophysics,
34, 221-232.
Duncan, J. & Humphreys, G. W. (1989). Visual-Search and Stimulus
Similarity. Psychological Review, 96, 433-458.
Frith, U. (1974). Curious Effect with Reversed Letters Explained by A
Theory of Schema. Perception & Psychophysics, 16, 113-116.

Garner, W. R. & Clement, D. E. (1963). Goodness of Pattern and Pattern Uncertainty. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
2, 446-452.
Goldstone, R. (1994). Influences of Categorization on Perceptual Discrimination. Journal of Experimental Psychology-General, 123,
178-200.
Goldstone, R. L. (1998). Perceptual learning. Annual Review of Psychology, 49, 585-612.
Grill-Spector, K. & Kanwisher, N. (2005). Visual recognition - As
soon as you know it is there, you know what it is. Psychological
Science, 16, 152-160.
Harnad, S. (2005). Cognition is categorization. In H.Cohen & C. Lefebvre (Eds.), Handbook of Categorization ( Elsevier.
James, W. (1890). Principles of Psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Holt.
Jonides, J. & Gleitman, H. (1972). Conceptual Category Effect in Visual Search - O As Letter Or As Digit. Perception & Psychophysics,
12, 457-460.
Levin, D. T., Takarae, Y., Miner, A. G., & Keil, F. (2001). Efficient
visual search by category: Specifying the features that mark the
difference between artifacts and animals in preattentive vision.
Perception & Psychophysics, 63, 676-697.
Lupyan, G. (2005). Carving Nature at its Joints and Carving Joints into
Nature: How Labels Augment Category Representations. In
A.Cangelosi, G. Bugmann, & R. Borisyuk (Eds.), Modelling Language, Cognition and Action: Proceedings of the 9th Neural Computation and Psychology Workshop. (pp. 87-96). Singapore: World
Scientific.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007). Language is
not just for talking: labels facilitate learning of novel categories.
Psychological Science, in press.
Malinowski, P. & Hubner, R. (2001). The effect of familiarity on visual-search performance: Evidence for learned basic features. Perception & Psychophysics, 63, 458-463.
O'Craven, K. M., Downing, P. E., & Kanwisher, N. (1999). fMRI
evidence for objects as the units of attentional selection. Nature,
401, 584-587.
Rauschenberger, R. & Yantis, S. (2006). Perceptual encoding efficiency in visual search. Journal of Experimental PsychologyGeneral, 135, 116-131.
Rumelhart, D. E., Smolensky, D. E., McClelland, J. L., & Hinton, G.
E. (1986). Parallel Distributed Processing Models of Schemata and
Sequential Thought Processes. In J.L.McClelland & D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing Vol II (pp. 7-57).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shomstein, S. & Behrmann, M. (2006). Cortical systems mediating
visual attention to both objects and spatial locations. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103, 11387-11392.
Spivey, M. J., Tyler, M. J., Eberhard, K. M., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2001). Linguistically mediated visual search. Psychological Science, 12, 282-286.
Taylor, T. L. & Hamm, J. (1997). Category effects in temporal visual
search. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology-Revue Canadienne de Psychologie Experimentale, 51, 36-46.
Treisman, A. M. & Gelade, G. (1980). Feature-Integration Theory of
Attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Wang, Q. Q., Cavanagh, P., & Green, M. (1994). Familiarity and PopOut in Visual-Search. Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 495-500.
Wolfe, J. M. (2001). Asymmetries in visual search: An introduction.
Perception & Psychophysics, 63, 381-389.
Wolfe, J. M. & Horowitz, T. S. (2004). What attributes guide the deployment of visual attention and how do they do it? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 495-501.
Wolfe, J. M., Stewart, M. I., Friedmanhill, S. R., & Oconnell, K. M.
(1992). The Role of Categorization in Visual-Search for Orientation. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 34-49.

1252

