UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reversal of the Alignment Effect: Influence of Visualization and Spatial Set Size

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02g606c7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Harrison, Anthony M.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reversal of the Alignment Effect: Influence of Visualization and Spatial Set Size
Anthony M Harrison (anh23@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center, 3939 O’Hara Street
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Abstract

handle the effect just as well and, in the case of
geometrically regular configurations, present the possibility
of multiple, non-viewer centered orientation preferences
(Shelton & McNamara, 2001). Ignoring the special case of
geometrically regular configurations, the two classes of
theories are equivalent in their predictions. In order to
differentiate these representational systems, one can look at
the processes that operate on the representations while
engaging in JRDs.

When asked to engage in judgments of relative direction
(JRD), subjects routinely show a performance benefit when
the judgments are aligned with the perspective used at
encoding. This alignment effect (Roskos-Ewoldsen,
McNamara, Shelton, & Carr, 1998) has recently been shown
to reverse itself when subjects rotate 180°(Waller, Montello,
Richardson, & Hegarty, 2002), consistent with the predictions
of egocentric spatial representation theories (Wang & Spelke,
2000). This study shows how the alignment effect is not only
dependent upon individual differences in the quality of a
subject’s target visualization, but also that this benefit for
latency, but not error, diminishes as target set size increases.
Keywords: spatial reasoning, representation, spatial updating,
alignment, visualization, set size.

Introduction
The nature of spatial memories and their underlying
representations have been the focus of research across many
domains including not only cognitive (e.g. Presson &
Montello, 1994; Shelton & McNamara, 2001; Wang &
Spelke, 2000), development (e.g. Gouteux & Spelke, 2001;
Newcombe, & Huttenlocher, 2000), and neuropsychological
(e.g. King, Burgess, Hartley, Vargha-Khadem, & O'Keefe,
2002; O'Keefe, & Nadel, 1978), but even robotics and
artificial intelligence (e.g. Burgess, Donnett, Jeffery, &
O'Keefe, 1999; Hiatt, Trafton, Harrison, & Schultz, 2004).
These studies consistently find that memories for the
locations of objects are orientation dependent. Spatial
judgments that are aligned with the encoding orientation are
performed faster and more accurately than those that are
misaligned (Roskos-Ewoldsen, McNamara, Shelton, & Carr,
1998). Investigations of orientation dependency often rely
upon judgments of relative direction (JRD). In this
methodology, subjects study a configuration of objects
(figure 1). They are asked to imagine themselves standing at
one target, facing a second, and then point to the third. The
standing/facing target pair defines an imaginary heading.
This imaginary heading can be aligned (i.e. parallel) to the
encoding orientation or misaligned. In the case illustrated in
figure 1, the JRD HYA would be faster and more accurate
than the contra-aligned (180° rotation) EAH judgment.
Any representational theory must be able to account for
this basic alignment effect. Egocentric theories, which
encode the objects individually relative to the viewer,
naturally encompass this phenomenon (e.g. Wang & Spelke,
2000). Allocentric theories, which represent the locations of
objects relative to an external, stable frame of reference,

Figure 1. First training configuration used in this study.
Left: aligned judgment HYA (i.e. “Imagine you’re standing
at H, looking at Y, point to A”). Right: contra-aligned
judgment EAH (i.e. “Imagine you’re standing at E, looking
at A, point to H”).
Egocentric representational theories necessarily depend
upon some form of spatial updating in order to maintain a
consistent representation of the spatial world across
movement and time (Wang & Spelke, 2000). This updating
can be performed automatically with subject movement by
path-integration (Klatzky, Loomis, Beall, Chance, &
Golledge, 1998; Presson & Montello, 1994) or through
effortful mental transformations (e.g. Shepard & Metzler,
1971). These processes operate on the individual egocentric
representations such that after real or imagined movement,
there should be some measurable representational change.
Theories of allocentric representation take a
fundamentally different tack on path-integration and mental
transformations. Instead of updating the object location
representations, they serve to anchor a representation of the
viewer within a stable allocentric network (e.g. King, et al.,
2002; Mou, McNamara, Valiquette, & Rump, 2004;
O'Keefe, & Nadel, 1978). An appropriate analogy would be
the “you are here” arrow often seen on map kiosks. As the
viewer moves or imagines moving through the space, the
actual allocentric spatial representation remains unchanged;
rather it is the viewer’s position within it that is updated.
With these computational differences in mind, attention
can be turned to a study conducted by Waller, Montello,

341

Richardson, & Hegarty (2002). They were interested in
exploring the changes to the alignment effect as a result of
viewer movement. In their third experiment they examined
the effect of a 180° rotation. After learning the target
locations, if subjects were asked to rotate and visualize the
locations of the objects relative to themselves (i.e. behind
themselves) the alignment effect reversed itself: that is,
contra-aligned judgments were now faster and more
accurate than aligned judgments. When subjects were asked
to rotate but ignore the locations of the objects relative to
themselves (i.e. visualize the original learning view) they
showed the standard alignment effect.
Interpreting these results from an egocentric perspective is
quite straightforward. When the subjects rotated, they
actively updated the locations of the targets in order to
maintain spatial consistency. Those that were asked to
visualize the new locations used the updated representations
in solving the JRD. Those that had been asked to ignore the
rotation merely retrieved and used the initially learned
representations.
As a class of theories, allocentric representations have
difficultly with this finding. Without a spatial updating
mechanism, the allocentric network doesn’t change with
subject movement. The alignment effect should be immune
to changes in the subject’s position or orientation. However,
two specific theories do address this phenomenon. May
(2004) proposes that this is not an example of updating but
rather interference between sensori-motor and cognitive
object location estimates. In other words, the greater the
difference between where you actually are and where you
imagine you are, the greater the performance decrement.
When subjects do not rotate, the interference will be greatest
for contra-aligned judgments. On the other hand, when
subjects do rotate interference will be greatest for aligned
judgments. This explains the rotate-update results quite
nicely, but not the rotate-ignore results, since for this group
the average disparity between actual and imagined locations
would be the same.
The model proposed by Mou, McNamara, Valiquette, &
Rump (2004) explicitly addresses the Waller, et al. (2002)
study. Their explanation rests upon two assumptions: 1)
judgments aligned with 180° are roughly equivalent to those
along 0° (i.e. aligned ≈ contra-aligned) and 2) the mental
transformation necessary to align the imagined and actual
headings introduces a roughly constant cost (as a function of
disparity). If the first assumption were true, the reversal seen
would be entirely due to the cost of mentally rotating in
order to align the imaginary heading with the actual
heading. Like May’s proposal, this does explain the rotateupdate but not rotate-ignore results for Waller, et al. (2002).
While the two previous allocentric theories make
promising steps towards explaining the reversal of the
alignment effect, there is an additional computational aspect
that can help tease apart the predictions. If path-integration
and mental transformations merely anchor the single
representation of the self within a larger allocentric network,
JRD performance should be relatively immune to set size

effects. However, if spatial updating transforms individual
egocentric representations, the efficiency of it should be
constrained by working memory limitations (Harrison &
Schunn, 2003; Hodgson & Waller, 2006; Wang, et al.,
2006). Most recently, Wang, et al. has shown that egocentric
pointing is sensitive to increases in set size for both latency
and error (2006). However, Hodgson and Waller (2006)
have only found latency effects across a much wider set size
range. They conclude that this latency effect is the result of
subjects engaging in mental transformations at testing and
not during the rotation itself.
If rotation induces updates to egocentric representations,
as suggested by the reversal of the alignment effect in JRDs,
then as the number of targets increases, the magnitude of the
alignment effect (or its reversal) should decrease both for
latency and pointing error. Specifically, while there may be
a main effect of set size (i.e. a serial search effect for
latency), there should also be a significant interaction
between set size, body position (stay/rotate) and imaginary
heading (aligned/contra-aligned).

Methods
This study was effectively a set size variant of Waller, et
al.’s third experiment (2002). Here subjects studied fourtarget configurations and made aligned and contra-aligned
JRDs. Participants made these judgments on two
configurations in each of three different conditions: stay,
rotate-update, and rotate-ignore. For rotate-update and
rotate–ignore conditions, participants turned 180° in place.
During rotate-update subjects were asked to visualize the
locations relative to their new position; that is, behind
themselves. For rotate-ignore trials, subjects were asked to
imagine that they had not moved at all.
This study introduced a few changes to Waller, et al.’s
methodology. First, a between subjects manipulation of set
size was added (4,6,8). Because of this, new configurations
had to be generated for the six and eight target conditions.
Geometrically regular configurations (i.e. grid-like
configurations used by Mou & McNamara (2002)) were
avoided in order to dissuade intrinsic alignments, which
may mask changes to the alignment effects. Additionally,
Waller, et al. (2002) had subjects point to each of the targets
blindfolded before engaging in the JRDs. This was done to
ensure that participants knew the target locations
sufficiently after studying. In this experiment, a training-tocriterion study phase was used instead to ensure participants
knew target locations. The egocentric pointing was moved
to the end of the JRD pointing block in case it provided an
additional rehearsal opportunity after rotating. Finally, the
rotate-ignore group was not included; all subjects were
asked to visualize the target locations relative to themselves
as they rotated.
Participants Sixty-one students (29 female, 32 male) from
Pittsburgh and Philadelphia universities participated for
course credit or pay1. All participants were tested
1

No differences in performance were found between the student
groups based on university or compensation.

342

individually in one-hour sessions. Two participants were
omitted due to equipment failure, leaving a total of 59
participants (29 female, 30 male; 20, 19 & 20 in set sizes 4,6
& 8 respectively).

the targets again. As before, if their errors exceeded 15° they
were provided corrective feedback, given 15 seconds
additional time to study before replacing the blindfold, and
asked to try again. Upon completion of the blindfoldedEGO block, the JRD task was explained to the participants.
They were instructed that they would be provided with three
target locations. They were to imagine themselves standing
at the first, facing the second, and then point to the third.
Like the EGO blocks, participants were asked to engage in
four sighted and blindfolded JRDs. In this case the error
threshold was a more liberal 45°. After completing the EGO
and JRD training, participants received additional
information. They were told that accuracy was more
important than speed, but that they would have 8 seconds to
complete each trial. If they were uncertain of their response,
they were told to just let the time expire.
Participants were next introduced to second and third
practice configuration blocks, which were structured like the
actual testing configurations. Subjects entered the
experiment area and began the study-phase of the block.
During the study phase, participants were given 30 seconds
to study the configuration (figures 1 & 2), after which time
they replaced the blindfold and were tested. The study-phase
repeated itself until participants passed this test. The test
prompted them to point to each of the targets randomly three
times. In order to pass the study test, their pointing error to
each target had to be less than 15°. Upon exiting the studyphase there was a 30 second retention interval followed by
the testing-phase. The testing-phase consisted of a block of
eight randomly ordered JRD trials followed by a block of
randomly ordered EGO trials (once per target) with a five
second delay between each judgment. The eight JRD trials
were composed of four aligned and four contra-aligned
trials. The second practice configuration block introduced
participants to the rotate instructions. Specifically, just
before the retention interval, participants were instructed to
turn 180° in-place. They were instructed to try to visualize
the locations of the objects relative to themselves as they
moved, since they would be asked to point to each of the
targets at the end of the configuration block.
After the third practice configuration, the experimenter
answered any questions and set up the first testing
configuration block.
Testing Having completed the training, participants were
exposed to the four testing configurations presented in
random order (two each in stay and rotate conditions). The
testing configuration blocks were structured almost
identically to the second and third practice configurations.
After the configuration was in place, the participant entered
the experiment area and began the study-phase. Actual study
times were different based on set size condition. Initial study
times for the three conditions were 30, 50, and 70 seconds
for set sizes 4, 6, and 8 respectively. If participants failed the
study test, the additional study time was always 30 seconds
regardless of set size. The testing-phase again consisted of
eight randomly ordered JRD trials (four aligned & contraaligned) followed by a block of EGO trials.
After the final configuration, participants filled out a brief
questionnaire asking for general demographic information
as well their subjective awareness of the frequency of

Materials Fifteen configurations of targets were generated
for this study (three training sets and four testing sets for
each set size). Configurations were assembled from 30.5cm
(1ft) tall orange cones with 7.6cm (3in) reflective letter
labels. Each configuration fit within a 3m square region,
with a minimum of 0.5m separating each target. The initial
pointing-training configuration was an 8-target diamond
pattern, labeled alphabetically clockwise, with the subject
position in the center. The remaining two training
configurations were based on scaled versions stimuli used in
Waller, et al. (2002). The testing configurations were
pseudo randomly generated by computer with the following
constraints: there must be at least two columns with two
targets each, but no row or column can contain more than
two targets. Labels were assigned to targets pseudo
randomly to prevent label repetition in consecutive
configurations and to minimize phonetic similarity of labels.

Figure 2. Sample training and testing target configurations.
Participants wore a pair of blacked-out wrap-around
sunglasses, a pair of headphones (for probe presentation),
and a high-precision joystick (for responding). Participants
were blindfolded for the entire study except when studying
the target configurations.
Procedure After obtaining informed consent subjects were
randomly assigned to one of three target set size groups
(4,6,8). Before testing, all participants completed the same
three training configuration blocks.
Training The first training configuration (figure
2:Pointing-Training) gave participants practice using the
joystick to respond and introduced them to the two pointing
tasks: egocentric pointing (EGO) and judgments of relative
direction (JRD). Subjects stood in the middle of an eighttarget diamond configuration and were first asked to point
(while sighted) to each of the targets in random order. For
each target, if their pointing error exceeded 15°, they were
provided with corrective feedback and asked to try again.
After completing the sighted-EGO block, participants
replaced the blindfold and were prompted to point to each of

343

various types of visual imagery, behaviors, and strategies.
Of greatest interest here were the visual imagery questions.
These questions were designed to probe the frequency of the
use of egocentric (i.e. “When remembering the location of a
target, I often saw it from the same perspective I studied it
from”) or allocentric (i.e. “When remembering the location
of a target, I often saw it from a top-down, map-like
perspective”) visualizations. The responses for each were
averaged to produce an estimated frequency of egocentric
and allocentric imagery use.

pointing error (F(1,53)=12.5, p<0.001). In this case, while
the alignment effect is present in the stay condition, when
subjects are asked to rotate, the differences between aligned
and contra-aligned judgments are eliminated (figure 3).

Results
Each subject attempted 32 different JRDs, however the
actual number completed might be less if the subject failed
to respond in the allotted time for each judgment2. The
reaction times and errors were averaged within each of the
four conditions of concern (alignment x position). If any cell
had less than four judgments, the data for the entire subject
was excluded. All subjects completed at least half of the
trials.
All of the analyses discussed here are based on repeatedmeasures ANOVA with viewer position (stay/rotate) and
imaginary alignment (aligned/contra-aligned) as withinsubject factors and target set size (4,6,8) as a betweensubjects factor. These analyses were applied to absolute
pointing error and reaction time. An additional betweensubjects factor, allocentric visualization, was also used and
will be discussed later.
While the alignment effect is solely dependent upon the
imagined perspective of the subject, its reversal is
additionally dependent upon the subject’s position (and the
subjective quality of their visualization). It is the significant
interactions that are of primary concern here. Therefore,
while all significant effects will be touched upon, greater
attention will be directed towards the interactions. Two
specific interactions are predicted: the interaction of position
and alignment, such that after rotation contra-aligned
judgments are faster and more accurate than aligned; and
the interaction of set size, position and alignment showing a
decrease in the alignment effect (reversed or not) with
increases in set size.

Figure 3. Latency (left) and error (right) as a function of
alignment (aligned/contra) and position (stay/rotate). After
rotating, the alignment effect is eliminated. Error bars are
95% CI.

Visualization and Alignment Reversal
While the previous results show a significant change due to
rotation, it is far from the alignment reversal found by
Waller, et al. (2002). It now becomes necessary to consider
subjects’ response to the visualization questions. While over
90% of the subjects reported frequently engaging in
egocentric visualizations, only half the subjects reported
using allocentric visualizations frequently. The subjects
were split into two groups: those that only used egocentric
visualizations (Ego) and those that used both egocentric and
allocentric visualizations (EgoAllo).
The interaction between position, alignment and
visualization reveals a significant reversal of the alignment
effect, but for Ego visualizers only. Those that engaged in
both egocentric and allocentric visualizations (EgoAllo) just
exhibit the basic alignment effect favoring aligned JRDs
regardless of position (figures 4 & 5). This interaction was
significant for both latency (F(1,53)=11.6, p<0.001) and
pointing error (F(1,53)=10.3, p<0.002).

Alignment Effect
A significant main effect was found for alignment for both
latency and pointing error. Aligned judgments were both
faster (3.8s vs. 4.5s; F(1,53)=62, p<0.001) and more
accurate (42.8° vs. 50.2°; F(1,53)=8.5, p<0.005) than
contra-aligned judgments. A significant main effect of
position on pointing error was also found, showing an
increase when subjects were asked to turn around
(F(1,53)=8.26, p<0.006); latency was unaffected. More
importantly, the interaction between alignment and position
was significant for both latency (F(1,53)=71.8, p<0.001) and
Figure 4. For latency, the alignment effect reversal (inverted
slope) is seen only for Ego-visualizers (left). EgoAllovisualizers (right) exhibit the basic alignment effect. Error
bars are 95% CI.

2

Since subjects were under time pressure to respond, a
speed/accuracy analysis was conducted on each subject’s raw data.
Average r=0.1, with no group (set size & visualization type) less
than r=-0.2.

344

If we exclude the set size 6 condition entirely, the
significant interaction is maintained (F(1,36)=5.1, p<0.03)
and is much easier to consider (figure 6). Here we can see
that when set size increases from four to eight, not only does
the basic alignment effect diminish for EgoAllo visualizers,
but that the reversal diminishes as well for Ego visualizers.
In other words, as set size increases the alignment effect
decreases.

Discussion
It is well established that spatial representations have
preferential orientations. If a spatial judgment is made that is
consistent with that preferential orientation, it will be faster
and more accurate than those that are inconsistent (RoskosEwoldsen, et al., 1998). Unfortunately, this basic
phenomenon does not serve to differentiate contemporary
theories of spatial representation; both allocentric (Mou &
McNamara, 2002) and egocentric (Waller, et al., 2002)
theories make similar predictions for this alignment effect.
However, they do differ when one asks how, if at all, the
alignment effect changes with movement and target set size.
The egocentric with spatial updating theory (Wang &
Spelke, 2000) predicts that as a viewer moves through their
environment, path-integration processes update the
egocentric representations effectively moving the preferred
orientation as well. In other words, the alignment effect
would always benefit the alignment that was consistent with
the viewer’s current body position. In the case of judgments
of relative direction, the alignment effect would favor
aligned judgments when the subject did not move. However,
if the subject rotated 180°, the alignment effect would
reverse favoring contra-aligned judgments. This was
precisely what seen for Ego-visualizers for both latency
(figure 4, left) and pointing error (figure 5, left). Since this
updating process will necessarily be computationally
bounded, it should have a capacity limitation. Wang, et al.
(2006) showed that both latency and error are adversely
affected by increases in target set size. The data presented
here only partially corroborates their results. While
increasing set sizes do decrease the magnitude of the
alignment effect, it is limited to just latency, pointing error
is unaffected by set size (figure 6). While this only partially
supports Wang, et al.’s theory, it is consistent with Hodgson
and Waller’s conclusions that the updating that is taking
place occurs at testing not during rotation (2006).
Allocentric theories take a different perspective. Here
path-integration processes serve to anchor the viewer within
a larger allocentric representation of the space (e.g. Sholl &
Kenny, 2005). As such, the alignment effect should remain
relatively unchanged as the subject moves – precisely what
was seen for the subjects who engaged in both egocentric
and allocentric visualizations (EgoAllo in figures 4 & 5,
right). Unfortunately, this particular design is unable to
address the interference account put forward by May (2004).
However, the results are consistent with Mou, et al.’s
proposal (2004). If aligned and contra-aligned judgments

Figure 5. For pointing error, again, only Ego-visualizers
show the reversal of the alignment effect. Error bars are
95% CI.

Set Size Effects
Having found the reversal of the alignment effect and its
dependence upon the quality of subjects’ visualizations, we
can now explore the effect of set size. At the grossest level
of analysis, there is a main effect of set size on latency
(F(2,53)=4.9, p<0.01). However, post-hoc analyses3 showed
that it was only that four targets were significantly faster
than six (p<0.01) and eight (p<0.002). The differences
between six and eight targets were insignificant (p>0.5).
There was no effect of set size on pointing error
(F(2,53)=1.4, p>0.2).
Except for the four-way interaction with position,
alignment and visualization, none of the other interactions
with set size were significant. Because of the complexity of
this interaction, it is presented in terms of difference scores
between the contra-aligned and aligned judgments and can
be viewed as the magnitude of the alignment effect. This
interaction was significant for latency (F(2,53)=4.9,
p<0.01), but not pointing error (F(2,53)=0.139, p>0.8).
An in-depth analysis of this interaction showed that it was
being unduly influenced by the unequal distribution of
visualizers in the set size 6 group (13:6, Ego:EgoAllo). As
the result of three slower subjects, the average latency for
contra-aligned stay judgments was significantly slower than
it was for the equivalent cell in the set size 8 group.

Figure 6. Decrease in the alignment effect (basic or
reversed) for latency with increases in set size. Error bars
are 95% CI.
3

Bonferroni correction

345

taking. Proceedings of the international conference of
cognitive modeling.
Hodgson, E. & Waller, D. (2006). Lack of set size effects in
spatial updating: evidence for offline updating. Journal of
experimental psychology: learning, memory and
cognition, 32(4), 854-866.
King, J. A., Burgess, N., Hartley, T., Vargha-Khadem, F., &
O'Keefe, J. (2002). The human hippocampus and
viewpoint dependence in spatial memory. Hippocampus,
12, 811-820.
Klatzky, R. L., Loomis, J. M., Beall, A. C., Chance, S. S., &
Golledge, R. G. (1998). Spatial updating of self-position
and orientation during real, imagined, and virtual
locomotion. Psychological science, 9(4), 293-298.
May, M. (2004). Imaginal perspective switches in
remembered environments: Transformation versus
interference accounts. Cognitive psychology, 48, 163-206.
Mou, W. & McNamara, T. P. (2002). Intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Journal of experimental
psychology: learning, memory, and cognition, 28(1), 162170.
Mou, W., McNamara, T. P., Valiquette, C. M., & Rump, B.
(2004). Allocentric and egocentric updating of spatial
memories. Journal of experimental psychology: learning,
memory, and cognition, 30, 142-157.
O'Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a
cognitive map. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Presson, C. C. & Montello, D. (1994). Updating after
rotational and translational body movements: coordinate
structure of perspective space. Perception, 23, 1447-1455.
Roskos-Ewoldsen, B., McNamara, T. P., Shelton, A. L., &
Carr, W. (1998). Mental representations of large and
small spatial layouts are orientation dependent. Journal of
experimental psychology: learning, memory and
cognition, 24(1), 215-226.
Shelton, A. L. & McNamara, T. P. (2001). Systems of
spatial reference in human memory. Cognitive
psychology, 43, 274-310.
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Sholl, M. J. & Kenny, R. J. (2005). Sources of interference
in spatial long-term memory retrieval. Spatial cognition
and computation, 5(2&3), 187-215.
Waller, D., Montello, D., Richardson, A. E., & Hegarty, M.
(2002). Orientation specificity and spatial updating of
memories for layouts. Journal of experimental
psychology: learning, memory and cognition, 28(6),
1051-1063.
Wang, R. F. & Spelke, E. (2000). Updating egocentric
representations in human navigation. Cognition, 77, 215250.
Wang, R. F., Crowell, J. A., Simons, D. J., Irwin, D. E.,
Kramer, A. F., Ambinder, M. S., et al. (2006). Spatial
updating relies on an egocentric representation of space:
Effects of the number of objects. Psychonomic bulletin &
review, 13, 281-286.

are roughly equivalent, then the reversal seen is actually just
the result of the cost of mental aligning the imagined
heading with the actual heading.
If, as allocentric theories proposal, the spatial
transformations merely act upon the representation of the
self within the allocentric network, then increases in set size
should have resulted in relatively little change. At most, one
might expect increases in latency, as serial search processes
would have to sift through more objects in search of a
specific target. However, the effect of the serial search
should be constant across conditions within any given set
size. In other words, while average latency would increase
with set size, the alignment effect should remain constant.
What we see in the data, however, is that the alignment
effect (difference between contra-aligned and aligned
judgments) is decreasing with set size (figure 6).

Conclusions
This study set out to further differentiate egocentric and
allocentric theories of spatial representation by looking at
the effect of set size on the alignment effect. While the
alignment effect was reversed after rotation, it was limited
to those subjects who reported only engaging in egocentric
visualizations. Participants who reported visualizing the
targets both egocentrically and allocentrically showed no
such reversal. Regardless of the nature of the alignment
effect, as the number of targets studied increased, the
magnitude of the alignment effect for latency decreased,
contrary to allocentric predictions. This set size effect might
account for the lack of updating seen in Mou, et al.’s nine
target experiments (2004). That set size affected only
latency and not pointing error suggests to some that the
updating taking place isn’t occurring during the rotation
itself, but rather at testing and is driven by conscious mental
transformations (Hodgson & Waller, 2006).

Acknowledgments
Work on this manuscript was partially supported by Grant
N00014-01-1-0321 from the U.S. Office of Naval Research
to Christian Schunn. Many thanks to Dario Salvucci for
temporarily housing this vagabond graduate student.

References
Burgess, N., Donnett, J. G., Jeffery, K. J., & O'Keefe, J.
(1999). Robotic and neuronal simulation of the
hippocampus and rat navigation. In N. Burgess, K. J.
Jeffery, & J. O'Keefe (Eds.), The hippocampal and
parietal foundations of spatial cognition. Oxford
University Press.
Gouteux, S. & Spelke, E. S. (2001). Children's use of
geometry and landmarks to reorient in an open space.
Cognition, 81, 119-148.
Harrison, A. M. & Schunn, C. D. (2003). ACT-R/S: Look
Ma, No "cognitive-map"!. International conference on
cognitive modeling, 5.
Hiatt, L. M., Trafton, J. G., Harrison, A. M., & Schultz, A.
C. (2004). A cognitive model of spatial perspective

346

