UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity and Proximity: When Does Close in Space Mean Close in Mind?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/77j5p801

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity and Proximity:
When Does Close in Space Mean Close in Mind?
Daniel Casasanto
(djc@psych.stanford.edu)
Stanford University, Department of Psychology,
420 Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
inequality) are violated for judgments about some abstract
relations. Despite these limitations, metric models have
been shown to generalize widely. They also have intuitive
appeal, perhaps because the technical metaphor of
‘similarity as distance’ used by scientists resonates with
highly conventionalized metaphors used in everyday
language. In English (and many other languages), when
speakers talk about similarity they often use words and
expressions that describe spatial relations. Things that are
similar along nearly any dimension can be described as
close, and things that are dissimilar as far. For example:

Abstract
People often describe things that are similar as close and
things that are dissimilar as far apart. Does the way people
talk about similarity reveal something fundamental about the
way they conceptualize it? Three experiments tested the
relationship between similarity and spatial proximity
predicted by Conceptual Metaphor Theory (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999). In all experiments, similarity ratings
for pairs of words or pictures varied as a function of how far
apart stimuli appeared on the computer screen. However, the
direction of influence differed depending on the type of
judgments participants made.
Stimuli presented closer
together were rated more similar during ‘conceptual’
judgments of abstract entities or unseen object properties, but
less similar during ‘perceptual’ judgments of visual
appearance. These contrasting results underscore the
importance of testing Conceptual Metaphor Theory
experimentally, and suggest that our sense of similarity arises
from our ability to combine available perceptual information
with stored knowledge of experiential regularities.
Keywords: Similarity, Space, Metaphor.

a. These two shades of blue aren’t identical,
but they’re close.
b. The opposing candidates’ stances on the
issue couldn’t be farther apart.
Is it possible that the way people talk about similarity
reveals something fundamental about the way they
conceptualize it? According to Conceptual Metaphor
Theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999), metaphors like
SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY are more than ways of
talking; they are windows onto the structure of mental
representations in abstract domains.
Our notion of
similarity is abstract, like our ideas of justice or love,
insomuch as it is (a) vaguely and variably defined, (b)
highly context dependent, and (c) mentalistic: lacking a
concrete referent in the physical world that can be perceived
through the senses. According to Conceptual Metaphor
Theory, abstract domains that are typically described using
spatial language are also conceptualized, in part, in terms of
space. Although for decades, arguments for Conceptual
Metaphor Theory depended primarily on linguistic data,
recently behavioral data have corroborated the claim that
spatial representations support our conceptualizations of
number (Dehaene, Bossini, & Giraux, 1993; Fisher, 2003),
time (Boroditsky, 2000, 2001; Casasanto & Boroditsky,
2003, in press; Casasanto, et al., 2004; Núñez & Sweetser,
2006; Torralbo, Santiago, & Lupiáñez, 2006), and other
abstract concepts including affect, goodness, power, rank,
and value (Casasanto & Lozano, 2006; in press; Meier &
Robinson, 2004; Schubert, 2005).
The experiments reported here tested the hypothesis that
our notion of similarity depends, in part, on mental
representations of physical distance. In three experiments,
participants rated the similarity of pairs of words or pictures,
which were presented at varying distances on the computer

Introduction
How do people judge the similarity of words, objects, or
ideas? Despite concerns about its usefulness as a construct
(Goodman, 1972), similarity remains the focus of much
psychological research, perhaps because our sense of
similarity seems intimately linked with our capacity to
generalize, to form categories, and to individuate concepts
(Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993). Traditionally,
cognitive psychologists have pursued two types of
computational models of similarity: metric models (e.g.,
Shepard, 1987), and set-theoretic models (e.g., Tversky,
1977). In metric models, similarity is represented as
distance in a multidimensional mathematical space, which is
thought to correspond to a ‘psychological space’. In settheoretic models such as Tversky’s (1977) contrast model,
the similarity of two items is a linear combination of
measures of their common and distinctive features.
Metric models have been criticized, notably by Tversky
(1977), for two reasons: (a) they are better at capturing
similarity between stimuli that vary quantitatively along
simple, continuous, perceptual dimensions (e.g., color,
musical pitch) rather than similarity between complex
objects or ideas which may differ qualitatively in terms of
the presence or absence of features (cf., Shepard, 1987), and
(b) empirical data show that fundamental assumptions of
metric models (i.e., minimality, symmetry, triangle

155

assignment of word pairs to conditions was counterbalanced
across subjects.

screen (i.e., close, medium, or far apart). A simple
prediction was made based on the distance metaphors for
similarity that are used in metric psychological models of
similarity and in everyday language: if people think about
similarity the way they talk about it (i.e., similar things are
close), then participants should judge stimuli to be more
similar when they are presented close together on the screen
than when they are presented far apart.

Results and Discussion
Results of Experiment 1 showed that stimuli were judged to
be more similar when they were presented closer together
than when they were farther apart (fig. 1). Z-scored
similarity ratings were compared using one-way ANOVA.
Ratings differed significantly across conditions, both by
subjects (F1(2,52) = 3.45, p<.04) and by items (F2(2,105) =
4.49, p<.02). A one-tailed paired-samples t-test showed a
difference between Close and Far trials when analyzed by
subjects (difference = 0.28, t(26) = 2.22, p<.02 uncorrected,
p=.05 after Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons).
A one-tailed independent-samples t-test confirmed this
difference between Close and Far trials when analyzed by
items (difference = 0.24, t(36) = 2.74, p<.004 uncorrected,
p=.01 after Bonferroni correction).
The finding that stimuli were rated more similar when
presented closer together is consistent with predictions
based on Conceptual Metaphor Theory. One concern in
interpreting these results was that some of the word pairs
were judged to have very low similarity in all conditions,
and that the influence of proximity may have been restricted
to these pairs for which word meanings were difficult to
compare. However, when data were mean-split, the same
qualitative relationship between similarity and proximity
was found for high-similarity and low-similarity pairs,
analyzed separately.

Experiment 1: Abstract Nouns
Experiment 1 tested whether participants would rate pairs of
abstract nouns to be more similar in meaning when they
appeared closer together on the screen. Abstract nouns
(e.g., Grief, Justice, Hope) were chosen as stimuli for this
first test of the relation between similarity and proximity
because Conceptual Metaphor Theory posits that the
meanings of abstract concepts (not all concepts) are
structured metaphorically.
Therefore, the predicted
influence of space on similarity may be most evident for
similarity judgments about abstract entities that cannot be
perceived directly through the senses.

Methods
Participants 27 native English speaking participants from
the Stanford University community performed this
experiment, in exchange for payment.
Materials 72 abstract nouns (concreteness rating < 400)
between 4 and 10 letters long were selected from the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database.
Nouns were randomly
combined into 36 pairs (e.g., Grief-Justice, Memory-Hope,
Sympathy-Loyalty). Words were presented on an iMac
monitor (724 x 768 pixels resolution, 72 dpi) in 14 point
courier font.

Normalized similarity rating

0.25

Procedure Participants viewed word pairs in randomized
order, one word at a time, and rated their similarity in
meaning on a scale of 1 (not at all similar) to 9 (very
similar). Before the first word appeared, a pair of empty
‘picture frames’ (150 pixels wide, 50 pixels high) appeared
on the vertical midline of the screen for 500 ms. The
centers of the frames were separated horizontally by 150
pixels in the Close condition, 300 pixels in the Medium
condition, and 450 pixels in the Far condition. Pairs of
Close, Medium, and Far picture frames appeared in one of
four positions on the far left, middle left, middle right, or far
right of the screen. This variation in position was
orthogonal to the variation in distance between words, and
was intended to reduce demand characteristics of the task.
After 500 ms, the first word in each pair appeared for 2000
ms in the leftmost picture frame, then disappeared. After a
500 ms inter-stimulus interval, the second word of the pair
appeared in the rightmost picture frame for 2000 ms. The
words of each pair were presented serially rather than
simultaneously to rule out low-level explanations for any
observed differences in similarity ratings across conditions
due to differences in saccadic activity or sharing of visual
attention. Participants saw each word pair once, and the

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
-0.25

Close

Medium

Far

Figure 1. Similarity ratings for pairs of abstract nouns
varied significantly as a function of their spatial separation
on the screen, consistent with predictions based on
Conceptual Metaphor Theory. Error bars indicate s.e.m.

Experiment 2: Unfamiliar Faces
Experiment 2 tested whether the results of Experiment 1
would generalize to a different type of stimulus for which
similarity had to be computed along different dimensions.
To judge the similarity of the abstract nouns pairs,
participants had to retrieve word meanings from memory,
and to reason about unseen properties of abstract entities.

156

tailed independent-samples t-test confirmed this difference
between Close and Far trials when analyzed by items
(difference = 0.12, t(118) = 2.45, p<.02 uncorrected, p=.05
after Bonferroni correction).
Whereas in Experiment 1 closer stimuli were judged to be
more similar, in Experiment 2 closer stimuli were judged to
be less similar. Thus, Experiment 2 results not only fail to
show an influence of proximity on similarity in the direction
that was predicted based on Conceptual Metaphor Theory
(i.e. closer = more similar), they also show a highly
significant effect of proximity on similarity judgments in the
exact opposite direction.

Because the appearance of words is arbitrarily related to
their meaning, the visual stimuli themselves provided little
information (if any) that was relevant to the similarity
judgment.
Would distance still influence similarity
judgments as in Experiment 1 even if more of the relevant
information were given perceptually, in the visual stimuli,
themselves? According to Conceptual Metaphor Theory, it
should.
Although ‘concrete’ entities that can be perceived directly
are not posited to be structured metaphorically (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1999), people use the SIMILARITY IS
PROXIMITY metaphor to describe similarity between both
abstract and concrete things, alike: just as two abstract
words can be said to be close in meaning, two lines can be
close in length, two paint chips can be close in color, two
shirts can be close in size, and two faces can be close in
appearance. The relation between similarity and proximity
in linguistic metaphors generalizes broadly (so broadly, in
fact, that it is difficult to imagine a case in which similarity
cannot be described in terms of distance). The same
metaphor can describe similarity along both conceptual and
perceptual dimensions. Therefore, if people conceptualize
similarity the way they talk about it, the same prediction
about the relation between similarity and proximity should
hold for both conceptual judgments about abstract entities
and perceptual judgments about concrete entities.
For Experiment 2, participants judged the similarity of
pairs of unfamiliar faces.
Whereas participants in
Experiment 1 were instructed to judge similarity of abstract
words based on their meanings, participants in Experiment 2
were instructed to judge similarity of faces based on their
visual appearance.

Normalized similarity rating

0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
-0.05
-0.10
-0.15

Close

Medium

Far

Figure 2. Similarity ratings for pairs of faces varied
significantly as a function of their spatial separation on the
screen, but contrary to predictions based on Conceptual
Metaphor Theory. Error bars indicate s.e.m.

Experiment 3: Object Pictures

Methods

Why did proximity have opposite effects on similarity
ratings for abstract nouns and unfamiliar faces?
Experiments 1 and 2 differed both in the kind of stimulus
participants judged (i.e., verbal vs. pictorial) and in the kind
of judgments they made (i.e., ‘conceptual’ judgments based
on meaning vs. ‘perceptual’ judgments based on visual
appearance). Experiment 3 evaluated whether the results of
Experiments 1 and 2 differed because of the type of
stimulus or the type of judgment.
For Experiment 3, different judgments were made on the
same set of stimulus pictures, which depicted common
objects. Half of the participants were instructed to judge
their similarity in visual appearance (a perceptual
judgment), and the other half to judge their similarity in
function or use (a conceptual judgment). If the difference
between the results of Experiments 1 and 2 was due to a
difference in the type of experimental materials used, then
results of both Experiments 3a and 3b should resemble
those of Experiment 2, in which pictorial stimuli were used:
closer stimuli should be judged to be less similar, regardless
of the type of judgment participants made. By contrast, if
the difference between results of the first two experiments
was due to participants judging abstract, unseen properties
of the stimuli in Experiment 1 but judging concrete,

Participants 33 native English speaking participants from
the MIT community performed this experiment, in exchange
for payment.
Materials and Procedure 60 pairs of unfamiliar faces
were constructed from a database of University of
Pennsylvania ID card photos. Half were male-male and half
were female-female pairs. Faces pairs were presented
exactly as word pairs were presented in Experiment 1, with
the following exception: the height of the ‘picture frames’
was changed to accommodate the size of the photos (150
pixels wide by 200 pixels high).

Results and Discussion
Results of Experiment 2 showed that stimuli were judged to
be more similar when they were presented farther apart
than when they were presented closer together (fig. 2). Zscored similarity ratings were compared using one-way
ANOVA. Ratings differed significantly across conditions,
both by subjects (F1(2,64) = 3.61, p<.04) and by items
(F2(2,177) = 3.29, p<.04). A two-tailed paired-samples ttest showed a difference between Close and Far trials when
analyzed by subjects (difference = 0.16, t(32) = 2.90, p<.007
uncorrected, p=.02 after Bonferroni correction). A two-

157

after Bonferroni correction), whereas Close trials were rated
significantly less similar than Far trials during perceptual
judgments (Experiment 3b: difference = .10, t(58) = 2.56,
p<.02 uncorrected, p=.03 after Bonferroni correction).
Results of Experiment 3 suggest that the contrasting
effects of proximity on similarity judgments found for
Experiments 1 and 2 were not due to superficial differences
between the verbal and pictorial stimuli. Rather, the effect
of proximity on similarity depends on the kind of judgment
participants make: conceptual judgments about abstract
entities or unseen object properties vs. perceptual judgments
about visible stimulus properties.

perceptible properties of the stimuli in Experiment 2, then
results of Experiment 3a (conceptual judgment) should be
similar to those of Experiment 1 (i.e., closer stimuli should
be judged more similar), whereas results of Experiment 3b
(perceptual judgment) should be similar to those of
Experiment 2 (i.e., closer stimuli should be judged less
similar).

Methods
Participants 40 participants performed Experiment 3a
and an additional 40 performed Experiment 3b, in exchange
for payment. All were native English speakers from the
MIT community.

Normalized similarity rating

Materials and Procedure 30 pairs of objects were
constructed from the Snodgrass & van der Wart line
drawings. Objects were paired only within semantic
categories (e.g., tools, clothing, furniture) to facilitate
meaningful comparisons. Object pairs were presented as in
previous experiments, with the following exception: stimuli
appeared at one of two distances on the screen (instead of
three), to maximize the difference between the Close
condition, in which the centers of pictures were separated by
150 pixels, and the Far condition in which the centers of
pictures were separated by 600 pixels.

0.10

Close
Far

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.10

Conceptual
Judgment

Results and Discussion
Results showed that during conceptual judgments
(Experiment 3a), closer stimuli were judged to be more
similar (Fig. 4, left). By contrast, during perceptual
judgments (Experiment 3b), closer stimuli were judged to
be less similar (Fig. 4, right). Similarity ratings were zscored, and a mixed ANOVA with Distance (Close, Far) as
a within-subjects factor and Judgment Type (Perceptual,
Conceptual) as a between-subjects factor showed a
significant 2-way interaction by subjects, (F1(1,78) = 12.23,
p<0.001) with no main effects. This significant interaction
was confirmed in 2-way ANOVA by items, with Distance
(Close, Far) and Judgment Type (Perceptual, Conceptual) as
between-subjects factors (F2(1,116) = 12.12, p<0.001), with
no main effects.
Planned pair-wise comparisons tested the difference
between Close and Far trials in Experiments 3a and 3b, by
subjects and by items. Two-tailed paired samples t-tests
showed that Close trials were rated significantly more
similar than Far trials during conceptual judgments
(Experiment 3a: difference = .10, t(39) = 2.59, p<.02
uncorrected, p=.03 after Bonferroni correction), whereas
Close trials were rated significantly less similar than Far
trials during perceptual judgments (Experiment 3b:
difference = .09, t(39) = 2.46, p<.02 uncorrected, p=.04
after Bonferroni correction) when analyzed by subjects.
Two-tailed independent-samples t-tests confirmed that this
same pattern was found when data were analyzed by items:
Close trials were rated significantly more similar than Far
trials during conceptual judgments (Experiment 3a:
difference = .10, t(58) = 2.35, p<.03 uncorrected, p=.04

Perceptual
Judgment

Figure 3. Results of Experiment 3a (left) and 3b (right).
Similarity ratings for pairs of object pictures varied
significantly as a function of their spatial separation on the
screen. For the same set of stimuli, the relation between
similarity and proximity was consistent with predictions
based on Conceptual Metaphor Theory during Conceptual
Judgments (Experiment 3a), but inconsistent during
Perceptual Judgments (Experiment 3b). Bars indicate s.e.m.

General Discussion
Experiments 1-3 tested whether similarity ratings for words
and pictures vary as a function of how far apart stimuli
appear on a computer screen. Results showed that physical
proximity influenced similarity judgments significantly in
all experiments, but the direction of influence varied
according to the type of judgment participants made. Closer
stimuli were rated more similar during ‘conceptual’
judgments of abstract entities or unseen object properties
(Experiments 1 and 3a), whereas closer stimuli were rated
less similar during ‘perceptual’ judgments of the visual
appearance of faces and objects (Experiments 2 and 3b).
Conceptual judgments followed the simplest prediction
based on the SIMILARITY IS PROXIMITY metaphor
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999): when stimuli appeared
closer in physical space they were judged to be ‘closer’ in
participants’ mental similarity space, as well. Perceptual
judgments showed the opposite pattern, however, contrary
to predictions based on linguistic metaphors for similarity.

158

category tend to be found close together, and also tend to be
similar to one another compared with things that belong to
different categories. Given that we are continually exposed
to such organization, and that recognizing clumpiness may
be useful for reasoning about our environment, it seems
plausible that people implicitly learn and use a set of
relations that could be called The Clumpiness Principle
(building on Wertheimer’s principles of proximity and
similarity): Proximity α Similarity α Category Membership.
Tenenbaum & Griffiths (2001) proposed a Bayesian
model according to which the similarity of two items is
computed in terms of the probability that they are members
of the same category (i.e., drawn from the same statistical
distribution). In their model, the probability that items share
category membership is proportional to the likelihood that
they do given the information present in the stimuli, per se,
and also proportional to the probability that they do given
the observer’s prior experience and stored knowledge. If we
assume this generalization-based view of similarity, then in
the present experiments participants’ estimates of the
probability that stimulus items belonged to the same
category (and, therefore, of their similarity) depended in
part on perceptible information given in the stimulus, and in
part on their implicit knowledge of the Clumpiness
Principle. In the case of conceptual similarity judgments,
little relevant perceptual information was available in the
stimulus items, so participants’ heuristic use of the
Clumpiness Principle was evident: greater proximity was
used as an index of more probable shared category
membership and of greater similarity. In the case of the
perceptual similarity judgments, however, participants’
estimates of the probability that stimulus items belonged to
the same category were likely to depend more strongly on
the perceptible information given in the stimuli, themselves,
which overwhelmed any influence of the Clumpiness
Principle.
On this proposal, when perceptible information was
available in the stimuli (and was relevant to the task),
participants used it. Participants may have judged closer
stimuli to be less similar in Experiments 2 and 3b because
proximity facilitates noticing small differences during
perceptual judgments that might go unnoticed for stimuli
presented farther apart1. By contrast, when perceptual
information wasn’t available in the stimuli (in Experiment
1) or wasn’t relevant to the required judgment (in
Experiment 3a), then participants’ judgments reflected their
heuristic use of the knowledge that proximity correlates
with category membership and with similarity.
Thus, it may be possible to account for the contrasting
effects of proximity on conceptual and perceptual similarity

Can these results be accommodated within a Conceptual
Metaphor framework? The outcome of Experiments 1-3 is
broadly consistent with the claim that abstract entities are
mentally represented metaphorically, whereas concrete
entities that can be perceived directly are represented nonmetaphorically, on their own terms (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980, 1999). Still, Conceptual Metaphor Theory is hardpressed to account for the difference between the effects of
space on perceptual vs. conceptual judgments, given that the
same spatial metaphors for similarity can be used to
describe both low-level perceptual properties and high-level
conceptual properties: similarities in appearance, function,
or meaning can all be described using words like close and
far. Thus, linguistic metaphors suggest that the same
conceptual metaphor underlies our notions of both
perceptual and conceptual similarity.
Although
Experiments 1 and 3a supported the metaphor-based
prediction that stimuli presented closer in space would be
judged to be more similar, Experiments 2 and 3b showed
the opposite pattern of results. Overall these studies pose a
challenge to Conceptual Metaphor Theory, and suggest that
we cannot necessarily infer relations between similarity and
proximity in people’s nonlinguistic mental representations
from patterns in metaphorical language.
Previous studies have also reported positive associations
between proximity and conceptual similarity for both
abstract and relatively concrete entities. Sweetser (1998)
observed that speakers sometimes bring their hands closer
together in space to indicate the similarity of abstract ideas
via spontaneous co-speech gestures. Goldstone (1994)
asked participants to arrange various tokens of the letter “A”
on the computer screen such that more similar tokens were
positioned closer in space. Importantly, although in
principle similarity between tokens of the letter “A” could
depend on perceptual properties of the stimuli, Goldstone
noted that when participants were asked to indicate
similarity via spatial proximity they focused on “abstract
commonalities” between tokens (pg. 385).
Whereas
participants’ non-spatial same/different judgments of the
“A” stimuli were driven by perceptual similarity, instructing
participants to arrange stimuli according to the rule that
‘closer = more similar’, led them to “tap into a level of
similarity that is relatively cognitive rather than perceptual”
(pg. 385). This complex relationship between spatial
proximity, conceptual similarity, and perceptual similarity
appears to have been unexpected in the Goldstone study, as
it was in the present study.
Conceptual Metaphor Theory does not predict the pattern
of data reported here, and it is possible that no current
theory of similarity predicts it a priori.
However,
considering the computation of similarity to be a rational
statistical inference based on regularities in our environment
may help to situate the observed pattern of results in an
ecological framework (Anderson, 1991; Shepard, 1987;
Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001). As Gestalt psychologists
observed, the world appears to be pervasively clumpy
(Wertheimer, 1923/1939). Things that belong to the same

1

Since all stimuli were presented serially, this explanation requires
that proximity facilitates noticing small differences even when
members of a pair are never seen simultaneously. Although further
research is needed to test this assumption, this seems plausible
given evidence that the location of stimuli is automatically indexed
in memory and accessed during retrieval, even when this spatial
information is task-irrelevant (Richardson & Spivey, 2000).

159

Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Chicago.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (In Press). Time in the
mind: Using space to think about time. Cognition.
Casasanto, D., & Lozano, S. (2006). Metaphor in the mind
and hands. in Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, BC.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of pairity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122(3), 371-396.
Fischer, M. (2003). Cognitive representation of negative
numbers. Psychological Science, 14(3), 278-282.
Goldstone, R. (1994). An efficient method for obtaining
similarity data. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
& Computers, 26(4), 381-386.
Goodman, N. (1972). Seven strictures on similarity. In N.
Goodman (Ed.), Problems and Projects (pp. 437-447).
New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical
structure of the human conceptual system. Cognitive
Science, 4, 195-208 .
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Medin, D., Goldstone, R., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respects
for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2), 254-278.
Meier, B., & Robinson, M. (2004). Why the sunny side is
up: Associations between affect and vertical position.
Psychological Science, 15(4), 243-247
Núñez, R., & Sweetser, E. (2006). Looking ahead to the
past: Convergent evidence from Aymara language and
gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30(3), 401-450.
Richardson, D., & Spivey, M. (2000). Representation,
space, and Hollywood Squares: Looking at things that
aren't there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269-295.
Schubert, T. (2005). Your highness: Vertical positions as
perceptual symbols of power. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 89(1), 1-21.
Shepard, R. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization in psychological science. Science,
237(4820), 1317-1323.
Sweetser, E. (1998). Regular metaphoricity in gesture:
Bodily-based models of speech interaction. Paper
presented at the 16e Congrès International des
Linguistes.
Tenenbaum, J., & Griffiths, T. (2001). Generalization,
similarity, and Bayesian inference. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 629-640.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupiáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30(4), 745-757.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of Similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), 327-352.
Wertheimer, M. (1923/1938). Laws of Organization in
Perceptual Forms. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A source book of
Gestalt psychology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

judgments if the computation of similarity is considered to
be a process of rational inference that optimally combines
perceptible information at hand with stored knowledge of
experiential regularities (Anderson, 1991; Shepard, 1987;
Tenenbaum & Griffiths, 2001).

Conclusions
Three experiments showed that similarity ratings for pairs of
words and pictures were affected systematically by their
spatial separation on the computer screen. Our judgment of
similarity appears to depend, in part, on our experience of
spatial proximity, but not always as predicted by spatial
metaphors in language. When participants made conceptual
judgments about abstract entities or unseen object
properties, stimuli presented closer together were judged to
be more similar than stimuli presented farther apart,
consistent with predictions based on Conceptual Metaphor
Theory. By contrast, when participants made perceptual
judgments about visible stimulus properties, stimuli
presented closer together were judged to be less similar than
stimuli presented farther apart, contrary to predictions based
on linguistic metaphors.
These findings underscore the importance of testing
Conceptual Metaphor Theory experimentally, and suggest
that it is not possible to infer the relationship between
similarity and proximity in people’s nonlinguistic mental
representations based solely on patterns in metaphorical
language. Results encourage further exploration of how
spatial proximity influences similarity judgments, and more
generally, of how people integrate available perceptual
information with their implicit knowledge of experiential
regularities during similarity judgments.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Herb Clark for helpful comments on an earlier
draft of this manuscript. This research was supported in part
by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to the author and
by NRSA post-doctoral fellowship #F32MH072502.

References
Anderson, J. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98(3), 409-429.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
Mandarin and English speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2003). Do we think about
time in terms of space? in Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Boston.
Casasanto, D., Boroditsky, L., Phillips, W., Greene, J.,
Goswami, S., Bocanegra-Thiel, S., et al. (2004). How
deep are effects of language on thought? Time estimation
in speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish. in

160

