UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Speed Accommodation in Context: Context Modulation of the Effect of Speech Rate on
Response Speed

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vc028rw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Shintel, Hadas
Nusbaum, Howard C.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Speed Accommodation in Context:
Context Modulation of the Effect of Speech Rate on Response Speed
Hadas Shintel (hadas@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience,
The University of Chicago
Chicago IL 60637 USA

Howard C. Nusbaum (h-nusbaum@uchicago.edu)
Department of Psychology and Center for Cognitive and Social Neuroscience,
The University of Chicago
Chicago IL 60637 USA

recognize that a picture represents an object that had been
mentioned in a preceding sentence when motion information
implied in speech rate (fast vs. slow) matched the motion
information implied in the picture (object in motion vs. at
rest). Acoustically-conveyed motion information affected
listeners even though it was not required for the recognition
task, and even though its use did not confer any
performance benefit.
These findings suggest that, capitalizing on audio-visual
cross-modal correspondences, acoustic properties of speech
can provide non-auditory referential information. While
these experiments focused on a referential function of crossmodal analog mappings of information unto acoustic
properties of speech, it is possible that such analog
mappings can also have a non-referential function.
Previous research has supported the idea of cross-modal
stimulus-response correspondences and has shown that
auditory or visual stimuli can prime responses that share a
compatible feature, for example corresponding duration or
intensity (Kunde & Stöcker, 2002; Mattes, Leuthold, &
Ulrich, 2002; Romaiguère, Hasbroucq, Possamaï, & Seal,
1993). These findings raise the possibility that, drawing on
stimulus-response correspondences, acoustic properties of
speech may also affect listeners’ response, not just their
representations of external referents. For example a fast or a
slow speech stimulus may prime speed-corresponding
responses.
In addition to stimulus-response compatibility effects,
considerable evidence suggests that people often
unconsciously mimic each other or match their behavior to
the behavior of their interaction partner (Chartrand & Bargh,
1999; Dijksterhuis & Bargh, 2001). The tendency to match
the behavior of one’s conversational partner was observed
across a wide range of speech-related behaviors such as
accents (Giles & Powsland, 1975; Giles, Coupland, &
Coupland, 1991), tone of voice (Neumann & Strack, 2000),
speech rate (Webb 1969; Webb 1972), as well as across
other linguistic levels (see Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
Although the effect of the perception of a stimulus on

Abstract
Previous research has shown that analog mapping of
information unto acoustic properties of speech can affect
listeners’ interpretation of described objects and events. In
this paper, we examine whether the effect of analog acoustic
variation on listeners is governed by intrinsic acoustic
properties of the stimulus, through direct priming of listeners’
concepts or behavior. For example, fast speech may always
prime the concept of speed or a faster response. Alternatively,
the effect of analog acoustic variation may be mediated by a
context-dependent interpretation of the acoustic properties.
For example, the effect of speech rate may depend on how
listeners construe the meaning of a fast or a slow speech rate
in the immediate linguistic context. Our results suggest that
speech rate can have an effect on listeners’ response speed,
but only in contexts that supported the interpretation of
speech rate as conveying response speed relevant information.
Keywords: Prosody; Perception- behavior link; Language
comprehension.

Introduction
Numerous studies have shown that prosodic patterns (see
Cutler, Dahan, & Van Donselaar, 1997, for a review) can be
meaningful to listeners and systematically affect
comprehension. Recently, we have shown that, in addition
to conveying information about the speaker’s internal state
(such as emotion or certainty) or the message (syntactic
structure or discourse status), prosody can convey
referential information through an analog mapping of
information about object properties onto acoustic properties
of speech (Shintel, Nusbaum, & Okrent, 2006). For
example, speakers spontaneously modulated their
fundamental frequency (the acoustic correlate of pitch)
when describing upward or downward motion, analogically
mapping pitch height and vertical direction; speakers
modulated their speech rate when describing fast or slow
motion, analogically mapping rate of articulation to rate of
motion. Such analog acoustic information affected
comprehension even when it was irrelevant for listeners’
task and was not correlated with task-relevant information
(Shintel & Nusbaum, in press); listeners were faster to

641

the relevant scenarios, but not following the irrelevant
scenarios.

subsequent behavior may be modulated by the degree of
similarity between the perceived stimulus and the relevant
behavior, speed accommodation may occur even when
listeners respond to a speech stimulus with a non-verbal
behavior.
A potential effect on listeners’ behavior also raises the
issue of the process underlying the effect of acoustically
conveyed analog information. Explanations of compatibility
phenomena, as well as unintentional mimicry, have called
upon the idea of shared representations, or common coding,
for perception and action (see Chartrand & Bargh, 1999;
Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001; Pickering
& Garrod, 2004). However, perception may affect behavior
through different processes. One possibility is that stimulus
features prime response features through a direct, automatic,
context-independent priming process. For example, in our
previous studies a fast speech rate may directly prime the
concept of a fast speed, and in this way prime a
representation of the object as being in motion. Thus, the
effect of analog acoustic variation may be determined by
intrinsic acoustic properties of the stimulus itself. An
alternative possibility is that the effect of a fast-spoken
utterance is not a direct consequence of perceiving fast
speech rate per se, but is mediated by a context-dependent
interpretation of the modulation of speech rate; a particular
speech rate may convey different information in different
contexts and have different effects on listeners’
representations and responses.

Context scenario in both Relevance conditions
(parts in bold appeared only in the relevant condition)

James was very proud of his daughter. As a child she
was exceptionally bright, but even he and her mother
were surprised when she finished her PhD at such a
young age and went on to become a neurology professor
at a distinguished university. James was particularly
excited when the results of her last study, investigating
the neurotransmitters involved in the brain’s recovery
following a stroke, were reported in the science section
of the New York Times. Not only that, but she was about
to be interviewed on the 7 o’clock evening news on TV.
She told him it would only be a short interview, no
longer than a couple of minutes. James made sure he was
home to watch the interview. Suddenly he noticed that
it was already 7 and he reached for the remote
control to turn on the TV.
Figure 1: An example of one experimental scenario

Method
Participants
45 University of Chicago students contributed usable data
(37 participated in the experiment and 8 in a control
conditions, see Design and Procedure). All participants had
native fluency in English and no reported history of speech
or hearing disorders.

The current experiment
To investigate these hypotheses, we presented participants
with written short scenarios. Some scenarios described the
protagonist in a situation that required him/ her to quickly
perform a specific action, for example submitting an online
application right before the deadline, thereby making speedrelated information relevant. Other scenarios did not have
this implication, for example there would be no mention of a
strict deadline approaching (relevant and irrelevant
scenarios respectively). Each scenario was followed by a
recorded instruction to the participant to press different
keyboard keys, spoken at a fast or at a slow speech rate.
If speech rate affects listeners’ response speed, and if
this effect reflects direct priming due to the perception of
intrinsic properties of the stimulus, listeners should be faster
to respond to fast-spoken instructions regardless of the
context; there should be no interaction between the speech
rate with which the instruction is given and the type of
context scenario that preceded it. On the other hand, if
listeners’ response speed depends not only on the speech
rate in itself, but on the information it carries given the
immediate context (e.g. a fast spoken instruction is more
likely be treated as implying urgency when it is preceded by
a scenario in which speed of action is made highly relevant),
we would expect listeners to respond faster to fast-spoken
instructions compared to slow-spoken instructions following

Materials
Twenty short scenarios served as the experimental
materials. Each scenario appeared in two versions: relevant
scenarios described the protagonist as being in a situation
where she/ he needed to quickly perform a specific action,
(typically involving pressing some kind of button, for
example ringing a doorbell or pressing an elevator button),
irrelevant scenarios were constructed by omitting the last 12 sentences from each relevant scenario, so that they did not
imply a need to quickly perform an action. Twenty
additional scenarios served as filler scenarios.
Recorded sentences were produced by a male speaker.
Test instructions consisted of five imperative sentences,
each with a different keyboard key name (e.g. End or Esc)
embedded in the phrase Press the ___ key. Each sentence
was recorded by a male speaker spoken at a fast speech rate
(mean duration 987 ms) and at a slow speech rate (mean
duration 1569 ms), resulting in ten test instructions.
Reaction time was measured from the disambiguation point
of the key name relative to other key names (e.g. the second
phoneme in End and Esc). To make the experimental
manipulation less obvious, five additional filler instructions

642

were recorded at the speaker’s natural speech rate (mean
duration 1370 ms).

that Instruction Speed condition, were excluded from the
analysis (2.4% of all trials; 4.4% in the control condition).
A repeated-measures ANOVA conducted on participants’
response times showed that there was no significant main
effect of Relevance (F1(1,36)< 1, F2(1,19) = 1.4, ps > .25,
NS). However, there was a marginally significant effect of
Instruction Speed (F1(1,36) = 2.7, MSE = 43141 p < .11,
non significant in the item analysis, F2(1,19) < 1). This
marginal difference was qualified by a significant Relevance
by Instruction Speed interaction (F1(1,36) = 9.47, MSE =
35286 p1 < .005; F2(1,19)= 5, MSE= 30501, p2 < .05).
Response times were shorter for fast instructions compared
to slow instructions in the relevant condition (1482 ms. and
1633 ms. respectively). However, the reverse pattern
emerged in the irrelevant condition (1551 ms. and 1513.
respectively). A simple effects analysis showed that the
difference in response times between fast instructions and
slow instructions was significant in the relevant condition,
t(36) = 3.5, p < .005, but not in the irrelevant condition, t <
1, NS.
A repeated-measures ANOVA conducted on the response
times of participants in the control version with the written
instructions showed no significant effects (all F <1, NS).
Within the relevant condition, response times for fast and
slow instructions (i.e. short and long intervals, respectively)
did not differ (1709 and 1707 ms, respectively, p > .9, NS).
The results thus support the idea that the difference between
fast and slow spoken instructions following relevant
contexts scenarios in the spoken version of the experiment
depends on speech rate, rather than merely reflecting the
time course motor activation decay.
These results show that speech rate had an effect on the
speed with which listeners performed the required response.
However, the effect of speech rate was different depending
on the type of the preceding context. The interaction of
speech rate with the preceding context shows that the effect
on listeners’ response speed is not governed only by the
speech rate of the stimulus, and thus argues against the idea
that listeners’ response speed is directly primed by the
intrinsic acoustic property of the stimulus, independently of
the context.
In post-experimental questioning participants were asked
about the goal of the study, the goal of the speaker
producing the instructions, and if they noticed anything
special about the stories or the instructions. Only 4
participants mentioned both speech rate and implied
urgency in the scenarios, suggesting that participants were
not generally aware of the relation between speech rate and
the context scenario. These 4 participants actually showed
an opposite pattern; they responded slower to fast-spoken
compared to slow-spoken instructions in both the relevant
(1537 vs. 1438 ms, respectively) and the irrelevant (1441 vs.
1342) conditions.

Design and procedure
The design consisted of two levels of Relevance (relevant
vs. irrelevant) crossed with two levels of Instruction Speed
(fast vs. slow) manipulated within-subjects. Each participant
read ten scenarios in each Relevance condition (scenario
versions were counterbalanced across participants). Out of
the experimental scenarios in each Relevance condition, half
were paired with a fast instruction and half were paired with
a slow instruction, counterbalanced across participants.
Scenarios were presented on a computer screen.
Participants were instructed to read each scenario at their
own pace and to press the spacebar when they were done
reading. Immediately after pressing the spacebar, a spoken
instruction was presented through headphones and
participants had to respond by pressing the appropriate
keyboard key. Eight experimental trials and 8 filler trials
were followed by a true/ false question; after responding to
the instruction, participants saw a sentence and had to
indicate whether it was true or false in the scenario. Context
scenarios were blocked by Relevance condition, each block
containing ten experimental scenarios and ten filler
scenarios. Block order was counterbalanced across
participants.
Because relevant context scenarios ended with a sentence
describing or implying a reaching/ pressing action, reading
the sentence may have primed a corresponding motor
response (see Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002). Since the time
intervals between the scenario offset and the critical word
onset differed for fast and slow instructions (short or long
intervals, respectively), this may have resulted in different
degrees of decay of the motor activation for the two
conditions, and thus in different effects on listeners’
response speed1. To ensure that the difference in response
speed is due to speech rate, rather than to the time interval
per se, 8 participants participated in a ‘no-speech’ control
condition with written instructions. In each speed condition,
time intervals between scenario offset and written
instruction onset matched the time intervals between
scenario offset and spoken instruction disambiguation point.
In all other respects, the procedure was the same as in the
spoken version. If the difference in response speed is due to
the different time interval, a similar pattern of results should
emerge in both the spoken and the written versions.

Results and Discussion
Trials followed by an incorrect key press or an incorrect
answer on the true/ false question were excluded from the
analysis (3.7% of all trials; <1% in the control condition). In
addition, response times greater than 3500 ms, or greater
than 2.5 standard deviations above the participant’s mean in
1

We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.

643

Irrelevant

These results suggest that while the effect of speech rate
on listeners’ response is not contingent on listeners’
conscious intention to respond at a specific speed, it may be
modulated by the way listeners code and attend to speech
rate in specific contexts. Such an interpretation would be
consistent with findings on stimulus-response compatibility
effects, such as the Simon effect (Simon, 1969), in which
response time to non-spatial stimulus features is affected by
the spatial compatibility between the task-irrelevant location
of the stimulus and the location of the response. Previous
findings suggest that even such spatial compatibility effects
that involve a seemingly direct relation between stimulus
and response can be modulated by task instructions,
participants’ intentions, stimulus context, and the way
people code and interpret the stimulus and the response. For
example, Hommel (1993) has shown that when a key-press
response was associated with a light flashing on the
opposite location (e.g. a right hand key switched the left
light), the direction of the Simon spatial compatibility effect
depended on whether participants coded the same response
as ‘key pressing’ or as ‘light flashing’. Similarly, Guiard
(1983) has shown that when turning a steering wheel to the
right required moving both hands to the left, the spatial
compatibility effect was modulated by whether participants
coded the same response as hand movement or as wheel
rotation. These findings emphasize a relation between
perception and behavior that does not require an
intermediary voluntary translation process, but nonetheless
is modulated by relevance, context, and goals, rather than
consisting of an invariant mapping process between specific
perceptual features of the stimulus and specific motor
features of the response (for example see the theory of event
coding, Hommel et al., 2001).
The present results suggest that acoustic properties of
speech that may not appear relevant from a linguistic point
of view, for example speech rate, may nonetheless have an
effect on listeners and may affect listeners’ behavior, as well
as their interpretation of the described objects and events.
This effect may not be limited to speech rate, but may
extend to other acoustic properties of speech. For example,
previous studies showed a stimulus-response compatibility
effect between the stimulus and response duration
(Romaiguère et al., 1993) and between stimulus intensity
and response force (Mattes et al., 2002), suggesting that
other acoustic properties, such as amplitude, may have an
effect on listeners response.
However, our findings also suggest that the effect of
speech rate on listeners’ response is not governed just by the
speech stimulus in itself, but depends on the stimulus
context and on the way the acoustic properties of the
stimulus are interpreted within that context.

Relevant

1700

Reaction time (ms.)

1650

1600

1550

1500

1450

1400

Figure 2: Reaction times by Relevance condition
The results support the idea that speech rate can have a
reliable effect on listeners’ response speed. The results
further suggest that the effect of speech rate on listeners’
responses may depend on the way listeners interpret speech
rate information, based on the antecedent discourse.
Listeners responded faster to fast instructions when these
followed contexts that made speed of action and speed
information highly relevant and supported an interpretation
of fast speech as signaling a need for a faster action.
However, speech rate had no effect on listeners’ response
speed in the absence of such contextual information.
Context scenarios with speed-related content may have
primed the dimension of speed and called attention to speed
information as relevant information in the context. On the
other hand, variation in speech rate following contexts that
had no timing implications or speed-related content may
have been treated as reflecting normal random articulatory
variability and thus have no reliable effect on listeners’
subsequent response speed. Such context-dependent
interpretation of speech rate is consistent with findings
regarding
the
context-dependent
perception
and
interpretation of variations in acoustic properties of speech
that convey linguistic or affective information. For example,
depending on listeners’ expectations about the speech
presented to them, the same fundamental frequency (F0)
difference was interpreted as signaling a different talker or
as reflecting random variability (Magnuson & Nusbaum, in
press), and the same sentence final F0 rise was interpreted
as indicating a question or surprise (Luks, Nusbaum, &
Levy, 1998). Similarly, the same F0 contour was interpreted
as conveying different speaker affect in the context of
different sentence types (Scherer, Ladd, & Silverman,
1984).

644

Acknowledgments

Luks, T. L., Nusbaum, H. C., & Levy, J. (1998).
Hemispheric involvement in the perception of syntactic
prosody is dynamically dependent on task demands.
Brain and Language, 65, 313-332.
Magnuson, J. S., & Nusbaum, H. C. (In Press). Acoustic
differences, listener expectations, and the perceptual
accommodation of talker variability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance.
Mattes, S., Leuthold, H., & Ulrich, R. (2002). Stimulusresponse compatibility in intensity-force relations. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55A(4),
1175-1191.
Neumann, R., & Strack, F. (2000). "Mood contagion": The
automatic transfer of mood between persons. Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 79(2), 211-223.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral & Brain Sciences,
27(2), 169-226.
Romaiguère, P., Hasbroucq, T., Possamaï, C. A., & Seal, J.
(1993). Intensity to force translation: A new effect of
stimulus-response compatibility revealed by analysis if
response time and electromyographic activity of a prime
mover. Cognitive Brain Research, 1, 197-201.
Scherer, K. R., Ladd, D. R., & Silverman, K. A. (1984).
Vocal cues to speaker affect: Testing two models. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 76, 1346-1356.
Shintel, H. & Nusbaum, H. C. (In press). The sound of
motion in spoken language: Visual information conveyed
by acoustic properties of speech. Cognition.
Shintel, H., Nusbaum, H. C., & Okrent, A. (2006). Analog
acoustic expression in speech. Journal of Memory and
Language, 55, 167-177.
Simon, H. (1969). Reactions toward the source of
stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81,
174–176
Webb, J. T. (1969). Subject speech rates as a function of
interviewer behaviour. Language and Speech, 12, 54-67.
Webb, J. T. (1972). Interview synchrony: An investigation
of two speech rate measures in an automated standardized
interview. In B. Pope & A. W. Seigman (eds.) Studies in
dyadic communication. New York: Pergamon.

We thank Tim Brawn for his help with stimulus preparation.
The support of the Center for Cognitive and Social
Neuroscience at The University of Chicago is gratefully
acknowledged.

References
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,
76(6), 893-910.
Cutler, A., Dahan, D., & Van Donselaar, W.A. (1997).
Prosody in the comprehension of spoken language: A
literature review. Language and Speech, 40 (2), 141-202.
Dijksterhuis, A., & Bargh, J. A. (2001). The perceptionbehavior expressway: Automatic effects of social
perception on social behavior. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 33).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Giles, H., Coupland, N., & Coupland, J. (1991).
Accommodation theory: Communication, context, and
consequence. In G. Howard & J. Coupland (eds.)
Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied
sociolinguistics. Studies in emotion and social interaction.
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Giles, H., & Powesland, P. F. (1975). Speech style and
social evaluation. Oxford, England: Academic Press.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565
Guiard, Y. (1983). The lateral coding of rotations: A study
of the Simon effect with wheel-rotation responses.
Journal of motor behavior, 15(4), 331-342.
Hommel, B. (1993). Inverting the Simon effect by intention.
Psychological Research, 55, 270-279.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-878.
Kunde, W. & Stöcker, C. (2002). A Simon effect for
stimulus-response duration. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 55A(2), 581-592.

645

