UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strategies for Orientation: The Role of 3D Landmark Salience and Map Alignment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5d79337m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Davies, Clare
Peebles, David

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Strategies for Orientation: The Role of 3D Landmark Salience
and Map Alignment
Clare Davies (clare.davies@ordnancesurvey.co.uk)
Research Labs, Ordnance Survey,
Romsey Road, Southampton, SO16 4GU, UK.

David Peebles (D.Peebles@hud.ac.uk)
Department of Behavioural Sciences, University of Huddersfield,
Queensgate, Huddersfield, HD1 3DH, UK.
Abstract

that people do tend to use this landmark-based strategy, picking a salient object or visible feature to match rather than
abstracting the overall geometry. This appears to contradict the conclusions of some recent studies of reorientation
tasks (e.g., Hermer & Spelke, 1994) which have been concerned with establishing geometric reasoning as a basic cognitive module. In these tasks, after having been disoriented
within a room-sized space, animals and children (and sometimes adults) seem to be strongly dependent on the geometry
of the space rather than its contents when re-establishing an
orientation heading.

An experiment and eye movement study investigated the
strategies people use to orientate themselves in urban settings using a streetmap. Previous studies have suggested that
the preferred strategy involves choosing salient landmarks to
match between the scene and the map. We presented stimuli
for which single-landmark matching was not the optimal strategy; the only unambiguous information available for matching
was the map’s 2D geometry which could also be abstracted
from the scene. However, most participants still chose a
landmark-based strategy. We discuss the implications for cognitive models, for understanding individual differences, and for
potentially improving map designs to aid orientation.∗
Keywords: orientation; spatial cognition; individual differences; mental rotation; landmarks

One factor in this difference may be that in previous
orienting-with-map studies the landmark-based strategy was
both possible and appropriate: obvious features in the 3D
scene also tended to be obvious on the map. An exception
is the recent study of Gunzelmann and Anderson (2006), but
this involved highly simplified artificial environments and a
task that focused on identifying a specific target among identical geometric shapes within an unstructured circular scene
(viewed from outside a circle by the observer), rather than orienting from within a scene (and map) which is the more common task in everyday life. The other previous studies have
also focused on environments which were either extremely
sparse, or limited to a view of a single building. For this
study we wished to extend the paradigm to real-world urban
landscapes, and at the same time to test users’ strategies and
orientation capabilities in a scenario where single-landmark
matching would not be so easy. In addition, we wished to
check previous findings that the degree of alignment of the
map with the space affects performance (even when participants are apparently performing single-landmark matching).

Introduction
Orienting oneself in an environment with the aid of a map
is a common problem carried out in a variety of real-world
contexts. One must match a direction within the visible scene
on the ground with a specific direction on the map, assuming
that one already knows where one is located† . It is generally assumed to depend upon mental rotation, to match the
2D and 3D object representations, and as such is assumed to
be subject to the individual differences in ability and training
which are well known for mental rotation tasks (Dror, 1992;
Shepard & Hurwitz, 1984).
One obvious strategy for performing this task involves
studying the geometry of the scene in front of the observer,
and deriving from it a mental representation of the 2D shapes
of the ground layout (as would be seen if viewed from above,
i.e. from the map’s perspective). However, a short-cut strategy could be employed in many situations, if some salient
cue or landmark can be identified in both the scene and the
map. The observer could then use the cue as an orientation
indicator and would be able to match other items in the scene
according to their position relative to it, rather like having a
huge north arrow marked on the ground.
Previous studies of orientation tasks (e.g., Gunzelmann &
Anderson, 2006; Pick, Heinrichs, Montello, Smith, & Sullivan, 1995; Warren, Rossano, & Wear, 1990) have suggested

Urban environments provide a rich and varied set of building shapes, road patterns and architectural features. This is
especially true for European and other ‘evolved’ cities, as opposed to New World or other planned settlements (Hillier,
Penn, & Dalton, 1992). Very few cities in the UK, for example, are based on a grid or block pattern, but have evolved
organically over time so that a wide range of architectural and
development styles often coexist within a local area. This
means that the 2D geometry is almost always uniquely specified from any point in a typical urban space: it is rarely completely symmetrical and hence tends not to be ambiguous in
terms of orientation. This factor has often been surmised to

∗ Ordnance

Survey c Crown Copyright 2007.
the purposes of this study we have assumed a scenario
where one knows one’s location but not direction. This can occur,
e.g., when emerging from a subway station, when viewing a ‘youare-here’ map signboard, or on reaching a decision point in navigation having managed without a map until that point.
† For

923

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Scene (a) and corresponding map (b), stimulus 18. c Crown copyright 2007. Reproduced by permission of Ordnance
Survey.
have an impact on spatial cognitive processing (e.g., Freundschuh, 1991; Montello, 1991).

such as Figure 1 than for those such as Figure 2 where heights
and shapes were less variable, although 2D ground layout was
often just as complex.

We therefore decided to investigate orientation strategies
where the scene people viewed was an image taken from a 3D
model of a UK city, Southampton, with only the 2D ground
layout and the 3D building shapes being shown. The scenes
were shorn of irrelevant detail that did not appear on the map
and thus could not be used for the task, and the map in turn
contained no name labels or other indicators to differentiate
buildings and other objects. For items remaining within the
scene, the only remaining visual cues were overall size (both
in terms of ground area and height), shape (again in terms of
both roof line and ground layout), and (one single) colour.

Experiment
Method
Design and Participants Forty-nine students and members
of staff from the University of Huddersfield took part in the
experiment. All participants saw the entire set of stimuli in
random order. An additional five participants carried out the
experiment while having their eye movements and verbal protocols recorded to enable qualitative assessment of their apparent strategies in solving the task. The other 49 participants
were encouraged to perform the task as quickly and accurately as possible.

Rather than depicting buildings in their actual colours, the
same colour scheme was used for both the scene and map, to
emphasise the similarity of their 2D geometry and to facilitate
its use in matching. Therefore, choosing a single item based
on salient 3D cues (e.g., height), and attempting to match it to
the map was unlikely to be successful, since its 2D geometry
would probably not be sufficiently unambiguous on its own
(but only when combined with other ground layout cues or
relative object positions).

Materials The experiment was carried out using PC computers with 17 inch displays. The eye movement and verbal protocol study was conducted using a Tobii 1750 remote desktop eye tracker with a 17 inch display. The stimuli were 25 scenes and corresponding maps from various locations in the city of Southampton, UK. The scene images
were generated using a buildings-only 3D model overlaid on
OS MasterMap R Topography Layer and draped on an OS
Land-Form PROFILE R terrain model to provide a realistic
and accurate representation of height information (see e.g.,
Figures 1a and 2a). The maps were circular sections of OS
MasterMap R Topography Layer at 1:1250 scale. A black dot
in the centre of the map indicated the location of the observer.
When the mouse cursor was moved over the map, a short
black line of fixed length was drawn from the centre of the
dot toward the tip of the cursor (see e.g., Figures 1b and 2b).
This rotated around the dot as the mouse was moved around
the map so that it always pointed toward the mouse cursor.
Scenes and maps were selected to represent a wide range of

Figures 1 and 2 show typical scene-map pairings from our
stimuli and Figure 3 shows the actual real-world streets corresponding to the experiment scenes. In Figure 1 two large and
distinctive 3D objects can be seen within the scene, revealed
by Figure 3a to be a church with a steeple in real life. Neither
of these objects can be unambiguously identified on the map
however. We hypothesised therefore that people would learn
within a few trials to use aspects of the 2D geometry (such as
roadside shape or relative object locations) to solve the orientation problem, rather than focusing on these visually salient
but task-irrelevant 3D objects. If instead they were distracted
by the latter, then performance would be worse for scenes
924

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Scene (a) and corresponding map (b), stimulus 7. c Crown copyright 2007. Reproduced by permission of Ordnance
Survey.
building shapes, degrees of salience and distinctiveness, together with a range of urban features such as green spaces and
road patterns. The stimuli were also controlled for alignment
so that the correct response ranged across the full 0–360 degree circle and there were roughly equal numbers of roughly
north- and south-facing scenes.

and why and how they were choosing a particular direction.

Results
Solution strategies In line with previous studies (e.g., Warren et al., 1990) we scored a response as correct if the angle of
the centre line fell within 15 degrees of the true angle in either
direction (i.e. within the 30 degree range that it bisected), at
the point when the participant clicked the mouse. Given that
the scenes tended to subtend about 60 degrees of visual angle in total, which is also typical of a photograph taken with a
normal camera, this meant that the participants had got within
half a scene of the exact line.
In order to test whether performance was influenced by the
presence of salient 3D landmarks, the scenes were coded according to the presence or absence of such a landmark. Ten
scenes included at least one. Similarly, scenes were also
coded according to the presence of distinctive 2D ground layout information in the foreground of the scene, which would
facilitate identification on the grounds of 2D layout. Nine
of the 20 scenes included such 2D features, e.g., an extensive and irregularly shaped strip of lawn or pavement in the
foreground. For example Figure 1 shows a scene that includes both a salient 3D landmark and distinctive ground layout cues, whereas Figure 2 is typical of a scene with predominantly 2D layout cues.
The mean response time and percentage of correct responses for the stimuli categorised by the presence or absence
of 2D and 3D cues are presented in Table 1. It should be noted
that with the more complex scenes and maps of this experiment, these were typically around 30-40 seconds rather than
the few seconds recorded in previous studies (e.g., Gunzelmann & Anderson, 2006). Separate 2 × 2 repeated-measures
ANOVAs were performed on participants’ error rates and response times, with presence or absence of 2D and 3D cues
as the two within-subjects factors. For errors, there was a

Procedure Participants were introduced to the experiment
through the following scenario: “Imagine that you are standing in the street in an unfamiliar town, holding a map. You
know where on the map you are standing, but you need to find
out which way you are facing”. They were then shown an example scene/map pair and told that their task was to work out
in which direction they must be facing on the map in order to
see the scene. Participants were instructed how to make a response, asked to respond as rapidly and as accurately as possible, and told that the maps were all the same scale and that
they should avoid the natural assumption that the ‘upwards’
direction on the map indicates ‘forward’ in the environment
(cf. Shepard & Hurwitz, 1984).
There were five practice trials and 20 experiment trials in
total. Participants initiated each trial by clicking a button at
the top of the screen. On each trial, a scene and corresponding
map were presented on the screen as shown in Figures 1 and
2. Participants were able to take as long as necessary to make
a judgement. When the participant responded by clicking on
the map, the angular degree of the response was recorded,
from 0◦ pointing directly to the top of the map to 180◦ pointing directly to the bottom, with the sign of the angle indicating left (negative) or right (positive). The duration between
the onset of the stimulus to the participant’s response was also
recorded. Participants in the eye movement and verbal protocol study were asked to talk through each trial as they attempted to solve the problem, in particular to say what they
were looking at, how they were thinking through the problem,
925

significant effect of the presence of salient 3D landmarks,
F(1, 48) = 40.35, p < 0.0001, and the presence of distinctive 2D ground layout, F(1, 48) = 5.47, p < 0.05. There was
also a significant interaction between them, F(1, 48) = 5.26,
p < 0.05. The directions of these effects showed that while
presence of an obvious 2D cue was able to decrease error
rates, this was only in the absence of a salient 3D cue which
always greatly increased them.
The analysis of response times, however, showed that both
3D, F(1, 48) = 29.7, p < 0.0001, and 2D, F(1, 48) = 9.28, p
< 0.005, cues seemed to slow participants down. There was
again a mild interaction, F(1, 48) = 4.37, p < 0.05, which
indicated that the presence of both a 2D and a 3D cue had the
most marked effect of all on response times; the presence of
a 2D landmark made only a small difference except when a
3D landmark was also present.
Some caution should be expressed with the above analyses
since both the response time and error data showed minor deviations from normality; however, the main effects were also
checked using non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank tests,
which showed the same significance patterns (but could not,
of course, test the interaction effects).
This finding was independently confirmed by qualitative
verbal protocol and eye movement analysis of the 5 additional
participants. By far the most commonly reported feature used
for solving the problem was ‘buildings’, and the eye movement patterns in the scenes with the most salient 3D landmarks (e.g., large skyscrapers or church steeples) tended to
strongly focus around those landmarks.

ted as a function of map alignment and compared with the
M-shaped curve found in Gunzelmann and Anderson (2006),
Experiment 1. In order to compare the two data sets on the
same axis, the RTs from the Gunzelmann and Anderson study
were scaled by a factor of 12. Although the M shape is also
partly visible in the RTs from our study, many scenes appear
to violate it: indeed, the alignment angles for the three fastest
scenes were −53, 76 and −17 degrees. Potential reasons for
these findings are discussed below.

Discussion
The persistence of a landmark-based strategy by participants
in this study, even when geometry was a far more reliable
cue, could be seen to be at odds with the recent assumed preeminence of geometry as the primary source of orientation
information for both humans and other animals (e.g., Hermer
& Spelke, 1994; Cheng & Newcombe, 2005). Generally the
question that is posed is whether geometry is so fundamental
to cognition that a specific area of the brain has a specially
evolved module for it. As summarised by Cheng and Newcombe (2005), this has been followed by the idea that perhaps the ability of adult humans (but possibly not all young
children) to use landmarks as well as geometry is due to a
relatively late-developing facility aided by language — or at
least that it is secondary to a fundamental use of geometric
information above all else.
Certainly, with respect to the linguistic angle, it is easy to
imagine a participant (and we sometimes saw this) muttering “OK. . . so find the church” to themselves as they moved
from viewing the scene to studying the map. However Cheng
and Newcombe (2005) reviewed various evidence that some
non-linguistic animals, and sometimes young children, can
also use landmarks to help them reorientate in a space (although it should be noted that the reorientation task generally
used for these studies is different in a number of respects from
our map-matching task). They also argue that other findings
that would support a linguistic explanation, based on the apparent disruption of orientation with landmarks by adding a
verbal shadowing dual-task paradigm but not a rhythmic one
(Hermer-Vazquez, Spelke, & Katsnelson, 1999), may only
mean that the linguistic task was harder, since it also disrupted
orientation without a landmark.
Whether or not landmark use could involve linguistic processes, or at least those that were in some sense propositional
more than spatial, Cheng and Newcombe’s review pointed out
that spatial information could be used either approximately,
“to tell broadly which direction is which” or precisely to “pinpoint a target location exactly” (p.15). We would argue that
studies on location memory (e.g., Lansdale, 1998) have suggested a similarly dual means of encoding spatial location one precise and easily disrupted (arguably geometric), and the
other vague and landmark-related (and again, perhaps more
descriptive or propositional than purely spatial) but apparently more robust and persistent in memory. This presents a
different and more flexible view of spatial encoding than the

Table 1: Mean RT (s) and Percentage of Erroneous Responses
for stimuli categorised by the presence or absence of 2D and
3D cues
3D Landmark
2D layout cue Present
Absent
Mean RT
Present
49.0
36.3
Absent
40.7
34.6
% Error
Present
49.0
26.5
Absent
49.8
39.1
Map alignment Previous studies where a map is matched
to a scene have tended to find a distinctive ‘M shape’ pattern in the effect of map alignment with observer position
(e.g., Gunzelmann & Anderson, 2006; Hintzman, O’Dell, &
Arndt, 1981). Performance typically is better not only at 0
degrees (where ‘up’ on the map exactly corresponds to the
forward direction within the scene), but also at 90, 180 and
270 (i.e. −90) degrees. It seems that mental rotation to angles at or close to these cardinal directions is easier than with
more oblique angles. In the current study however, these patterns were considerably less clear, as shown in Figure 4. In
Figure 4, the response times from our experiment are plot926

(a)

(b)

Figure 3: Street locations for scenes shown in Figure 1a (a) and Figure 2a (b). c Crown copyright 2007. Reproduced by
permission of Ordnance Survey.
find it quite difficult to abstract a 2D overhead layout from the
3D scene.
As well as the obvious implications for cognitive modelling of human cognition of large-scale spaces, this may also
help to explain the public popularity of bird’s eye urban maps
that show the buildings from an oblique angle rather than
from overhead (e.g., Gombrich, 1982). It also implies that
if large-scale maps were to be designed explicitly to aid their
use in orientation, it would help to include specific landmarks
that could be easily matched to the scene around the traveller
or viewer. However, it would not be sufficient merely to include orienting landmarks at places where the 2D geometry
was an ambiguous cue, since it may not be used efficiently
even when unambiguous.
The disruption of the usual ‘M shape’ effect of map alignment shown in Figure 4 indicates that map alignment alone
(implying a strong role of mental rotation in the task) is
not the only factor influencing orientation performance. The
scenes which had unexpectedly good performance despite
their alignment angle were apparently those where it was relatively easy to match an unambiguous cue to the map, regardless of its angle from the map’s upward (north) direction.
The graph therefore show that with a more realistic sampling of typical real-world urban scenes, other factors beyond
map alignment must be considered if we are to effectively
model the cognitive processes of orientation tasks.

one encouraged by the recent focus on geometric modularity.
Cheng and Newcombe (2005) concluded that the evidence
to date does not allow us to distinguish between a model of
spatial processing that integrates features and geometry into
a single representation, and the modular view that geometry is primary and that under different circumstances features
may or may not be added to it. While our study was not intended to help distinguish between these two models, the consistent finding by our and other studies in the map-matching
paradigm that landmarks are often used in preference to geometry suggests that the modularity proponents and opponents may need to take account of a broader range of evidence about spatial cognition. This point was also implied by
Cheng and Newcombe’s inclusion of studies of people learning spaces from different kinds of perspective, as well as the
pure reorientation paradigm, in their review of relevant evidence. Further reviews across the spatial cognition domain
might help to resolve these apparent contradictions between
task paradigms.
Previous studies have demonstrated people’s tendency to
match a single salient landmark between a 2D and 3D representation of a scene, and particularly to pick on a landmark
with a distinctive 3D (but not 2D) shape despite the absence
of 3D cues in the 2D map. The present results indicate that
this continues to be a preferred strategy when available, even
when not only inappropriate but also discouraged by the nature of the stimuli. In the scenes used in the present study,
as in the studies by Gunzelmann and Anderson (2006), the
2D shapes and colours were directly matchable between the
scene and the map (though they would not be in real-world
scenes or photographs), and all distracting salient cues were
removed other than the 3D geometry. Yet participants still
made errors through attending to the latter rather than the
more reliable 2D geometry. This, along with the slower response times where a 2D ground layout cue was provided
(which would still need some spatial transformation to be
matched accurately to the map), implies that participants may

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Claire Cannon and Jon Gould
for their help in analysing and interpreting the data, Isabel
Sargent, Jon Horgan and Dave Capstick (creators of the 3D
building model), Guy Heathcote and Tim Martin for help
in using the model and mapping to create the stimuli, the
experiment participants for their time and cooperation, Glenn
Gunzelmann and Glen Hart for insights and inspiration, and
Ordnance Survey of Great Britain for funding and supporting
this work.
927

60
45
40
25

30

35

Response time (s)

50

55

Mean RT
M−shaped Curve

−180

−140

−100

−60

−20

20

60

100

140

180

Map alignment

Figure 4: Response latencies plotted as a function of the map’s alignment with observer position and compared with the Mshaped RT curve rescaled from Gunzelmann and Anderson (2006), Experiment 1.
spatial representation in young children. Nature, 370, 57–
59.
Hermer-Vazquez, L., Spelke, E., & Katsnelson, A. (1999).
Source of flexibility in human cognition: Dual task studies
of space and language. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 3–36.
Hillier, B., Penn, A., & Dalton, N. (1992). Look back to
London. Architects’ Journal, 195 (15), 42–45.
Hintzman, D. L., O’Dell, C. S., & Arndt, D. R. (1981). Orientation in cognitive maps. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 149–
206.
Lansdale, M. W. (1998). Modeling memory for absolute
location. Psychological Review, 105, 351–378.
Montello, D. R. (1991). Spatial orientation and the angularity
of urban routes: a field study. Environment and Behavior,
23, 47–69.
Pick, H. L., Heinrichs, M. R., Montello, D. R., Smith, K., &
Sullivan, C. N. (1995). Topographic map reading. In P. A.
Hancock, J. Flach, J. Caird, & K. Vicente (Eds.), Local applications of the ecological approach to human-machine
systems (Vol. 2, pp. 255–284). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Shepard, R. N., & Hurwitz, S. (1984). Upward direction,
mental rotation, and discrimination of left and right turns
in maps. Cognition, 18, 161–193.
Warren, D. H., Rossano, M. J., & Wear, T. D. (1990). Perception of map-environment correspondence: The roles of
features and alignment. Ecological Psychology, 2, 131–
150.

This article has been prepared for information purposes only.
It is not designed to constitute definitive advice on the topics
covered and any reliance placed on the contents of this article
is at the sole risk of the reader.

References
Cheng, K., & Newcombe, N. (2005). Is there a geometric
module for spatial orientation? Squaring theory and evidence. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 1–23.
Dror, I. (1992). Abilities and individual differences in complex skill acquisition. In Innovations for interactions: Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 36th annual meeting (Vol. 2, pp. 1368–1372). Santa Monica CA: Human
Factors Society.
Freundschuh, S. (1991). The effect of the pattern of the environment on spatial knowledge acquisition. In D. M. Mark
& A. U. Frank (Eds.), Cognitive and linguistic aspects of
geographic space (pp. 167–183). Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Kluwer.
Gombrich, E. H. (1982). The image and the eye: Further
studies in the psychology of pictorial representation. London: Phaidon Press.
Gunzelmann, G., & Anderson, J. R. (2006). Location matters: Why target location impacts performance in orientation tasks. Memory and Cognition, 34, 41–59.
Hermer, L., & Spelke, E. (1994). A geometric process for
928

