UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Supporting Information Processing in Museums with Adaptive Technology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5s3772nb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Mayr, Eva
Zahn, Carmen
Hesse, Friedrich W.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Supporting Information Processing in Museums with Adaptive Technology
Eva Mayr (e.mayr@iwm-kmrc.de)
Applied Cognitive and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Carmen Zahn (c.zahn@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Friedrich W. Hesse (f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany
this setting (capacity hypothesis). Both hypotheses will be
explored with regard to theories of information processing
and existing results of psychological and museum research.

Abstract
When people visit informal learning settings like museums,
they often do not give priority to learning and knowledge
building. This could be due to a leisure orientation or due
reduced cognitive capacities available for information
processing. To enhance collaborative and individual
elaboration of information presented and individual as well as
collaborative learning in museums it is assumed that
information presentation should be adaptive and match
visitors’ shared interests. Additionally, when a visitor dyad is
aware of their shared goals more goal-orientated information
processing and knowledge communication should result and
thereby learning should be enhanced. To address the effect of
goal-awareness and adaptive information presentation an
experimental study is conducted. Shared goals are made
aware to visitor dyads and information is presented adaptively
on a Pocket PC during their museum visit. Visitors, who are
aware of their goal, but do not receive adaptive information,
look at fewer exhibits than others. Visitors, who are aware of
their shared goals and are provided with adaptive information
additionally, are better in solving transfer problems. Impact
for design of adaptive technology for informal learning is
discussed.

Leisure Hypothesis

Keywords: Informal Learning; Mobile Learning; ComputerSupported Collaborative Learning; Cognitive Capacity

Studies on visitors’ motivations for visiting a museum have
shown that only 18% come with a specific interest, 26%
come to learn (without further specification), and 20% come
with some general interest (Black, 2005). Interestingly,
different results emerge when visitors are given a list of
different motivations to indicate how much they agree with
each of them (Falk, Moussouri, & Coulson, 1998; Packer,
2006): Most people indicate that learning is an important
part of their visiting experience, but also entertainment.
Packer (2006) found that of those coming without any
(50%) or without concrete learning intentions in mind
(30%) a huge proportion (70%) nevertheless reports after
the visit that they had a learning experience. According to
Falk et al. (1998) visitors with education or entertainment
agendas have higher learning outcomes than visitors with
other agendas (place, life cycle, social event, and practical
issues). Thus, differences in visiting agendas do not fully
explain differences in learning: Visitors with learning goals
as well as visitors with leisure goals have learning
experiences in informal settings (Falk et al., 1998; Packer,
2006).
Subjective concepts about and attitudes towards the
learning setting and learning within this setting (Packer,
2006; Salomon, 1984) might explain the similar power of
learning goals and leisure goals for knowledge acquisition:
Packer (2006) showed that learning in museums has an
important enjoyment characteristic in visitors’ subjective
concepts. According to the work of Salomon (1984), the
subjective attitudes towards a medium determine how
information is processed: As American children have higher
leisure attitudes towards television they process information
with less mental effort than Israeli children. As visitors
regard learning in museums as easy and effortless (Packer,
2006), Salomon’s (1984) results should be valid for the
museum setting, too.

Information Processing in Informal Settings
Informal learning settings like museums provide rich
resources for individual and collaborative knowledge
building: Visitors have to choose from a huge pool of
information according to their personal interest (free-choicelearning, Dierking, Ellenbogen, & Falk, 2004) and elaborate
on the selected information. Therefore, visitor interests and
learning goals have an even greater value in informal than in
formal learning settings (Boekaerts & Minnaert, 1999) as
they guide information selection and elaboration.
Unfortunately, informal learning is often inferior to
formal learning with regard to knowledge acquisition.
Different explanations for this phenomenon are possible:
First, visitors might have no learning but only recreational
and social intentions when visiting a museum (leisure
hypothesis). Second, presented information might be too
complex to process with the cognitive capacities available in

1289

As descriptive museum studies (e.g., Black, 2005, p. 16)
showed that around 80% of museum visitors come in
groups, it could be assumed that many visitors come with a
social intention instead of a learning intention. However,
Packer and Ballantyne (2005) found that the social
experience is subjectively not an important agenda for a
collaborative visit. Anderson (2003) on the other hand found
that especially the social aspects of a visit are remembered
in the long term. Co-visitors are also important for
knowledge processing in the museum (Packer & Ballantyne,
2005): Dyads share opinions about the exhibits, explain
them to each other and relate information to prior
experiences in their conversations. These observations are
similar to results in formal learning, where social influences
were shown to be important for information processing
(Hinsz, Tindale, & Vollrath, 1997; Levine, Resnick, &
Higgins, 1993; Salomon & Perkins, 1998). However, it
remains to be proven, that these processes and influences
are equivalent. Nevertheless, the social situation of a
museum visit can assist knowledge acquisition in the
individual and should be taken into account when designing
technological support for informal learning.
As studies showed the relevance of a focused visiting
strategy for learning in museums (Falk et al., 1998),
learning could be improved, when a museum is visited in a
more focused way. Studies in formal learning contexts
showed the relevance of goals for more strategic
information processing (e.g., Rothkopf & Billington, 1979;
Zumbach & Reimann, 2002). Conscious goals are available
in working memory and have a high potential to structure
information processing (Austin & Vancouver, 1996).
Additionally, aware goals can raise curiosity, intrinsic
motivation and attention towards reaching this goal
(Boekarts & Minnaert, 1999; Csikszentmihalyi &
Hermanson, 1995; Loewenstein, 1994). Therefore making
shared goals aware to a visitor dyad prior to a museum visit
might enhance their goal orientation and thereby informal
learning.

Capacity Hypothesis
Museum studies on visitors’ attention and cognitive
capacity are quite rare. One of the best documented
concepts in museum research is “museum fatigue” (Evans,
1995; Petrelli, Not, & Zancanaro, 1999): Museum visitors
experience physical and mental fatigue after some time of
exploration. According to Serrell (1997) there is only a
limited time available to hold visitors’ attention. The
average visitor spent 19 minutes in an exhibition and 51%
of visitors looked at less than half the exhibits available. If
visitors are provided with advanced organizers more mental
effort is available to process the information presented:
When homogenous exhibit clusters were labeled
accordingly by Falk (1997) visitors’ concept development
was enhanced. This effect could be explained by a higher
amount of mental effort available for information
processing. Research by Salomon (1984) indicates that
different amounts of mental effort are invested in informal /

leisure and in formal / educational settings. An analysis of
differences between informal and formal learning shows
that self-regulation of the learning behavior differs
(Boekaerts & Minnaert, 1999): In an informal learning
setting goals have to be set by the learner himself, he has to
select appropriate information, and process it with respect to
his prior knowledge. Maybe an even higher amount of
mental resources is needed in informal learning settings to
process information at the same depth as in formal settings.
The social situation can reduce the needed mental
resources by providing some kind of structure: Agendas are
often implicitly inhered in an existing visitor group (e.g.,
school classes: learning intention, parent-child groups:
exploration intention) and shared interests guide their
visiting behavior. Other visitors serve as model for
information selection (social navigation, Höök, 2003).
Exhibit information is elaborated in conversation
(conversational elaboration, Allen, 2002; Leinhardt,
Crowley, & Knutson, 2002). Studies in the context of
formal learning for example show that under specific
conditions (e.g., high trust, familiarity) dyads are superior to
individual learners regarding memory capacity (Hinsz et al.,
1997; Hollingshead & Brandon, 2003).
But not only other visitors, also the museum as a learning
environment can structure the visit and guide visitors in a
way that reduces mental resources needed to process the
information. Following this rationale, principles for object
organization (e.g., Falk, 1997) and label design (e.g.,
Bitgood, 2000) are broadly used in museums. But these
actions do not serve all visitor groups in the same way:
They have different interests, prior knowledge, time
resources, to name only some differences. New media
applications can adapt information to visitors’ needs (cp.
Goren-Bar et al., 2006). Adaptive systems build a model of
the visitor and use this model for further interaction
(Brusilovsky, 2003). An exemplary application is a PDA
guide suggesting tours based on visitors’ interests and time
budget (e.g., Singapore Science Centre; Teo, 2005). Next to
an explicit adaptation of information based on user input
(e.g., Teo, 2005) implicit adaptation based on user behavior
is possible (e.g., Not et al., 1997). As information that
matches a visitor dyad’s shared interests reduces the amount
of mental effort needed to relate this information to existing
knowledge structures, more cognitive capacities are
available to process the information. Thereby, informal
learning could be increased.

Research Questions

1290

The appropriateness of both hypotheses for learning in
museums is studied in this experiment. First, visitor dyads
are made aware of a shared goal. It is assumed that
availability of shared goals in working memory would
increase motivation and learning orientation in informal
learning.
Second, information is presented adaptively to a visitor
dyad’s shared goal. Thereby the need to relate a selected
object to this goal is reduced. Other ways of adaptation like

adapted navigation or adaptive guided tours were
considered, too. The advantage of adaptive information to
every exhibit is that visitors’ free-choice is maintained. As
free-choice is an important feature of informal learning
(Dierking et al., 2004) a less invasive technology seems
more appropriate for a museum setting.
It is studied whether visitor dyads, who are aware of their
shared goals or who are presented information adaptively,
select objects differently, elaborate information in their
conversation in different ways, and finally learn more than
visitors provided with none of these two ways of support.

Methods
A 2 (goal-awareness) x 2 (goal-adaptive information)
experimental design is used in this study (see table 1). In
condition 1 information is adapted explicitly on user input;
visitors are asked to state their shared goal. In condition 2
visitors are made aware of their shared goal, too, but
information is not adapted to this goal. In a third condition
information is adapted implicitly on visitors’ prior exhibit
selection. In a control condition (condition 4) neither goals
are made aware nor is information adapted.
Table 1: Research design.
Goalawareness
Yes
No

Goal-adaptive information
Yes
No
condition 1, N = 16 condition 2, N = 16
condition 3, N = 15 condition 4, N = 15

interests (chances & risks, societal impact, impact on daily
life, background information, oddities). The information is
presented to dyads according to their shared interests in
condition 1 or prior exhibit selection in condition 3, whereas
dyads in conditions 2 and 4 receive random text versions for
each exhibit. Exhibit information is presented on a Pocket
PC.
Next to a video camera and PDA log files, microphones
were used to record the visiting behavior of a dyad.
Communication was recorded as an indicator of cognitive
processing and collaborative elaboration of information.
To assess mental effort the self-report-measures by
Salomon (1984) were adapted. Additionally, subjects were
asked to compare the mental effort needed to process
information in the exhibition with mental effort needed to
process information in seven other everyday situations (e.g.,
visiting other exhibitions, watching news on TV, reading a
contract).
Learning is assessed with a knowledge test. To find an
appropriate measure for informal learning, three different
types of questions are used: Open questions that allow
assessment of broader and deeper knowledge, multiplechoice (MC) factual knowledge questions, and MC transfer
knowledge questions. For all MC questions partial and full
knowledge could be indicated by the participant (BenSimon, Budescu, & Nevo, 1997). Partial knowledge seems
more appropriate as learning outcome for informal learning
settings than full knowledge. Prior knowledge on
nanotechnology is controlled.

Procedure

Subjects

Participants are asked to participate in a study on
communication in museums. This cover story is used to
reduce expectations of a learning-related study, as a pilot
study showed that subjects participate with a learning
intention otherwise. As subjects with learning intentions
would act more similar to formal learning and would reduce
the size of the expected effect, a learning-unrelatedinstruction and study title was used.
At the beginning, participants are familiarized with
navigation in the virtual exhibition and the use of a PDA.
Then, dyads in condition 1 and 2 are asked to select a topic
of shared interest from a list of topics, which are satisfied in
the exhibition. In condition 1 information about the exhibits
is then adapted to these interests. In condition 3 exhibit
selection in the first minutes is analyzed with respect to the
behavior of participants in conditions 1, 2, and 4, and
information is then presented adaptively based on this
behavior.
Dyads visit the laboratory exhibition without time
constraints. After the visit participants are asked to fill out a
questionnaire on their knowledge, satisfaction with the visit,
experienced mental effort, prior knowledge, interest in the
topic, and acceptance of the technology.
Participants received 12 € for their participation in this
study.

15 dyads of acquainted subjects from Tuebingen (Germany)
are recruited per condition. Relationships include fellow
students (10%), flat mates (27%), friends (31%), siblings
(6%), and partners (26%). Most dyads are same sex (63%)
and have at least a high school diploma (87%) or university
degree (9%). Most study participants visit a museum
regularly: once a year (35%), several times a year (44%),
once a month (12%) or several times a month (6%).
The first subjects are randomized to conditions 1, 2, and
4. Condition 3 is assessed subsequently, as behavioral data
from other participants serves as data base for implicit
adaptation in condition 3.

Material
A small exhibition about nanotechnology (“Nanodialogue”
by the European Commission) serves as research setting in
this project. A virtual version of the exhibition was created
and is presented in the form of a graphical hypertext
(imagemaps) on a smartboard, allowing input from both
participants alike. The size of the exhibition allows research
on this exhibition in a research laboratory under controlled
conditions. Validation studies in the real exhibition are
planned.
For all exhibits five parallel text sets have been created,
providing adequate information serving five different
1291

laboratory experiment can not be compared to visitors with
respect to their agendas, interindividual differences might be
reduced. Additionally, as subjects visited only this
exhibition, they are more likely to spend much time on this
exhibition in contrast to visitors to a large museum, where
many different exhibitions are explored during one visit.
Visitors in condition 2, who were aware of their shared
goals, but did not receive adaptive information, visited less
exhibits than visitors in other conditions. This might be due
to expectations, raised by the awareness of shared goals, but
not satisfied with the random texts these visitors received.
More detailed data analysis will show if there exist
differences in attendance to additional information, if more
conversational elaboration on exhibits within the dyad takes
place in conditions 1 and 2, or both is the case. By making
available relevant information for visitors’ shared interests
by adaptation it is assumed that a deeper processing strategy
can be induced. Rothkopf and Billington (1979) found in an
eye-tracking-study on text-processing, that goal-relevant
information received more attention than goal-irrelevant
information, when a specific goal was available.
With a focus on a specific interest visitors were shown to
learn more (Falk et al., 1998). In this study dyads with
adaptive information were better able to use their newly
acquired knowledge to answer transfer questions. This is in
line with the assumption that subjects in this condition
elaborated higher on the content. The similar amounts of
factual knowledge in all conditions shows that even without
aware goals and adaptive information some knowledge is
acquired in informal settings. This emphasizes the
importance of non-strategic information acquisition (cp.
Berger, 2002) in informal settings like museums.
Analysis of conversational data is still missing, but the
influence of aware goals on conversation could be shown in
other studies (Higgins, McCann, & Fondacaro, 1982;
Russell & Schober, 1999). As the awareness of shared
interests or goals adds to a dyad’s common ground (Clark &
Brennan, 1991) it thereby influences conversation.
Furthermore, more thorough elaboration of information in
dyadic conversation is assumed when information is adapted
to a dyad’s shared interest, as the amount of needed mental
effort to relate the information to this shared interest is
reduced.
An open question still is, whether the awareness of a
specific interest also induces a learning orientation in
visitors. A preliminary study showed an influence of
learning orientation on the visiting behavior (more
information and exhibits examined, higher scores in the
knowledge test). These patterns are similar to preliminary
results of the main study. Detailed analysis of the
conversational data might answer the question whether a
dyad’s awareness of shared goals led to a more focused
visiting strategy.
Studies on invested mental effort reported that less mental
effort is invested in leisure settings (Salomon, 1984). These
results show that adaptation of information and awareness
of shared goals are two powerful ways to elicit deeper

Results
To compare visiting behavior across the experimental
conditions, overall visiting time, number of selected exhibits
and mean time at exhibits were analyzed. Preliminary data
analysis1 indicates that subjects have similar overall visiting
times in all conditions and spend similar amounts of time at
exhibits on the average. Subjects in condition 2 tended to
look at less exhibits than subjects in conditions 1 and 4
(df = 2, F = 2.33, p = .10; cp. figure 1).

Mean Number of Exhibits

200,00

150,00

100,00

50,00

0,00
1

2

4

experimental condition

Figure 1: Mean number of exhibits visited
Conversational data have not been analyzed so far.
Communication will be categorized with respect to
negotiation processes, evidence of goal-orientation in
exhibit selection and elaboration on information, and depth
of processing. However, similarity of data within dyads is a
first indicator that social processes during the visit lead to
convergence of dyads (e.g., subjective knowledge
acquisition ICC = 0.39, F = 2.26, p = .003, however prior
knowledge ICC = 0.03, F = 1.07, p = 0.41, cp. Kenny,
Kashy, & Cook, 2006).
With respect to knowledge acquisition, dyads, who
received information that matched their shared interests,
tended to be better able to answer transfer questions (df = 2,
F = 2.17, p = .10). No differences were found with respect
to factual knowledge.
First analysis did not show different amounts of invested
mental effort between groups, but more sophisticated data
analyses are still in progress.

Discussion
Other studies found that visitors focused on a specific
interest stay longer in a museum (Doering & Pekarik, 1997;
Falk et al., 1998). In contrast, this study found similar
overall visiting time in all conditions. As subjects to a
1
Data collection of condition 3 and data analysis is still in
progress. Therefore, only tendencies are described and no numbers
are reported. Results of the whole sample will be presented at the
conference.

1292

elaboration in leisure settings. However, no differences in
amounts of invested mental effort were found between the
experimental conditions so far. Studies on adaptive systems
in formal (Brusilovsky, 2003) and informal contexts
(Goren-Bar et al., 2006) show interindividual differences in
acceptance and effect of adaptive systems depending on
personality and prior knowledge. Maybe analysis of
conversational data will give further insight into this
question.
Overall, this study showed that both support systems –
goal-awareness and adaptation – had an impact on visiting
behavior and learning in the exhibition Nanodialogue: As
adaptive technology provides the visitor with goal-relevant
information, free-choice in the informal setting is
maintained and less mental effort is needed to find
appropriate information. With adaptive technology visitors
seem to gain knowledge more flexible for transfer.
Additionally, an informal setting like a museum emphasizes
not only learning, but also enjoyment and development of
interest and public understanding of science and humanities
(PUSH, Durant, 1992) as outcomes of a museum visit.
Influences of adaptive technologies on PUSH, visiting
enjoyment, and interest development are important topics to
be addressed in future studies.

Acknowledgments
The first author is member of the Virtual PhD-Program
"Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with
New Media" (VGK) sponsored by the German Research
Association (DFG). This dissertation is conducted within
the wider context of an interdisciplinary research project on
learning in the museum (Deutsches Museum, Munich;
Institute for Science Education, Kiel; Knowledge Media
Research Center, Tuebingen) with new technologies funded
by the "Pact for research and innovation" of the German
Federal Ministry of Education and Research.

References
Allen, S. (2002). Looking for learning in visitors talk: A
methodological exploration. In G. Leinhardt, K. Crowley,
& K. Knutson (Eds.), Learning conversations in
museums. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Anderson, D. (2003). Visitors’ long-term memories of
World Expositions. Curator, 46, 400-420.
Austin, J. T., & Vancouver, J. B. (1996). Goal constructs in
psychology: Structure, process and content. Psychological
Bulletin, 120, 338-375.
Ben-Simon, A., Budescu, D. V., & Nevo, B. (1997). A
comparative study of measures of partial knowledge in
multiple-choice
tests.
Applied
Psychological
Measurement, 21, 65-88.
Berger, C. R. (2002). Strategic and nonstrategic information
acquisition. Human Communication Research, 28, 287297.
Bitgood, S. (2000). The role of attention in designing
effective interpretive labels. Journal of Interpretation
Research, 5(2), 31-45.

Black, G. (2005). The engaging museum. London:
Routledge.
Boekaerts, M., & Minnaert, A. (1999). Self-regulation with
respect to informal learning. International Journal of
Educational Research, 31, 533-544.
Brusilovsky, P. (2003). Adaptive navigation support in
educational hypermedia: The role of student knowledge
level and the case for meta-adaptation. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 34, 487-497.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.), Socially shared cognition. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Hermanson, K. (1995). Intrinsic
motivation in museums: Why does one want to learn? In
J. H. Falk & L. D. Dierking (Eds.), Public institutions for
personal learning: Establishing a research agenda.
Washington, DC: American Association of Museums.
Dierking, L. D., Ellenbogen, K. M., & Falk, J. H. (2004). In
principle, in practice: Perspectives on a decade of
museum learning research (1994-2004). Science
Education, 88, 1-3.
Doering, Z. D., & Pekarik, A. J. (1997). Why time is not
quality. Curator, 40, 249-252.
Durant, J. (1992). Museums and the public understanding of
science. London: Science Museum.
Evans, G. W. (1995). Learning and the physical
environment. In J. L. Falk & L. D. Dierking (Eds.), Public
institutions for personal learning: Establishing a research
agenda. Washington, DC: American Association of
Museums.
Falk, J. (1997). Testing a museum exhibition design
assumption: The effect of explicit labeling of exhibit
clusters on visitor concept development. Science
Education, 81, 679-687.
Falk, J. H., Moussouri, T., & Coulson, D. (1998). The
effects of visitors’ agendas on museum learning. Curator,
41, 107-120.
Goren-Bar, D., Graziola, I., Pianesi, F., & Zancanaro, M.
(2006). The influence of personality factors on visitor
attitudes towards adaptivity dimensions for mobile
museum guides. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 16, 31-62.
Higgins, E. T., McCann, C. D., & Fondacaro, R. (1982).
The “communication game”: Goal-directed encoding and
cognitive consequences. Social Cognition, 1, 21-37.
Hinsz, V. B., Tindale, R. S., & Vollrath, D. A. (1997). The
emerging conceptualization of groups as information
processors. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 43-64.
Hollingshead, A. B., & Brandon, D. P. (2003). Potential
benefits of communication in transactive memory
systems. Human Communication Research, 29, 607-615.
Höök, K. (2003). Social navigation: From the web to the
mobile. In G. Szwillus & J. Ziegler (Eds.), Mensch &
Computer 2003: Interaktion in Bewegung. Stuttgart: B. G.
Teubner.

1293

Kenny, D. A., Kashy, D. A., & Cook, W. L. (2006). Dyadic
data analysis. New York: Guilford Press.
Leinhardt, G., Crowley, K., & Knutson, K. (Eds.). (2002).
Learning conversations in museums. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Levine, J. M., Resnick, L. B., & Higgins, E. T. (1993).
Social foundations of cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 44, 585-612.
Loewenstein, G. (1994). The psychology of curiosity: A
review and reinterpretation. Psychological Bulletin, 116,
75-98.
Not, E., Petrelli, D., Stock, O., Strapparava, C., &
Zancanaro, M. (1997). Person-oriented guided visits in a
physical museum. In D. Bearman & J. Trant (Eds.),
Museum Interactive Multimedia 1997: Cultural Heritage
Systems Design and Interfaces. Pittsburgh, PA: Archives
& Museum Informatics.
Packer, J. (2006). Learning for fun: The unique contribution
of educational leisure experiences. Curator, 48, 329-344.
Packer, J., & Ballantyne, R. (2005). Solitary vs. shared
learning: Exploring the social dimension of museum
learning. Curator, 48, 177-192.
Petrelli, D., Not, E., & Zancanaro, M. (1999). Getting
engaged and getting tired: What is in a museum
experience. In Proceedings of the workshop on ‘Attitude,
Personality and Emotions in User-Adapted Interaction’,
Banff.
Retrieved
June
15,
2006,
from
http://tcc.itc.it/people/not/papers/UM99emotion.ps.gz

Rothkopf, E. Z., & Billington, M. J. (1979). Goal-guided
learning from text: Inferring a descriptive processing
model from inspection times and eye movements. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 71, 310-327.
Russell, A. W., & Schober, M. F. (1999). How beliefs about
a partner's goals affect referring in goal-discrepant
conversations. Discourse Processes, 27, 1-33.
Salomon, G. (1984). Television is “easy” and print is
“tough”: The differential investment of mental effort as a
function of perceptions and attributions. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 76, 647-658.
Salomon, G., & Perkins, D. N. (1998). Individual and social
aspects of learning. Review of Research in Education, 23,
1-24.
Serrell, B. (1997). Paying attention: The duration and
allocation of visitors’ time in museum exhibitions.
Curator, 40, 108-125.
Teo, J. (2005). ScienceAlive: Wireless, location-based,
multimedia PDA tour guide. In S. Hsi (Ed.), Electronic
Guidebook Forum. San Francisco: Exploratorium.
Retrieved
March
9,
2006,
from
http://www.exploratorium.edu/guidebook/eguides_forum
2005.pdf
Zumbach, J., & Reimann, P. (2002). Enhancing learning
from hypertext by inducing a goal orientation: Comparing
different approaches. Instructional Science, 30, 243-267.

1294

