UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Surprise in the Learning of Color Words

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6k08d0fn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Ramscar, Micheal
Thorpe, Kirsten
Denny, Katie

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Surprise in the Learning of Color Words
Michael Ramscar (michael@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305

Kirsten Thorpe (thorpe@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305

Katie Denny (katie32@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Building 420
Stanford, CA 94305
Smith, 1999). If shown a blue cup and asked about its
color, typical 2-year-olds seem as likely to answer “red” as
“blue.” Even as late as age 4, sighted children may still be
unable to accurately sort objects by color, even after
hundreds of explicit training trials (Rice, 1978).
In English, while word order for color adjectives varies,
they are used overwhelmingly in prenominal position (e.g.,
“blue cup”), such that word order causes the adjective to
arrive before its meaning, rather than post-nominal
presentation (e.g., “the cup is blue”), where the meaning
cues the word. We hypothesize that children’s
incompetence at color word learning in English is not
caused by any unique property of color, or indeed, of the
world. Rather, it reflects an interaction between the very
mechanisms that enable children to be such masterful
word learners in the first place, and the way that these
mechanisms interact with these order effects as color
words are presented in real-time.
Although it may surprise linguists that the relative order
of words matters so much in learning, these effects are
consistent with many models of animal learning. In these
models, animals do not learn “facts” about the world.
Rather, they learn cues that predict events; learning
involves strengthening representations of the values of
these cues (this is true for both “associative” and
“information processing” models, e.g., Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972; Gallistel & Gibbon, 2000). Thus animal
learning can be characterized – irrespective of the
particular framework one is examining – as the process by
which useful predictive structure in the world is
discovered. For example, the Rescorla-Wagner (1972)
learning model is a model of elementary associative
learning that has been employed in many contexts and
used to explain a wide variety of learning effects both in
animals and humans (e.g., Gluck and Bower, 1988). In the
model, the discovery process can be broadly characterized
as follows: an animal observes that a series of cues (CSs)
occur, and based on the predictive (or associative) strength
that these CSs have acquired relative to various
environmental outcomes (USs) which can subsequently

Abstract
In two experiments, we investigate whether, in English,
children’s difficulty learning color adjectives might stem
from their overwhelming tendency to be used in prenominal position (e.g., “blue cup”), where word order
causes the adjective to arrive ahead of its meaning, rather
than post-nominal presentation (e.g., “the cup is blue”),
where the meaning cues the word. We consider factors of
sequencing from the point of view of models of animal
learning. Results indicate that children as young as 2 years
begin to reliably master color words when hearing them in
training presented post-nominally, but not pre-nominally,
and that adults challenged with learning novel color
categories are affected by the same ordering effects. We
suggest that children’s difficulty with color word learning is
in part due to the challenge of having to make predictions
from words to the properties they refer to, rather than being
able to make predictions from the world to the words.
Keywords: learning; language; color words; modeling.

Introduction
In the course of the first few years of their lives, children
successfully master the use of hundreds of words. Words
for objects, actions, emotions, relationships, states of
affairs and myriad other aspects of the social, physical and
metaphysical worlds they encounter. For some reason,
however, in spite of their impressive feats in most other
domains, when it comes to learning color words, children
perform abjectly. So miserable were his children at
learning color names relative to other words that Darwin
(1877) initially concluded they were color-blind. Though
this is incorrect – 4 month old children can distinguish
between basic color categories (Bornstein, Kessen, &
Weiskopf, 1976) – Darwin can hardly be faulted for his
observation: young children use color words in the same
way that blind children do (Landau & Gleitman, 1985):
words such as “blue” and “yellow” appear in children’s
expressive language in answer to answer questions such as
“what color is this?” but their mapping to individual colors
is haphazard and interchangeable (e.g., Sandhofer &

575

and (3) the availability of cues, which allow the prediction
of the outcomes (the discovery of the correct configuration
of cues to successfully predict an outcome is the product
of learning).
How might these elements relate to word or symbol
learning? If learning is a process by which the predictors
of behaviorally important outcomes in the environment are
identified, the words of a language might be considered as
both behaviorally important cues and outcomes. To take a
benign example, a word such as “chair” is a regularity that
applies to the somewhat varied set of entities on the world
we happen to call chairs. In other words, the word “chair,”
when it occurs, might be predicted by, and serve to
predict, a set of features in the world that are to some
degree systematic. Moreover, it appears that children can
learn to identify the sounds of words from speech as useful
signals in a way that would allow them to serve as
regularities in the world that could enter into predictive
relationships with other cues or outcomes (see Saffran,
Aslin and Newport, 1996). Hence in encountering the
word “chair,” a child might learn both that the word
“chair” serves as a cue to the presence of certain objects in
the environment, and the cues that predict occurrences of
the word “chair”. From this perspective the goals of word
learning are to identify (i) the set of environmental
outcomes (objects or features) that the word “chair”
predicts, and (ii) the set of features in the world that can
serve as cues to the word “chair.” (This conception of
word-learning differs from “referential” views of wordlearning in that while these theories stress the idea that
words act as cues to things in the environment – such that
hearing “chair” allows a listener to pick out some referent
in the world – they do not generally consider the
environment as a cue to words; see Bloom, 2000, for a
review).
What implications does the view of words as cues that
we have outlined have for our understanding of word
learning? As we noted above, on the view that a set of
objects in the world predicts a word, a surprise, or errordriven learning model such as the Rescorla-Wagner model
would learn – through a process of cue competition – the
set of cues that most reliably predicts that word (this might
loosely be characterized as learning the “concept”
associated with that word; see also Gluck and Bower,
1988). On the other hand, if a word predicts an object
(which can consist, potentially, of a constellation of
features, or dimensions), the situation can be very
different. From this perspective, words appear to have a
unique (or at least extremely uncommon) status relative to
other cues in the world: while objects can have many
features that can be simultaneously co-present (and hence,
when the features of an object serve as cues to a word, cue
competition will occur between these features with the
result that the cue structure that serves to best predict the
word will be learned under Rescorla-Wagner learning),
words are single identifiable events in the world that do
not tend to be bound to other specific co-occurring events.

occur, the animal is able to anticipate the likelihood of
observing each of these USs. After a delay, one or more of
the USs actually occurs, and based on the degree to which
the set of USs was mispredicted – informally, based on the
degree to which the animal was ‘surprised’ by the outcome
– learning takes place. In particular, the amount of
learning, which is manifested in the change of associative
strengths between CS and US elements, is proportional to
the size of the discrepancy between the actual outcome and
the outcome predicted by the animal, such that more
learning happens when events are poorly predicted than
when they are well predicted. The outcome of this process
is far from the simple binary Stimulus-Response process
which is often used to characterize Pavlovian conditioning,
instead, what is learned by this process are sets of cues in
the environment, and the complex sets of relations
between them that allow an animal to represent and better
understand its surroundings (Rescorla, 1988). Learning
thus depends both on what is observed to occur, and also
the strength to which the set of actual outcomes was
predicted, based on (the strength) of what has already been
learned. As a consequence, when multiple cues (CSs) are
present, cues compete with one another in order to explain
subsequent US outcomes. For example, if one cue already
serves as a perfectly reliable predictor of an outcome, an
additional cue observed in conjunction with the original
cue at a later time will not become strongly associated with
the outcome, even if it is also a perfect predictor of the
outcome. This is because the predictive strength of the first
cue is such that the animal is never ‘surprised’ by the
outcome, so there is no error-signal (discrepancy between
observed and expected outcome) to drives changes in the
predictive values of the set of cues present (such
‘blocking’ is well established in animal and human
learning).
As a result of these interactions between cues, the
outcome of learning under the Rescorla-Wagner model is
far from the simple binary stimulus-response process that
is often used to characterize Pavlovian conditioning (and
which did indeed accurately characterize early linear
models of learning). Instead, the Rescorla-Wagner model
proposes that when an animal encounters important
regularities in its environment, what is learned are both the
cues, and the complex relations between them, that allow
the animal to represent, predict and understand that
environment (Rescorla, 1988).
Three elements are key to learning in the RescorlaWagner model: (1) the availability of identifiable
regularities to drive learning (the prediction of regularly
identifiable, behaviorally important aspects of the
environment such as events, objects, etc., is the goal of the
learning process under this analysis); (2) inadequate
anticipation of these regularities, which drives learning
(violation of expectation is the key mechanism that
initiates learning; evidence suggests that the neural
realization of this error signal may be a dopamine response
originating in the midbrain; Hollerman and Schultz, 1998);

576

comprised six objects that were novel to the children.
There were three examples of each object in each of three
colors (red, yellow and blue). The objects were presented
on trays, with the target object location counterbalanced
across trials. In both tests, children were asked to select the
novel objects in response to requests in which the color
word was either a prenominal (“which is the red one?”) or
a post-nominal (“which one is red?”). Question order was
counterbalanced (children were never asked for the same
color consecutively), and the form of the initial question
was balanced between participants.
In training the children were introduced to a “magic
bucket” containing 5 sets of items familiar to 26-montholds (balls, cups, crayons, glasses and toy bears) in each of
the three colors. Half the children were then presented
with the items one-by-one and heard them labelled with
color words used prenominally (“This is a red crayon”)
while the other half were introduced to the same items
described with a postnominal color word (“This crayon is
red”). Children then repeated the selection task on the
novel items (the post-test was identical to the pre-test).
As we noted above, the problem associated with
children’s difficulty with color words is not these words
are not unfamiliar, or that they can’t use color words in
appropriate parts of speech. Rather, it is that they fail to
consistently map color words to correct colors (to this
extent the color word usage of sighted children of this age
appears similar to that of blind children, Landau &
Gleitman, 1985). Thus to assess the quality of children’s
knowledge of the color words, and the effect of each type
of training, correct choices on items that were consistent
across the pre- and post-tests were used to measure
children’s color knowledge (a child was not considered to
“know”, or be a competent user of a color word if their
pre- and post-test choice for a given color word was
incorrect or inconsistent). Since the erratic nature of
children’s color word usage and comprehension is one of
its more striking features, consistency of correct behavior
constituted a relatively robust criterion for attributing color
knowledge in 2-year-olds.

As such, cue competition might not apply when a word
serves as a cue to other events in the environment (there is
little cue structure associated with a word as a cue; just the
word itself). This difference may in turn lead to important
differences between in the learning that takes place when
using a word as a cue to a set of features, versus using a
set of features as a cue to a word.
In the Rescorla-Wagner model differences in the
associations learned from cues arises as a function of cue
competition. Hence the logic of the model suggests that
when a single cue (such as a word) predicts multiple
outcomes (i.e. numerous features), each individual
outcome could serve as a regularity relative to the learning
of the predictive value of that cue. Therefore, with regular
pairing and in the absence of other competing cues, the
cue would simply increase its associative strength to the
various features (or values on a dimension) until each
association was learned to asymptote. Thus, ultimately, all
the features could come to be predicted by the cue with
similar associative strengths, such that the cue (word)
would not come to discriminate between outcomes in any
meaningful sense. The situation could be very different
when there are multiple cues to a single environmental
outcome, however. In this case the cues would compete
with one another, meaning that the associations learned are
likely to be more variable. In this case, discrimination
between the various features is likely to be greater (see
Ramscar & Yarlett, under review, for a formal treatment of
this).
In English, the language most carefully investigated in
the domain of children’s color word learning, color
adjectives occur prenominally (“blue cup”) around 70% of
the time in the speech adults direct at children (Thorpe &
Fernald, 2006). When a color word is used prenominally
as language unfolds in time, it acts as a cue to the feature
to be learned (the color mapping) rather than being cued
by that feature. Together with our analysis of learning
theory, this suggests a reason for children’s difficulties
with color word learning in English: most of what they
hear from adults will be unhelpful in learning what color
words refer to. To explore this, in Experiment 1 we
conducted a training study with children at an age where
they are still struggling to master color adjectives (Rice,
1978; Sandhofer & Smith, 1999) and in Experiment 2, we
sought to replicate our findings with children in adults
learning novel color categories.

Results and discussion
Individual analysis of the pre- and post-test data (which
confirmed parental vocabulary reports) showed the
children had at least some knowledge of the three color
words: they averaged 2 out of 3 correct choices in
response to both pre- and postnominal question types,
significantly more than chance both the pre- (M=63%,
t(81) = 7.77, p<0.0001) and post- tests (M=57%, t(81) =
5.57, p<0.0001). To establish how robust this knowledge
was, and to see whether robustness was affected by the
different methods of training and testing we employed, a 2
(training type) x 2 (testing type) ANOVA was conducted
of pre- and post-test consistency. This revealed a
significant
interaction
between
these
factors
(F(1,39)=7.48, p<0.01; see Figure 1), indicating that
performance was at its most consistent when children were

Experiment 1
Participants
Participants were 41 children aged between 23 and 29
(M=26) months recruited from the Stanford area. All were
typically developing, monolingual, English learners.
Method and materials
Experiment 1 comprised 3 phases: a pre-test, training, and
a post-test that was identical to the pre-test. Test materials

577

very short stimulus exposures, either when the category
name preceded the exemplar (to simulate pre-nominal
learning) or when the exemplar preceded the category
name (to simulate post-nominal learning).

both trained and tested on postnominal adjectives, and
worst when trained on prenominal adjectives and tested on
post-nominal adjectives (that the children performed
poorest on postnominals when they were not trained on
them is consistent with the low frequency of postnominal
color adjectives in the input in English). Post hoc tests
revealed significant effects of both training and question
type: only the children trained with postnominally
presented color words made more consistent correct sorts
than one would expect by chance (M = 51%, t(41) = 2.9,
p<0.01) compared to an average of 38% correct in the
pre-nominal training group, t(39) = 0.76, p>0.4).
Moreover, when children’s responses to the question types
were assessed independently, only children who had been
trained with postnominal color word presentation and then
tested with postnominal question types were significantly
more accurate than chance (M = 59%, t(20) = 3.2,
p<0.005; the p values in all other cells were greater than
.3, see Figure 1).
0.8

Experiment 2
Participants
Participants were 16 Stanford undergraduates.
Method and materials
In order to challenge adult participants, who are already
well aware of what hues standard color adjectives refer to,
adults were asked to learn three categories that
transcended ordinary color category boundaries mixing
two different regions of color space within one category.
One additional filler category was used that only occupied
a single area of color space.
To further challenge adult participants, and to ensure
that they could not use their pre-existing knowledge of
color words in testing, training was arranged so that 75%
of the exemplars they saw for each of the three mixed test
categories were from one of the category’s regions (high
frequency), and only 25% were from the other (low
frequency). Training was arranged so that the low
frequency exemplars were more similar (closer in color
space) either to the high frequency exemplars of another
category, or the filler category, while still being clearly
discriminable from the other categories (Figure 2).
Adult participants were trained and then tested on their
ability to correctly classify the low frequency exemplars
by name, and therefore reject competition from the high
frequency exemplars from other categories. Training in the
post-exemplar label condition consisted of seeing a 175ms
flash of a color exemplar followed by a 1 second exposure
to a written sentence naming the color, e.g., “That was
wug.” In the pre-exemplar label condition, the order of
presentation of sentence and colored screen were reversed,
and participants read e.g., “This is wug.”
To control for any bias in the method of testing, and in
order to recreate some of the pre- / post-test comparisons
we performed in Experiment 1, half of the participants in
each training condition were first tested by matching a
single category name to four category exemplars (one
from each category) and then given further training, after
which they were tested on matching a single exemplar to
the four category names; for the other half of the
participants the order of the tests was reversed. Assessing
performance on trials after initial and secondary training
allowed us to assess whether there were performance gains
or losses in each condition as training increased, as in
Experiment 1. Each training block comprised 20
exemplars from each category, each repeated twice, and
each test block comprised 26 test trials.

Prenominal Questions
Postnominal Questions

Average % Consistent Correct Sorts

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Prenominal Training

Postnominal Training

Figure 1: The average number of consistent correct sorts by
the children in the training study (error bars are SEM).

Finally, comparing the pre- and post-test scores across
each condition revealed a significant decline in
performance when children were both pre-tested (M = 65%
correct) and post-tested (M = 48%) with questions that
placed the color words prenominally (t(20) = 2.236,
p<0.05, two tailed). No significant overall changes were
observed in the other cells.
Consistent with the analysis presented above, it appears
that when children are exposed to color adjectives in postnominal position, they learn them rapidly (after just 5
training trials per color); when they are presented with
them pre-nominally, as English overwhelming tends to do,
children they show no signs of learning.
This result is a striking testament to the predictions we
derived from error-driven learning models above. To
investigate whether adults might demonstrate similar
learning patterns, in a laboratory study, we taught
undergraduates novel color categories using a training
regime that required them to learn four categories from

578

exposure exemplars correctly 39% of the time in a 4AFC
task where chance was 25% (t(23)=2.84, p<0.01), whereas
when trained with the label preceding the exemplars,
participants sorted only 26% of the low exposure
exemplars correctly (t(23)=0.23, p>0.8).

Label -> Exemplar Learning
0.9
block 1
block 2

0.8

% Correct Sorts

0.7
0.6

Exemplar -> Label Learning

0.5

0.8

0.4

block 1
block 2

0.7

0.3

0.6
% Correct Sorts

0.2
0.1
0
High (75%)

Low (25%)

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Figure 2: The three mixed-color categories and the filler
category from Experiment 2. In the mixed categories, high
exposure exemplars form the top row, and low exposure
exemplars the bottom row
0.8

0
High (75%)

Low (25%)

Figure 4: Test performance after Block 1 and Block 2 in the
post-exemplar (top) and pre-exemplar (bottom) conditions.

High (75%)
Low (25%)

0.7

Average % Correct

0.6

Further, the failure of participants in the label first training
condition did not appear to be something that further
training would remedy. An analysis of the change in
performance between tests one and two revealed that while
(as predicted), participants in the exemplar first training
condition showed a significant improvement in accuracy
for low frequency items between trials one (32%) and two
(46%, t(24)=1.8, p<0.05; there was no significant change
for the high frequency items), participants in the label first
condition showed a decrease in performance between trials
one (31%) and two (21%, t(24)=2.05, p<0.05, two-tailed).
This decline (which was consistent with the decline in
performance in the pre-nominal test/train data in
Experiment 1) was mirrored in the high frequency items as
well (trial one 72%, trial two 60%, t(24)=2.2, p<0.05, twotailed; Figure 4).

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Label -> Exemplar

Exemplar -> Label

Figure 3: The average number of correct sorts by participants
in Experiment 2 (error bars are SEM).

Results and discussion
Participants failed to learn to classify the low frequency
exemplars when they were given a label prior to a color
sample in training, effectively mimicking children’s
experience with pre-nominal color words, but succeeded in
learning them from exactly the same number of exposures
at the same duration when the color samples preceded the
label, mimicking children’s experience with post-nominal
color words. A repeated measures ANOVA of high and
low frequency performance with training type as a
between subjects factor revealed a main effect of training
condition, (F(1,24)=46.00, p<0.001), with no interaction
between training and frequency. Critically, analysis of the
low frequency categories revealed that participants in the
condition where the category label followed the category
exemplars (the “post-nominal” condition) sorted the low

General Discussion
In two Experiments testing the learning capacities of both
young children and adults, we have demonstrated that the
difficult (in English at least) task of mapping a color word
to a specific color (or space of colors) in the world can be
massively affected by the order in which words and their
referents are arranged. The importance of sequencing and
timing is well established in animal learning: in animal
models (or any model that implements cue competition),
what gets learned depends on the timing of one event
relative to another. These factors may apply to learning
words and meanings more than has often been supposed.

579

Landau, B., & Gleitman, L. R. (1985). Language and
experience: Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press
Ramscar, M & Yarlett, D (under review), The temporal
and predictive structure of symbolic category learning.
Rescorla, R.A. 1988. Pavlovian conditioning: It's not what
you think. American Psychologist 43:151-160.
Rescorla RA, Wagner AR. (1972) A theory of Pavlovian
conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In: Classical
Conditioning II: Current Research and Theory. New
York: Appleton Century Crofts, pp. 64-99
Rice, M. L. (1978). The effect of children’s prior
nonverbal color concepts on the learning of color words.
(PhD dissertation, University of Kansas, 1978)
Dissertation Abstracts International, 39 (8-A), 4915.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928
Sandhofer, C. M., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Learning color
words involves learning a system of mappings.
Developmental Psychology, 35, 668-679.
Thorpe, K., & Fernald, A. (2006). Knowing what a novel
word is not: Two-year-olds "listen through" ambiguous
adjectives in fluent speech. Cognition, 100, 389-433.

Acknowledgements
We thank Nicole Gitcho, Brad Love and Dan Yarlett for
discussion. This research was supported by a National
Science Foundation CAREER Award (#0547775) to MR

References
Bloom, P. (2000). How Children Learn the Meanings of
Words. Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Bornstein, M. H., W. Kessen, & S. Weiskopf. (1976).
Color Vision and Hue Categorization in Young Human
Infants, Journal of Experimental Psychology 2:115-19.
Darwin, C. (1877) Biographiche skizze eines kleinen
kindes. Kosmos, 367 –376.
Gallistel, C. R., & Gibbon, J. (2000). Time, rate, and
conditioning. Psychological Review, 107, 289–344
Gluck, M. A., & Bower, G. H. (1988). From conditioning
to category learning: An adaptive network model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117,
227-247
Hollerman, R. and Schultz, W. (1998) Dopamine neurons
report an error in the temporal prediction of reward
during learning, Nature Neuroscience 1(4): 304-309

580

