UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Integration of Salivary Immunoglobulin A by the Repetitive Stressful Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28n7q0pn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Nomura, Shusaku
Mizuno, Tota
Nozawa, Akio
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Integration of Salivary Immunoglobulin A by the Repetitive Stressful Task
Shusaku Nomura (nomra@cis.shimane-u.ac.jp)
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Shimane University
1060 Nishikawatsu, Matsue, Shimane, 6908504 JAPAN

Tota Mizuno (mizuno@biel.ee.aoyama.ac.jp)
Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, Aoyama Gakuin University
5-10-1 Fuchinobe, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 2298558 JAPAN

Akio Nozawa (akio@ee.meisei-u.ac.jp)
Department of Electrical Engineering, Meisei University
2-1-1 Hodokubo, hino, Tokyo, 1918506 JAPAN

Hideto Ide
Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, Aoyama Gakuin University
5-10-1 Fuchinobe, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 2298558 JAPAN
studies, by contrast, focus on the change of human secretion
inside the body by assessing the variety of hormones and
immune substances. Those substances are considered to
interact both central and autonomic nervous system, thus
PNEI is expected to reveal the underlying mechanism of
how the stressor recognized in a brain brings forth the
physiological change inside human body.
However, even though past PNEI studies successfully
observed physiological changes in the human body
depending on subjects’ mental states (see the review e.g.,
Bosh, Ring, de Geus, Veerman & Amerongen, 2002), the
number of studies is still small and some studies have
reported controversial results. Besides, there are some
technical and methodological issues need to be improved.
For example, few studies have been investigated precise
change of secretory substances in time series. Most of the
past studies assessed human secretion, such as saliva, urine,
and blood, just before and after 20-30 minutes of
psychological intervention but covering all the experimental
period. Some reasons can be thought for that small numbers
of assessing human secretory substances; acceptability of
subjects for repetitive sampling that is especially for blood
and urine, expense of quantitative determination of
secretory substances. However, the change of secretory
substance in the human body are recently turned out to be
much more sensitive in terms of reaction speed ever thought
before. It thus is possible that the small time difference of
secretion collection could result in big difference of the
amount of secretory substances, and that would lead to the
controversial results against the same psychological
interventions (Valdimarsdottir & Stone, 1997). In addition,
such physiological responses are also turned out not to be a
merely reflection for the given interventions but higher
cognitive processes including individual personality can
mediate those responses (Valdimarsdottir & Stone, 1997;
Ohira, 2001; Bosh, Ring, de Geus et al., 2002). Therefore,
for further investigation, it is quite important to design an
experiment more systematic, well controlled, and
reproducible.

Abstract
Recent psychophysiological studies have revealed that the
human endocrine and immune secretion changes its level
sensitively according to participants' subjective stress and
relaxation. In this study, one of the major secretory immune
substances, salivary Immunoglobulin A (IgA), was assessed
to investigate the human secretion response induced by a
short-term stress. In the experiments, subjects were required
to conduct a short period of a calculation task repeatedly with
intervals. The result indicated that the IgA changed clearly
along with the calculation/interval schedule. Thus the IgA
could be assumed to reflect the participants' subjective stress
level. Besides, the integrative change of IgA was also
observed depending on the duration of the stressful task. The
relatively slower and long lasting modulation feature of the
secretion response could result in such an integrative change.
This, in turn, shows the possibility of estimating the
intermittent workload stress in our daily life by tracing IgA.
Keywords: Immunoglobulin A; stress marker; acute stress;
Psychoneuroendocrinology; Psychoneuroimmunology

Introduction
This study is targeted on the estimation of human mental
stress by introducing one of the human secretory substances,
salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA). This intriguing new field
of study has been started by the findings in 70’s that the
human secretory substances changes its volume depending
on his/her mental states. That field of study has then
drastically developed for the last decade accompanying with
the development of molecular analysis techniques, and
nowadays, it forms an interdisciplinary scientific field called
as Psychoneuroendocrinology (PNE) and/or Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) (Ader, Felten & Cohen, 2001)1. In
the numerous past psychophysiological studies, stress
estimation has been frequently investigated introducing
central and autonomic nervous system indices, such as brain
wave, heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration. PNEI
1
In this paper, we use the term PNEI (Psychoneuroendocrineimmunology) for indicating both PNE and PNI.

1349

However, the precise IgA modulation against a shortterm stress is still unknown. We then conducted an
experiment investigating the changes of IgA concentration
in time series induced by a short-term stressful task with
repetitive saliva collection.

In this study, we investigated the precise change of
salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA) induced by a short-term
stressful task paying attention to the methodological issues
mentioned above. IgA is one of the immune substances
secreted in saliva, and it is known to increase by mental
stress and frequently introduced in past PNEI studies. But
no study has investigated the precise change of IgA in time
series. We thus designed an experiment aiming to obtain a
basic and useful knowledge for future PNEI study.

Method
Subjects
Subjects recruited for this study were ten healthy male
students, ages ranged from 21 to 31 years old. They were
well informed about the experiment and the purpose of our
study before the experiment. They all had no problem about
physical condition and did not have any infectious illness
when they experienced the experiment. Subjects were
indicated not to eat and drink without water for one hour
prior to the experiment because pH of saliva could affect
quantitative determination of IgA.

Salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA)
A glycoprotein called immunoglobulin A (IgA) is one of the
most important substances for human immune system. IgA
exists within serum and other various secretory fluids, such
as saliva, breast milk, and nasal, gastrointestinal, bronchial,
and urogenital secretions. IgA containing in those secretory
fluid (IgA) are normally in the dimeric form combined with
other glycoprotein named J chain and secretory component
(SC) which stabilizes the IgA molecular and protects it from
degradation in those fluid (Tsujita & Morimoto, 1999). The
salivary IgA antibodies work nonspecifically and, therefore,
play a very important role for our health, e.g., for preventing
bacteria from forming colonies, neutralizing toxins and
enzymes produced by bacteria, and inhibiting pathogenic
viruses to penetrate into the epithelial cell. It is thus
considered that the salivary IgA works as the first line of
defense from influenza or other upper respiratory tract
infection (URTI) illnesses. Actually, clinical studies
suggested that the correlation between relatively higher
levels of salivary IgA and a lower incidence of an acute
URTI (Jemmott III, & McClelland, 1989). It was also
reported that the relation of salivary IgA level with caries
and periodontitis (Gregory, Kim, Kindle, Hobbs, & Lloyd,
1992).
On the other hand, by the 70's behavioral-immune studies,
it was found that salivary IgA changes its level
accompanying with various types of psychosocial factors
(see review, e.g., Valdimarsdottir & Stone, 1997; Bosh,
Ring, de Geus et al., 2002), such as desirable or undesirable
daily events (Stone, Neale, Cox, Napoli, Valdimarsdottir &
Kennedy-Moore, 1994), daily hassles (Martin & Dobbin,
1988), negative or positive mood (Martin, Guthrie & Pitts,
1993), academic stress such as an examination (Jemmott III,
Borysenko, Borysenko, McClelland, Chapman, Meyer &
Benson, 1983) and presentation (Evans, Bristow,
Hucklebridge, Clow & Pang, 1994), a short-term stress
(Jemmott III & McClelland, 1989) and relaxation (e.g.,
Green & Green, 1987; Knight & Rickard, 2001). A review
article indicated there are distinguishable two types of stress
effect on IgA: 1) increasing IgA secretion immediately after
a shot-term stress, named "immediate stress effect", and 2)
decreasing IgA secretion several days after stress, named
"delayed stress effect" (Tsujita & Morimoto, 1999). Because
the delayed stress effect could be easily masked by the
immediate stress effect, it is concluded that the IgA can be a
useful stress maker for a short-term stress.

A Short-Term Stressful Task
Subjects were instructed to conduct a simple calculation
task as a short-term stressful experience. The calculation
task was a simple addition of two double-digit integers, and
it was repeatedly presented on the laptop monitor
(INSPIRON 700m with 12.1 inch thin film transistor-liquid
crystal display, DELL Inc., USA) every 3.0 seconds with
changing the figures. Subjects were instructed to conduct
the calculation task as fast and correct as possible.
Such a simple calculation task is quite similar to so-called
Kraepelin psychodiagnostic test, which is frequently
introduced for the researches investigating the effects of the
mental stress on physiological indices. The result of our
experiment thus expects to compare with broad research
fields of study.

Experiments

1350

Two types of experiments differing the duration of
calculation task were prepared for this study to compare the
IgA changes in time series. In experiment A, subjects were
instructed to conduct two sets of 18 minutes of the
calculation tasks and 9 minutes of breaks after that. Thus the
duration of the calculation and break was 36 and 18 minutes
in total. In experiment B, subjects were instructed to
conduct six sets of 6 minutes of the calculation tasks and 3
minutes of breaks after that. The total duration of the
calculation tasks and breaks was the same as the experiment
A. Each subject daily experienced one of those types of
experimental procedures.
Saliva samples were taken by small cotton every three
minutes during the calculation tasks and breaks. Saliva was
also taken 3, 10 and 20 minutes after the last set of
calculation/break. Subjects were instructed to place the
cotton under his tongue, not to chew, for three minutes.
Those cottons were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 minutes
to remove mucin, and stored in freezing chamber at –20
Celsius before quantitative analysis.

Salivary IgA concentration was determined by enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Salivary Secretory
IgA Indirect Enzyme Immunoassay Kit, Salimetrics, LLC.,
USA). ELISA is nowadays the major molecular
determination technique. ELISA is much easier in treatment
and cheaper in running cost than other molecular
determination techniques, such as the radioimmunoassay
(RIA) that needs to be assessed with radioactive substance
and the high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
that costs higher than ELISA for samples in small number.
The principle of ELISA is based on the antigen-antibody
reaction for capturing a target substance and the enzyme
reaction for detecting the mass via optical density of
reaction produced color. The ELISA Kit we use is
employing competitive method. Brief description of the
analysis procedure is as follows; first, each saliva sample (or
standard human IgA solution) is mixed with a constant
amount of the anti-human IgA conjugated to horseradish
peroxidase (HRP). Next, the unbind IgA antibody is added
to human IgA-coated 96-well micro-plate. Because the
bottom of the micro-plate is coated with human IgA, the
unbind IgA antibody conjugated to HRP is captured. The
amount of the bind enzyme conjugate can be detected as
optimal color strength (near 450nm) cased by enzyme
reaction. Therefore, that optimal density is inversely
proportion to the concentration of IgA containing in each
saliva sample. Finally, IgA concentration of each sample is
determined by referencing the optimal density of the
standard samples. All the analysis procedure takes roughly 8
hours for one micro-plate.

Results
Behavioral profiles
The averaged score of the calculation task during the
experiment A and B indicated no significant difference. On
the other hand, according to the results of five points’ scaled
questionnaire, five out of ten subjects replied the experiment
B was relatively stressful than the experiment A.

IgA Changes in Experiment A and B
As for an averaged profile, salivary IgA concentration has
changed along with the calculation/break schedule in
experiment A and B, as in Figure 1 and 2. It shows our
experimental design was adequate for investigating the
effects of a short-term stress on human secretory substance.
In the experiment A, IgA got increased immediately after
the calculation task and decreased when the task removed.

1351

450

IgA concentration (µg/mL)

IgA determination

500

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-3 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78

Time (min)

Figure 1: IgA concentration in the experiment A. Error
bar indicates standard error. The period indicated as in gray
band represents the calculation task.
500
450

IgA concentration (µg/mL)

Each experiment A and B was conducted in the afternoon
for reducing the influence of the diurnal change of IgA. The
order of those experiments was counterbalanced among the
subjects. All the experimental procedure was conducted in a
dark and soundproof room one by one.

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
-3 0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78

Time (min)

Figure 2: IgA concentration in the experiment B. Error
bar indicates standard error. The period indicated as in gray
band represents the calculation task.
In addition, interestingly, the average IgA concentration
during the second set of the calculation task in the
experiment A was higher than that of the first set (a
significant main effect in period; F(21,189)=2.74, p<.01 and
post hoc comparisons between two sets; p<.05 by paired ttest), as in Table 1. That could happen because the duration
of the first break was not enough to recover the IgA to the
baseline.In the experiment B, IgA got slight increase and
decrease repeatedly along with the six sets of the
calculation/break. The IgA integration effect during the
experiment B was not observed unlike the experiment A, i.e.,
no significant main effect in period has found.
Comparing the experiment A and B, the average baseline
of IgA had no significant difference, but the average IgA
concentration during all through the experiment and during
through 36 minutes of the calculation task in the experiment

A was significantly higher than that of B (p<.01 by paired ttest respectively), as in Table 2.
When one considers those differences in IgA changes, it
could assume that the IgA increase by a short-term stress
would be in the form of exponential. If IgA increased and
decreased linearly, the integration effects would be found,
or not found, for both experiments because the rate of the
duration of the calculation/break was the same (2:1) in both
experiments. Thus, if a short-term stress does not last long,
IgA would decreases to the baseline during a short break,
and vice versa.

Saliva flow
The total amount of sampled saliva volume in the
experiment A was significantly smaller than that of in the
experiment B (p<.01 by paired t-test). However there was
no correlation between saliva volume and IgA in both
experiments (by Pearson’s correlation; r = -0.25, p>.05 and
r = -0.23, p>.05 for the experiment A and B).

acceleration. Actually, the IgA integrative change observed
in the experiment A can reflect the difference in IgA
increasing speed by a stressor and decreasing by break. If
one assumes that IgA increase by a stressor would be in the
form of exponential against the duration of the stressor, it is
accountable that 1) the recovering by break in the
experiment A was not enough unlike in the experiment B, 2)
averaged IgA concentration during all through the
experiment A was higher than that of B, and 3) it took much
time to recover the IgA to the baseline in the experiment A
than B.
As a whole, our experimental result could imply the
possibility of IgA as a psychophysiological index in two
aspects. One is as a transient short-term stress marker, and
another is as a long lasting or recursive stress marker.

Application of IgA for stress management

Table 1: Average IgA concentration (standard deviation)
during the first and second set of task.

Our experimental result was quite unique and remarkable in
the point that subjects’ subjective change of mental state
could be explained by a single physiological index of IgA.
Besides, stress estimation by salivary IgA has several
methodological advantages, for instance, it is easy for
sampling, non-invasive, less stress and repeatable sampling
unlike blood, conservable for a long time, and so on. That
means IgA can be applicable for a broad stress management
field, while we need to integrate much more studies on IgA
or other secretory substances. For example, the simple
calculation task introduced in our experiment possesses the
same characteristics of a typical visual display terminal
work (VDT work) in terms of its repetitive, boring and
endless feature. When one compares the behavioral profiles
in our experiments, there was no difference in performance
significantly. However the physiological change, that is the
IgA change, induced by such tasks was significantly
different; total amount of IgA secretion was higher in the
experiment A and an integration effect was observed in the
experiment A. Certainly, one might not engage such a
calculation task in actual daily VDT work, but point is the
fact that the same performance does not necessary result in
the same effects inside the human body. Thus it leads to the
idea of the stress management for the intermittent type of
office work. We have already proposed the simple
mathematical model, which could successfully mimic the
IgA change during intermittent calculation task in our
experiment (Nomura, 2006). The model is designed as the
nonlinear ordinary differential equation consisting of the
first order of exponential increasing term and the second
order of nonlinear decreasing term. We suggested that the
stress level caused deskwork could be predictable by such a
simple model and derive an optimal work/break schedule.
This idea might be applicable for other intermittent type of
work situations like as long distance driving.
On the other hand, autonomic nervous system related
indices such as heart rate and blood pressure might also
seem to be useful markers for evaluation of intermittent
workload stress. But those indices are under strong and
rapid homeostatic control, so it would not be suitable for

First task period
304.1(123.1)

Second task period
351.8(210.8)

t-test
p<.05

Unit of IgA concentration is µg/mL.
Table 2: Average IgA concentration (standard deviation).
Period
Base
Task
Break
Total

Experiment A
198.5(68.3)
327.9(173.5)
278.8(166.0)
305.6(171.5)

Experiment B
210.4(74.3)
269.0(119.8)
256.3(133.9)
263.2(126.3)

t-test
Ns
p<.01
Ns
p<.01

Unit of IgA concentration is µg/mL.

Discussion
IgA as a psychophysiological index
Our experimental results that the average IgA concentration
changed according to a short-term stress and break schedule
is quite interesting. Such an IgA change has been expected
when one reviews the numbers of past IgA studies (e.g.,
Valdimarsdottir & Stone, 1997). However almost all those
studies have assessed IgA just before and after a stressor,
thus no study has shown such a detail IgA change in time
series. Especially, in the experiment B, such an IgA change
observed even by 6 minutes of a stressful tasks and 3
minutes of breaks, while it was indicated as an averaged
profile. It implies that the IgA change induced by a shortterm stress can occur much more sensitive and rapid than
ever thought before.
On the other hand, IgA concentration had no correlation
with salivary flow rate. Therefore our experimental results
can bring basic knowledge about human IgA secretion
against mental stress, such as IgA secretion speed and

1352

evaluation of long lasting, from an order of minutes to hours,
workload stress. Actually, the heart rate showed On/Off like
change in our experiments, i.e., rose right after the task
started and fell immediately after finishing the task, but did
not show any integrative change. Respect to this point,
human secretion related indices would take an advantage as
for its slow and integrative change.

Possible mediators and other stress markers

Therefore, far more systematic and integrative researches on
the effects of a short-term stress on changes of human
salivary and/or serum substances must be necessary for
better understanding of underlying mechanism of stress
driven psychophysiological interaction. More numbers of
such researches will also promises to make a reasonable
criterion for human mental stress toward the application of
this fields, while it is not necessary to be thought that the
modulation of human mental state is continuous in time.

We have to admit there must be uncountable potential
mediator for our experiment, e.g., personality, chronic
stresses, sex, age. For example, the subjects categorized in
Type A behavioral pattern showed higher baseline of IgA
and lower reactivity against acute stressor, as in Ohira,
Watanabe, Kobayashi and Kawai (1999). Ohira also
suggested that the idea of controllability against an acute
stress unconsciously determined the salivary IgA (2001).
Those studies thus suggested that the higher cognitive
process could mediate the IgA secretion within human body.
But studies targeting on those potential mediators are still
small in number, it is necessary to investigate in future
works.
In addition, there are some possible stress markers within
human saliva besides IgA, such as cortisol (Vining &
McGinley, 1987; Kirschbaum & Hellhammer, 1994;
Ocknfels, Porter, Smyth, Kirschbaum, Hellhammer & Stone,
1995; King & Hegadoren, 2002), amylase (e.g., Yamaguchi,
Kanemori, Kanemaru, Takai, Mizuno & Yoshida, 2004;
they argue that salivary alpha-amylase responds only for
distress but for eustress.), dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA),
free-3-mehoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (free-MHPG) (e.g.,
Buchsbaum, Muscettola & Goodwin, 1981), and
Chromogranin (Nakane, Asami, Yamada & Ohira, 2002).
Especially, cortisol has been frequently introduced to the
PNEI study investigating the effect of mental stress on
human secretory circulation because it is considered that the
cortisol in saliva and/or serum directory reflects the
activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA
axis), which is thought to be the major biological pathway
against mental stress. In addition, like as IgA, there are
some studies reporting possible mediators of cortisol change,
such as diurnal change, personality like as anxiety trait
(Schlotz, Schulz, Hellhammer, Stoen & Hellhammer, 2005),
reactivity for stressor (Nagamine, Murota, & Shimizu,
2002), and hypertensive (Nyklicek, Bosh, Nieuw
Amerongen, 2005). On the other hand, the integrative PNEI
researches assessing variety of physiological indices in
blood, such as active natural killer (NK) cell level, varieties
of T lymphocyte, dopamine, norepinephrine, and
epinephrine, are recently undergoing, and showed rapid
change of composition of those substances (Isowa, Ohira &
Murashima, 2004; Kimura, Isowa, Ohira, Murashima, 2005).
But far more research would need for discussing those
results.
PNEI study is rapidly developing as mentioned above,
but there are still few studies investigating the detail change
of those substances against a short-term stress like this study.

Conclusion
In this paper, we illustrated the IgA as a useful transient
stress marker and as a long lasting stress marker. In contrast,
there are also some studies focusing on the effects of the
positive change of human mental state on IgA and other
secretory fluid. For example, the music listening helps to
recover stress-induced increased IgA to the baseline
(Nomura, Tanaka & Nagashima, 2006). Such a positive
change of human mental states might be mediated strongly
by higher cognitive process than the stress. Therefore, the
PNEI studies would possibly reveal new research methods
for cognitive science.

Acknowledgments
This work is funded in part by Ono Acoustic Research Fund.
We would like to special thank to Mr. Kyu Hioki and
Hiroyuki Maeda for their support, to all colleagues of Prof.
Ide for their voluntary participation to our experiment, and
to Yukiko Nomura and Kofuki Nomura for their helpful
discussions.

References

1353

Ader, R., Felten, L., & Cohen, N. (Eds.) (2001).
Psychoneruoimmunology.3rd ed. New York: Academic
Press.
Bosch, J.A., Ring, C., de Geus, E.J., Veerman, E.C., &
Amerongen, A.V. (2002). Stress and secretory immunity.
International Review of Neurobiology, 52, 213-253.
Buchsbaum, M.S., Muscettola, G. & Goodwin, F.K. (1981).
Urinary MHPG, stress response, personality factors and
somatosensory evoked potentials in normal subjects and
patients with major affective disorders. Neuropsychology,
7, 212-224.
Evans, P., Bristow, M., Hucklebridge, F., Clow, A., & Pang,
F.Y. (1994). Stress, arousal, cortisol and secretory
immunoglobulin A in students undergoing assessment.
The British journal of clinical psychology, 33, 575-576.
Green, R.G., & Green, M.L. (1987). Relaxation increases
salivary immunoglobulin A1. Psychological Reports, 61,
623-629.
Gregory, R.I., Kim, D.E., Kindle, J.C., Hobbs, L.C. & Lloyd,
D.R. (1992). Immunoglobulin-degrading enzymes in
localized juvenile periodontitis. Journal of periodontal
research, 27, 176-183.
Isowa, T., Ohira, H & Murashima, S. (2004). Reactivity of
immune, endocrine and cardiovascular parameters to

active and passive acute stress. Biological Psychology, 65,
101-120.
Jemmott III, J.B., Borysenko, J.Z., Borysenko, M.,
McClelland, D.C., Chapman, R., Meyer, D. & Benson, H.
(1983). Academic stress, power motivation, and decrease
in secretion rate of salivary secretory immunoglobulin A.
Lancet, 1(8339), 1400-1402.
Jemmott III, J.B., & McClelland, D.C. (1989). Secretory
IgA as a measure of resistance to infectious disease:
comments on Stone, Cox, Valdimarsdottir, and Neale.
Behavioral Medicine, 15, 63-71.
Kimura, K., Isowa, T., Ohira, H & Murashima, S. (2005).
Temporal variation of acute stress responses in
sympathetic nervous and immune systems. Biological
Psychology, 70, 131-139.
King, S.L., & Hegadoren, K.M. (2002). Stress hormones:
how do they measure up? Biological Research for
Nursing, 4, 92-103.
Kirschbaum, C., & Hellhammer, D.H. (1994). Salivary
cortisol in psychoneuroendocrine research: recent
developments
and
applications.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 19, 313-333.
Knight, W.E., & Rickard, N.S. (2001). Relaxing Music
Prevents Stress-Induced Increase in Subjective Anxiety,
Systolic Blood Pressure, and Heart Rate in Healthy Males
and Females. Journal of Music Therapy, 38, 254-272.
Martin, R.A. & Dobbin, J.P. (1988). Sense of humor,
hassles, and immunoglobulin A: evidence for a stressmoderating effect of humor. International journal of
psychiatry in medicine, 18, 93-105.
Martin, R.B., Guthrie, C.A. & Pitts, C.G. (1993). Emotional
crying, depressed mood, and secretory immunoglobulin A.
Behavioral Medicine, 19, 111-114.
Nagamine, M., Murota, M., & Shimizu, Y. (2002).
Evaluation of psychological variables under mental
arithmetic tasks by salivary cortisol and heart rate (Tech.
Rep. ET2001-121). Tokyo, JAPAN: The Institute of
Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers.
Nakane, H., Asami, O., Yamada, Y., & Ohira, H. (2002).
Effect of negative air ions on computer operation, anxiety
and salivary chromogranin A-like immunoreactivity.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 46, 85-89.
Nomura, S. (2006). Prediction of Deskwork Stress with
Visual Display Terminal by Human Immune Substance in
Saliva. Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (pp. 28432848). Taipei, China: IEEE Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics Society.

Nomura, S., Tanaka, H., & Nagashima, T. (2005). A
Physiological index of the mental stresses cased by the
deskwork with VDT and the relaxation by music.
Proceedings of ASIASENSE 2005 and The International
Conference on New Techniques in Pharmaceutical and
Biomedical Research. (pp.130-134). Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. IEEE Malaysia Section.
Nyklicek, I., Bosh, J. A., & Nieuw Amerongen, A. V.
(2005). A generalized physiological hyperreactivity to
acute stressors in hypertensive. Biological Psychology,
70, 44-51.
Ockenfels, M. C., Porter, L., Smyth, J., Kirschbaum, C.,
Hellhammer, D. H., & Stone, A. A. (1995). Effect of
chronic stress associated with unemployment on salivary
cortisol: overall cortisol levels, diurnal rhythm, and acute
stress reactivity. Psychosomatic Medicine, 57, 460-467.
Ohira, H. (2001). Controllability of aversive stimuli
unconsciously determines volume of secretory
immunoglobulin A in saliva. Japanese Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 6, 16-28.
Ohira, H., Watanabe, Y., Kobayashi, K. & Kawai, M.
(1999). The Type A Behavior Pattern and Immune
Reactivity to Brief Stress: Change of Volume of Secretory
Immunoglobulin A in Saliva. Perceptual and motor skills,
89, 423-430.
Schlots, W., Schulz, P., Hellhammer, J., Stoen, A.A., &
Hellhammer, D.H. (2005). Trait anxiety moderates the
impact of performance pressure on salivary cortisol in
everyday life. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 20, 1-14.
Stone, A.A., Neale, J.M., Cox, D.S., Napoli, A.,
Valdimarsdottir, H. & Kennedy-Moore, E. (1994). Daily
events are associated with a secretory immune response to
an oral antigen in men, Health Psychology, 13, 440-446.
Tsujita, S. & Morimoto, K. (1999). Secretory IgA in Saliva
can be a Useful Stress Maker. Environmental Health and
Preventive Medicine, 4, 1-8.
Valdimarsdottir, H.B., & Stone, A.A. (1997). Psychosocial
factors and secretory immunoglobulin A. Critical reviews
in oral biology and medicine, 8, 461-474.
Vining, R.F., & McGinley, R.A. (1987). The measurement
of hormones in saliva: possibilities and pitfalls. Journal of
Steroid Biochemistry, 27, 81-94.
Yamaguchi, M., Kanemori, T., Kanemaru, M., Takai, N.,
Mizuno, Y., & Yoshida, H. (2004). Performance
evaluation of salivary amylase activity monitor.
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 20, 491-497.

1354

