UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Mere Belief of Social Interaction Improves Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7rs81781

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Okita, Sandra Y.
Bailenson, Jeremy
Schwartz, Daniel L.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Mere Belief of Social Interaction Improves Learning
Sandra Y. Okita (yuudra@stanford.edu)
School of Education, Stanford University
485 Lasuen Mall Stanford CA 94305-3096 USA

Jeremy Bailenson (bailenson@stanford.edu)
Department of Communication, Stanford University
450 Serra Mall Stanford, CA 94305-2050

Daniel L. Schwartz (danls@stanford.edu)
School of Education , Stanford University
485 Lasuen Mall Stanford CA 94305-3096 USA
Abstract
Thirty-five adult participants tested the hypothesis that the
mere belief in having a social interaction with someone
improves learning and understanding. Participants studied a
passage on the mechanism that causes a fever. They then
entered a virtual reality environment with an embodied agent
on the other side of a table. The participant read scripted
questions relevant to the fever passage, and the agent gave
scripted responses. In the avatar condition, participants heard
that the virtual representation was controlled by a person
whom they had just met. In the agent condition, participants
heard that the virtual representation was computer controlled.
The avatar condition exhibited better learning at posttest, even
though all interactions within VR were held constant. Skin
conductance indicated that the avatar condition caused more
arousal and higher arousal was correlated with learning on a
problem-by-problem basis. Further results suggest that the
learning effect was not due to social belief per se, but rather in
the belief of taking a socially relevant action.
Keywords: Learning; virtual environments; agents; avatars.

Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) permits novel investigations of what
it means to be social. For example, it is possible to tell
people that they are interacting with an embodied agent that
is controlled by a computer. Alternatively, people can hear
they are interacting with an embodied avatar that is
controlled by a person. In this research, we examined
whether simply believing a virtual representation was an
agent (computer) or an avatar (person) affected learning.
Research on virtual reality and other new media has
examined what features cause people to treat a computer
representation as a social being (e.g., Bailenson et. al 2005;
Reeves & Nass, 1996; Schroeder, 2002). A different
question asks if differences arise when people believe they
are interacting with a person or a machine, when all features
are otherwise held constant. Research indicates that people’s
interaction patterns differ depending on whether they
believe they are interacting with an agent or an avatar
(Bailenson, Blascovich, Beal & Loomis, 2003; Blascovich
et. al., 2002; Hoyt, Blascovich & Swinth, 2003). For

example, people will respect the virtual “space” of a human
representation if they believe it is an avatar.
VR also provides a unique way to examine the effects of
social interaction on learning. Social interaction is a natural
and powerful way to learn. Social interaction can generate
well-tuned feedback, as in the case of a tutor. Moreover,
social actors can provide models that learners might imitate.
Meltzoff (2007), for example, demonstrated that infants
learn to solve a puzzle box if they see a human move the
parts, but not if the parts move by themselves. In the current
work, we explore whether the mere belief that an interaction
is with another person influences learning. Neurological
evidence indicates that attributions of humanness recruit
different brain circuitry (Blakemore, Boyer, Meltzoff,
Segebarth & Decety, 2003), but the effect of social
attributions on learning is unknown, particularly if visual
features and interactive opportunities are held constant.
In the study, participants engaged in a scripted Q & A
session with a computer agent on the mechanisms that
maintain a fever. Participants were told that they were
either interacting with an avatar or agent. Afterwards, they
took a posttest outside of VR on the mechanisms of fever to
see who had learned better. We also collected measures of
skin conductance. Skin conductance levels (SCL) reflect
changes in the arousal of the autonomic nervous system.
Arousal comprises multiple biological systems, and it is
involved in emotion and alertness. Prior research indicates
that moderate levels of arousal at encoding correlate with
better “factual” memory (Lang, 2000). SCL measures within
VR may help reveal whether and when the belief in social
increases arousal and influences learning.

Method
Participants
Thirty-five (17 female, 18 male) college students were paid
to participate in the study. They were randomly assigned to
one of two conditions.

Design and Procedure
Figure 1 provides a schematic of the procedural flow for the
comparison of avatar versus agent.

1355

interaction, which we thought was be important for
maintaining the social belief in the avatar condition.
In review, the study used a 2 x 3 x 3 design with the
between-subject factor of Condition (avatar v. agent), the
within-subject factor of Response manner (exhilarating,
neutral, shameful), and the crossed within-subject factor of
Exposure Order to a manner (1st, 2nd, 3rd exposure).

Material and Measures
Material

Figure 1: Procedural Flow and Design
Participants completed the study individually. They first
studied a one-page passage on fever for 5 minutes and were
told to “prepare to tutor” a student so they would read more
carefully. We did not tell the participants when they would
be tutoring, so we could complete the experiment. (They
never did tutor anybody.) The passage was removed and
they were then introduced to a confederate posing as another
participant named “Alyssa.” They played the game of
Operation with Alyssa for 5 minutes so they could get to
know one another (in the physical world). The participants
then moved to a separate room (Figure 2). They were told
they would be interacting with a computer agent or with
Alyssa’s avatar. In reality, there was no avatar; a computer
program played identical pre-recorded verbal and nonverbal
responses in both conditions. To match interactions in the
agent and avatar conditions, participants only read fever
questions that appeared on the monitor beside the
avatar/agent (Figure 3). The participant called out to the
avatar/agent and asked the question shown on the monitor.
For example, for one question in the avatar condition,
participants said, “Alyssa, why do your hands and feet get
cold when you have a fever?” In the agent condition,
participants said, “Computer, why do your hands and feet
get cold when you have a fever?” After reading the question,
the participants pressed a button, and the computer character
responded with the pre-recorded answer. The pre-recorded
response was always only partially correct and never
included incorrect information. Participants read 9 questions
from the screen and heard 9 answers for each of the
questions. The question order was randomized across
participants.
A within-subject factor manipulated the manner of the
pre-recorded response. For each question, we pre-recorded
three manners of response, each using the exact same
wording, but a different tone of voice. An exhilarated voice
was confident and excited. A shameful voice was unsure
and apologetic. A neutral voice was flat. Participants heard
each manner three times. Response manner was randomly
assigned across question and order for each participant. The
different response types were intended to increase variability
in SCL that we could then correlate with learning (an
exhilarated response may induce more arousal). Moreover,
changing the manners of response “livened up” the

The fever passage explained how the human body gets and
maintains a fever. It explained the mechanisms that trigger
the fever response (e.g., macrophages), the mechanisms that
introduce more heat into the body (e.g., shivering), and the
mechanisms that prevents heat release (e.g. blocking sweat).

Apparatus
Figure 2 shows a participant wearing a head-mounted
display (HMD), which allows participants to see and interact
in the virtual world. The HMD contains a separate display
monitor for each eye (50 degrees horizontal by 38 degrees
vertical field-of-view with 100% binocular overlap). The
graphics system renders the virtual image separately for
each eye for stereoscopic depth at approximately 60 Hz. The
software used to assimilate the rendering and tracking was
Vizard 2.53. Participants wore a Virtual Research 8 HMD
that featured dual 640 horizontal by 480 vertical pixel
resolution panels. The equipment used to measure SCL was
a BioGraph Infiniti 3.1 from Thought Technology Ltd.

1356

Figure 2: Participant in VR learning environment: 1)
Head-mounted display (HMD) and orientation tracker,
2) monitor showing the experimenter what the
participant sees in the HMD, 3) Game pad used to
notify agent/avatar, 4) rendering computer, 5)
equipment recording skin conductance level.

Results
Learning Results

Figure 3: The Viewpoint of a Participant during the
Q & A Session in VR

Measures
There were two measures. One was the posttest that
measured learning, and the second was skin conductance
level (SCL), which indexed arousal. SCL was measured
while the participant was in the VR environment interacting
with the agent/avatar. The posttest contained the original 9
questions given in VR during the Q & A session and an
additional 6 new questions. The questions comprised three
categories: Factual, Inferential, and Application. Factual
questions could be answered directly from the passage (e.g.,
“What processes cause the body to increase temperature?”).
Inferential questions depended on an integrated model of
fever mechanisms (e.g., “Why is shivering not enough to
cause a fever?”). Application questions gave participants
commonly known facts and asked for an explanation (e.g.
“Why does a dry nose mean a dog might have a fever?”).
Each question was scored on a 0 to 2 point scale (0:
incorrect/no answer, 1: partially correct but incomplete, 2:
precise and detailed). Thus, for the posttest, the maximum
possible score was 30. Table 1 provides a sample scoring. A
secondary coder scored 20% of the transcripts with 97%
agreement.
Table 1: Scoring Method.
Scoring Method (0-2 point scale)
0: incorrect or
1: partially correct 2:precise and
no answer
but incomplete
Detailed
Why is shivering not enough to create a fever?
0 point:
“Because its not enough, you need more”
1 point:
“Because shivering alone creates heat, but
the brain is not involved so it doesn’t set
the temperature set point.”
2 points:
“You can create heat with shivering, but
you also need a mechanism that doesn’t
let that heat escape, so you need the
hypothalamus to raise the set point.”

The leading question was whether the avatar condition
would cause better learning than the agent condition. The
posttest given after the VR experience provides the relevant
data. Table 2 shows the percent accuracy for participants in
each condition on each portion of the posttest. The results
are notable because they show that the avatar advantage
occurred for the 9 questions heard in VR as well as for the 6
new questions. We conducted a repeated measures analysis
using average score on old and new questions crossed by
condition. There was a main effect of condition, F (1, 33) =
4.14, MSE = .18, p < .05. Old and new questions did not
exhibit any differences or interaction with condition, F’s <
0.6. We repartitioned the questions by category, instead of
old and new, and found similar results. There was a
significant effect of condition, p < .05, and no condition by
question type interaction, p > .9. However, as expected by
the design of the questions, there was a main effect of
question type; factual questions were the easiest and
application questions were the hardest, F (2, 32) = 9.6, p
< .01. Finally, we coded the computer’s responses with the
same coding scheme that we applied to the participants’
scores. The average score of the responses we scripted for
the computer was 0.7. This is significantly below the
average score of 1.1 that the participants achieved for the
exact same questions, t (34) =7.2, p < .001. Combined,
these results indicate that the avatar condition led to superior
learning. This learning went beyond simply memorizing the
responses of the computer, because participants
outperformed the computer on the same questions and they
did well on novel problems.
Table 2: Posttest Score

9 Old Questions from VR
6 New Questions

Avatar
M (SD)
1.2 (0.26)
1.2 (0.33)

Agent
M (SD)
0.98 (0.35)
0.98 (0.36)

.
The second question was whether the different response
manners had an effect on learning for the 9 questions heard
in VR. Figure 4 shows the average question score for each
manner (exhilarate, neutral, shameful) broken out by how
many times the participants had been exposed to that
manner. A repeated measures analysis crossed manner of
response by order (how many times people had heard the
manner) by condition. In addition to the condition effect
found earlier, there was a condition by order interaction,
F(1,33) = 8.3, p < .01. There was no effect of manner, p
> .6. The relative novelty of each manner rather than the
manner per se influenced learning, and this novelty only
affected the avatar condition. The order by condition
interaction alleviates concerns about hidden confounds, such
as a higher level of prior knowledge in the avatar condition.
If the avatar condition had some hidden advantage, then we
1357

Avatar

2.00

Agent

Average Score

1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00

1st

2nd
Exhilarate

3rd

1st

2nd
Neutral

3rd

1st

2nd

3rd

Shameful

Figure 4: Score by Response Type & Exposure Order
(error bars equal SE of the mean)
The effect of order of exposure to a manner is conflated
with the absolute order that people saw each question; for
example, the first exposure to an exhilarated response is
likely to occur early on in the 9 questions. Therefore, it is
difficult to separate the effects of absolute order from the
effects of response manner exposure (1st, 2nd, or 3rd). In
regression analyses, response manner exposure provided a
better fit to the posttest accuracy than absolute order, but the
two predictors are highly co-linear. In the subsequent
analyses, we continue to use Response Manner by Exposure
as factors because it was the a priori design of the study.
In summary, the mere belief of interacting with a human
led to superior learning of complex material. The learning
carried over to new questions not heard in VR. A second
analysis examined only the questions heard in VR.
Participants in the agent condition showed minimal
systematic variability in their posttest scores for each
problem, regardless of when they heard the question in VR.
In contrast, participants in the avatar condition showed the
strongest learning for those questions that were answered
with a relatively novel manner of response.

in the sample; the loss of the 9 participants’ data does not
distort the learning results.
We also normalized the SCL data. The equipment took 60
samples per second. This level of precision is favorable for
sudden events. A coarser aggregation is more appropriate
for this study, because each question episode spanned tens
of seconds. In addition, episodes varied in length; for
example, some questions had longer pre-recorded answers
than others did. To conduct analyses across questions of
different length, we found the mean SCL scores for intervals
within an event. We split each question into a reading and
listening phase. We further split each phase into thirds;
Reading (1st-Beginning, 2nd-Middle, 3rd-End), Listening (1stBeginning, 2nd-Middle, 3rd-End). We found the mean SCL
for each of the thirds.
Different people have different levels of skin moisture.
We further normalized the SCL data by subtracting
individual baselines. In between each Q & A episode, there
was a 10 second blue screen that let SCL levels recover
from the preceding event. We computed people’s average
baseline for the final 3 second of the blank screen period.
We subtracted the pre-event baseline from participants’ SCL
for the subsequent Q & A. Thus, the baseline was updated
between each question. The process was repeated for each of
the 9 question events in VR.
Effects of Condition on Arousal
The learning analyses indicated that the effect of avatar
condition was strongest when the manner of response was
relatively novel. We analyzed the arousal data to capitalize
on this localization of the learning effect. Figure 5 reflects
the structure of the analysis and results.
0.25

Deviation from Baseline (uS)
[error bars = 1/2 SE]

would expect the participants to do better across the board,
not in interaction with order.

Arousal
Did people’s belief that they were interacting with another
person influence their physiological response? If so, was the
physiological response correlated with learning outcomes?
To answer these questions, SCL was recorded while the
participants interacted with the agent/avatar in VR. SCL
gauges arousal by passing small electric charges between
two points on the body (e.g. one finger to another). When a
person’s arousal level increases, there is an increase in skin
moisture, which increases conductivity across the skin.
Conditioning the Arousal Data
In preparation for analyzing the SCL data, we removed 4
participants from the avatar condition and 5 from the agent
condition due to corrupt SCL data. We re-analyzed the
learning data for the remaining 26 participants. The results
mirrored the results when all 35 participants were included

Agent

0.2

Avatar

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
-0.05
1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd 1st 2nd 3rd
Read

Listen

First Exposure

Read

Listen

Read

Second Exposure

Listen

Third Exposure

Order of Exposure to Response Type
(collapsed across Exhil, Neutral, Shame)

Figure 5: Changes in Skin Conductance Level
A repeated measures analysis included the betweensubjects factor of Condition and the within-subject factors of
Exposure Order (First time, Second time, Third time) by
Read/Listen by Thirds (e.g., 1st third of a read event). The
dependent measure was the participants mean SCL
aggregated across the three response manners. Figure 5
shows a stable pattern of peaking while reading the question,
and then declining while listening to the answer;
Read/Listen by Thirds interaction, F(2, 48) = 13.7, p < .01.
There was also a significant interaction with condition.
Avatar participants showed a steeper rise in SCL for the

1358

early exposures to the computer’s response manner than the
agent condition; Condition by Exposure Order by Thirds,
F(2.16, 96) = 3.2, p < .05 (applying the Huhn-Feldt
correction).
The computer responses appeared after people read the
question. Thus, the higher reading arousals for early
exposures cannot be attributed to the subsequent response
manner. Perhaps the avatar participants were more readily
aroused when hearing a variety of response manners, and
they became generally less aroused as they began to
experience the same types of response repeatedly. An
implication may be that it is useful to have a variety of
response manners to keep people engaged. This implication,
however, does not extend to non-social technologies; arousal
levels were unaffected by response types in the agent
condition, which parallels the learning results.
Relation between learning and arousal
The avatar participants showed greater learning when the
response manners were still relatively novel. They also
showed greater arousal when the response manner were still
relatively novel. This implies that arousal and learning were
correlated. To conduct a closer examination, we switched to
problem as the unit of analysis. We back-sorted the arousal
measures by posttest score, so we could find the arousal
profile for questions where participants scored a 2, 1, or 0.
0.25

Dev from Baseline (uS)

Incorrect (n=51)
Partial (n=117)
Complete (n=66)

0.15

0.05

-0.05

First

Second
READ

Third

First

Second

Third

LISTEN

Figure 6: Skin Conductance Back-Sorted by Score on
Posttest Measure of Learning
Figure 6 shows SCL means in relation to the posttest
scores and the read/listen thirds. The legend indicates the
sample size for each arousal profile. For example, out of 234
problems (26 subjects x 9 questions), 66 problems scored a
2 (full correct credit). Higher scores on the posttest had
significantly higher SCL levels during the read-listen event.
To analyze the relation of SCL to posttest score, we used the
question as the unit of analysis. SCL levels for the six
periods (Read/Listen by Thirds) were dependent measures in
a multivariate analysis. Posttest score and condition were
crossed-factors. Results indicated that SCL means for the
Read3 and Listen 1-3 were higher for correct answers than
for partial and incorrect answers; all F’s > 3.0, p’s < .05.
Partial and incorrect answers did not exhibit different levels

of arousal; all p’s > .5. There was no interaction of
condition by posttest score on the SCL measures; F(12, 446)
= 1.02, Wilkes Lambda = .95, p > .4. Thus, the relation of
arousal to learning was the same for both conditions; namely,
higher arousal levels were correlated with better learning
outcomes. This is a useful finding, because prior research
has indicated that arousal is correlated with factual memory
(Lang, 2000), but here we found a correlation with learning
that went beyond what participants had heard in the VR
setting.
The SCL data provide information about the time course
of learning in VR. For problems on which participants did
well, the highest level of arousal occurred during reading.
For these problems, there was also an elevated level of
arousal when listening, but it is less than the reading peak.
The elevated arousal during listening may be due to events
that occurred during listening (e.g., a surprising manner of
response). But, they may also be due to a naturally slow
descent of arousal levels from the peak at reading; a higher
peak at reading causes higher levels during listening. This
latter alternative is interesting because it suggests that the
arousal period that was most significant for learning
occurred before the participants listened to the response.
We discuss one implication of this explanation below.

Discussion
This study explored whether the mere belief that one is
interacting with another person makes a difference in how
much one learns. The experiment was unique in that it held
all interactions constant. In both conditions, participants
spoke identical words asking questions, and the virtual
human provided identical pre-recorded verbal and nonverbal
responses. Therefore, the experiment isolates “social belief”
from other important aspects of social interaction for
learning, such as the tailored responses that often arise in
social exchange. Results showed that the “belief” in the
avatar condition resulted in a significant learning gain
relative to the agent condition. This gain occurred even
though we scripted the computer’s responses so they were
neither highly informative nor incorrect. Avatar participants
constructed a model of the mechanisms of fever that went
beyond the information provided by the computer; they gave
better answers for the questions they heard in VR, and they
were able to apply their knowledge to novel questions they
had not heard in VR.
When we took a closer look at the order of the different
response manners in Figure 4, we saw that the first two
exhilarating, first neutral, and first two shameful questions
all received relatively higher scores in the avatar condition
than the agent condition. There are multiple possible
explanations. One is that when the computer’s responses
varied in tone and the participants had not yet noticed the
repetitions in tone, they were more engaged. However, the
effect is not simply due to novelty, because the agent
participants experienced identical levels of novelty in tone
and it had no effect on them. Rather, it was the interaction of
novelty and social belief.

1359

The SCL (arousal) measure showed that the belief in
social led to greater arousal, especially on early exposures to
a response manner. Greater arousal correlated with better
learning on a problem-by-problem analysis. We found that
the peak SCL occurred during the final third of the reading a
question. Originally, we had thought that different response
manners would affect learning differentially, but there was
no effect of response manner per se. The learning analysis
showed that avatar condition learned best when they heard a
new type of response. The arousal analysis showed that
effect of arousal on learning seemed to occur during reading,
which was before participants heard the manner of response.
Possibly the effect of the manner of the response on learning
was indirect. The different manners of response kept people
socially engaged for a while, which in turn led to more
arousal responses.
SCL is a measure that indexes some internal process (we
are not claiming that hand sweat causes learning). Our main
interest in the SCL measures is that they provide some
indication of the time course of processing during each Q &
A event. The peak SCL scores that were correlated with
learning occurred during the reading phase and not the
listening phase. This suggests that the locus of the learning
effect occurred when people took the socially-relevant
action of reading, which in turn, prepared them to learn
more deeply when listening to the response. Of course, the
relation between the arousal data and learning is only
correlational. For example, it is possible that people became
more aroused when they read questions where they thought
they knew the answer. Nevertheless, the SCL data suggest
the interesting hypothesis that the learning effect is not due
to a general belief that they are listening to a human. Rather,
the effect is that people believe they are taking socially
relevant action. The engagement/arousal during this action
is what prepares them to learn from the response. In ongoing work, we are testing this hypothesis. For example, in a
new avatar condition, participants read silently rather than
aloud. This way, they cannot take any socially relevant
action. If people listen passively to an avatar, they may not
learn as well and their arousal signatures may stay low. If
so, this might help explain some of the common wisdom
that listening is not always as good as interacting. It is the
social action, or potential for social action, that prepares one
to listen to the response.

Conclusion
In this study, we found that the mere belief one is
interacting with another person leads to superior learning,
especially when there is novel social variability in the tone
of response. The learning goes beyond remembering what
was said, because avatar participants maintained their
advantage for novel questions. The “belief in social” also led
to greater skin conductance changes early on when there
was novel variability in the response type. The SCL was
correlated with better learning, and the greatest SCL
occurred during the action of reading, possibly implying that

that when people take a socially-relevant action, this
influences what they learn when they hear a response.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under grants SLC-0354453, 0527377,
and REC-0634044. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation. We thank Byron Reeves, Roy
Pea, Anthony Wagner and the members of the LIFE Media
group, the VRITS lab members Ben Trombley-Shapiro,
Michael Jin, Kathryn Rickertsen, Jessica Yuan, Liz Tricase,
Nick Cooper, and Nick Yee for all their help.

References
Bailenson, J.N., Beall., A.C., Blascovich, J., Loomis, J., &
Turk, M. (2005). Transformed Social Interaction,
Augmented Gaze, and Social Influence in Immersive
Virtual Environments. Human Communication Research,
31, 511-537.
Bailenson, J.N., Blascovich, J.,Beall, A.C., & Loomis, J.M.,
(2003). Interpersonal distance in immersive virtual
environments. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
29. 1-15.
Blakemore, S.-J., Boyer, P., Meltzoff, A.N., Segebarth, C.,
& Decety, J. (2003). The detection of contingency and
animacy in the human brain: An fMRI study. Cerebral
Cortex, 13, 837-844.
Blascovich, J., Loomis, J., Beall, A., Swinth, K., Hoyt, C., &
Bailenson, J. (2002). Immersive virtual environment
technology as a methodological tool for social psychology.
Psychological Inquiry, 13(2), 103-124.
Hoyt, C., Blascovich, J., & Swinth, K. (2003). Social
inhibition in immersive virtual environments. Presence,
12, 183-195.
Lang, A. (2000). The limited capacity model of mediated
message processing. Journal of Communication, 50(1),
46-70.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). Infants’ causal learning:
Intervention, observation, imitation. In A. Gopnik & L.
Schulz (Eds.), Causal learning: Psychology, philosophy,
and computation (pp. 37-47). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Reeves, B., Nass, C. (1996). The media equation: how
people treat computers, television, and new media like
real people and places. NY: Cambridge University Press.
Schroeder, R. (Ed.). (2002). The social life of avatars.
London: Springer-Verlag.

1360

