UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Interaction of Strategy Use and Experience in Intuitive and Analytical Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73s444pd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Pretz, Jean E.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Interaction of Strategy Use and Experience
in Intuitive and Analytical Problem Solving
Jean E. Pretz (jpretz@iwu.edu)
Illinois Wesleyan University, Department of Psychology
P.O. Box 2900, Bloomington, IL 61702-2900
Abstract
Research on dual processes in cognition has found that
explicit, analytical thought is more powerful and less
vulnerable to heuristics and biases than is implicit, intuitive
thought. However, several studies have found that holistic,
intuitive processes can outperform analytical processes,
documented by the disruptive effects of hypothesis testing,
think-aloud protocols, and analytical judgments. To examine
the impact of intuitive versus analytical strategies and level
of experience on problem solving, undergraduates solved
problems dealing with college life. Results showed that
strategy appropriateness depended on the problem solver’s
level of experience. Analysis was found to be an appropriate
strategy for more-experienced individuals, whereas lessexperienced participants scored best using intuition.
Implications for problem solving, expertise, and dual process
models are discussed.
Keywords: strategy; expertise; intuition; problem solving;
decision making; dual process models

Intuitive and Analytical Problem Solving
When it comes to solving an everyday, practical problem,
should the problem be approached analytically or
intuitively? Much psychological research on problem
solving has attempted to explain how individuals use logic
and analysis to solve well-defined problems. However,
many everyday, practical problems involve high stakes and
are complex and ill-structured, lending themselves to a more
intuitive approach. Practical problems involve the
application of intuitive, tacit knowledge that has been
gained through experience rather than explicit instruction
(Sternberg et al., 2000). For practical problems, to what
extent should we attempt analysis or rely on intuition? I
argue that the appropriateness of strategy use depends on an
individual’s level of experience in the domain.
The constructs contrasted in this work are rooted in dual
process models of cognition (e.g., Epstein, 1991; Sloman,
1996). Intuition is part of the mode characterized as holistic,
automatic, effortless, affective, slow, resistant to change,
context-specific, passive and preconscious, whereas analysis
is part of the mode described as rational, intentional,
effortful, logical, rapidly and easily changed, contextgeneral, active and conscious.
Traditionally, the problem-solving literature has focused
on how individuals solve well-defined problems using
analytical processes such as means-end analysis and
hypothesis testing, which rely on explicit metacognitive

processes. Various studies of dual processes in higher
cognition have emphasized the benefit of the analytical
processing mode in overcoming the heuristic responses of
the intuitive processing mode (e.g., Epstein, Pacini, DenesRaj, & Heier, 1996; Greenwald & Banaji, 1995). Intuitive
processing has been often noted as causing errors in
judgment while rationality has been held up as an ideal.
Intuition has generally been thought of by cognitive
psychologists as synonymous with heuristic processing
(e.g., Chase, Hertwig, & Gigerenzer, 1998; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1974).
However, theoretical work on intuition describes two
distinct definitions of the construct (Hill, 1987-88).
Classical intuitionism views intuition as a holistic
processing mode, whereas inferential intuitionism defines
intuition as “a heuristic that represents a logical (inferential)
process in which several intermediary steps have been
omitted or obscured” (p. 138). This paper adopts a classical
understanding of intuition. Intuitive thinking is a holistic
perspective that takes into account all types of information
that can often not be easily articulated explicitly. Holistic
intuition is distinct from inferential (or heuristic) intuition,
which has its roots in an analytical process that has become
automatized. Theoretically, analysis and inferential intuition
are on a continuum based on automatization, but holistic
intuition is a qualitatively different process altogether.
Evidence from various literatures in psychology supports
the proposal that classical, holistic intuitive processes
outperform analytical processes in many cases, for example,
in studies of nonverbal communication (Ambady &
Rosenthal, 1992), judgment and decision-making (Wilson &
Schooler, 1991), and problem solving (Berry & Broadbent,
1988; Schooler & Melcher, 1995). Such studies have shown
that analytical approaches lead to misleading hypothesis
testing or the neglect of relevant information, whereas
intuitive approaches allow for a holistic perspective that
takes into account all information, regardless of prior
hypotheses or schemas. For example, Wilson and
Schooler’s (1991) research has shown that holistic
judgments of strawberry jam are closer to expert judgments
than judgments made after analyzing various features of the
jams. Recent empirical and theoretical work by Dijksterhuis
(2004; Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006) has argued that
unconscious thought (i.e., thought during a period of
distraction or incubation) is superior to conscious thought
(i.e., careful analysis of the problem) when the task requires
the holistic processing of highly complex stimuli.

1397

Experience

Hypotheses

Experience affects the organization of knowledge. Expert
knowledge is organized according to highly sophisticated
schemas, whereas novices lack this deep structure,
organizing their knowledge on more surface features (Chi,
Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). Categorization research has
found that experts use these schemas to make holistic
judgments such as medical diagnoses (e.g., Eva, Norman,
Neville, Wood, & Brooks, 2002). Novices are known to rely
on analytical processing initially and then take a more
holistic, similarity-based approach as they gain experience
(Kulatunga-Moruzi, Brooks, & Norman, 2001). Use of
schemas in judgment and decision-making tasks are
examples of the use of inferential intuition. Such judgments
rely on previously explicit knowledge that has become
automatized in the form of a schema that is imposed on a
new set of information.
These schemas can be contrasted with the tacit knowledge
that is acquired through experience rather than direct
instruction, and is thus not easily articulated (Polanyi,
1966). Whereas novices become experts by automatizing
explicit knowledge into schemas that form the basis for
inferential intuition, expertise in the form of tacit knowledge
is theoretically never explicit and forms the basis for holistic
intuition. If tacit information is to be taken into account in
solving a problem, it must be made available and accessed.
Therefore, if tacit knowledge is not easily amenable to
explicit thought, it may be best processed in a holistic,
intuitive manner.
Research on practical problem solving has provided
evidence that experts may benefit from either an analytical
or an intuitive problem-solving strategy. In one study,
Antonakis, Hedlund, Pretz, and Sternberg (2002) proposed a
model of tacit-knowledge acquisition and application that
highlighted the importance of metacognitive skills in the use
of tacit knowledge. The study found that military officers at
higher ranks were distinguished from those at lower ranks
by their ability to articulate more detailed metacognitive
knowledge in an open-ended measure of tacit knowledge,
suggesting that an explicit approach that emphasizes the use
of metacognition may enhance practical problem solving.
However, the tacit nature of expert knowledge suggests
that it may only be processed intuitively. Schön (1983) has
illustrated the value of reflection and intuitive thinking in
problem solving. Schön explains that leaders form intuitive,
implicit, latent representations that reflect patterns of events
in the environment acquired through experience. Problems
are solved by responding spontaneously and intuitively to a
situation by matching it to a similar pattern representation in
memory. In a similar vein, recent work has conceptualized
intuition as knowledge based on extensive experience
(Hogarth, 2001; Klein, 1998).
Less-experienced individuals may benefit from holistic
processing when solving relatively complex problems that
involve tacit knowledge. Such problems may be more easily
analyzed by experts who have schemas that allow them to
identify relevant information in the problem.

The research reviewed here indicates that neither an
analytical nor an intuitive strategy will be particularly
“better” than the other for solving problems. Problemsolving success is expected to depend on both the strategy
approach and the experience of the problem solver.
Specifically, analytical problem solving is expected to be
best for experienced participants, and holistic intuitive
problem solving is expected to be best for less-experienced
participants. This hypothesis is tested in study 1 by
manipulating strategy use through analytical and intuitive
strategy instructions. Study 2 tests the same hypothesis by
comparing participants based on self-reported preferred
strategy.

Study 1
Method
The study employed a factorial analysis of covariance
design. Independent variables included manipulated strategy
instruction and level of experience. The dependent variable
was practical problem solving performance. Included as
covariates in the design were baseline practical problem
solving ability, cognitive ability, and cognitive style.
Participants were assigned to a condition based on the type
of strategy instruction they received. One group of
participants was taught to use an intuitive approach to
problem solving, a second group, an analytical approach.
Participants Participants were 107 undergraduates (73
women, 34 men; 71 first-year students and 36 upper-level
students; Mean age = 18.96, SD = 1.37). First-year students
were recruited during their first two weeks on campus.
Upper-level students were juniors and seniors who were
trained residential advisors. These students had had at least
four semesters of experience on campus and had received
between 120 and 180 hours of training in confrontation,
helping skills, time management, and other skills related to
becoming an advisor to other students in residence halls on
campus.

1398

Practical Problem Solving Measure Problems were based
on the College Student Tacit Knowledge Inventory (CSTKI;
PACE Center, 2002), a 15-item measure of tacit knowledge
in the domain of college life. CSTKI problems presented
interpersonal and general academic issues. Brief problem
scenarios were followed by a series of possible response
strategies (usually approximately eight) which the
participant rated in terms of their relative effectiveness on a
scale ranging from 1 (extremely bad) to 7 (extremely good).
In this study, two items from the CSTKI were used as a
measure of baseline problem solving performance. For a
sample problem, see Figure 1.
Problems were scored based on the standardized
Euclidean distance of an individual’s response profile from
the consensus of the experts in the sample. High values on
problem solving reflected greater discrepancy from the
consensus.

3. Decide how you will use your resources to solve the
problem; and 4. Identify and evaluate the possible
consequences of the potential solutions. The experimenter
illustrated how the strategy could be implemented using two
examples.

You have decided to apply for an internship during the
upcoming break, and want to ask one of your
professors for a letter of recommendation. The
professor you have in mind is teaching a fairly large
class, and he does not know you very well. One day
you run in to him in the coffee shop, where he is sitting
with what you assume are his kids. Given this situation,
rate the quality of the following options:
Rating scale
3
5
Somewhat Somewhat
bad
good

7
Extremely
good

2.95 a) You decide that this is a good time to talk to
him about the letter.
5.61 b) You go up and greet him, reminding him of
your name and what class you are in.
4.18 c) You greet him and then start chatting with
his kids.
3.52 d) You nod but do not talk to him.
2.82 e) You pretend you have not seen him. He
probably does not want to deal with students outside of
his workplace.
3.32 f) You ask if you can sit down with him and
his kids and talk about different things.
5.27 g) You greet him and ask for an appointment
with him the following day.
3.00 h) You greet him and offer to buy him and his
kids coffee or sodas.

The success of the instructional manipulations was checked
via a self-report measure of strategy use.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1: Sample practical problem with expert consensus

Self-reported strategies confirmed the success of the
strategy manipulation. Participants in the Analysis condition
endorsed analytical strategies (e.g., “break the problem
down into steps,” “carefully define the problem”) more than
intuitive strategies (e.g., “view the problem from a variety
of perspectives,” “rely on guesses, hunches, or feelings”),
F(1, 61) = 20.46, p < .001. Participants in the Intuition
condition reported using intuitive strategies more than
analytical strategies, F(1, 61) = 50.75, p < .001.
A 2 x 2 factorial analysis of covariance was conducted to
examine the interaction of strategy use and level of
experience on problem solving performance. Cognitive style
scores and baseline problem solving performance were
included as covariates in this analysis.
The hypothesized interaction of condition and class year
was confirmed in the repeated-measures analysis of
covariance, F(1, 56) = 7.90, p = .007 (see Figure 2). The yaxis represents the distance score from the consensus on the
problem-solving measure. Higher values represent greater
discrepancy from the consensus, and thus less successful
performance.

Analytical and Intuitive Cognitive Style Measure To
control for individual preferences for strategy use,
intuitiveness and analytical thinking as individualdifference, cognitive-style variables were measured using
the Rational-Experiential Inventory (REI; Pacini & Epstein,
1999) The rational inventory measures an individual’s
preference to rely on logic and analysis in making decisions
and solving problems. In contrast, the experiential inventory
estimates the degree to which an individual prefers to rely
on intuition or hunches when making decisions.

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups which were randomly
assigned to an experimental condition. Participants
completed two practice problem-solving items and were
then given the intervention instructions and asked to
complete the test problems using the instructed strategy.
Analytical Strategy Instructions The experimenter gave
participants in the analytical condition explicit instructions
on how to use logic and analysis in approaching these
practical problems using four steps: 1. Define the problem;
2. Identify the relevant pieces of information in the problem;
1399

Distance Score

1
Extremely
bad

Intuitive Strategy Instructions Participants in the intuitive
condition were given a set of strategies that encourage the
use of intuition in problem solving. The experimenter
defined holistic intuition and encouraged participants to use
the following problem-solving strategies: 1. Imagine the
situation vividly; 2. View the problem holistically; 3. Trust
your hunches and feelings about the problem; and 4.
Incubate – skip the problem and come back to it later if you
get stuck. The experimenter illustrated how the strategy
could be implemented using two examples.

1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

Analysis
Intuition

Less-experienced
students

Moreexperienced
students

Figure 2: Problem solving performance as a function of
strategy instruction and level of experience

39) = 3.52, p = .068. In contrast, more experienced
participants with a more analytical cognitive style
performed slightly better than those who preferred intuition,
F(1, 39) = 3.62, p = .064.
Distance Score

First-year students performed better when using an
intuitive strategy, and upper-level students performed better
when using an analytical strategy. Simple effects analyses
revealed that less-experienced students performed
significantly better when using intuition than analysis, F(1,
56) = 5.33, p = .025. Among more-experienced students, the
difference between the analytical and intuitive conditions
was marginal, F(1, 56) = 3.50, p = .067. These results show
that first-year students who tried to analyze everyday
problems performed worse than those who relied on holistic
intuition. In contrast, students with years of experience and
hours of training tended to perform better on everyday
problems when they carefully analyzed a problem than
when they trusted their intuition.

1.05
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

High
analytical
Low
analytical

Study 2

Less-experienced More-experienced
students
students

Figure 3: Problem solving performance as a function of
analytical strategy preference and level of experience

Study 1 demonstrated that an experimental manipulation
of strategy use influenced practical problem solving
performance differentially for participants of varying levels
of experience. However, does this effect occur when
participants are not instructed with a given strategy? Are
highly intuitive first-year students better problem solvers
than their highly analytical classmates? Are highly intuitive
upper-level students likely to score worse than their
analytical classmates?
In Study 2, I addressed these questions by examining
problem solving performance among participants who
solved problems using their own preferred strategy rather
than an instructed one. I hypothesize that the interaction of
strategy use and expertise will be apparent even in the
absence of an experimental manipulation.

Method

Distance Score

The hypothesized interaction of intuitive strategy
preference and experience did not reach significance, F(1,
39) = 2.00, p = .165. However, the pattern of means showed
that less-experienced participants who were low on intuition
performed poorly relative to the highly intuitive students
with equal experience (see Figure 4). In fact, highly intuitive
students with little experience scored as well as the trained
and highly-experienced participants.

Participants Forty-four undergraduates (29 female, 15
male, 29 first-year, 15 upper-level; Mean age = 18.91, SD =
1.39) participated in this study.

1.05
1
0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7

Low
intuitive
High
intuitive

Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Study 1
with one exception: participants did not receive an
instructional strategy manipulation. High analytical strategy
preference was operationally defined as scores above the
median on the REI rational scale, and high intuitive strategy
preference was operationally defined as scores above the
median on the REI experiential scale.

Less-experienced
students

Moreexperienced
students

Figure 4: Problem solving performance as a function of
intuitive strategy preference and level of experience

Results and Discussion

Although these results did not reveal as strong a pattern as
those of Study 1, they added support for the hypothesis. A
comparison of high intuitive / low analytical with high
analytical / low intuitive participants may have revealed a
clearer interaction, but the small sample size did not permit
such an analysis. Overall, these findings showed that selfreported preference for intuitive or analytical thought
affected practical problem-solving performance in the
absence of an instructional manipulation.

A 2 x 2 factorial analysis of covariance was conducted for
each dichotomized cognitive style variable to examine the
effects of strategy preference and expertise on problem
solving score. Each analysis included baseline problem
solving score as a covariate.
The hypothesized interaction of analytical strategy
preference and experience was significant, F(1, 39) = 6.77,
p = .013 (see Figure 3). First-year students who reported a
more analytical cognitive style scored marginally
significantly lower than those who were less analytical, F(1,

General Discussion

1400

These two studies provide converging evidence for the
primary hypothesis. When strategy was manipulated or
measured, its interactive effect with experience was
detected. Less-experienced individuals performed best when

using an intuitive strategy, and more-experienced
individuals were more successful when using the instructed
analytical strategy than the intuitive one. Furthermore,
analysis resulted in worse performance among first-year
students relative to trained upper-level students.
In order to explain this interaction, one must consider that
these problems are relatively complex and involve the
application of tacit knowledge that is difficult to articulate.
Therefore, intuition is a useful strategy for bringing to mind
all the relevant information about a problem situation,
especially for novices. Among more-experienced
individuals, analysis aids practical problem solving because
it focuses the problem solver on the information that he or
she knows is key to the solution of the problem. When
individuals with little experience attempt analysis, their
performance suffers because they are likely to rely on
irrelevant information during problem solving. When
experienced individuals rely on intuition, they are distracted
from that which is known to be relevant. Overall, the data
from Study 1 and Study 2 provide support for the
hypothesis.
Notably, these studies revealed no main effects of
instructed strategy or strategy preference. Neither analysis
nor intuition was an optimal strategy for solving. Strategy
success could only be determined by considering experience
level and strategy use simultaneously.

Strengths, Limitations, and Implications
The results of these studies may be easily generalized to
actual problem-solving behavior among undergraduates, and
potentially individuals in other populations due to the high
ecological validity of the materials. The problems used in
this study refer to real-life problems encountered by a
typical college student, and the instructional interventions
were grounded in the context of everyday problem solving.
The results of this study have implications for research on
problem solving, expertise, and dual processes.
Problem Solving Researchers who aim to enhance practical
problem solving and the acquisition of tacit knowledge
needed for such tasks must consider that level of experience
will influence the type of training that will most benefit
problem solvers. Research designs that can detect main
effects alone may neglect to find meaningful interaction
effects such as those found in this study. Other intervention
studies seeking to teach problem-solving strategies or
enhance decision-making should include a holistic, intuitive
approach for novices, but emphasize analytical strategies for
individuals with more experience.
Expertise Expertise can be viewed as tacit knowledge that
is inherently intuitive in nature, or as a set of automatized
schemas that were once explicit. Recently, researchers have
argued that expertise is intuitive in nature (Hogarth, 2001;
Klein, 1998). However, these studies found that novices
performed better when using intuition and that experts
actually benefited from an analytical approach.

There are two points to be made with respect to this
apparent inconsistency. First, the definition of intuition must
be clarified. Hill (1987-88) has made a distinction between
classical (holistic) and inferential (heuristic) intuition. The
novices in Study 1 were instructed to use holistic intuition.
In contrast, expert intuition is often considered a result of an
automatization of previously-explicit processes, precisely
the kind of intuition that is inferential. The instructions to
use holistic intuition used in this study may not have
benefited experts whose intuitions are inferential in nature.
The data from Study 2 provide preliminary support for this
hypothesis. Highly intuitive experts did not perform worse
than those who were less intuitive, suggesting that some
kind of intuition may be a valid and useful strategy for
experienced participants. Further study must be done to
determine if this self-reported intuition in fact corresponds
to the inferential nature of intuition.
Second, it is arguable that the experts in these studies, the
experienced and trained college juniors and seniors are not
actually experts by the definition of the field. While their
scores are better than those of first-year students, the main
effect of expertise was merely marginal in Study 1 and nonsignificant in Study 2. In fact, it is difficult to determine
who would qualify as an expert in the college life
experience on any particular campus. Expertise is said to be
achieved generally after ten years of experience in the
domain, yet this level of experience is rarely achieved by
Residential Life staff members let alone student Resident
Assistants. Future work should attempt to replicate these
findings in a sample for which clear experts and novices can
be identified.
If the upper-level students in these samples are not
considered experts, then they may have a kind of
intermediate expertise as compared to first-year students.
One theoretical model of the development of expertise can
be used to explain the current pattern of results. Baylor’s
(2001) U-shaped model of expertise and intuition proposes
that intuition is used by both novices and experts, but that
intermediate experts use a more analytical strategy. In Study
1, I found that holistic intuition helped novices solve
complex problems involving the use of tacit knowledge. As
these novices gain knowledge in the domain, they will
become better able to articulate their knowledge, and as they
become intermediate experts who see the structure and logic
of problems, they will benefit from an analytical strategy.
As this knowledge becomes part of an automatized expert
schema, they become true experts who can rely on
inferential intuition to make decisions and solve problems.
The sample used in these studies was limited in its range of
expertise. Future work should include participants with very
little knowledge and participants with highly automatized
schemas. Using such a sample, the distinction between
holistic and inferential intuition as well as the U-shaped
model can be tested.
Dual Process Models This theoretical distinction between
holistic and inferential intuition has implications for dual

1401

process models. Most researchers emphasize the limitations
of the intuitive system, yet these studies highlight the
benefits of intuitive processing. Previous work has criticized
solely the heuristic nature of intuition. It is the holistic
nature of intuition which has strong advantages over
analytical processing, especially when tasks are so complex
that analysis leads to neglect of important information,
where the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Future
studies in the dual process framework should attempt to
distinguish between these two types of intuition and their
influence on problem-solving and decision-making tasks.

Conclusions
Practical problems are often ill-structured and involve
high stakes. This study has demonstrated that the approach
to solving such problems depends on the experience of the
problem solver. Analysis is a good strategy to the extent that
an individual can see the structure of a problem and identify
the relevant pieces of information necessary for solution.
However, more inexperienced individuals may benefit from
a holistic, intuitive approach to problem solving.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from Illinois
Wesleyan University. Special thanks to Amy Kowalski,
Emily Eickhorst, and Sarah Flores for their leadership in
data collection, and to the Illinois Wesleyan Student Affairs
staff members who assisted in our recruitment efforts.

References
Ambady, N., & Rosenthal, R. (1992). Thin slices of
expressive behavior as predictors of interpersonal
consequences: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
111(2), 256-274.
Antonakis, J., Hedlund J., Pretz, J., & Sternberg, R.J.
(2002). Exploring the nature and acquisition of tacit
knowledge for military leadership (Army Research
Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences.
Research Note 2002-04). Alexandria, VA.
Baylor, A.L. (2001). A U-shaped model for the
development of intuition by level of expertise. New Ideas
in Psychology, 19, 237-244.
Berry, D.C., & Broadbent, D.E. (1988). Interactive tasks and
the implicit-explicit distinction. British Journal of
Psychology, 79, 251-272.
Chase, V.M., Hertwig, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (1998). Visions
of rationality. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(6), 206214.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P.J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization
and representation of physics problems by experts and
novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Dijksterhuis, A. (2004). Think different: The merits of
unconscious thought in preference development and
decision making. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87(5), 586-598.

Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L.F. (2006). A theory of
unconscious thought. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 1(2), 95-109.
Epstein, S. (1991). Cognitive-experiential self-theory: An
integrative theory of personality. In R.C. Curtis (Ed.),
The relational
self:
Theoretical
convergences
in
psychoanalysis and social psychology (pp. 111-137).
New York: Guilford.
Epstein, S., Pacini, R., Denes-Raj, V., & Heier, H. (1996).
Individual differences in intuitive-experiential and
analytical-rational thinking styles. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 71(2), 390-405.
Eva, K.W., Norman, G.R., Neville, A.J., Wood, T.J., &
Brooks, L.R. (2002). Expert-novice differences in
memory: A reformulation. Teaching and Learning in
Medicine, 14(4), 257-263.
Greenwald, A.G., & Banaji, M.R. (1995). Implicit social
cognition: Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes.
Psychological Review, 102(1), 4-27.
Klein, G. (1998). Sources of power: How people make
decisions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hill, O.W. (1987-88). Intuition: Inferential heuristic or
epistemic mode? Imagination, Cognition, & Personality,
7(2), 137-154.
Hogarth, R.M. (2001). Educating intuition. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kulatunga-Moruzi, C., Brooks, L.R., & Norman, G.R.
(2001). Coordination of analytic and similarity-based
processing strategies and expertise in dermatological
diagnosis. Teaching and Learning in Medicine, 13(2),
110-116.
PACE Center. (2002). College Student Tacit Knowledge
Inventory.
Pacini, R., & Epstein, S. (1999). The relation of rational and
experiential information processing styles to personality,
basic beliefs, and the ratio-bias phenomenon. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 76(6), 972-987.
Polanyi, M. (1966). The tacit dimension. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
Schön, D.A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How
professionals think in action. New York: Basic Books.
Schooler, J. W., & Melcher, J. (1995). The ineffability of
insight. In S. M. Smith (Ed.), Creative cognition
approach (pp. 97-133). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sloman, S.A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119(1), 3-22.
Sternberg, R.J., Forsythe, G.B., Hedlund, J., Horvath, J.,
Snook, S., Williams, W.M., Wagner, R.K., &
Grigorenko, E.L. (2000). Practical intelligence in
everyday life. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.
Wilson, T.D., & Schooler, J.W. (1991). Thinking too much:
Introspection can reduce the quality of preferences and
decisions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
60(2), 181-192.

1402

