UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Activation of Hypotheses during Abductive Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7c4286fb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Baumann, Martin R.k.
Mehlhorn, Katja
Bocklisch, Franziska

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Activation of Hypotheses during Abductive Reasoning
Martin R. K. Baumann (martin.baumann@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Katja Mehlhorn (katja.mehlhorn@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Franziska Bocklisch (franziska.bocklisch@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)
Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology,
Wilhelm-Raabe-Str. 43, 09107 Chemnitz, Germany

observations. Following the above example, in most cases a
patient complains not only about one symptom, such as a
headache, but about a set of observations that could be a
headache, sickness, and fever. Each of these symptoms can
be caused by many different diseases. The physician’s task
is to find the best explanation for the whole symptoms set.
And, despite the complexity of the problem, the physician
solves the problem in most cases quickly and accurately.
How is this accomplished? Johnson and Krems (2001)
suggested on the basis of their results on abductive
reasoning that people use initial observations to construct a
preliminary explanation for these observations. Succeeding
observations are sequentially comprehended and integrated
to generate a single current explanation for all observations
seen so far. If an observation can be comprehended in
different ways, that is, if there exist alternative elementary
explanations for this new observation, the current
explanation is used to decide between these alternatives.
Only those elementary explanations for the new
observations are considered as relevant that are compatible
with the current explanation. Thus, the current explanation
acts as an explanatory context for the comprehension and
explanation of new observations. It reduces the complexity
of the abductive reasoning problem as not all possible
elementary explanations for a new observation are
considered as relevant but only those that are compatible
with the current explanation.
Whereas Johnson and Krems’ model focuses on
deliberate reasoning processes to describe the use of the
current explanatory context, we assume that automatic
comprehension processes based on spreading activation and
constraint satisfaction also play a key role. It has been
argued recently that both deliberate and automatic processes
are involved in many reasoning tasks (Sloman, 1996) such
as impression formation (Thagard & Kunda, 1998),
hypothesis evaluation (Johnson, Zhang, & Wang, 1997), and
medical diagnosis (Arocha & Patel, 1995). Thagard and
Kunda explain how spreading activation processes can
explain the effect of social stereotypes on the interpretation
of behavior. Johnson, Zhang, and Wang show how
automatic processes can provide information for the
evaluation of hypotheses that is used subsequently in more
deliberate processes to revise existing or generate new
hypotheses in an abductive reasoning task.
In our view these automatic processes also serve the
function of making those elementary explanations of new
observations highly available to the reasoner that have a
high probability of being the relevant explanations in the

Abstract
Abductive reasoning, that is, finding an explanation for a set
of observations, can be understood as a process of
sequentially understanding and integrating new observations
into a mental model about the current situation (Johnson &
Krems, 2001; Josephson & Josephson, 1994). Whereas
Johnson and Krems’ model focuses on conscious deliberate
processes, it has been argued that automatic implicit processes
also play an important role in abductive reasoning (e.g.
Johnson, Zhang, & Wang, 1997). Adopting Kintsch`s (1998)
construction-integration theory, we assume that automatic
activation processes regulate the availability of possible
explanations during the reasoning process. In our experiment,
participants solved an artificial diagnosis task while the
activation of explanatory hypotheses was measured. We
found that explanatory hypotheses relevant in the current
context for explaining a set of observations are kept in a more
active state in memory than irrelevant or rejected hypotheses.
Keywords: abductive reasoning; causal reasoning; automatic
processes; explanations; activation.

Introduction
Generating a hypothesis to explain one or more observations
is an essential part of many real world tasks. This kind of
reasoning is called abductive reasoning (Josephson &
Josephson, 1994). It is a vital subprocess, for example, in
scientific discovery, medical diagnosis, software debugging,
social attribution processes, and discourse comprehension.
While explaining a given set of observations, the reasoner
has often to decide between different alternative
explanations to find the best explanation for the
observations. We assume that both deliberate reasoning
processes and automatic comprehension processes
contribute to the generation of hypotheses (Johnson, Zhang,
& Wang, 1997; Sloman, 1996). The goal of this paper is to
examine how automatic comprehension processes constrain
the consideration of hypotheses to the most plausible ones in
the given context by making these hypotheses highly
available to the reasoner and reducing the availability of
implausible ones.
Constructing an explanatory hypothesis can be a quite
complex task. First, in many cases there is more than one
possible explanation for a given observation. For example,
headache is a common symptom of many diseases and is
associated with many different causes. Second, the task is
often not to explain one observation but a set of
observations where each observation can be explained with
more than one explanation. In such a case, a combination of
elementary hypotheses has to be found that best explains all

803

assume that previously activated knowledge that has
become irrelevant is actively inhibited (Conway & Engle,
1994; Gernsbacher, 1993; Lustig, Hasher, & Tonev (2001)
Kintsch (1998) is somewhat unclear about this. The
construction-integration theory postulates that incompatible
knowledge structures should be associated via inhibitory
links leading to the inhibition of incompatible structures.
But he also assumes that activated nodes lose activation
once they are rejected, but “retain considerable activation as
a sort of memory of past trouble” (Kintsch, 1998, p. 169).
An additional objective of our research was to address this
issue and test the “active inhibition” assumption against the
“decay of activation” assumption.
Figure 1 illustrates the postulated construction-integration
process. The first symptom (headache) activates associated
explanatory hypotheses stored in long-term memory
resulting in a preliminary explanation with two alternative
explanations for headache - concussion and influenza. The
second symptom (fever) is compatible with the influenza
explanation for headache but not with the concussion
explanation. After the integration phase the influenza
explanation as a still relevant explanation should be
strengthened as it receives activation both from the
symptom fever and the symptom headache, whereas the tobe-rejected concussion explanation should decrease in
activation as it is inhibited by the symptom fever. Thus,
after integrating the network, influenza remains the only
possible explanation for the observed symptoms.

current context. Effortful and deliberate reasoning processes
are thereby focused on those hypotheses that are the most
promising candidates. A precondition for this is that the
reasoner’s knowledge is highly adapted to the task at hand,
which normally requires many years of domain experience.
If, for example, a physician possesses this experience,
observing a given set of observations immediately reminds
him of at most a small set of possible explanations for these
observations. This set of hypotheses is then used for further
examinations (Groen & Patel, 1988).
We assume that these automatic comprehension processes
can be described using Kintsch’s (1998) constructionintegration theory. According to Kintsch, comprehension
involves a two-stage process. In the first phase, the
construction phase, knowledge stored in long-term memory
(LTM) is activated by new information via associative links.
The result of this activation process is a knowledge network
that is unstructured and in most cases inconsistent. In this
network, compatible nodes are connected with excitatory
links, incompatible nodes with inhibitory links. The network
becomes then integrated by a constraint satisfaction process
that keeps compatible knowledge activated whereas
incompatible knowledge is suppressed and thereby removed
from the activated network. The result of this two-stage
process is a coherent representation of the current situation the situation model that in our case represents the current
explanation for the given observations.
Kintsch’s theory has been used to explain a wide variety
of behavioral phenomena, such as discourse comprehension
(Kintsch, 1988), completing the Tower of Hanoi task
(Schmalhofer & Tschaitschian, 1993), human computer
interaction skills (e.g., Doane, McNamara, Kintsch, Polson,
& Clawson, 1992), and action planning in piloting (Doane
& Sohn, 2000). Arocha and Patel (1995) adopted the
construction-integration theory to explain the differences in
medical diagnostic reasoning performance between experts
and novices. Whereas their focus was to apply Kintsch’s
construction-integration theory to predict the performance
differences between experts and novices in diagnostic
reasoning given the different knowledge structures of
experts and novices we use Kintsch’s theory to make
predictions about the activation and inhibition of hypotheses
during the abductive reasoning process.
We assume that observations, such as the symptoms of a
patient, are linked to explanatory hypotheses in the
reasoners LTM (Arocha & Patel, 1995). According to
Kintsch (1998), observing a symptom should activate at
least the subset of the most common of these explanatory
hypotheses. This activated network represents the current
explanation after, for example, the first symptom. When
observing a new symptom, those hypotheses that are
compatible both with the previous and the new observation
should receive additional activation. In contrast, hypotheses
that were compatible with the previous but incompatible
with the new observation should decrease in activation. As
these hypotheses cannot explain the whole set of
observations they should be rejected. Whereas others

Figure 1: Illustration of the generation of an explanation
during an abductive reasoning task according to the
construction-integration theory. Solid lines represent
excitatory links, dashed lines inhibitory links.
Our experiment tested these predictions. We measured the
activation of explanatory hypotheses during an abductive
reasoning task. These were either hypotheses that should be
considered as relevant as they were compatible with all
observations presented so far or hypotheses that had to be
rejected as they were compatible with previous symptoms
but incompatible with a new observation or hypotheses that
were irrelevant as explanation for the presented symptoms
because they had never been part of the current explanation.
For relevant hypotheses we assumed the activation to be
higher than for irrelevant hypotheses because relevant

804

hypotheses should be activated by the associated symptoms,
irrelevant hypotheses not as they were not part of the
activated network of explanations. For rejected hypotheses,
two competing assumptions were tested against each other:
If rejected hypotheses are actively inhibited, we would
expect the following pattern of activation: relevant >
irrelevant > rejected. If activation simply decays, the
activation pattern should be: relevant > irrelevant = rejected.

Figure 2 shows an example of a trial demonstrating the
principal idea of this task. In each trial the symptoms of one
hypothetical patient were presented sequentially. The
participants’ task was to find the correct diagnosis for the
set of observations shown in this trial. Therefore they had to
sequentially understand the symptoms and integrate them
into their current situation model. More precisely, the first
symptom should initiate the explanatory context for the
following symptoms by activating all explanations
compatible with this symptom. The second symptom should
either confirm the current set of explanations (if they were
compatible with both symptoms) or allow excluding one or
more hypotheses from the set of possible explanations (if
they were incompatible with the new symptom). By this
mechanism the set of relevant explanations should be
reduced during the trial until only one possible explanation,
the correct diagnosis remained.
To measure the activation of the different types of
explanations during the task, a probe reaction task was used.
After one of the symptoms in each trial a probe was
presented and participants had to decide as fast as possible
whether or not the probe was the name of one of the nine
chemicals learnt before. Half of the probes, the targets, were
names of chemicals, the other half, the distractors, were not.
Only the reactions to targets were of interest with regard to
our hypotheses. These targets varied in terms of their
relation to the current explanation of the symptoms
presented so far. The first type of targets, the relevant
targets, were the names of relevant explanations, that is,
chemicals that were compatible with all symptoms
presented so far. The second type, the rejected targets, were
the names of rejected explanations, that is chemicals that
were compatible at least with the first symptom but
incompatible with one of the succeeding symptoms. The
third type of targets, the irrelevant ones, were the names of
irrelevant explanations, that is chemicals that had never
been part of the explanatory context because they were
incompatible with the first symptom of the trial.

Experiment
The Abductive Reasoning Task
To examine the activation of explanatory hypotheses during
an abductive reasoning task an artificial diagnosis task was
developed. It was introduced to the participants with the
cover story: “You are a doctor in a chemical plant. After a
chemical accident an employee complaining about several
symptoms comes to see you. Your job is to find out which
chemical caused the symptoms.” Table 1 shows the
structure of the knowledge necessary to solve the task. The
right column displays the symptoms that are caused by the
chemicals shown in the middle column. The chemicals were
grouped into three categories, “Landin”, “Amid”, and
“Fenton”. This hierarchical structure should ease the
learning of the material and reflects in a simplified form the
hierarchical knowledge organization found in medical
diagnosis (Arocha & Patel, 1995). Each chemical caused
three or four symptoms1. As each symptom could be caused
by several chemicals only the combination of symptoms
allowed to unambiguously identify the chemical causing the
symptoms. In total there were nine different symptoms that
were caused either only by chemicals of one group, such as
cough in the group Landin, (specific symptoms), or by
chemicals of different groups, such as headache (nonspecific symptoms).
Table 1: Summary of the material participants had to
learn (original material in German).
Group Chemical
B
Landin
T
W
Q
Amid
M
G
K
Fenton
H
P

Symptoms
short breath, cough, headache, eye inflammation
short breath, cough, headache, itching
cough, eye inflammation, itching
redness, skin irritation, headache, eye inflammation
redness, skin irritation, headache, itching
skin irritation, eye inflammation, itching
vomiting, diarrhea, headache, eye inflammation
vomiting, diarrhea, headache, itching
diarrhea, eye inflammation, itching

Figure 2: Example trial with irrelevant target after the
third symptom and H as final diagnosis.

1

The reason for this difference in the number of symptoms was
to keep the material of the experiment as close as possible to the
material of another experiment (Baumann, Bocklisch, Mehlhorn &
Krems, in press). Baumann et al. used some of the trials with three
symptom chemicals to present an additional symptom that
contradicted the other symptoms.

The reaction times and response accuracy to these targets
were used as a measure for the activation of the respective
chemicals. The higher the activation of an explanation the

805

shorter should be the reaction time and the higher response
accuracy to the corresponding target (Gernsbacher, 1990).
According to our predictions about the activation of
hypotheses during an abductive reasoning task, we expected
the reaction times to the relevant targets to be shorter (and
response accuracy to be higher) than the reaction times (and
response accuracy) to irrelevant targets. Reaction times to
rejected targets should be either slower (given active
inhibition) or similar (given decay of activation) to that of
irrelevant ones. Respective, response accuracy for rejected
probes should be either lower or similar to that of irrelevant
ones.

Results
First, trials were analyzed with respect to accuracy and time
for generating the diagnosis at the end of each trial. In
96.1% of all trials participants correctly solved the task.
Correct diagnoses were generated on average 731.16 ms
(SD = 468.42),
wrong
diagnoses
1954.30 ms
(SD = 1158.18) after onset of the screen asking for the final
diagnosis. The high accuracy and short duration for
generating correct diagnoses indicates that participants were
able to solve the task quite easily. Neither accuracy nor time
for generating the final diagnosis differed between the trials
with different probe types. This indicates that these trials
were comparable in terms of task difficulty.
Second, to test the predictions about the activation of
explanations, response accuracy and reaction times for
correct responses to the targets were analyzed. Therefore,
only trials with correct final diagnosis were used. Because
the results for accuracy and reaction time showed a similar
pattern, here only the results for the reaction times are
presented.

Experimental design
We manipulated in this experiment the type of probe
(distractor vs. relevant, irrelevant, or rejected target) and the
position at which the probe was presented (after first,
second, third, or fourth symptom). Rejected targets were
additionally varied according to the number of symptoms
between the first incompatible symptom and the target
presentation resulting in three different types of rejected
targets: “just rejected”, “rejected one (symptom) ago” and
“rejected two (symptoms) ago”.
The most relevant dependent variables in terms of our
predictions were reaction times and response accuracy to the
targets. We also measured diagnosis performance by
assessing accuracy and time for generating the diagnosis at
the end of each trial.

Relevant vs. irrelevant. To test the prediction that relevant
explanations are more activated than irrelevant explanations,
reaction times to relevant and irrelevant targets were
compared. Consistent with the prediction that relevant
explanations should be more activated than irrelevant
explanations, reactions to relevant targets were faster at all
positions in the trial sequence than reactions to irrelevant
targets (see Figure 3), F(1, 25) = 14.537, p = .001, partial
eta-square = .368. Furthermore, reaction times to both target
types decreased the later in the trial sequence the target was
presented, F(3, 75) = 13.224, p < .001, partial etasquare = .346. This was somewhat more pronounced for the
relevant targets than for the irrelevant ones, but the
respective interaction term in the ANOVA did not reach
significance.

Participants and procedure
Twenty six (16 female and 10 male; mean age 22.8,
SD = 3.6) undergraduate students from the Chemnitz
University of Technology took part in this experiment that
consisted of 3 sessions within one week. The first session
was a pure practice session, to ensure a high familiarity with
the material and the task. After learning the material shown
in Table 1, participants had to perform a series of practice
blocks until they achieved a level of at least 80% correct
trials. The actual data collection took place in the following
two sessions. It was spilt into two sessions to prevent fatigue
among participants. In each of these sessions participants
had to solve 170 abductive reasoning trials.
In these 340 trials the sequence of symptoms was chosen
such that the different levels of the manipulated factors
could be realized, therefore controlling for a) the number of
symptoms before presentation of the probe, b) the number
of symptoms between the rejection of an explanation and
presentation of the respective rejected target, and c) the
frequency of the different probe types. Additionally, to
control for confounding variables that could possibly affect
the performance in the probe reaction task, such as the
number of currently possible alternative hypotheses, but
could not be included as factor in the experimental design
due to efficiency reasons, the frequency of specific and nonspecific symptoms on the different positions of a trial
sequence and the frequency with which the different
chemicals caused the symptoms were balanced across trials.

1000
reaction time [ms]

950
900
850
800
750
relevant
irrelevant

700
650
1

2

3

4

target position

Figure 3: Reaction time to relevant and irrelevant targets
at the different target positions.
Relevant vs. irrelevant vs. just rejected. To test the
predictions regarding rejected explanations, the reaction
times to relevant, irrelevant, and just rejected targets were
compared. In accordance with our prediction, reactions to
rejected targets were slower than to relevant ones. However,
they were not slower than reactions to irrelevant targets (see

806

Figure 4). A significant main effect for target type was
confirmed by a 3 (target type) x 3 (target position) withinsubjects ANOVA, F(2, 50) = 9.720, p < .001, partial etasquare = .280. Pairwise Bonferroni-adjusted comparisons
showed that reaction times were significantly faster for
relevant targets than for both irrelevant (p = .002) and
rejected targets (p = .030). Irrelevant and rejected targets did
not differ significantly. Again, a significant main effect for
target position was found, (F(2, 50) = 23.916, p < .001,
partial eta-square = .489), whereas the interaction between
target type and position was not significant.

targets rejected one (p = .030) or two (p = .023) symptoms
ago. Just rejected targets were marginally faster than targets
rejected one symptom ago (p = .077). All other comparisons
were not significant.

Discussion
The results of the probe reaction task show that reactions to
targets that are related to relevant explanations are faster
than reactions to targets that are related to irrelevant
explanations or explanations that had to be rejected during
the abductive reasoning task. This indicates that explanatory
hypotheses that are relevant in the current context for
explaining a set of observations are kept in a more active
state in memory than irrelevant or rejected hypotheses.
Considering the effect of target position on reaction times
three aspects seem noteworthy. First, the difference between
relevant and irrelevant hypotheses tended to increase with
the number of symptoms shown in a trial (see Figure 2). On
the one hand this might be due to the fact that with a
growing number of symptoms presented in a trial the
number of symptoms confirming the relevant hypotheses
grew, leading to an increase of activation for relevant
hypotheses. On the other hand, with an increasing number
of symptoms more and more hypotheses had to be rejected
as they were not compatible with all symptoms presented so
far. Hence, the available activation became focused to a
decreasing number of relevant hypotheses (cf. Anderson,
1983) leading to an increase of the activation of the still
relevant hypotheses. This also means that the reaction times
in the probe tasks are not simply an effect of associative
priming due to links between the symptoms and causal
hypotheses. Focusing activation on a decreasing number of
hypotheses is only possible when only those explanations
for a new symptom are considered as relevant that are also
compatible with the previously presented symptoms. If the
reaction times in the probe task were only the result of an
associative priming process due to the links between the just
presented symptom and the associated causes, the course of
activation should be the same for relevant and irrelevant
hypotheses.
Second, the fact that the reaction times to irrelevant
explanations also decreased, even though to a smaller extent
than the reaction times to relevant explanations, might be
due to a growing activation of the probe task itself. The
more symptoms were shown in a trial the more likely the
presentation of a probe became, thereby increasing the
activation of the probe task set after each symptom.
Third, regarding the question whether rejected
explanatory hypotheses are actively inhibited or show just a
decay of activation to baseline level, the results support
Kintsch’s (1998) decay assumption. Reaction times to
rejected targets increased with increasing time interval since
rejecting the respective hypothesis until they reached the
level of irrelevant targets. This indicates that the activation
of rejected explanatory hypotheses decreased over time to
the level of irrelevant hypotheses but not beyond this level.

1000
reaction time [ms]

950
900
850
800
relevant
irrelevant
just rejected

750
700
650
2

3

4

target position

Figure 4: Reaction time to relevant, irrelevant and just
rejected targets at the different target positions.
Effect of time since explanation rejection. In addition to
the above analysis we examined the effect of the time
elapsed since a hypothesis had to be rejected. Therefore,
reaction times to targets presented after the 4th symptom
were compared (see Figure 5).
1000
reaction time [ms]

950
900
850
800
750
700
650

rel

l
irre

t
jus

.
o
o
rej
ag
ag
ne . two
o
.
j
re
rej

target type

Figure 5: Reaction time to all types of targets (x-axis)
presented after the 4th symptom.
As expected, reactions to relevant targets were the fastest.
Reactions to rejected targets were slower and the response
time increased the more time elapsed between the
presentation of the contradicting symptom and the target
presentation. A one-factorial ANOVA confirmed, that the
reaction times after the 4th symptom differed significantly
between the different target types, F(4, 100) = 4.643,
p = .002, partial eta-square = .157. For further analysis,
pairwise comparisons with Bonferroni adjustment were
carried out. Relevant targets were significantly faster than

807

Hence, our results provide no support for an inhibition
process of rejected hypotheses.

Baumann, M. R. K., Bocklisch, F., Mehlhorn, K., & Krems,
J.F. (in press). Changing explanations in the face of
anomalous data in abductive reasoning. Proceedings of
the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. August 01-04, 2007, Nashville, USA.
Conway, A. R. A. & Engle, R. W. (1994). Working
Memory and Retrieval: A Resource-dependent Inhibition
Model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
123, 354-373.
Doane, S. M., McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, W., Polson, P. G.,
& Clawson, D. (1992). Prompt comprehension in UNIX
command production. Memory and Cognition, 20, 327–
343.
Doane, S. M. & Sohn, Y. W. (2000). ADAPT: A predictive
cognitive model of user visual attention and action
planning. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction
10, 1-45.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1993). Less skilled readers have less
efficient suppression mechanisms. Psychological Science,
4, 294-298.
Gernsbacher, M. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Groen, G. J., & Patel, V. L. (1988). The relationship
between comprehension and reasoning in medical
expertise. In M. Chi & R. Glaser (Eds.), The nature of
expertise. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson, T. R. & Krems, J. F. (2001). Use of current
explanations in multicausal abductive reasoning.
Cognitive Science, 25, 903-939.
Johnson, T. R., Zhang, J., & Wang, H. (1997). A hybrid
learning model of abductive reasoning. In R. Sun & F.
Alexandre (Eds.), Connectionist symbolic integration.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Josephson, J., & Josephson, S. G. (1994). Abductive
inference: Computation, philosophy, technology. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163–182.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Lustig, C., Hasher, L., & Tonev, S. T. (2001). Inhibitory
control over the present and the past. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 13, 107-122.
Schmalhofer, F. & Tschaitschian, B. (1993). The acquisition
of a procedure schema from text and experiences.
Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Thagard, P. & Kunda, Z. (1998). Making sense of people:
Coherence mechanisms. In S. J. Read & L. C. Miller
(Eds.), Connectionist models of social reasoning and
social behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Conclusions
The goal of this paper was to examine how automatic
comprehension processes are involved in the generation of
explanations for observations. We assumed that these
comprehension processes support the abductive reasoning
process by making the most plausible explanatory
hypotheses for the given context highly available so that
deliberate reasoning processes are constrained to these
hypotheses. This should be the case especially in routine
situations where the reasoner has available a rich body of
domain knowledge that is fine-tuned to the task structure.
We used Kintsch’s (1998) construction-integration theory as
a framework for these automatic comprehension processes
to predict that relevant hypotheses should become activated
during the reasoning process. Hypotheses that were first
considered as relevant but had to be rejected later because of
new incompatible observations should decrease in activation
or should be actively inhibited.
The results of the experiment indicate that automatic
comprehension processes are indeed involved in abductive
reasoning. They lead to the activation of relevant hypotheses
in comparison to irrelevant ones. And this activation of
relevant hypotheses increases in the course of the abductive
reasoning task when more confirming observations are
processed and the activation of hypotheses becomes focused
to a decreasing number of still relevant hypotheses. The
results did not provide support for the notion of an active
inhibition process of rejected hypotheses. It rather seems
that after being rejected hypotheses are not kept activated
anymore and therefore loose activation until they reach the
baseline level activation.
Our results demonstrate how automatic comprehension
processes in the context of abductive reasoning tasks serve
to reduce the complexity of these tasks by constraining the
number of explanations that are considered first as possible
explanations to those that remain highly relevant in the
developing context.

Acknowlegements
We thank Frank Ritter, Josef Krems, Georg Jahn, and
three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on
earlier drafts of this paper.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behaviour, 22, 261-295.
Arocha, J. F. & Patel, V. L. (1995). Construction-integration
theory and clinical reasoning. In Ch. A. Weaver, S.
Mannes, & C. R. Fletcher (Eds.), Discourse
comprehension. Essays in honor of Walter Kintsch.
Hillsdale, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

808

