UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Training Context on Fixations Made During Visual Discriminations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sf0x6hb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Brou, Randy J.
Garrison, Teena M.
Doane, Stephanie M.
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Training Context on Fixations Made During Visual Discriminations

1

Randy J. Brou (Rbrou@Inst.Msstate.Edu)1
Teena M. Garrison (Teenag@Cavs.Msstate.Edu)2
Stephanie M. Doane (Sdoane@Doane.Inst.Msstate.Edu)1
Gary L. Bradshaw (Glb2@Msstate.Edu)3
Institute for Neurocognitive Science and Technology, 1207 Hwy 182 West
Starkville, MS 39759 USA
2
Center for Advanced Vehicular Systems, 200 Research Blvd.
Starkville, MS 39759 USA
3
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 6161
Mississippi State, MS 39762 USA

Abstract

through practice to eliminate redundant comparisons during
task performance. If this were true, then initial training
leading to the development of optimal strategies would lead
to superior transfer performance.
The current research builds on the work of Doane and
colleagues (Doane, Alderton, Sohn, & Pelligrino, 1996;
Doane, Sohn, & Schreiber, 1999), which showed that visual
discrimination skills consisted of both stimulus-specific and
strategic processing elements. Doane et al. (1999) trained
participants to discriminate between polygons that varied in
similarity and complexity. Some of the participants were
initially trained to discriminate between very similar
polygons (difficult training), while others were initially
trained to discriminate between dissimilar polygons (easy
training). After completing 960 training trials, both training
groups were transferred to another stimulus set, and had to
make discriminations between very similar novel polygons.
Participants trained to make difficult discriminations were
more accurate at discriminating between novel polygons,
and their advantage lasted for at least 1900 more trials.
In effect, Doane et al.’s (1996; 1999) difficult training
group learned to use a superior processing strategy that they
were able to transfer to the novel stimuli. The results
supported the information reduction hypothesis, but
differences in processing strategies across training groups
could only be inferred by transfer performance. The
information reduction hypothesis would be further
supported by finding evidence for differences in processing
strategies used by the two training groups. For example,
Doane et al. have suggested that participants trained in the
difficult condition learn to use a point-by-point comparison
strategy. Such a strategy would involve making successive
comparisons between individual corresponding features on
each of the to-be-compared stimuli, terminating either when
a difference was found or when no features remained to be
compared (Fisher & Tanner, 1992). As the stimuli are
learned through repeated exposure, this point-by-point
comparison strategy should become more refined, focusing
only on points that change between the standards and the
comparison polygons.
Alternatively, Doane et al. (1996; 1999) suggested that
participants trained in the easy condition develop an
unconstrained and early terminating feature search. This

The present research probed the relationship between the
difficulty of initial training and the nature of the resulting
strategic visual skills. Participants were trained to
discriminate between polygons that varied in similarity and
were then transferred to a novel stimulus set of similar
polygons. Eye movements were recorded during both training
and transfer, providing information about the acquisition and
transfer of a strategic visual discrimination skill. The results
suggest that training difficulty affects the processing
strategies developed by participants: Participants trained on
difficult stimuli initially allocated more fixations to higher
complexity stimuli. These participants exhibited superior
transfer performance, potentially because they learned to
optimize their allocation of fixations. Participants trained on
easy stimuli developed less optimal strategic skills and did not
sufficiently modify these skills at transfer.
Keywords: Strategic
Discrimination.

Skill;

Eye

Movements;

Visual

Introduction
In many real-life situations, people are asked to determine
whether two objects are the “same as” or “different from”
each other (just think about selecting a pair of dark socks
that should be the same from a drawer full of “singles”).
Clearly there is a strong influence of experience on
discrimination skill: people improve with practice (e.g.,
Logan, 1988). At question here is the nature of the
discrimination skill: how general or specific is it, and how
does initial training difficulty impact its development?
Several theories of stimulus processing relevant to the
theoretical question of interest have been advanced (e.g.,
Fisher & Tanner, 1992; Haider & Frensch, 1996; Logan,
1988). In Logan’s view, stimuli must be processed
algorithmically when initially encountered, but as the
number of exposures to specific stimuli increase, the
processing gives way to direct retrieval of a response. Thus,
Logan would predict a stimulus-specific improvement in
performance over time, but would not predict initial training
to impact the processing of novel stimuli. Haider and
Frensch, on the other hand, postulate an improvement in
performance that is not tied to the specific stimuli, but rather
to the strategy used for processing stimuli in general. Their
information reduction hypothesis states that people learn
839

would mean the participants select a random subset of
possible features for comparison. Thus, a participant using
an unconstrained and early terminating feature search would
be likely to examine multiple points during any given trial
to determine if differences between stimuli exist at the
selected locations. “Different” judgments would require
fewer fixations overall because the search would terminate
when a difference was discovered. This pattern is similar to
the point-by-point comparison strategy, but no specific
points would receive more attention over time, nor would all
points be examined in the case of “same” judgments. If the
participants carried this strategy over to the transfer session,
they would continue to sample points for comparison but
would be less likely to effectively identify and rely on
diagnostic points.
Because of the nature of the visual discrimination task
(comparing individual features or global shapes of multiple
stimuli), fixations should follow shifts in attention, and thus
visual processing should be observable through eye
movement recording. Thus, this research used the same
basic methodology as Doane et al. (1999, Exp. 2) for the
visual discrimination task, but with additional eyemovement measures including number of fixations and
dwell time in order to better understand the processes
involved in learning a visual discrimination strategy. If
differences in eye movements consistent with Doane et al’s
predictions are discovered, the information reduction
hypothesis would be more strongly supported.

Figure 1. Sample “easy” visual discrimination trial.
The stimulus sets used for this experiment each contained
35 polygons divided into five complexity levels, with 7
polygons per complexity level. The complexity level of the
polygons was based on the number of unique points used to
create the polygon, ranging from 6 to 20 (see Figure 2). The
seven polygons within a complexity level differed by
varying degrees, so that a D1 polygon was similar to the
standard polygon (S) on the left, whereas a D6 polygon was
quite different. These polygons were then grouped into sets
of 20: a “difficult” similarity set, consisting of D1-D3
polygons and the standard (S) polygons; and an “easy”
similarity set, consisting of D4-D6 polygons and the
standard (S) polygons. Because the transfer session included
only “difficult,” similar stimuli, only the standards and D1D3 polygons from the second stimulus set were used (see
Figure 3).

Method
Participants
Seventy-one students from the undergraduate population of
Mississippi State University were paid for their
participation. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
two training groups: difficult training, involving difficult
same/different judgments between similar stimuli, or easy
training, involving same/different judgments between
dissimilar stimuli. After the training session, all participants
were transferred to a discrimination task involving a novel
set of similar (i.e., difficult) stimuli. Data from 7
participants were excluded from analyses because of
relatively poor accuracy (below 80%) during the training
session. Additionally, 7 participants were excluded from
the eye movement analyses due to problems with equipment
calibration.

Apparatus and Materials
The experiment was conducted using a Dell personal
computer with a 43.2 cm (17 in.) monitor at a viewing
distance of 65 cm. Figure 1 gives an example of a trial.
Each set of polygons includes a standard polygon on the
left, paired either with itself or with one of three other
polygons of varying similarity to the standard on the right.
Polygons averaged 4.7 cm x 5.0 cm (4.1o x 4.4o), with a 2.4
cm (2.1o) separation between them.

Figure 2. Doane and Liu polygon stimulus set, ordered by
similarity (left-to-right) and complexity (top-to-bottom).
Adapted from Doane et al. (1996).
Eye movements were recorded with an ASL Series 5000
oculometer, including a Series 501 (Ascension Flock of
Birds) magnetic head tracker to compensate for head
movements. Eye movements were recorded at a rate of 60
840

Hz. Eye movements, latency, and accuracy information
were synchronized to a time stamp from the system clock to
permit data analysis.

across experimental blocks as no diagnostic points would be
specifically identified. Although the primary focus of this
research was on examining the nature of the strategies
developed, it is important to demonstrate that the basic
effects found by Doane et al. (1999) were replicated. Thus,
the first analyses presented will demonstrate the effect of
initial training on transfer performance. The eye movement
data will then be discussed in detail.

Latency and Accuracy
Latency for Same Judgments Our primary dependent
variable in assessing transfer is accuracy, but it is important
to consider latency differences as well. Figure 4 shows the
group mean latencies for correct same judgments during the
16 blocks of trials. Recall that the “same” judgment stimuli
were identical for the two training groups throughout the
experiment. During the training session, the difficult
training group took significantly longer to make same
judgments than did the easy training group. The latency
differences were reduced during the transfer session, and
significant group differences were no longer present. Samediscrimination latencies increased in both groups when they
transferred to making novel difficult discriminations. To
examine group differences in same-judgment latencies, an
analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on the mean
latencies, with training group (difficult vs. easy) as a
between-participant variable, and block (1-8), session
(training and transfer), and stimulus complexity (6, 8, 12,
16, 20 points) as within-participant variables. Consistent
with Figure 4, significant effects of training group, block,
and a training group × session interaction were obtained: F
(1, 60) = 11.21, MSE = 51.63, p < .01; F (7, 420) = 67.82,
MSE = 1.13, p < .01; and F (1, 60) = 21.66, MSE = 9.27, p <
.01, respectively.

Figure 3. Cooper polygon stimulus set, ordered by
similarity (left-to-right) and complexity (top-to-bottom).
Adapted from Cooper and Podgorny (1976).

Procedure
The experiment was divided into two sessions of visual
discrimination trials. Each session was divided into 8
blocks, for a total of 16 blocks. On each trial, two images
were presented on the screen and participants were asked to
indicate (via a key press) if the images were the same or
different. Accuracy and latency were recorded for each trial,
as were the eye fixations made by the participants.
In this experiment, a same judgment consisted of a
standard compared to itself, and a different judgment
consisted of a standard compared to one of the D1-D6
comparison images. During the first session, participants
were assigned to one of two training groups: difficult or
easy training. During their second session, participants
switched to a novel stimulus set and made difficult
discriminations.

Latency for Different Judgments Figure 5 shows the
group mean latencies for correct “different” discrimination
judgments as a function of trial block. As expected, the
difficult training group took longer to make high-similarity
(D1-D3) discriminations than the easy training group took
to make low-similarity (D4-D6) discriminations during the
training session, but this difference was absent when both
groups viewed the same high-similarity polygons during the
transfer session. An ANOVA was performed on the mean
latencies for the transfer session, with training group
(difficult vs. easy) as a between-participant variable, and
stimulus complexity (6, 8, 12, 16, 20), and block (1-8) as
within-participant variables. This analysis was limited to the
transfer session because of the differing similarity levels of
different judgments during training (similar polygons for the
difficult training group compared to dissimilar polygons for
the easy training group). At transfer, the latencies for the
two groups were not significantly different. Both groups’
latencies did decrease with practice, F (7, 406) = 80.64,
MSE = 0.40, p < .01.

Results
The purpose of this experiment was to examine the nature of
the strategies developed by participants trained to make
either difficult or easy visual discriminations. Because the
difficult group was asked to initially discriminate among
highly similar stimuli, it was hypothesized that this group
would develop a point-by-point comparison strategy. If
this were the case, the number of fixations made by the
difficult group should be high early in training and transfer
(particularly for more complex stimuli), and decrease over
each session once diagnostic points had been identified.
The easy group, by contrast, was expected to develop an
early terminating feature search strategy. This strategy
would lead to fewer overall fixations with little decline
841

the significant impact of initial discrimination difficulty
(i.e., superiority of the difficult training group) on transfer
performance, F (1, 62) = 4.80, MSE = 0.50, p < .05.
Accuracy for both groups declined as discrimination
difficulty increased, F (2, 124) = 86.48, MSE = 0.05, p <
.01, and both groups improved with practice, F (7, 434) =
27.58, MSE = 0.01, p < .01.

Eye Movements
Previous research provides indirect evidence for the
effects of training difficulty on strategic skill acquisition and
transfer (Doane et al., 1996; 1999). This research has
replicated those findings, showing that participants trained
to discriminate between very similar stimuli were more
accurate when transferred to a novel stimulus set. Of
interest in the current research is the nature of the acquired
strategic skill. For these analyses, only same judgments will
be discussed, both for brevity and because all groups saw
identical same judgments throughout all blocks of the
experiment.

Figure 4. Latency (seconds) means and standard errors for
correct “same” discrimination judgments as a function of
blocks of trials.

Figure 6. Accuracy means and standard errors for
“different” discrimination judgments as a function
of blocks of trials.

Figure 5. Latency (seconds) means and standard errors for
correct “different” discrimination judgments as a function of
blocks of trials.

Number of Fixations for Same Judgments If the two
training groups used the strategies hypothesized in the
current research, then the difficult training group should
have a higher number of fixations early in training in
comparison to the easy training group. Figure 7 shows that
the groups indeed followed the expected pattern. The
difficult group had more fixations during training, F (1, 54)
= 14.46, MSE = 20.12, p < .01. Interestingly, the transfer
session shows no group differences for number of fixations,
but considering the accuracy and latency data, the two
groups must still be processing the stimuli differently.
If the two groups used the predicted strategies, the
difficult training group should also have made a greater

Accuracy for Different Judgments Although accuracy for
same judgments was near 100% for both groups across all
blocks of the experiment, different judgment accuracy
differed across blocks and groups. Figure 6 shows the
group mean accuracy for different judgments as a function
of practice. In the training session, the easy training group
had higher overall accuracy scores, while at transfer, the
difficult training group had higher overall accuracy scores.
An ANOVA was performed on group mean accuracy data
for different judgments in the transfer session, with training
group (difficult vs. easy), block (9-16), and discrimination
difficulty (D1-D3) as variables. The accuracy results reflect
842

number of fixations as stimulus complexity increased. That
is, with more points to examine, a point-by-point strategy
would take more comparisons to lead to a decision. On the
other hand, an unconstrained and early terminating feature
search strategy would not be as likely to lead to a greater
number of fixations as complexity increased.
In Figure 8, complexity slopes relating stimulus
complexity to number of fixations are graphed as a function
of trial block for the two groups. By the second block of
training, the difficult group has higher complexity slopes
than the easy training group, consistent with the
hypothesized strategies, F (1, 60) = 4.58, MSE = 0.07, p <
.05. Later in training, the slopes relating complexity and
number of fixations did not differ significantly between the
two groups because of the dramatic decrease in the difficult
training group’s fixation slopes, F (7, 420) = 3.28, MSE =
0.03, p < .05. This is consistent with the difficult group
identifying diagnostic points on the polygons and narrowing
their focus to those points.

Figure 8. Regression slopes relating complexity and number
of fixations for correct “same” discrimination judgments.
Dwell Times for Same Judgments Information about the
strategic skills used by the two training groups is also
available by comparing the dwell time results. If all
fixations are equally important in providing information
about the polygons to the participants, then there should be
little difference in the overall dwell times across fixations.
On the other hand, if longer fixations occur in areas that are
considered more informative or relevant for discrimination,
then a greater range of dwell times is expected. More
processing would be expected to occur when fixating on
relevant areas versus other areas. Less relevant areas may be
fixated for confirmatory purposes or for cuing memory
retrieval of previously acquired formation.
Figure 9 shows the group means and standard errors for
the difference between dwell time maxima and dwell time
means. ANOVAs were performed to compare the variability
of dwell times during same judgments for training and
transfer sessions. Variability of dwell times was defined as
the difference between the maximum dwell time and the
mean dwell time for each trial averaged over a block. For
each of these analyses, training group was the betweenparticipants variable, with complexity (6, 8, 12, 16, 20) and
block (1-8 or 9-16) as the within-participant variables. The
ANOVAs revealed a main effect for training group, F (1,
55) = 11.14, MSE = 1074804.27, p < .01, for the training
session, and F (1, 57) = 6.60, MSE = 861779.85, p < .05 for
the transfer session. The difficult training group had a
greater difference between the maximum dwell time and the
mean dwell time for same judgments during both sessions,
potentially indicating a greater distinction in processing
between areas that were considered relevant and those that
were less informative. The easy training group participants
had less variability in their dwell times, supporting the
conclusion that these participants were more likely to treat
all fixations as similarly informative.

Figure 7. Means and standard errors for number of fixations
per trial for correct “same” discrimination judgments as a
function of blocks of trials.
During transfer, the two groups had similar fixation
slopes except with regard to which polygon (left vs. right)
received the greater number of fixations related to
complexity. Recall that the left side polygon was always the
standard, but the right side could be either a standard or a
D1-D3 polygon. An ANOVA was performed on samejudgment mean complexity slopes for the transfer session,
with training group (difficult vs. easy) as the betweenparticipants variable, and block (9-16) and polygon (left vs.
right) as within-participant variables. An interaction of
training group × polygon was found, F (1, 57) = 5.51, MSE
= 0.02, p < .05, indicating that the easy group attempted to
modify its strategy at transfer, but failed to concentrate on
the more diagnostic right-side polygon.

843

into the transfer session, as the relevant information found
in the similarity and complexity of the polygons was
recognized more quickly.
The current results support and expand the previous
claims of Doane and colleagues (Cross & Doane, 2002;
Doane et al., 1996; Doane et al., 1999) that initial training
difficulty is an important aspect in optimizing transfer to
similar tasks. When a training task is too easy in comparison
to the transfer task, the acquired processing skill leads to
less efficient parsing of available cues. Regardless of the
precise origin of the processing differences, the persistence
of the previously learned strategic skill, even after the more
difficult task is recognized, should serve as a warning
against overly easy training to those in fields where efficient
visual processing is integral to performance (e.g., airport
baggage screening, air traffic control).
Figure 9. Mean differences between dwell time maxima
and means, in milliseconds, for correct “same” judgments
by block.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by funding from the Office of
Naval Research (Grant #: N000140310088). The authors
wish to thank Dr. Astrid Schmidt-Nielsen from ONR for her
support of this effort.

Discussion
Overall, the results indicate that the two groups, difficult
training and easy training, developed different strategic
skills due to initial training difficulty. Evidence for
processing differences was found in the indirect measures of
accuracy and latency, as well as in the direct measures of
eye movements. The strategic skill acquired by the difficult
training group involved more attention to specific features
and required more individual comparisons per trial, than the
skill acquired by the easy training group, which supports
Doane et al.’s (1999) findings.
From the analysis of the eye movement data, several
differences were found in how the two training groups
processed information about the stimuli. Although the
differences in the different training contexts were expected,
the differences in the transfer context, when both groups
discriminated among the same polygons, were more
intriguing: the differences between the two training groups
during transfer are not based in general eye movement
patterns, reflected in the overall mean number of fixations,
but in more sophisticated levels of processing, such as the
attention paid to the differing complexity levels.
The present findings support previous informationreduction research findings (e.g., Doane et al., 1999; Haider
& Frensch, 1999). One interpretation of the pattern of eye
movement data is that the difficult training group developed
a more fine-tuned strategic skill, providing more
information about the polygons (particularly those of higher
complexity) than did the more general skill of the easy
training group. Because participants in the difficult training
group processed more information to reach accurate
discrimination judgments, they may have gained more
sensitivity to specific diagnostic areas. The skill acquired
due to initially difficult training could be applied to
processing the novel stimuli during transfer. This led to
increased accuracy, decreased latency, and positive transfer

References
Cooper, L. A., & Podgorny, P. (1976). Mental
transformations and visual comparison processes: Effects
of complexity and similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2, 503514.
Cross, G. W., & Doane, S. M. (2002, June). Individual
differences in strategic skill acquisition and transfer.
Poster session presented at the meeting of the American
Psychological Society, New Orleans, LA.
Doane, S. M., Alderton, D. L., Sohn, Y. W., & Pellegrino, J.
W. (1996). Acquisition and transfer of skilled
performance: Are visual discrimination skills stimulus
specific? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 22, 1218-1248.
Doane, S. M., Sohn, Y. W., & Schreiber, B. (1999). The
role of processing strategies in the acquisition and transfer
of a cognitive skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 25, 1390-1410.
Fisher, D. L., & Tanner, N. S. (1992). Optimal symbol set
selection: A semiautomated procedure. Human Factors,
34, 79-95.
Haider, H., & Frensch, P. A. (1996). The role of information
reduction in skill acquisition. Cognitive Psychology, 30,
304-337.
Haider, H., & Frensch, P. A. (1999). Eye movement during
skill acquisition: More evidence for the informationreduction
hypothesis. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 172190.
Logan, G. D. (1988). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review, 95, 492-527.
844

