UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Relationship Between Decision and Action: Simulating Response Dynamics in
Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3xd6g1nz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
Dale, Rick

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Relationship Between Decision and Action:
Simulating Response Dynamics in Categorization
Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, 38152
Abstract

similar category label (e.g., fish) for atypical exemplars
(e.g., whale) compared to control trials (e.g., cat).
These results show that processing flows in systematic
ways into motor behavior, rather than simply collapsing
onto them to generate a categorical response. They may
indeed recommend a “cascadic flow” perspective on
cognition that sees information flow continuously from
sensors to effectors (McClelland, 1979; Spivey et al., 2005).
Such an account naturally predicts the appearance of these
“post-decision” response dynamics, where the purported
“decision” event is defined as the point at which motor
movement is initiated.
These discoveries of dynamic response characteristics
suggest numerous lines of inquiry. One such question, and
the focus of the present paper, is the following: What kind
of interaction between cognition and action gives way to
dynamic post-decision characteristics of responses? In this
paper, we employ a neural network model of taxonomic
categorization to explore this question. We aim to further
elaborate the possible relationship and interaction between
cognition and action using a localist attractor network that
categorizes animal exemplars.
In what follows, we briefly review research on
categorization and the role typicality plays in common
accounts of categorization. We then present a neural
network simulation that permits comparison of different
relationships between internal processing of animal
exemplars, and an output component that models an explicit
response. We explore this by investigating a parameter
space that specifies the network’s decision-action
relationship. Network conditions that vary this relationship
are compared in how well they fit with human experiments
that show these graded action dynamics.

A neural network simulation of taxonomic categorization is
presented. Parameters of the model permit exploration of
different interactivity between cognitive processing and a
simple output component. By matching the simulation with
human data, the model reveals that fluid interaction between
cognition and action may be what produces graded response
dynamics observed in human categorization experiments.
Keywords: Neural network, categorization, action, dynamics.

Introduction
Cognition is often thought to happen in places between the
sensors and effectors, with sharp delineations at these
boundaries (e.g., Fodor, 1983; Pylyshyn, 2000). This
common account envisages cognition collapse its decisions
onto the effectors, directing various motor systems in an allor-none fashion. For example, well-known theories of
attention posit central processing separate from systems
responsible for guiding action (e.g., Posner & Petersen,
1990). In rapid, frequent, and metabolically cheap motor
output, such as the ballistic saccades of the eyes, this
perspective seems most apt. When the eyes are drawn by an
external stimulus, the processing that has led to the saccade
is programmed over a couple hundred milliseconds, and
once it reaches premotor regions responsible for saccadic
movement, fires off a motor instruction that may differ from
moment to moment only because of noise. In other words,
once the command has been issued, and the eyes instructed
on their movement, a ballistic, linear motion to the target
should be observed (e.g., Becker, 1991).
Recently, however, a growing body of research has shown
that motor systems interact more richly with cognitive
processes. Even in oculomotor systems, the trajectory of a
saccade may vary in curvature depending on stimulus
context (e.g., Sheliga, Riggio, & Rizzolatti, 1994). Perhaps
more compelling is evidence that manual responses exhibit
a range of dynamic characteristics that reveal processing.
For example, force and velocity of responses after initiation
vary concomitantly with frequency in a lexical decision task
(e.g., Balota & Abrams, 1995), and response and stimulus
probability in simple reaction-time tasks (Mattes, Ulrich, &
Miller, 2002; see also Tipper, Howard, & Jackson, 1997).
More recently, Dale, Kehoe, and Spivey (in press; see also
Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005) show that computermouse trajectories indicate competition between categories
when classifying atypical animal exemplars. The dynamic
characteristics of the response, in the form of mouse
trajectories, revealed an attraction towards a featurally-

Categorization and Typicality
In the current study, we make use of the graded nature of
category structure: Categories, whatever their origin, have
members that lie along typicality gradients. For example, an
animal can be more or less typical as a member of an animal
category, such as of mammals. The members of the
mammal category thus reveal a typicality gradient, with cats
being typical, and whales being considerably less typical.
This results in a variety of experimental effects. Typical
members are recognized faster, more consistently, have
many features in common, and can facilitate language
comprehension (see Murphy, 2002, for an excellent review).
Dale et al. (in press) make use of this property of category
structure to uncover post-decision response dynamics in
human participants. Computer-mouse trajectories were
911

recorded during a simple categorization task. Participants
categorized an animal exemplar by clicking the mouse on
one of two category choices. Mouse-movement trajectories
consisted of a movement from the bottom-center of the
screen, to the correct target on the left or right (beside which
was a competing category label). Target trials used atypical
animals (e.g., whale) and included an incorrect competitor
category that had considerable overlap in terms of semantic
and visual features (e.g., fish). Though participants
responded by clicking the appropriate category (mammal),
mouse-movement
trajectories
exhibited
substantial
attraction toward the competitor category.
This taxonomic categorization task may be a particularly
good cognitive process to continue exploring these
properties of motor output. While many previous studies of
action involve very simple processes (e.g., cued fixation or
reaching, Sheliga et al., 1994; Tipper et al., 1997),
categorization is a relatively “higher-order” process,
involving more processing of exemplars prior to the manual
response. More importantly for the present paper, theories
of category structure have often made use of feature-based
explanations. With very few exceptions, theories of
categorization have proposed evaluation of object features,
and in some manner comparing these features to prototypes

or exemplars in memory (Medin, 1989). This aspect of
categorization theories makes this cognitive process
amenable to constraint-based neural network architectures.
Before setting forth the current simulation, it is important
to note that there exist a number of quantitative models for
categorization, including basic retrieval and recognition
mechanisms (e.g., Nosofsky, 1987), category learning and
organization (e.g., Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004), and
even typicality (e.g., Hirahara & Nagano, 2003) and the
time course of categorization (Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997;
Lamberts, 2000). Despite such a broad range of models and
their application, none makes a distinction between the
decision mechanism and a component that implements the
overt response. For example, Nosofsky and Palmeri (1997)
and Lamberts (2000) offer prominent models for the time
course of the decision leading up to the response, but not the
dynamics of the response itself. We make use of a relatively
transparent neural network model that facilitates the
inclusion of a motor-response component – the response
dynamics of the model is a natural extension of the
architecture of the system itself. The model includes
decision and response components that are very similar in
their operation, permitting manipulation of parameters to
explore the relationship between the categorization process,
and the response dynamics it generates.
A second important point about the model is that it
finesses some debate about the nature of categorization. In
particular, exemplar-based and prototype-based theories of
categorization are in ongoing competition (e.g., recently,
Smith & Minda, 2000). We avoid these issues, and for
simplification assume a basic prototype for each animal
category used: Mammals, fish, etc., are assumed to have
ideal, familiar, frequent, etc. features that define a
prototypical exemplar. While this simplifies the presentation
of the model here, the way we integrate a response
component in the model may be extended to previous
models discussed above.

Simulation
Network Architecture
We use normalized-recurrence to simulate the time course
of categorization. This hand-coded localist attractor
architecture has been used to model a range of cognitive
processes, including phoneme perception, spoken-word
recognition, online sentence processing, and in modeling the
time course of visual search (Spivey & Dale, 2004; Spivey
et al., 2005). This architecture is localist because individual
units stand for specific features of the animal exemplars. For
example, when having the network categorize cat, one unit
in the network might be active to represent the feature
representing the animal’s habitat, <land>. The architecture
is an attractor network because iterated updates of its unit
activations lead the network towards a stable state. By
applying a set of activation-update rules, the activations of
the network’s units are expected to asymptote on particular

Figure 1: The hand-coded normalized-recurrence
model for categorization, with 6 banks of 5 features
feeding into the integration (category) layer.

912

values, usually with one unit obtaining maximal activation,
and competing units approaching minimal activation.
The network functions according to two basic
computational principles. First, multiple feature units
simultaneously constrain the network’s behavior. Second,
this parallel feature processing is integrated in a layer of!
units representing alternative outcomes of the model, in
which one unit achieves maximal activation over time. Fig.
1 presents the current model. It consists of an array of
feature layers, in which each unit represents a particular
property of animal exemplars. These layers feed into an
integration layer, in which the outcome of categorization is
assessed by iterated parallel processing of the constraints.
To further illustrate how the model captures the time
course of categorization, we can present an exemplar to the
model by setting the appropriate features in the layers to an
activation of 1, and all those not relevant to 0. For example,
when setting features representing the exemplar whale, the
values for LIMBS features would have 1 for <fins>, and 0
for all other units. The activity of all these layers serves as
input at the integration layer by taking a sum over all
relevant nodes. For the processing of whale features, the net
input to the mammal node would be the sum of the
activation levels of the units representing mammalian
features – in this case, 0 for <legs>, but 1 for <air> as
source of oxygen, and so on. When processing whale, the
fish node will thus receive some net input from the <fins>
feature unit.
The integration layer is then updated by normalization:
The units are made to sum to 1 all together by dividing these
net input values by the total net input to the integration layer
across all units. This normalized activation then feeds back
into the feature layers, these are then normalized, and the
cycle is continued until the integration layer becomes stable.
Fig. 2 represents such a simulation run for whale, in which
repeated iteration results in stable and maximal activation of
the unit for mammal in the integration layer.

Figure 2: Integration node activation when
categorizing whale.
Formal presentation of this model’s functioning is
straightforward. Net activation into the i-th integration unit
is the total sum of its relevant feature units across all the
feature layers (the i-th unit in each layer). From this net
input, the output from this integration unit is obtained by
dividing this input activation by the total sum of activation
into all integration units. With Fk representing the k-th
feature layer in the set of layers F, and I the integration
layer,

k

j

net I, i, t = # aF
F

k , i, t"1

aI, i, t = net I, i, t / " net I,

j, t

I

where net ., i,t and a., i,t represent net input and activation of
the i-th unit of the given layer at time step t. The value
netI,2,t is the net input
! to the second unit of the integration
layer, receiving input from the second feature unit of all 6
layers of F. The subsequent activation of a feature unit is
determined by the sum of its previous activation and that
activation multiplied by the corresponding input from the
integration layer. Each feature layer then outputs a
normalized activation, as in the integration layer. This
process continues until one unit in the integration layer (or
motor layer) reaches criterion activation (see below).
net F

k , i, t

= aF

k , i, t"1

+ aI, i, t • aF

k , i, t"1

j

aF

k , i, t

= net F

k , i, t

/ " net F
Fk

k , j, t

! are a number of benefits to this simple architecture.
There
First, its inner-workings are directly scrutable. While it is
important
! to seek scaled-up systems that fit data from
categorization (e.g., Love et al., 2004), simple models that
capture core theoretical principles may serve as explicit and
transparent accounts for basic patterns of behavioral data.
One such core theoretical principle, a second benefit of this
model, is conceiving cognitive processes as subject to
simultaneous informational constraints. This constraintbased approach to the time-course of categorization fits with
perspectives on related cognitive phenomena, particularly
semantic phenomena (e.g, among many, McRae, de Sa, &
Seidenberg, 1997). Finally, this transparency and theoretical
property are implemented in a simple system that operates
through iterated updates of its activations. This makes
normalized-recurrence particularly suitable for capturing
temporal properties of cognition, an important goal for
models of a cognitive process such as categorization
(Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997).
In order to map this categorization model onto a
simulated response, we supplement it with an additional
bank of nodes that receives input from the integration layer.
This “motor” bank of units, denoted M, represents the
outcome response, and also exhibits a time course over
iterations of the model (see Fig. 1). Just as the integration
layer approaches a stable decision through input from
feature layers, the motor layer does so through input from
the integration layer. At a given time t!, some number of
time steps over which integration and feature layers have
interacted, these M units begin to receive activation from
the integration layer in a manner similar to how the feature
layers receive integration activation.
net M, i, t = aM, i, t"1 + aI, i, t +t"1 • aM, i, t
#

The activation of the i-th unit aM,i,t is then similarly
normalized. The parameter t! may be varied, allowing M to
!
receive
input from the categorization decision at different
points in time. We choose to vary this parameter by
913

observing the “confidence” of the categorization decision –
the maximal activation found in the integration layer,
denoted here as !. The integration and feature layers may
therefore be permitted to interact for a period of time (up to
iteration t!) before M receives input from the integration
layer when the maximal activation in the integration layer is
! or higher.
As outlined further below, this allows a number of
parameters specifying the interaction between I and M to be
modified. Firstly, the point in time at which M begins to
receive input from I, and begins to update its activation
towards a stable output response, can be modified.
Secondly, M may be included in the set of layers F that feed
into the integration layer. This allows the process of
categorization to be influenced by available responses in the
task.

integration units: 0, .4, and .8. This parameter will reveal in
the model the amount of processing that may lead to or
diminish dynamic post-decision dynamics in the activation
of M. We hold the interaction parameter (!; see next
section) constant at 1 while modifying t!.
Varying Interaction between I and M. Finally, we
examine whether interaction between integration and motor
layers contributes to graded output in the model, and as
observed in human experiments. To do this, we add a term
to the net input to unit i in I:
k

net I, i, t = # aF
F

k , i, t"1

+ $ • aM, i, t"1

This permits activation in M, set at the beginning of the
simulation run, to impinge on the time course of the
categorization
decision – activation in I. The interaction
!
parameter " permits variable interaction from M to I, and
we use a broad range of values again: 0, .5, and 1. We hold
t! constant using a threshold of ! = 0.

Procedure
In this simulation, we compared three different initial
network conditions. 3 atypical-competitive conditions
involved initializing a non-prototypical exemplar (whale,
penguin, bat), and a featurally-similar competing response
possibility (fish, fish, bird). 9 atypical-noncompetitive
conditions were different only in activating a less saliently
competing response unit (e.g., bird for whale). Finally, 8
composed a typical condition, (proto)typical feature values
were activated, with a randomly selected competing
response option. Each trial in the conditions was selected to
have some overlap with Dale et al. (in press), in which
human participants were subjected to similar trial types.
The beginning of a simulation run involved setting feature
layer units to their relevant values, and turning the two
relevant response units to .5 to have equibiased initial
response options.1 According to the equations above,
activation then feeds into the integration layer, and back,
until the motor layer reached criterion activation (.95).
As mentioned above, the parameters of this attractor
network may be modified so as to vary the relationship
between the categorization units in I and the output units M.
Two separate sets of runs using these network conditions
were conducted to explore this relationship. Each of these
conditions is outlined individually below.

Results

Figure 3: Dynamic profile of response activation (M)
when modifying the point at which categorization flows
into output (cross = atypical-competitive; triangle =
atypical-noncompetitive; circle = typical).
Varying !. All run conditions were normalized into 10 time
steps so they could be overlaid (Spivey et al., 2005; Dale et
al., in press). Figures present the iteration after competing
response units are set at .5, showing the subsequent 9
normalized time steps before the motor units reach criterion
of .95 or greater. Fig. 3 presents the effect of increasing or
decreasing the threshold at which I begins to feed into M.
The normalized time course of run conditions becomes
more similar as this threshold increases. The earlier the
integration layer feeds into motor, the greater the
competition effect seen in the atypical-competitive
activation change. As an additional check of this pattern, we
ran two further parameter values having t! established at
integration thresholds 0, .2, .4, .6, and .8. The average
difference between atypical-competitive and typical
trajectories in the three middle time steps diminishes
significantly as this parameter is increased (r = -.97, p <
.005).

Varying !. The point in time at which activation flows from
I to M can also be varied. This can be accomplished by
varying the confidence threshold (!) at which the integration
layer begins to influence the motor layer. As mentioned, t!
is defined as the point at which one integration layer unit
has activation of ! or greater in each subsequent iteration.
We do this while maintaining the non-integral activation
values in layer I. We chose three levels of threshold ! that
span a reasonable range of possible activation of the
1

Varying Interaction between I and M. Fig. 4 shows that
feedback from M into I is not required to generate the

To match human experiments in Dale et al. (in press), where
parameters permitted, activation flowed in for 3 time steps from
response options (since these were shown first to subjects).

914

graded patterns in the atypical-competitive condition.
However, increasing feedback from M generates a slight
competition in the atypical-noncompetitive runs. Again, we
ran another two parameter values (" = .25 and .75), and
tracked the average difference between the middle three
time steps for atypical-noncompetitive and typical
conditions. This difference increases significantly with " (r
= .98, p < .005). In other words, there emerges a disparity in
the output dynamics of typical and atypical-noncompetitive
runs when one allows motor and integration layers to more
fluidly interact.

motor layers in both directions. In fact, in both perceptual
(i.e., pictures) and lexical categorization, Dale et al. (in
press) observed curved motor trajectories in trials akin to
atypical-noncompetitive network conditions here, along
with the more intuitive effect of atypical-competitive
conditions. In a correlation of corresponding time steps,
these normalized x-coordinate proportions show a strong
relationship with M activation in the high interaction (" =
1) and early motor input condition (! = 0; r = .99, p <
.0001). When conducting the same regression analysis over
the other parameter values, one obtains increases in fit in the
expected directions (see Fig. 5b). The best fit with human
data is obtained when interaction between integration and
motor layers is maximized: When " is large (high
interaction between I and M), and ! is small (early input to
M).

General Discussion
Normalized-recurrence provides a simple yet ideal arena for
exploring the interaction among constraints that underlie
taxonomic categorization. These constraints involve the
parallel processing of features, and an accumulation of
information that guides the categorization decision and
resultant response. This model indeed resembles several
recent simulations that also seek to characterize the time
course of categorization (e.g., Lamberts, 2000). While the
current model is simple, it offers some explicit insight into
the possible relationship between the categorization
decision, and the resultant response itself. In the model,
patterns of competition observed in human data are obtained
when both the decision process and the motor output
concurrently and continuously interact. The kind of
approach used here may suggest ways in which existing
models (e.g., Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997; Lamberts, 2000)
might integrate action parameters, thereby providing a fuller
picture of the cognitive process: Accounting for not just the
hypothesized
internal
processes, but
information
accumulation all the way into the observable response
behavior and its time course. For example, the Nosofsky
and Palmeri (1997) model involves a random-walk process
where exemplars race each other to help categorize a test
exemplar. Including a motor component may simply involve
integrating a second random-walk process in which possible
category responses race each other for selection. Interactive
parameters could then be similarly explored.
One possible promissory note about such models is a
synthesis of “pre-decision” process models, and the
experimentally observed relationship between process and
response characteristics. Growing research on the
embodiment of cognition (e.g., Barsalou, 1999) shows that
parameters of action can impinge on the cognitive
processing eventually leading into it (e.g., Glenberg &
Kaschak, 2002). The current model provides some simple
means by which computational mechanisms of these effects
can be devised.
The current model has some obvious limitations. Firstly,
it is extremely simple. The model simply embodies basic

Figure 4: Dynamic profile of correct response (M)
when modifying the feedback it receives from output
units.
Mapping to Human Data. To investigate the relationship
between the simulation and human data, we analyzed xcoordinates in manual trajectories drawn from Dale et al. (in
press). A number of measures may be used, such as ycoordinate and Euclidean distance to target. However, the xcoordinate more closely represents proximity to correct or
incorrect target (since, in the experiment, y-coordinates are
the same for each category response label). In addition,
differences in x-coordinates have served as the basis for
comparing response dynamics in previous work (Spivey et
al., 2005; Dale et al., in press).

Figure 5a: Dynamic profile of x-coordinate change (in
proportion to final, correct target) in human experiment.
5b: As the interaction parameter " (dotted line) is
increased, a better fit is achieved with normalized
human data. As the required confidence threshold !
(solid line) is increased, the opposite holds.
Data from the lexical categorization tasks in Dale et al. (in
press) are shown in Fig. 5a. This graph depicts similarly
normalized time courses of the same trial types in human
experiments as the manual response’s x-coordinate reaches
its target. The figure bears resemblance to network
conditions that involve interaction between integration and
915

computational principles regarding constraint-based feature
processing, and the continuous integration of this
information. However, it is perhaps surprising that such
simple assumptions can succeed in generating the kind of
response patterns observed in the human experiments: Both
competitive and noncompetitive trials and their graded
response characteristics can be captured in this system.
Secondly, as discussed earlier, the model does not seek to
resolve current debate regarding opposing theories of the
categorization process. While the model may prima facie
have difficulty fitting knowledge-based results of
categorization, its properties serve as an exploration of the
time course of categorization given certain conditions.
Those assumed here are at least sufficient to model basic
categorization tasks. While this is promising, others seek to
scale up computational models of categorization and
category learning (Love et al., 2004). The current model
may again provide some motivation for integrating outputbased dynamics to model responses.
Thirdly, the model’s parameters clearly cannot be directly
mapped to neurophysiology. Nevertheless, substantial
evidence from the neurophysiology of the motor system
reveals both simultaneous and continuous competition
between possible actions – properties similar to this paper’s
normalized-recurrence network (Spivey & Dale, 2004, for
some review).
Despite these limitations, rather than intricately capturing
categorization and its underlying neural substrate, the model
provides an idealized computational system that explores
the effects of two interacting systems. One system acts
through informational constraints to gradually decide on a
relevant category; another acts through this decision
component at a given later time to mediate between only
two possible stable states (the correct vs. incorrect end-point
actions). In this model’s context, fluid interaction between
these components is what generates the response dynamics
observed in human experiments.

Glenberg, A., & Kaschak, M. (2002). Grounding language
in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 558-565.
Hirahara, M. & Nagano, T. (2003). A neural network for the
typicality effects. Proceedings of the International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks, 4, 2502-2505.
Lamberts, K. (2000). Information-accumulation theory of
speeded categorization. Psychological Review, 107, 227260.
Love, B., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Mattes, S., Ulrich, R., & Miller, J. (2002). Response force in
RT tasks: Isolating effects of stimulus probability and
response probability. Visual Cognition, 9, 477-501.
McClelland, J. (1979). On the time relations of mental
processes: An examination of systems of processes in
cascade. Psychological Review, 86, 287-330.
McRae, K., de Sa, V.R., & Seidenberg, M.S. (1997). On the
nature and scope of featural representations of word
meaning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
126, 99-130.
Medin, D. L. (1989). Concepts and concept structure.
American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1481.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1987). Attention and learning processes in
the identification and categorization of integral stimuli.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 13, 87-108.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T.J. (1997). An exemplarbased random walk model of speeded classification.
Psychological Review, 104, 266-300.
Posner, M. L., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attenion system
of the human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13,
25-42.
Pylyshyn, Z. (2000). Is vision continuous with cognition?:
The case for cognitive impenetrability of visual
perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 341-365.
Sheliga, B., Craighero, L., Riggio, L. & Rizzolatti, G.
(1997). Effects of spatial attention on directional manual
and ocular responses. Experimental Brain Research, 114,
339-351.
Smith, J., & Minda, J. (2000). Thirty categorization results
in search of a model. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: LMC, 26, 3-27.
Spivey, M.J., & Dale, R. (2004). The continuity of mind:
Toward a dynamical account of cognition. In B. Ross
(Ed.), Psychology of Learning and Motivation v.45 (pp.
85-142). Elsevier Academic Press.
Spivey, M., J. Grosjean, M., Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102,
10393-10398.
Tipper, S., Howard, L., & Jackson, S. (1997). Selective
reaching to grasp: Evidence for distractor interference
effects. Visual Cognition, 4, 1-38.

Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Morten Christiansen and
Michael Spivey for valuable input and criticism.

References
Balota, D., & Abrams, R. (1995). Mental chronometry:
Beyond onset latencies in the lexical decision task.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 1289-1302.
Becker, W. (1991). Saccades. In R. H. S. Carpenter (Ed.),
Eye Movements, Vol. 8 in Vision and visual
Dysfunction. CRC Press.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C., & Spivey, M. (in press). Graded motor
responses in the time course of categorizing atypical
exemplars. Memory and Cognition.
Fodor, J.A. (1983). Modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA:
Bradford.

916

