UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Foundations of Numeracy: Subitizing, Finger Gnosia, and Fine Motor Ability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vb45554

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Penner-Wilger, Marcie
Fast, Lisa
LaFevre, Jo-Anne
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Foundations of Numeracy: Subitizing, Finger Gnosia, and Fine Motor Ability
Marcie Penner-Wilger (mpwilger@connect.carleton.ca)
Lisa Fast (lfast@connect.carleton.ca)
Jo-Anne LeFevre (jlefevre@connect.carleton.ca)
Centre for Applied Cognitive Research, Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Brenda L. Smith-Chant (Brenda.Smith-Chant@ontario.ca)
Department of Psychology, Trent University, Peterborough, ON K9J 7B8 Canada

Sheri-Lynn Skwarchuk (s.skwarchuk@uwinnipeg.ca)
Faculty of Education, University of Winnipeg, MB R3B 2E9 Canada

Deepthi Kamawar (dkamawar@connect.carleton.ca)
Institute of Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Jeffrey Bisanz (jeff.bisanz@ualberta.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, T6G 2E9 Canada
Abstract
Butterworth (1999; 2005) proposed that several component
abilities support our numerical representations and processes:
an innate capacity to represent small numerosities (indexed by
subitizing), fine motor ability (indexed here by finger
tapping), and the ability to mentally represent one’s fingers
(indexed by finger gnosia). In the current paper, we evaluated
the predictive power of these component abilities in the
development of numeration and calculation skills in Grade 1
children (N = 146). Each component ability was found to be a
significant unique predictor of number system knowledge,
which in turn was related to calculation skill. Finger gnosia
was related to calculation skill indirectly through number
system knowledge. In contrast, subitizing predicted
calculation skill both directly and indirectly through number
system knowledge. Our results support Butterworth’s view of
the foundations of numeracy and have implications for the
early identification of children at risk of math difficulties.
Keywords:
Numerical
representation;
Arithmetic
Development; Subitizing; Finger Gnosia; Finger Tapping.

Introduction
Mathematical skill is vital in our society. Poor skill in basic
mathematics has been shown to have a greater negative
effect on employment opportunities and job retention than
poor literacy skills (Bynner & Parsons, 1997). In
comparison to literacy, however, less is known about the
precursor abilities that support math. Butterworth (1999;
2005) proposed that three component abilities support our
numerical representations and processes: an innate capacity
to represent small numerosities, the ability to functionally
use one’s fingers, and the ability to mentally represent one’s
fingers. In the current paper, we evaluate the component
abilities underlying the development of numeration and
calculation skills.
In Butterworth’s view of the development of numerical
abilities, the core component is the ability to “categorize the

world in terms of numerosities—the number of things in a
collection” (1999, p. 6). This ability, he posits, can be
indexed by subitizing, that is, the ability to quickly
enumerate the items in a set without counting. Subitizing
generally applies only to sets of up to 3 or 4 items (Mandler
& Shebo, 1982). To date, no one has examined the specific
relation between subitizing ability and math skill.
To extend our core numerical abilities, Butterworth
(1999) asserts, we construct concrete and abstract numerical
representations using fingers, number words, and numerals.
Across cultures, fingers are used to represent numerosities.
The representations of fingers, thus, become tied to the
representation of numerosities. Butterworth’s position is
that children’s representation of number beyond the
subitizing range hinges on the ability to mentally represent
one’s fingers, that is, finger gnosia. Children use their
fingers not only to represent numerosities, but also for
counting and arithmetic. Fingers serve as portable
manipulatives, providing a bridge from concrete to abstract
representations of quantity and of operations. Thus, the fine
motor ability necessary to perform such functions may be
important for the development of counting and calculation.

Subitizing
Butterworth (1999; 2005) suggested that the core
component upon which all other math abilities are built is an
innate ability to recognize, represent, and manipulate
cardinal values, termed numerosity. Deficits are posited to
lead to a plethora of math difficulties. In accordance with
Butterworth’s view, Benoit, Lehalle, and Jouen (2004)
concluded that subitizing is a necessary component for the
mapping of number words to numerosities, as subitizing
“allows the child to grasp the whole and the elements at the
same time” (p. 21). The ability to predict math performance
based on subitizing ability, however, has not yet been
examined.

1385

Koontz and Berch (1996) evaluated children’s speed in
enumerating sets of items. The authors found that in contrast
to normally-achieving children, children with dyscalculia
appeared to count the number of dots in a display of 1 – 3
such that their response times increased with each additional
dot. These results and similar results from a dyscalculia
study by Landerl and colleagues (Landerl, Bevan, &
Butterworth, 2004) suggest that a relation will exist between
subitizing speed and math skill.

Mental representation of fingers
Consistent with Butterworth’s position that children’s
representation of number hinges on the ability to mentally
represent one’s fingers, young children of every culture use
their fingers to represent quantities and for counting
(Butterworth, 1999). As a result of children’s use of their
fingers to represent numerosity, he posits that fingers come
to be associated with numerosities. Fayol and Seron (2005),
likewise posit that fingers may be the “missing link”
between preverbal representations of number and number
words. In support of the importance of fingers in math
development, both finger agnosia and fine motor deficits
have been linked to math deficits in groups with
neuropsychological disorders (Barnes, Smith-Chant, &
Landry, 2005). Finger gnosia performance has been found
to predict children’s math performance both concurrently
and longitudinally (Fayol, Barrouillet, & Marinthe, 1998;
Noël, 2005).
Fayol, Barrouillet, and Marinthe (1998) examined the
predictive power of finger-related measures on math
performance in a longitudinal study of 5- and 6-year-old
children (N = 177). Neuropsychological tests of perceptuotactile performance, including tests for simultagnosia,
digital gnosia, digital discrimination, and graphisthesia,
were given in June preceding entry into Grade 1.
Developmental tests, including the Lozenge Drawing Test
and Goodenough’s Person Drawing Test, were also given
during this session. These tests were combined to derive a
neuropsychological score and a developmental score, which
were used to predict math outcome both concurrently and
longitudinally eight months later in Grade 1. Math outcome
was measured by children’s performance on tests including:
write down all numbers you know, completing sequences of
numbers, identifying cardinal values, and verbal word
problems. The neuropsychological score was the best
predictor of mathematical scores in preschool and Grade 1
(r = .49 and .46 respectively). This evidence supports a role
for fingers in math development.
Noël (2005) examined the predictive power of finger
gnosia on numerical tasks in a longitudinal study of children
from the beginning of Grade 1 to the end of Grade 2 (6 – 7
year olds, N = 41). Noël refined the finger gnosia task,
eliminating the confound of number labels for identifying
the fingers. Children were given the finger gnosia test in
Grade 1 and again in Grade 2. Numerical tasks were given
in Grade 2 and included: magnitude comparison (range 1- 9,
with dots and with Arabic digits), number transcoding

(write dictated number in Arabic digits, range 2- to 3-digit
numbers), subitizing (range 1-8), finger counting
(identifying conventional and unconventional patterns of
raised fingers), and single-digit addition. A numerical error
factor was created from accuracy measures (comparison,
subitizing, number transcoding, finger counting, and
addition), and a numerical speed factor was created from
response time measures (comparison, finger counting).
Finger gnosia scores in Grade 1 were correlated with both
the numerical error factor (-.48) and the numerical speed
factor (-.30). Finger gnosia scores in Grade 2 were
correlated with the numerical error factor (-.36). The
predictive power of finger gnosia was specific to numerical
skills and was not correlated with reading skill. Thus, even
once the confound of number labels is removed, finger
gnosia remains a good predictor of children’s numerical
abilities in the early grades. In summary, existing research
supports the view that children’s mental representation of
fingers is related to the development of mathematical skill.

Functional role of fingers
Consistent with Butterworth’s position that fingers play a
functional role in the development of numeracy, fine motor
deficits are associated with math disabilities. Barnes et al.
(2005) investigated the link between fine motor ability and
math in children with Spina Bifida. Spina Bifida is a
neurodevelopmental disorder that produces, among others,
deficits in fine motor ability. Moreover, children with Spina
Bifida show math difficulties early in development and
these difficulties persist into adulthood.
In a group of 120 children aged 8 – 16 years (60 with
Spina Bifida and 60 age- and grade-matched controls)
Barnes et al. found that fine motor ability, measured with
the Purdue Pegboard task, was correlated with skill in multidigit calculation, accounting for 28 % of the variance. In a
group of younger children (aged 36 months old) fine motor
ability measured with the Visual Motor Integration test
(Beery & Beery, 2004) predicted significant unique variance
in children’s nascent quantitative skills including: object
counting, finger counting, quantitative vocabulary, and
counting concepts. Thus, there is a link between fine motor
skill and a variety of numerical tasks that is robust across
measures and development.

Present Research

1386

What component abilities underlie the development of
numeration and calculation skills? Butterworth posits a role
for three component skills: subitizing, finger gnosia, and
fine motor ability. In the current paper we investigated the
joint and independent contributions of each component
ability to the numeration and calculation skills of children in
Grade 1. Numeration skills include counting, ordering,
recognizing numerals, sequencing, and place value. These
tasks make use of the representations of number, which are
posited to be formed based on subitizing ability and
extended via finger gnosia, and of the procedures facilitated
by fine motor ability. We hypothesized that these

component abilities make independent contributions to the
development of numerical skill. We further hypothesized
that the component abilities relate to calculation skill
indirectly via numeration. In contrast, on the view that
subitizing forms the core of all numerical skills, we
hypothesized that subitizing may also relate to calculation
skills directly.

Method
Participants
Grade 1 children (N = 146) were selected from an ongoing
longitudinal study. The testing sessions took place in the
late Spring, by which time the children had participated in
nine months of mathematical instruction. The children (71
girls and 75 boys) ranged in age from 5 to 7 years old (M =
82 months).
Socio-economic status (as measured by parent education
levels) was relatively high across all of the schools in the
sample. Seventy-three percent of the participants’ parents
provided education level information, of these, only 19%
did not hold university or college degrees, while 25% held
post-graduate degrees.

Procedure
Most children completed the computer measures in one
half-hour session and the rest of the measures in a separate
half-hour session on a different day. Some children
completed all of the measures in a single session of
approximately an hour.
All of the computer tasks were presented using software
developed specifically for this project. For the computer
tasks, children initiated the trials themselves by pressing the
spacebar. Response times were measured from the point at
which the stimuli appeared, until the experimenter pressed
the stop-timer key (using a separate keyboard) when the
child spoke their response. The experimenter then typed in
the child’s response.

Materials
Subitizing On each trial the computer displayed a set of 1 to
6 circular red target objects. The children were instructed to
respond with the number of objects, out loud, as quickly as
possible. The child initiated each trial by pressing the space
bar. To promote accuracy, the targets remained on the
display until the child's response was entered by the
experimenter. There were 18 trials, preceded by two
practice trials of two and seven objects. Half of the trials
were within the subitizing range (1 to 3), and half in the
counting range (4 to 6). Although the subitizing range is
often defined as from 1 to 4 objects (Trick & Pylyshyn,
1994), previous research with children in the Grade 1 age
range shows accuracy and speed declined for four items
(Trick, Enns, & Brodeur, 1996).
The measure of interest for the present research is the
response time (RT) slope as a function of set size. To
compensate for the variability in the response times of this

small number of trials, median response times were
calculated for each set size (1 – 3 items) for each child. The
best-fitting regression line through these medians was
calculated for each child. The slope values were used as the
dependent measure.
Finger Gnosia The Finger Gnosia measure is based on one
designed by Noël (2005). Ten trials were conducted on each
hand, beginning with the dominant hand. In each trial, two
fingers were lightly touched below the first knuckle. The
child's view of the touches was obstructed with a cloth cover
raised from the child's wrist. After the cloth cover was
lowered, the child pointed to the two fingers that had been
touched. A point was awarded for each correct identification
of a touched finger in a trial, with a maximum of 20 points
per hand. The score for the non-dominant hand was used as
the dependent measure.
Finger Tapping To isolate fine motor ability from visualspatial performance, we developed a computer-game
version of the Finger Tapping Test (Baron, 2004). The
game was presented as a canal-digging exercise, where the
longer the canal, the bigger the fish that will swim in it.
Each tap on the space bar was a 'dig of the shovel', and
increased the length of the canal, with an indicator of the
maximum length from any previous trials. Children were
instructed and encouraged to tap as fast as they could.
Timing began upon the first press of the space bar and
continued for 10 seconds (Baron, 2004), until an animated
fish appeared. The tapping score determined the type of fish,
with a prized killer whale animation appearing for scores
over 50 taps. Tapping scores were collected for three trials
on each hand, beginning with the dominant hand. The
maximum number of taps achieved across the three nondominant hand trials was used as the dependent measure.
Digit Recognition/Next Number The Digit Recognition
and Next Number tasks were performed on the computer.
Each of these tasks had 18 trials of increasing difficulty. The
task ended if the child made three sequential errors. In each
trial, a number was displayed on the screen. The first half of
the trials were under 100, then increased in difficulty
through the hundreds, thousands and for Next Number, into
the ten and hundred thousands, ending at 407,276. For Digit
Recognition, the experimenter asked the child, "What
number is that?" Later during the testing session, for the
Next Number task, the child was asked to respond with the
number "that comes next when counting." Responses that
were spoken as digits–for example, "one oh oh" instead of
"one hundred"–were marked as errors. The total number of
correct responses was used as the dependent measure.
Place Value Knowledge of place value was measured
through a test designed for this study. Each page of the
testing easel displayed an image of a set of proportionately
sized unit, ten, hundred or thousand blocks. Above the
blocks was a two- to four-digit number with one digit
underlined. The child was asked to identify whether the

1387

number of blocks was consistent with the underlined
number. A consistent trial would show the number 352 with
an image of 3 hundred-unit blocks. An inconsistent trial
would show the number 352 with an image of 3 ten-unit
blocks. Two example trials and two practice trials precede
the twelve test trials. The task taps children’s understanding
of the values associated with the location of digits in
numbers. The total number of correct trials was used as the
dependent measure.

Vocabulary Receptive language was measured using the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test–Third Edition (Dunn &
Dunn, 1997). It was included primarily as a measure of
verbal, non-mathematical knowledge.

Results

Numeration Concepts such as quantity, order, and place
value were measured with the Numeration subtest of a
multi-domain diagnostic test, the KeyMath Test-Revised,
Form B (Connolly, 2000).

Descriptive statistics for each measure are shown in Table 1.
Correlations among the measures are shown in Table 2.
Notably, there were no significant correlations among the
three precursor abilities, subitizing, finger tapping, and
finger gnosia, supporting Butterworth’s view of separate
component abilities (Butterworth, 1999). Subitizing and
finger gnosia were correlated with both number system
knowledge and calculation skill. Finger tapping was
correlated with number system knowledge.

Calculation Skill Mathematical skill was assessed with the
Calculation subtest from the Woodcock-Johnson PsychoEducational Battery—Revised (Woodcock & Johnson,
1989). This subtest begins with small mathematical
problems in both horizontal and vertical formats. The
problems progress in difficulty and include addition,
subtraction, and multiplication.

Table 1. Descriptive information (N = 146)
Measure

Max
4

Processing Speed To assess processing speed, we
implemented a computer-based simple choice reaction time
task (Petrill, Luo, Thompson, & Detterman, 2001). Two
types of stimuli (an X or an O) were displayed for 1 second,
preceded by a half second fixation point. The display then
cleared and the next trial began automatically 1 second later.
There were 24 trials. The child positioned the index finger
of their dominant hand on the keyboard key with an 'X'
sticker (the 'X' key) and their middle finger on the key
above it labeled 'O' (the 'D' key). Left-handed children used
similar stickers on the right side of the keyboard. The
median response time for pressing the correct key in
response to the stimuli was used as the dependent measure.

Subitizing Slope
Finger Gnosia2
Finger Tapping
Calculation Skill1
Processing Speed4
Vocabulary1

20

M

SD

100.8
15.0
38.8
99.8
781.2
109.5

129.4
2.4
5.5
15.1
209.4
11.5

Number System Knowledge [Component Measures]
Digit Recognition2
18
14.5
2.6
Next Number2
18
10.2
3.8
Place Value2
12
7.2
2.1
Numeration3
17
12.6
3.7
1
Standardized score; 2 Number correct; 3 Scaled Score;
4
Milliseconds

Table 2. Correlations among measures (N = 146)

Task

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

—
.04
.18*
.12

—
-.30**
-.31**

—
.61**

1

1. Gender
—
2. Vocabulary
.13
—
3. Processing Speed
-.08
-.06
—
4. Finger Gnosia
-.15
.10
-.16
—
5. Finger Tapping
-.01
.06
-.113
.06
6. Subitizing
-.03
-.05
-.10
-.10
7. Number System Knowledge
.23**
.43**
-.23**
.27**
8. Calculation Skill
.16**
.23**
-.10
.19**
1
Gender coding: Female = 1 and Male = 2. Significance levels: *p<.05, **p<.01.

1388

Data Reduction
Tasks that index number system knowledge (i.e. digit
recognition, next number, place value, and KeyMath
numeration) were entered into a principal components factor
analysis with varimax rotation. A one-factor solution
emerged that accounted for 66% of the variance among the
measures with the following loadings: digit recognition
(.89), next number (.86), place value (.59), and KeyMath
numeration (.87). Factor scores were saved and used as the
Number System Knowledge measure in the subsequent
regressions.

Regressions
To test the hypothesis that the finger tasks and subitizing
would each predict number system knowledge, a regression
was conducted with the number system knowledge factor as
the dependent variable and subitizing, finger gnosia, and
finger tapping as predictors. In both this and the following
regression, gender, receptive vocabulary, and processing
speed were included as control variables. The pattern of
significant predictors is shown on the left of Figure 1.
Consistent with Butterworth’s view, each precursor ability
was a significant unique predictor of number system
knowledge. Overall, the model accounted for 36.4 % of
variance in number system knowledge.
Next, a second regression was conducted with calculation
skill as the dependent variable, and with number system
knowledge and the three precursor abilities as the predictors.
As shown in Figure 1, number system knowledge was related
to calculation skill. Finger gnosia was related to calculation
skill indirectly through number system knowledge. This
finding is consistent with Butterworth’s view that the ability
to mentally represent fingers is an integral building block for
the representation of numbers beyond the subitizing range. In
contrast, subitizing predicted calculation skill both directly
and indirectly through number system knowledge. This
finding is consistent with Butterworth’s view that the capacity
to represent small numerosities is the core ability upon which
all other mathematical skills are built. Overall, the model
accounted for 36.0 % of variance in calculation skill.
In summary, as predicted, all component skills (subitizing,
finger gnosia, and finger tapping) contributed uniquely to
number system knowledge. As predicted, finger gnosia was
indirectly related to calculation skill. Finger tapping,
however, was not related to calculation skill. This finding
may reflect that our operational definition of fine-motor skill
as indexed by finger tapping was not ideal. In contrast,
subitizing exerted influence on calculation skill beyond that
accounted for by number system knowledge.

view that each reflects a separate ability. Further, each
component ability was found to predict significant unique
variance in children’s number system knowledge.
Subitizing was correlated with both number system
knowledge and calculation skill. Thus, children able to
enumerate 1 - 3 items without counting performed better in
mathematics. Butterworth (1999) proposes that this is the core
ability upon which math is built. Indeed, both young infants
and many non-human animals exhibit the ability to
distinguish small sets of items based on magnitude (for a
review see Butterworth, 1999; Dehaene, 1997). Despite the
evidence supporting subitizing as a developmental and
evolutionary precursor to mathematics, our findings are the
first that we are aware of to show a correlation between
subitizing and mathematical ability in an unselected
population.
Finger-based representations of magnitude are posited to
extend the representation of quantity beyond the subitizing
range. Finger gnosia was correlated with both number system
knowledge and calculation skill. Thus, children able to use
their fingers as representational tools performed better in
mathematics. Butterworth (1999) proposes a functional
relation between finger gnosia and math; the two are related
because children use their fingers to represent quantities.
Alternative neural views of the relation between finger gnosia
and math have also been proposed (see Anderson & PennerWilger, 2007; Dehaene, et al. 2003). Anderson and PennerWilger suggest that the two tasks share a common underlying
neural circuit, which though originally purposed for finger
representation has been redeployed for the representation of
magnitude.
Children with greater finger agility, as measured by finger
tapping, would be in a better position to use their fingers to
perform counting and arithmetic procedures. We found that
finger tapping was correlated with number system
knowledge. The numeration component of number system
knowledge involved counting and simple arithmetic
problems.

Discussion
In the current paper we investigated the joint and independent
contributions of each component ability (subitizing, finger
gnosia, and fine motor ability) to the numeration and
calculation skills of children in Grade 1. No correlations were
found among the component abilities, consistent with the

1389

Figure 1: Regression model with semi-partial regression
coefficients.

Conclusion
What component abilities underlie the development of
mathematical skills? Overall, the results of the present study
suggest independent contributions for the ability to
enumerate small sets of items, fine motor ability, and the
ability to mentally represent one’s fingers. These predictors
hold promise for the early identification of children with
math difficulties. Mathematical skills form a complex
mosaic, however, and the component abilities investigated
constitute only a portion of the answer to why some children
are better at math than others. In the reported work we
examined the components concurrent with mathematical
skill in Grade 1; we are currently investigating whether
these predictors hold longitudinally.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research was provided by the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
through a standard operating grant to J. LeFevre, J. Bisanz,
S. L. Skwarchuk, B. L. Smith-Chant, and D. Kamawar. The
study reported in this paper is part of a longitudinal project.
More information about the project is available at
www.carleton.ca/cmi/ or from the first author. We greatly
appreciate the cooperation and enthusiasm of the children,
parents, teachers, principals, and schools who participated in
this research.

References
Anderson, M. L., & Penner-Wilger, M. (2007). Do
redeployed finger representations underlie math ability?
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Barnes, M.A., Smith-Chant, B. L., & Landry, S. (2005).
Number processing in neurodevelopmental
disorders: Spina bifida myelomenigocele. In J. I. D.
Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition.
New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Baron, I. S. (2004). Neuropsychological evaluation of the
child. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Beery, K. E., & Beery, N. A. (2004). The Beery-Buktenica
developmental test of visual-motor integration (5th ed.).
Minneapolis, MN: NCS Pearson, Inc.
Benoit, L., Lehalle, H., & Jouen, F. (2004). Do young
children acquire number words through subitizing or
counting? Cognitive Development, 19, 291-307.
Butterworth, B. (1999). What counts - how every brain is
hardwired for math. New York, NY: The Free Press.
Butterworth, B. (2005). The development of arithmetical
abilities. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
46, 3-18.
Bynner, J., & Parsons, S. (1997). Does numeracy matter?
evidence from the national child development study on

the impact of poor numeracy on adult life. London: The
Basic Skills Agency.
Connolly, A. J. (2000). KeyMath - Revised/Updated
Canadian norms. Richmond Hill, ON: Psycan.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind
creates mathematics. Oxford: Oxford Press.
Dehaene, S., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Cohen, L. (2003).
Three parietal circuits for number processing. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 20, 487-506.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (Eds.). (1997). Peabody
picture vocabulary test-III. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Service.
Fayol, M., & Seron, X. (2005). About numerical
representations: Insights from neuropsychological,
experimental, and developmental studies. In J. I. D.
Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition.
New York: Psychology Press.
Fayol, M., Barrouillet, P., & Marinthe, C. (1998). Predicting
arithmetical achievement from neuro-psychological
performance: A longitudinal study. Cognition, 68, B63B70.
Koontz, K. L., & Berch, D., B. (1996). Identifying simple
numerical stimuli: Processing inefficiencies exhibited by
arithmetic learning disabled children. Mathematical
Cognition, 2, 1-24.
Landerl, K., Bevan, A., & Butterworth, B. (2004).
Developmental dyscalculia and basic numerical
capacities: A study of 8 & 9-year-old students.
Cognition, 93, 99-125.
Mandler, G., & Shebo, B. J. (1982). Subitizing: An analysis
of its component processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 11, 1-22.
Noël, M. E. (2005). Finger gnosia: A predictor of numerical
abilities in children? Child Neuropsychology, 11, 413430.
Petrill, S. A., Luo, D., Thompson, L. A., & Detterman, D.
K. (2001). Inspection time and the relationship among
elementary cognitive tasks, general intelligence, and
specific cognitive abilities. Intelligence, 29, 487-496.
Trick, L. M., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1994). Why are small and
large numbers enumerated differently? A limitedcapacity preattentive stage in vision. Psychological
Review, 101, 80-102.
Trick, L. M., Enns, J. T., & Brodeur, D. A. (1996). Life
span changes in visual enumeration: The number
discrimination task. Developmental Psychology, 32,
925-932.
Woodcock, R. W., & Johnson, M. B. (1989). WoodcockJohnson psycho-educational battery—revised. Allen,
TX: DLM Teaching Resources.

1390

