UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Learning Multiple Instantiations on Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mz1d7gd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Kaminski, Jennifer A.
Sloutsky, Vladimir M.
Heckler, Andrew F.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Learning Multiple Instantiations on Transfer
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Andrew F. Heckler (heckler.6@osu.edu)
Department of Physics, Ohio State University
191 W. Woodruff Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Abstract
The effects on transfer of learning multiple instantiations were
investigated. Undergraduate college students learned one or
more artificial instantiations of a simple mathematical concept.
Some students were presented with instantiations that
communicated concreteness relevant to the to-be-learned
concept, while others learned generic instantiations involving
abstract symbols. Learning one or more concrete instantiations
resulted in little or no transfer. While learning one concrete and
one generic instantiation did result in transfer, it offered no
benefit over learning only one generic instantiation. These
findings suggest that learning a generic instantiation may be a
direct route to an abstract schematic representation that
promotes transfer.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology; Education;
Learning; Transfer; Analogical reasoning, Schema.

Introduction
Considerable research has been conducted to investigate
analogical transfer. This research has produced a consensus
on several important aspects of transfer. First, spontaneous
transfer is often difficult to achieve (Gick & Holyoak, 1980,
1983; Reed, Ernst, & Banerji 1974; Ross, 1987, 1989).
Second, superficial similarities between the learned and
novel domains can influence transfer (Holyoak & Koh,
1987; Holyoak & Thagard, 1997; Ross, 1989) with near
transfer to superficially similar instances more likely to
occur than far transfer to superficially dissimilar instances.
Third, successful transfer involves alignment of common
structure across learned and novel domains (Gentner, 1983,
Gentner & Markman, 1997; Holyoak & Thargard, 1989).
Our previous research has investigated another aspect of
transfer, the nature of the learning domain, which has
received less attention than inter-domain similarity and
structural alignment. We argue that successful transfer is
also a function of the concreteness of the learning domain.
We interpret concreteness to be extraneous information
present in a given conceptual instantiation. This information
might be perceptual or conceptual (i.e. tapping prior
knowledge). Analogical transfer is more likely to occur after

learning an abstract, generic instantiation than after learning
a concrete (contextualized or perceptually rich) instantiation
(Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005, 2006; Sloutsky,
Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005; see also Bassok & Holyoak,
1989; Goldstone & Sakamoto, 2003 for related findings). In
particular, we found that concreteness that benefited quick
learning resulted in difficulty with recognition and
alignment of common structure across domains and
consequently transfer failure (Kaminski, Sloutsky, &
Heckler, 2006). At the same time, learning a generic
instantiation resulted in successful structural alignment and
transfer.
Although concrete instantiations resulted in poor transfer
compared to generic instantiations, some may argue, on
practical grounds, for the use of such instantiations in
teaching abstract concepts such as mathematical and
scientific concepts. These concepts are often difficult for
students to grasp. Concrete instantiations may be more
likely than generic, symbolic instantiations to engage
students in the process of learning. Furthermore, given that
some concrete instantiations can facilitate initial learning,
perhaps learning experiences can be designed which use
such concrete instantiations while overcoming obstacles to
transfer.
One possible way of overcoming negative effects of
concreteness is to use multiple concrete instantiations. It has
been suggested that when a learner encounters multiple
examples of a concept, a schematic representation is formed
that will lead to successful future transfer (Gick & Holyoak,
1983; Novick & Holyoak, 1991; see also Reed, 1993 for
discussion). For example, Gick and Holyoak (1983)
investigated the effect on transfer of problem solving
strategies from learning one or two instantiations. They
found that 45% of study participants who learned two
analogues successfully transferred, while only 21%
transferred when given only one instantiation. With a
suggestion that previous knowledge would be useful in the
novel situation, 80% of participants transferred from two
analogues while 53% transferred from one instantiation.
While there is evidence that learning multiple
instantiations may result in successful transfer perhaps via

1139

schema formation, there are also reasons to believe that
schema formation and transfer may not be guaranteed,
especially when multiple instantiations are concrete. First,
transfer and most likely schema formation require
recognition and alignment of common structure (Gentner,
1983, Gentner & Markman, 1997; Holyoak & Thargard,
1989); and relational structure common to two situations is
less likely to be noticed when the situations are represented in
a more concrete, perceptually rich manner than in a more
generic form (Gentner & Medina, 1998; Markman &
Gentner, 1993). Second, we have found in a previous
experiment that participants who learned a concrete
instantiation were unable to recognize the learned structural
rules when presented with novel elements suggesting that
their knowledge of structure was encapsulated in the concrete
learning context (Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2006). If
concrete knowledge is indeed encapsulated, then there is
little reason to believe that learning multiple concrete
instantiations will have a substantial advantage for transfer
over learning only one.
The purpose of the present research was to investigate the
effects of learning multiple instantiations on subsequent
analogical transfer. Undergraduate college students learned
one or more instantiations of the simple mathematical concept
used in our earlier studies. Then they were presented with a
novel isomorphic transfer domain and asked to answer
questions about it.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Eighty undergraduate students from Ohio State
University participated in the experiment and received partial
credit for an introductory psychology course. Students were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions that specified the
type and number of instantiations they learned.
Materials and Design The experiment consisted of two
phases. In phase 1, participants learned one, two, or three
instantiations of a mathematical concept. The instantiations
were either generic or concrete. There were four betweensubject conditions, which specified the number and type of
instantiations learned in phase 1: One Generic, One Concrete,
Two Concrete, or Three Concrete. Total training was equated
across condition. In phase 2, participants were tested on an
isomorphic transfer domain.
The to-be learned concept was the same concept used in
our previous research (Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005,
2006; Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005). This was a
commutative mathematical group of order three. In other
words the rules were isomorphic to addition modulo three.
The idea of modular arithmetic is that only a finite number of
elements (or equivalent classes) are used. Addition modulo 3
considers only the numbers 0, 1, and 2. Zero is the identity
element of the group and is added as in regular addition: 0 + 0
= 0, 0 + 1 = 1, and 0 + 2 = 2. Furthermore, 1 + 1 = 2.

However, a sum greater than or equal to 3 is never obtained.
Instead, one would cycle back to 0. So, 1 + 2 = 0, 2 + 2 = 1,
etc. To understand such a system with arbitrary symbols (not
integers as above) would involve learning the rules presented
in Table 1. However, concrete contexts can be created in
which prior knowledge and familiarity may assist learning.
We constructed four instantiations of a mathematical group:
three concrete (Concrete A, Concrete B, and Concrete C) and
one generic (Generic).
The Concrete A instantiation was used in our prior research
and was shown to facilitate quick learning of the rules of the
mathematical group (Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005).
The symbols of this instantiation were three images of
measuring cups containing varying levels of liquid (see Table
1). Participants were told they need to determine a remaining
amount when different measuring cups of liquid are
combined. In particular,

and

will fill a container. So

for example, combining
and
would have
remaining. Additionally, participants were told that they
should always report a remainder. Therefore they should
report that the combination of
remainder

. In this domain,

and

behaves like 0 under

addition (the group identity element).
and

would have
acts like 1;

acts like 2. For example, the combination of

and
does not fill a container and so
remains.
This is analogous to 1 + 1 = 2 under addition modulo 3. The
perceptual information communicated by the symbols
themselves can act as reminders of the structural rules. In this
case, the storyline and symbols facilitate learning.
Concrete B and Concrete C instantiations were constructed
similarly with storylines and symbols that would assist
learning. The task for the Concrete B instantiation was to
determine the amount of burned pizza served from a
restaurant where the cook systematically burned a portion of
every order. Three possible individual orders could be placed:
1, 2, or 3 slices, represented as
,
, and
. The
proportion that would be burned followed the rules of the
mathematical group. For example, when an order for

and

was placed, then
would be burned. For the Concrete
C instantiation, participants were told of a tennis ball
manufacturing machine. Instead of producing batches of 3
balls to fill each ball container, the machine was producing
batches of 0, 1, or 2 balls, represented as
,
, and
.
Under these circumstances, more than one batch of balls
would be combined to fill containers. Participants’ task was
to determine the extra balls resulting from combining batches.
For example, if these two batches were combined,

and

, then
would be extra.
The Generic instantiation was presented as a symbolic
language in which three types of symbols combine to yield a
resulting symbol (see Table 1). Combinations were expressed
as written statements.

1140

In the One Concrete condition, participants learned the
Concrete A instantiation. In the Two Concrete condition,
participants learned Concrete A and Concrete B
instantiations. In the Three Concrete Condition, they learned
Concrete A, B, and C instantiations. Participants in the One
Generic condition learned the Generic instantiation. Training
was equated across condition, so that the same examples,
questions with feedback, summaries of rules, and test
questions were spread across the learning instantiations.
For each instantiation, training consisted of an introduction
and explicit presentation of the rules through examples. For
instance, for Concrete A, participants were told that

Table 1: Stimuli and rules across Concrete A and
Generic instantiations.
Concrete A

Rules of Commutative Group:
Associative

For any elements x, y, z:
((x + y) + z) = (x + (y + z))

Commutati
ve

For any elements x, y: x + y = y + x

Identity

There is an element, I, such that for any element, x:
x+I=x

Inverses

For any element, x, there exists another element, y,
such that x+ y = I

combining
and
has a remainder of
.
Analogously, for the Generic instantiation where students
were told that symbols combine to yield a resulting symbol
the analogue to the above rule was presented as

,

. Questions with feedback were given; and complex
examples were shown. To approximate the effect of
presenting the rules in more than one domain, additional
summaries of the rules were given when learning fewer
domains.
After training of an instantiation, the participants were
given a multiple choice test designed to measure the ability to
apply the learned rules to novel problems. In total, 24
multiple-choice questions were posed in phase 1 (learning
phase). Questions were distributed evenly over the learning
domains. Participants who learned two instantiations had a
12-question test over the first domain and the remaining
twelve questions over the second domain. Participants who
learned three instantiations had 8-question tests over each
domain. Participants who learned only one instantiation were
given a 24-question test. Many questions required application
of multiple rules. The following are examples of test
questions for the Generic instantiation.

Specific
Rules:

,

Remainder
(Result)

is the identity
Operands

Result

transfer). After being asked to study a series of examples.
from which the rules could be deduced, a 24-question
multiple-choice test was given. The questions on this test
were isomorphic to those given in phase 1. Questions were
presented individually on the computer screen along with four
key examples at the bottom of the screen. The same four

___ ,
, ___ ,
(2) Find the resulting symbol:
,

is the identity
Operands

(1) What can go in the blanks to make a correct statement?

,

Generic

Elements

Table 2: Stimuli for transfer domain.

_____

The concrete instantiations presented the analogues of these
questions.
After training and testing of the learning domains, a novel
transfer domain was presented. The same transfer domain
was used for all four conditions and was described as a
children’s game involving three objects (see Table 2).
Children sequentially point to objects and a child who is “the
winner” points to a final object. The correct final object is
specified by the rules of the game (rules of a mathematical
group). Participants received no explicit training in the target
domain. They were not explicitly taught the rules of the
system. Instead they were told that the game rules were like
the rules of the system(s) they just learned and they need to
figure them out by using their newly acquired knowledge (i.e

1141

Elements:
Examples:

If the children point
to these objects:

The winner points
to this object

examples were shown with all test questions. Following the
multiple-choice questions, participants were asked to match
each element of the transfer domain to its analogous element
in the first or only learning domain.
In previous experiments (Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler,
2005), no participant was able to score above chance on a test
of the transfer domain without first learning an isomorphic
domain. Therefore, in the present experiment, transfer test
scores that are above chance suggest successful transfer of
conceptual knowledge. Also, note that in a separate
experiment, adults who read descriptions of the learning and
transfer domains, but received no explicit training of the
rules, found both the generic and concrete domains equally
similar to the target domain. Thus, any differences in transfer
performance across conditions cannot be attributed to
differential similarity of learning and transfer domains.
Procedure Training and testing were presented to individual
participants on a computer screen in a quiet room. They
proceeded through training and testing at their own pace; and
their responses were recorded.

Results and Discussion
Eight participants (Three Two Concrete, three Three
Concrete, and two One Generic) were eliminated from the
analysis for failing to learn as evidenced by learning score(s)
not above chance. Chance score for total learning was 9 out
of 24, or 37.5%. The criterion for learning was composite
learning score (the sum of scores in all learning domains) as
well as learning scores in each individual instantiation
above chance.
In all conditions, participants successfully learned the
material (see Table 3). Composite learning scores were
significantly above chance, one-sample t-tests, ts > 9.62, ps
< .001; and there were no differences across condition, oneway ANOVA, F (3, 68) = .697, p > .55. In addition, learning
in each individual learning domain was above chance, onesample t-tests, ts > 8.84, ps < .001.
Most importantly, transfer performance differed across
conditions (see Figure 1). Transfer scores were submitted to
a one-way ANOVA. Results revealed a significant effect of
learning condition, F (3, 68) = 11.93, p < .001, ηp2 =.345,
Table 3: Learning scores (% correct) by instantiation.

Condition
One
Concrete
Two
Concrete
Three
Concrete
One
Generic

1st
Instant.

2nd
Instant.

3rd
Instant.

Mean
(SD)
75.8
(17.8)
82.3
(15.6)
80.1
(16.0)
80.3
(13.7)

Mean
(SD)
-

Mean
(SD)
-

74.5
(19.2)
78.6
(13.8)
-

89.0
(12.4)
-

Composite
Learning
Score
Mean
(SD)
75.8
(17.8))
78.4
(16.5)
82.6
(8.75)
80.3
(13.7)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
One Concrete Two Concrete

Three
Concrete

One Generic

Figure 1: Mean Transfer Test Scores (% Correct).
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.
Chance score is 37.5%.

participants in the One Generic condition performed
markedly higher than participants in each of the other three
concrete conditions, post-hoc Tukeys, ps < .002. At the
same time there were no differences in transfer scores across
the three concrete conditions, post-hoc Tukeys, ps > .626.
Transfer in the Generic condition was clearly above chance,
one-sample t-test, t(17) = 7.55, p < .001, while transfer in
the One and Two Concrete conditions was not, ts < 1.7, ps >
.09. Transfer in the Three Concrete condition was only
marginally above chance, t(16) = 2.78, p = .013.
In addition to differential transfer, the ability to match
analogous elements between the first or only learning
instantiation and the transfer instantiation was also
significantly different. Eighty-three percent of participants in
the One Generic condition correctly matched elements, while
only 30%, 24%, and 41% of participants made the correct
matches in the One Concrete, Two Concrete, and Three
Concrete conditions respectively. Note that the expected
proportion due to random guessing would be 33%.
These findings indicate that learning two or three concrete
instantiations offered no advantage for transfer over learning
only one concrete instantiation. Participants in the concrete
conditions were generally unable to match analogous
elements across learning and transfer domains which
suggests that they were unable to align common structure.
These results contradict schema theories that propose that
learning multiple instantiations will lead the learner to form
an abstract schematic representation of the relevant concept
that will in turn promote analogical transfer.
However, it could be argued that transfer was poor when
learning multiple instantiations because participants did not
align the learning instantiations. Abstraction of structure
may not be automatic, instead it may result from the
deliberate structural alignment, for example in the course of
comparison (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996; Ross & Kennedy,
1990). We also have evidence that alignment between a
learning and a transfer domain does promote transfer
(Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2006). Therefore, it is
possible that assisting the learners with structural alignment

1142

between two learning domains may also result in successful
transfer. The purpose of Experiment 2 was to examine this
possibility.

Experiment 2

Along with failing to transfer, participants were unable to
correctly match analogous elements between the first learning
instantiation and the transfer instantiation. Only 15% made
the correct correspondence. Apparently assisting participants
in structural alignment between two concrete learning
instantiations did not lead to the formation of an abstract
schema that can promote transfer. While transfer failed when
learning one or more concrete instantiations, learning one
generic instantiation did allow for successful structural
alignment and transfer (see Experiment 1). Another possible
learning design is to first learn a concrete instantiation that
might facilitate learning and then learn a generic instantiation
which has been shown to allow transfer. The goal of
Experiment 3 was to consider whether learning one concrete
and then one generic instantiation would offer an advantage
for transfer over learning only one generic.

Method
Participants Twenty undergraduate students from Ohio State
University participated in the experiment and received partial
credit for an introductory psychology course.
Materials, Design and Procedure The materials and
procedure of this experiment were almost identical to that of
Experiment 1, with two differences. First, all participants
learned two concrete instantiations, Concrete A and Concrete
B. Second, participants were given the correspondence of
analogous elements between the two learning instantiations.
Therefore, participants were trained on Concrete A
instantiation and were given a 12-question multiple-choice
test. Then participants were trained on Concrete B
instantiation and told that

is like

;

Experiment 3
Method
Participants Forty undergraduate students from Ohio State
University participated in the experiment and received partial
credit for an introductory psychology course.

is like

;
is like
. Participants were given a 12question multiple-choice test on Concrete B instantiation.
As in Experiment 1, participants were presented with the
novel transfer domain, shown examples, and given a 24question multiple-choice test analogous to the questions
posed over the two concrete learning instantiations.

Results and Discussion

Materials, Design and Procedure The materials, design, and
procedure were similar to those of the previous experiments.
Participants learned two instantiations of the mathematical
group, first Concrete A and then Generic. There were two
between-subject conditions: Correspondence and No
Correspondence. In the Correspondence condition,
participants were given the correspondence of analogous
elements between the Concrete A and Generic instantiations
(as in Experiment 2). In the No Correspondence condition,
they were not. As in the previous experiments, there were 12question multiple-choice tests in each of the two learning
domains and a 24-question multiple-choice test in the transfer
domain.

All participants successfully learned. Scores in each of the
learning domains were above chance (M = 88.3%, SD = 9.58
and M = 76.7%, SD = 16.2, respectively), one sample t-test,
t(19)s > 12.0, ps < .001. However, transfer scores were not
above chance (M = 41.2%, SD = 16.7), one sample t-test t
(19) = .943, p > .356 (see Figure 2).

Results and Discussion

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Experiment 2:
Learn 2 Concrete

No Correspondence

Eight participants (three Correspondence, five No
Correspondence) were removed from the analysis for failing
to learn (i.e. composite learning scores and scores in each
learning domain were not above chance).
Participants successfully learned the concrete (M = 88.3%,
SD = 6.14, M = 84.2%, SD = 12.5, for No Correspondence
and Correspondence respectively) and generic instantiations
(M = 77.5%, SD = 19.5, M = 72.5%, SD = 18.3, for No
Correspondence and Correspondence respectively).
Unlike in Experiment 2, transfer scores were well above
chance, one-sample t-tests, ts > 4.0, ps < .002 (see Figure 2)
with no significant differences between the Correspondence
and No Correspondence groups, independent sample t-test,
t(30) = 1.02, p > .311. To consider whether learning both a
concrete and a generic instantiation benefits transfer more
than learning only a generic instantiation, transfer scores were
compared to a mean transfer score of participants who learned

Experiment 3: Learn
Concrete/ Generic

Corresepondence

Figure 2: Mean Transfer Test Scores (% Correct).
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.
Lower dashed horizontal line represents chance score. Upper
dashed horizontal line represents mean Generic transfer score.
1143

the generic instantiation. This mean (80%) was calculated
from the results of Experiment 1 and three prior studies (see
Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2005; Kaminski, Sloutsky, &
Heckler, 2006). Transfer was marginally higher for one
generic than concrete-then-generic without assisting
alignment, one sample t-test t(14) = 2.31, p = .036, and no
higher than learning concrete-then-generic with assisting
alignment, one sample t-test t(16) = 1.06, p = .302.
Participants were generally able to make the correct
match of analogous elements, 87% in the No
Correspondence condition and 71% in the Correspondence
condition. This is particularly interesting because
participants were able to match the novel transfer domain
elements with the concrete elements first learned, after
having learned the generic instantiation. In comparison,
participants in Experiment 1 who learned only the concrete
instantiation were unable to correctly match these elements.

General Discussion
The results of this study make several important points.
First, learning multiple instantiations does not necessarily
lead to successful transfer. Learning two or three concrete
instantiations resulted in little or no transfer and no
improvement over learning only one concrete instantiation.
How does this finding reconcile with the effectiveness of
multiple instantiations found by other researchers (e.g. Gick
& Holyoak, 1983)? One possible explanation is differential
complexity of the to-be-learned concept. The mathematical
concept involved in the present research is perhaps more
complex than concepts/ solution strategies used in other
work. Second, learning a concrete and then a generic
instantiation did allow for successful transfer, but offered no
advantage over simply learning one generic. Third,
structural alignment and abstraction is spontaneous when
learning involved a generic instantiation. At the same time,
concrete knowledge appears to be encapsulated, making
structural alignment and schema formation difficult. Taken
together, these findings suggest that learning a generic
instantiation can be an efficient route to forming a
schematic representation that can facilitate transfer.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the Institute of
Educational Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(#R305H050125) to A. F. Heckler and V. M. Sloutsky.

References
Bassok, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Interdomain transfer
between isomorphic topics in algebra and physics.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 153-166.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure-Mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.

Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical problem solving. Cognitive Psychology,
15, 460-466.
Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Holyoak, K. J. & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition,
15(4), 332-340.
Holyoak, K. J. & Thagard, P. (1997). The analogical mind.
American Psychologist, 52, 35-44.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
Relevant concreteness and its effects on learning and
transfer. In B. Bara, L. Barsalou & M. Bucciarelli (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXVII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2006).
Effects of concreteness on representation: An explanation
for differential transfer. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXVIII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Novick, L. R. & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 387415.
Reed, S. K. (1993). A schema-based theory of transfer. In
D. K. Detterman & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.) Transfer on
Trial: Intelligence, Cognition, and Instruction. Norwood,
NJ: Alex Publishing.
Reed, S. K., Ernst, G. W., & Banerji, R. (1974). The role of
analogy in transfer between similar problem states.
Cognitive Psychology, 6, 436-450.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarity: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Ross, B. H., & Kennedy, P. T. (1990). Generalization from
the use of earlier examples in problem solving. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 42-55
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and transfer.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.

1144

