UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Use of Spatial Cognition in Graph Interpretation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6k2918d3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Trickett, Susan Bell
Trafton, J. Gregory

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Use of Spatial Cognition in Graph Interpretation
Susan Bell Trickett (trickett@itd.nrl.navy.mil)
J. Gregory Trafton (trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)
Naval Research Laboratory, Code 5515
4555 Overlook Drive, Washington DC 20375
Abstract
We conducted an experiment to investigate whether spatial
processing is used in graph comprehension tasks. Using an
interference paradigm, we demonstrate that a graph task
interfered more with performance on a spatial memory task
than on a visual (non-spatial) memory task. Reaction times
showed there was no speed-accuracy tradeoff. We conclude
that it was the spatial nature of the graph task that caused the
additional interference in the spatial memory task. We
propose that current theories of graph comprehension should
be expanded to include a spatial processing component.
Keywords: Graph comprehension, spatial reasoning.

Introduction
The ability to interpret graphs is a crucial skill in today’s
data-rich world. For example, graph skill has been shown to
be predictive of success in learning science (Schunn et al, in
press). Not coincidentally, in developing its recent national
standards, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
has emphasized the importance of proactively teaching
students of all ages to interpret graphs and use them to make
inferences (NCTM 2000). Beyond the classroom, graphs
also occupy an important part in people’s lives, from daily
encounters in the popular press to the tools used by highlyskilled scientists, as well as a range of usages in between.
Understanding the processes by which people
comprehend, interpret, and use graphs is an important first
step in both improving graph interpretation skills and
informing effective graphic design (e.g., Tufte, 2001; Tan &
Benbasat, 1990). We have argued elsewhere (Trickett &
Trafton, 2006) that current theories of graph interpretation
are inadequate on two counts. First, most current theories
address only very simple graph interpretation tasks
performed on very simple graphs, such as reading a value
off the y-axis of a bar graph (e.g., Cleveland, 1985) or
identifying a trend from a line graph (e.g., Zacks & Tversky,
1997). “Real-world” graph interpretation, on the other hand,
involves a range of complex tasks, such as integrating
information and making predictions. Moreover, it uses
highly complex graphic representations. Second, current
theories either assume people reason from graphs using
exclusively propositional representations and processes
(Lohse, 1993; Peebles & Cheng, 2003; Pinker, 1990), or are
non-committal, failing to specify what kind of
representation and processes are involved (Freedman &
Shah, 2002; Roth & Bowen, 2003).
In contrast to these theories, we have evidence that, in
complex tasks and domains at least, people use a great deal
of spatial processing when interacting with graphs (Trafton
et al, 2000; Trickett et al., in press). Furthermore, in Trickett

and Trafton (2006), we have argued, based on task analysis,
that spatial processing is involved in a range of graph
interpretation tasks, regardless of the graph’s complexity—
in fact, in most graph tasks that move beyond either reading
values from an axis or making purely perceptual judgments
(such as comparing two adjacent bar heights). In this paper,
we present an experiment that provides empirical support
for our claim that graph interpretation involves spatial
processing, even when the task is simple and the graph itself
is uncomplicated.
What do we mean by spatial processing? Baddeley was
instrumental in establishing the distinction between verbal
and spatial processing (Baddeley & Liebeman, 1980).
Spatial processing involves “the internalized reflection and
reconstruction of space in thought” (Hart & Moore, 1973).
Operationally, we define spatial processing in two ways.
Spatial processing involves maintaining spatial information
(e.g., the relative locations of objects) in working memory
(so-called spatial working memory). Instances of spatial
processing can therefore be identified by means of task
analysis (Gray et al., 1993). Spatial processing can also be
identified via the use of mental spatial transformations,
which occur when a spatial object is transformed from one
mental state or location into another mental state or location.
Mental spatial transformations—which we refer to simply as
spatial transformations—occur in a mental representation
that is an analog of physical space and are frequently part of
a problem-solving process. There are many types of spatial
transformations: creating a mental image, modifying that
mental image by adding or deleting features, mental rotation
(Shepard & Metzler, 1971), mentally moving an object,
animating a static image (Bogacz & Trafton, 2005; Hegarty,
1992), making comparisons between different views
(Kosslyn et al., 1999; Trafton et al., 2005), and any other
mental operation which transforms a spatial object from one
state or location into another.
In general, our research on spatial processing in graph
interpretation has focused on complex graphs in complex
domains (e.g., fMRI, target motion analysis, meteorology).
Our results have been consistent: verbal protocols show that
in these domains, at least, people use a great deal of spatial
processing to extract and use information from data
visualizations (Trafton et al., 2000; Trafton & Trickett,
2001). Further evidence of spatial processing is found in
meteorologists’ gestures when they talk about how they
performed the task (Trafton et al., 2006). Additionally, in
keeping with the important role of domain knowledge in
graph comprehension (Freedman & Shah, 2002; Roth &
Bowen, 2003; Tabachneck-Schijf et al., 1997), experts use
far more spatial processing than journeymen (Trafton et al.,

1563

2006). This general result—that spatial processing is
prevalent in complex graph comprehension—has been
replicated in studies of astronomy and computational fluid
dynamics (Trickett & Trafton, in press).
Based on these data, we have become convinced that
spatial processing is an important component of a
comprehensive model of graph comprehension, i.e., a model
that moves beyond the laboratory into the “real world” of
practice. Yet, curiously, spatial processing is not explicitly
included in any of the current models of graph
comprehension (e.g., Freedman & Shah, 2002; Lohse, 1993;
Peebles & Cheng, 2003; Pinker, 1990). In this paper, we
address this criticism of these theories, namely, their lack of
an explicit spatial component.
In order to test our hypothesis that spatial processes are
involved in many graph interpretation tasks, we used an
interference paradigm adapted from (Oh & Kim, 2004) in
establishing the role of spatial working memory in visual
search. Briefly, Oh and Kim developed both spatial and
non-spatial versions of a memory task, and participants
performed one of these tasks in tandem with a visual search
task. Performance on the spatial working memory task was
impaired by the search task, and performance on the search
task was impaired by the spatial task. In contrast, the nonspatial memory task did not interfere with the visual search
task. Oh and Kim concluded, “the visual search process and
spatial working memory storage require the same limitedcapacity mechanisms.” (See Baddeley 1980 for more on the
distinction between spatial and visual processing.)
In our experiment, we substituted a graph interpretation
task for Oh and Kim’s visual search task, but the logic of the
experimental design remains the same. Dual task
performance is almost always relatively worse than single
task performance, regardless of the respective natures of the
primary and secondary tasks. However, tasks that are
similar in nature (i.e., draw on the same processing
mechanisms) are likely to interfere more than dissimilar
tasks. The key to interpretation, then, is the extent to which
one type of secondary task interferes more than another. We
hypothesized that if the graph task involved spatial
processing, it would interfere more with the spatial memory
task than with the non-spatial memory task. If the graph
task did not involve spatial processing, there would be no
difference in the amount of interference caused by either the
spatial or the non-spatial memory task.
This interpretation rests on the assumption that both
memory tasks were equally difficult; in order to make sure
that this was the case, and in order to establish baseline
performance for these two tasks, we also examined
performance on both memory tasks carried out alone. Thus
our design includes both single and dual task conditions.

Method
Participants
Twenty-six George Mason University undergraduates
participated for course credit. Participants were randomly

assigned to one of two experimental conditions (described
below): spatial (14 participants) or visual (12 participants).

Stimuli and Tasks
Two tasks were developed, a memory task (primary task)
and a graph task (secondary task). We created two versions
of the memory task, one spatial and one visual (non-spatial).
The memory and graph tasks were presented both alone and
in a dual-task combination.
Graph Task Participants were presented with a column
graph representing two variables (the graph stimulus is
illustrated in Figure 1). One variable was colored grey and
the other black. Participants were asked to judge which set
of bars, grey or black, was larger overall. They responded
by pressing the g or b keys on the keyboard, respectively.
The graphs were constructed such that a) there was always
an interaction between the variables, b) there was some
constraint on the size difference between the bars, so that
the difference could not be ascertained by a purely
perceptual strategy, and c) grey and black were each the
correct answer on 50% of the trials.
We deliberately chose a simple task performed on a
simple graph, in part to avoid the suggestion that spatial
processing in graph interpretation occurs only during highly
complex graphical reasoning tasks and/or when the graphs
themselves involve a complex spatial layout. In addition,
college students are familiar with column graphs, and
consequently did not need any special training on how to
interpret such graphs; nor were there likely to be large
individual differences in their performance on this task.
The graph task could be performed in a number of
different ways (Simkin & Hastie, 1987; Trickett & Trafton,
2006). For example, one could mentally stack the grey bars
and the black bars, and compare their respective heights,
one could mentally find and compare the respective midpoints between the grey and black bars, or one could gauge
the difference between the leftmost black and grey bars and
compare it with the difference between the rightmost bars.
All these operations involve spatial transformations (Trafton
et al., 2005) and therefore involve spatial processing.
Spatial Working Memory Task The stimuli for the
spatial working memory task (hereafter referred to as the
spatial task) consisted of four solid black squares, randomly
chosen from among eight possible locations (illustrated in
Figure 2). Participants were instructed to remember the
location of the four squares until the end of the trial, at
which time they were shown one empty black square, again
chosen from among the eight possible positions. The
location of the empty square matched the location of one of
the original four squares in half the cases; in the other half,
it was in a different location. Participants had to judge
whether the empty square was in a location that had
previously been occupied by one of the original squares.
They answered by pressing the y and n keys for yes and no,
respectively. In this task, participants had to remember
location, a spatial task.

1564

Visual Working Memory Task The stimuli for the visual
working memory task (hereafter referred to as the visual
task) consisted of four colored squares, chosen at random
from among eight easily distinguishable colors (dark green,
lime green, yellow, teal, dark blue, red, magenta, and
purple). The squares were placed symmetrically around a
central fixation point (Figure 3 shows an example).
Participants were instructed to remember the color of the
four squares until the end of the trial, at which time they
were shown one colored square in the center of the screen.
The color matched the color of one of the original four
squares in half the cases, and in the other half, it was
different. Participants had to judge whether the single square
was the same color as one of the four original squares. As in
the spatial task, they answered by pressing the y and n keys
for yes and no, respectively. In this task, participants had to
remember color, a visual task. Note that because the squares
were always arranged in the same pattern, and the test
square was always in the center of the screen, no spatial
memory was required for this task.
blank

graph

blank

3250 msec

up to
4000 msec

2500 msec

Conceivably, participants could “translate” the spatial
memory stimulus into a propositional representation and
rehearse it. For example, in the stimulus shown in figure 2,
they might encode the four squares as an upside-down
anchor. Similarly, they might group and rehearse the colors
in the visual memory stimulus. To prevent this kind of
rehearsal, following Oh and Kim’s methodology (2004),
participants were required to continuously recite the first
four letters of the alphabet in the memory-only condition.
The procedure for trials in each task-set condition is
illustrated in figures 1 to 3. We could not control the amount
of time people would take to answer the graph task.
However, pilot-testing showed a mean of 2500 msec.; thus,
in the memory-only condition, we substituted a blank screen
displayed for 2500 msec. for the graph stimulus. Oh and
Kim (2004) showed the memory array for 500 msec., but in
pilot tests our participants performed the task at chance
levels at this duration, so we extended the time to 750 msec.
For all tasks, we collected reaction time and accuracy data.
The stimuli were presented using the E-Prime software.
Ninety-six unique pairs of memory array/memory test probe
combinations were used, randomly selected for each
participant. Forty-eight unique graphs were used, with each
graph presented twice, using E-Prime’s random selection
procedure. Each condition (graph-only, memory-only, and
dual-task) was tested in blocks, randomly ordered across
participants. A block comprised 10 training trials and 96
experimental trials.
blank

visual
memory array

blank

graph

blank

visual
memory test
probe

500 msec

up to
4000 msec

500 msec

2000 msec

average expected duration: 8250 msec

+

Figure 1: Procedure for graph-only condition

blank

spatial
memory array

blank

+

2000 msec

750 msec

2000 msec

spatial
memory test
probe

average expected duration: 8250 msec

Figure 3: Procedure for dual-task condition (visual task is
illustrated; not drawn to scale). Stimuli were in color.

+

3500 msec

750 msec

Results and Discussion

2000 msec

duration: 8250 msec

Our main goal was to test the hypothesis that the graph task
involved spatial processing, and that therefore it would
interfere more with the spatial task than with the visual task.
In order to test this hypothesis, we conducted a repeated
measures ANOVA with one between-subjects variable
(memory task: spatial vs. visual) and one within-subjects
variable (task set for the memory task: memory-only vs.
dual-task). We anticipated a main effect of task set, in that
accuracy on the memory task would be significantly worse
in the dual task condition than the memory-only condition.
Critically, for our hypothesis, we also predicted a significant
interaction, such that in the dual-task condition, accuracy on
the spatial memory task would suffer a larger decrement
than performance on the visual memory task.

Figure 2: Procedure for memory-only condition (spatial task
is illustrated; not drawn to scale).

Experimental Design and Procedure
The design was mixed, with one between-subjects variable
(memory task: spatial or visual) and one within-subjects
variable (task set: graph-only, memory-only, or dual-task).

1565

As predicted, the analysis of variance showed a
significant main effect of task set, F(1,24) = 45.193, p < .01.
This result is not surprising; in general, performance
worsens when a task is performed in conjunction with a
second task. There was no main effect of memory task,
F(1,24) = 1.877, p = .18, so that overall there was no
difference in performance on the spatial or visual tasks.
Importantly, there was a significant interaction between task
set and memory task, F (1,24) = 5.76, p < .05. Figure 6
illustrates these results.
1

1200

1000

RT (msec)

800

600

400

200

Single

0.9

Dual

0

0.8

Visual

0.7

Spatial

Figure 7: Reaction time for the memory tasks

0.6
0.5

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Visual

Spatial

Figure 6: Accuracy for both visual and spatial memory
tasks, in single- and dual-task conditions
There are several important points to be made about
Figure 6. First, it shows that participants performed equally
well on both memory tasks in the single task condition,
indicating that the tasks were of equal difficulty. Thus the
increased decrement in performance on the spatial task in
the dual-task condition cannot be attributed to the spatial
task’s being more difficult than the visual task. The fact that
the graph task interfered significantly more with the spatial
memory task than the visual memory task provides support
for our hypothesis that the graph task involved spatial
processing, and that it was the spatial nature of the graph
task that caused the additional interference. In addition,
Figure 6 shows that participants’ accuracy on the spatial
memory task was a full ten percent worse than on the visual
task; thus, the difference is not only statistically significant
but represents a meaningful drop in performance.
It is possible that in order to offset the effects of the
interference, participants engaged in some kind of speedaccuracy tradeoff, such that in the dual-task condition,
although they performed more accurately in the visual
memory task, they performed more slowly. If this were the
case, the interference (evidenced by reaction time) would
actually be greater in the visual memory task than in the
spatial memory task. In order to test this possibility, we
examined the reaction time data. We performed a repeated
measures ANOVA similar to our analysis of the accuracy
data, with one between-subjects variable (memory task:
spatial vs. visual) and one within-subject variable (task set
for the memory task: memory-only vs. dual-task). As Figure
7 shows, there was no main effect of either memory task or
task set, and no interaction (all F-values <1). Participants
responded equally fast to the memory task, regardless of the
interference caused by the secondary graph task.

Finally, we examined the graph data, to determine
whether either of the memory tasks interfered with the graph
task. Figures 8 and 9 show, respectively, the accuracy and
reaction time data for the graph task. As Figure 8 shows,
participants were remarkably consistent in their accuracy on
the graph task, answering correctly approximately 75% of
the time, regardless of memory task condition (spatial vs.
visual) and task set (single vs. dual). Note that although the
graph task was not complex, neither was it trivial. Although
participants performed well above chance, they were
nowhere near ceiling performance. A repeated measures
ANOVA, conducted as for the memory task data, showed
no significant effects nor any interaction (all F-values <1).

1566

Single
Dual

1
0.9
0.8

Proportion Correct

0.4

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Visual

Spatial

Figure 8: Accuracy for the graph task
2500

Single
Dual

2000

RT (msec.)

Proportion Correct

Single
Dual

1500

1000

500

0

Visual

Spatial

Figure 9: Reaction time for the graph task

The reaction time data showed a similar pattern, with the
exception that there was a significant effect of task set,
F(1,24) = 10.78, p < .01. Interestingly, participants were
slightly faster to answer the graph question in both the dual
task conditions; critically, however, there was not a
significant interaction between memory task condition
(spatial vs. visual) and task set (single vs. dual), F(1,24) =
1.05, p = .32. Note also that all participants were able to
answer the graph question well within the 4000 msec. for
which the stimulus was displayed.
In summary, accuracy on the graph task was not affected
by the additional load of the memory task; nor was it
affected by the task type in the dual-task condition. Reaction
time on the graph task was not affected by the type of task
in the dual-task condition, but was slightly faster when
participants had to perform the memory task as well. It
appears that in both spatial and visual memory conditions,
participants were trying to hasten their performance on the
graph task, in order to prevent further decay of the memory
stimulus. Critically, the speed-up was approximately the
same in both memory conditions.

General Discussion and Conclusion
We conducted an experiment using an established
interference paradigm to test our hypothesis that graph
interpretation involves spatial processing. Our results
showed that the graph task interfered with performance on a
spatial memory task, but not a visual (non-spatial) memory
task. This finding suggests that the graph task and the
spatial memory task tapped the same underlying cognitive
processes, whereas the graph task and the visual task drew
on different processes. Given that the spatial memory task
has been established as tapping spatial working memory, we
conclude that the graph task involved spatial processing.
Our experimental design does not completely rule out the
possibility that some other aspect of the graph task (apart
from spatial cognition) caused the different levels of
interference in the memory tasks. If so, one would expect
the same pattern of results using a different, non-spatial
graph task. We are currently running an experiment to rule
out this explanation, using a graph task that involves purely
reading off values, without the use of spatial cognition. We
anticipate that the interference caused by this secondary task
will be the same in both the spatial and visual primary tasks.
For the experiment described above, we chose a simple
graph task, not because such a task is fully representative of
“real-world” graph use, but because it is sufficiently
representative to serve as a proof of concept. This task is of
similar complexity to many tasks used in most prior studies
of graphing that have been used to construct current theories
of graph comprehension—like them, it is context-lean (or
context-free) and demands no domain knowledge and only
minimal graph skill. Yet even this simple task-graph
combination appears to involve spatial processing.
In a recent review of the graph comprehension literature,
(Shah et al., 2005) draw a distinction between perceptual
and conceptual processes. In their interpretation, perceptual

processes are “bottom-up encoding mechanisms,” which
focus on the visual features of the display. Conceptual
processes equate to “top-down encoding processes,” which
influence interpretation. They propose that when these
perceptual processes are not sufficient, “information must
be retrieved by complex inferential processes.” Although
several models agree that these “complex inferential
processes” are an essential part of the graph comprehension
process under some circumstances, they remain largely
unspecified. We propose that spatial processing comprises a
substantial part of these complex inferential processes
It appears that it is not the complexity of the graph or task
per se that determines whether spatial processing is used,
but rather whether the information can be directly extracted
from the display (e.g., reading off specific, marked values)
or inferred using direct perceptual processes (e.g.,
determining whether a line slopes up or down). In
accordance with current models, we propose that in such
cases, the task can be accomplished without spatial
processing. However, we suggest that when these conditions
are not met—for example, when users must integrate
disparate visual chunks, make inferences, or otherwise go
beyond the data—spatial processing will likely be used. We
propose that, although this may be more likely in complex
graph/task combinations, it can nonetheless be the case
regardless of the complexity of the graph.
Quite possibly, the reason spatial processing has not been
part of graph comprehension models is that the focus on
simple tasks and graphs has made it unnecessary, since in
general, simple perceptual processes are sufficient to
account for performance in these circumstances. In addition,
the strength of graphs as a form of representation is that they
can make implicit things explicit (at least, good graphs do),
so graphs are designed and selected so that it is possible to
make direct comparisons between visual chunks. However,
as tasks, domains, and visualizations become more complex,
this transparency may not always be possible or even
desirable (meteorologists, for example, don’t want simpler
graphs; they want many variables represented). As graph
comprehension research moves out of the laboratory into the
“real world” of practice, it will be more important for graph
comprehension models to address this reality.
Without incorporating spatial processing, it appears that
current models of graph comprehension will be incomplete.
Including spatial processing in these models will help us to
understand why some representations might be better than
others at a cognitive level, by shedding light on processes
that underlie different graph/task interactions. It can help
identify situations in which spatial processing is
unavoidable and can help us make predictions about
performance using these graphs. In some situations, it can
help us design better graphs, by developing creative ways to
reduce the amount of spatial processing required (for
example, by facilitating direct comparisons that can be
performed perceptually). In sum, we propose that including
spatial processing is an important step in building a
comprehensive model of graph comprehension.

1567

Acknowledgments
Work on this project was supported by ONR grants M12439
and N0001403WX30001 to Greg Trafton. Thanks to David
Cades, Melanie Diez, David Kidd, Sarah Kriz, Patrick
McKnight, and Raj Ratwani for their helpful comments, and
to Kim Hilton for assistance with data collection.

References
Baddeley, A. D., & Liebeman, K. (1980). Spatial working
memory. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and
performance viii (pp. 521-539). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Bogacz, S., & Trafton, J. G. (2005). Using dynamic and static
displays: Using images to reason dynamically. Cognitive
Systems Research, 6(4), 312-319.
Cleveland, W. S. (1985). The elements of graphing data.
Monterey, CA: Wadsworth.
Freedman, E. G., & Shah, P. (2002). Toward a model of
knowledge-based graph comprehension. Paper presented at
the Diagrammatic Representation and Inference, Second
International Conference, Diagrams 2002, Callaway
Gardens, GA, USA.
Gray, W. D., John, B. E., & Atwood, M. E. (1993). Project
ernestine: Validating a goms analysis for predicting and
explaining real-world performance. Human-Computer
Interaction, 8(3), 237-309.
Hart, R. A., & Moore, G. T. (1973). The development of
spatial cognition: A review. In R. M. Downs & D. Stea
(Eds.), Image and environment: Cognitive mapping and
spatial behavior (pp. 246-295). Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Company.
Hegarty, M. (1992). Mental animation: Inferring motion from
static displays of
mechanical systems. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 18(5), 1084-1102.
Kosslyn, S. M., Sukel, K. E., & Bly, B. M. (1999). Squinting
with the mind's eye: Effects of stimulus resolution on
imaginal and perceptual comparisons. Memory and
Cognition, 27(2), 276-287.
Lohse, G. L. (1993). A cognitive model for understanding
graphical perception. Human Computer Interaction, 8, 353388.
NCTM. (2000). Principles and Standards for School
Mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.
Oh, S., & Kim, M. (2004). The role of spatial working
memory in visual search efficiency. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 11(2), 275-281.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2003). Modeling the effect of
task and graphical representation on response latency in a
graph reading task. Human Factors, 45(1), 28-46.
Pinker, S. (1990). A theory of graph comprehension. In R.
Freedle (Ed.), Artificial intelligence and the future of
testing (pp. 73-126). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.

Roth, W.-M., & Bowen, G. M. (2003). When are graphs
worth ten thousand words? An expert-expert study. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 21(4), 429-473.
Schunn, C. D., Cho, K., & Raghavan, K. (in press).
Precursors for improved learning in a model-based middleschool science curriculum. Applied Developmental
Psychology.
Shah, P., Freedman, E. G., & Vekiri, I. (2005). The
comprehension of quantiative information in graphical
displays. In P. Shah & A. Miyake (Eds.), Cambridge
handbook of visuospatial thinking (pp. 426-476). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Shepard, R., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of threedimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Simkin, D., & Hastie, R. (1987). An information-processing
analysis of graph perception. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 82(398), 454-465.
Tabachneck-Schijf, H. J. M., Leonardo, A. M., & Simon, H.
A. (1997). Camera: A computational model of multiple
representations. Cognitive Science, 21(3), 305-350.
Tan, J. K. H., & Benbasat, I. (1990). Processing of graphical
information: A decomposition taxonomy to match data
extraction tasks and graphical representations. Information
Systems Research, 1(4), 416-439.
Trafton, J. G., Kirschenbaum, S. S., Tsui, T. L., Miyamoto, R.
T., Ballas, J. A., & Raymond, P. D. (2000). Turning
pictures into numbers: Extracting and generating
information from complex visualizations. International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, 53(5), 827-850.
Trafton, J. G., & Trickett, S. B. (2001). A new model of
graph and visualization usage. In J. D. Moore & K.
Stenning (Eds.), The proceedings of the twenty third annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 10481053). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Trafton, J. G., Trickett, S. B., & Mintz, F. E. (2005).
Connecting internal and external representations: Spatial
transformations of scientific visualizations. Foundations of
Science, 10, 89-106.
Trafton, J. G., Trickett, S. B., Stitzlein, C. A., Saner, L.,
Schunn, C. D., & Kirschenbaum, S. S. (2006). The
relationship between spatial transformations and iconic
gestures. Spatial cogntion and computation, 6(1), 1-29.
Trickett, S. B., & Trafton, J. G. (2006). Toward a
comprehensive model of graph comprehension: Making the
case for spatial cognition.
Trickett, S. B., & Trafton, J. G. (in press). "What if...": The
use of conceptual simulations in scientific reasoning.
Cognitive Science.
Trickett, S. B., Trafton, J. G., Saner, L., & Schunn, C. D. (In
press). "I don't know what's going on there": The use of
spatial transformations to deal with and resolve uncertainty
in complex visualizations.
Tufte, E. (2001). The visual display of quantitative
information. (2nd ed.). Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1997). Bars and lines: A study of
graphic communication. Paper presented at the 2nd AAAI
workshop on Reasoning and Diagrams, Cambridge, MA.

1568

