UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Practical Experience on Expertise in Clinical Psychology and Collaboration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2j82z1r3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Hauser, Sabine
Spada, Hans
Rummel, Nikol

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Practical Experience on Expertise in Clinical Psychology and
Collaboration
Sabine Hauser (sabine.hauser@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Hans Spada (hans.spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Nikol Rummel (nikol.rummel@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Institute of Psychology, Cognition-Emotion-Communication,
Engelbergerstr.41, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
shortcoming of expertise research: Up to now, expertise
research has concentrated on individual problem solving.
Today, however, a great deal of work is carried out in
interdisciplinary teams. Therefore, a second study
investigated the effects of growing practical experience on
interdisciplinary collaboration.
In the following, we review the relevant literature on the
nature of expertise, in particular expertise development in
medicine. We then focus the presentation of our first study
on expertise in the domain of clinical psychology in terms
of comparing experienced therapists and trainee therapists.
Next, we derive hypotheses for a study on computer-based
interdisciplinary collaboration and present this second study.

Abstract
Two studies are presented. The first study examined the
effects of growing practical experience on expertise in clinical
psychology. 85 persons with different amounts of practical
experience (novice, intermediate, and advanced students,
trainee therapists, and experienced therapists) took part in the
study. All participants completed an instrument consisting of
a test measuring basic and clinical knowledge in a multiple
choice format, two open-format questions on a basic and a
clinical concept, and two short case studies. Up to and
including the level of trainee therapists, the results followed
the picture known from studies on expertise development in
medicine. However, at the level of experienced therapists, the
results point to a decrease in knowledge The second study
examined the effects of domain experience on
interdisciplinary collaboration of physicians and clinical
psychologists. 27 dyads with different experience levels
(student dyads, trainee dyads, and experienced dyads)
collaborated on a complex case study. In most measures on
the quality of the collaboration, experienced dyads scored
lower than trainee dyads and advanced student dyads. For the
quality of the joint solution, results were more mixed. When
discussing the results, it should be noted that the experienced
therapists taking part in our studies had not undergone
postgraduate professional training comparable to that
completed by trainee therapists in Germany today.

Expertise

Keywords: Expertise; Clinical Psychology; Interdisciplinary
Collaboration

Expertise and expertise development have interested
researchers since the seminal work of de Groot (1965) and
later on of Chase and Simon (1988) examining expertnovice differences in chess. Since that work, expertise has
been analyzed in such different domains as physics, sports,
music, law, and medicine etc. Taking into account many of
these studies, Bredard and Chi (1992) deduced five
characteristics shared by experts from different domains:
Compared to novices, experts (1) possess more domainspecific knowledge (2) which is also better organized.
Therefore, experts (3) perform better than novices in
domain-related tasks. However, (4) expertise does not
transfer to other domains and (5) in some situations experts
are not better than novices.
In the domain of psychology, expertise research is still
rare. We are especially interested in the relationship
between practical experience and expertise, defined as more
and better organized domain-specific knowledge.

Introduction
Current overviews of expert problem solving and expertise
development were provided in 2005 by a special issue of
Applied Cognitive Science and in 2006 by the Cambridge
Handbook of Expertise (Ericsson, Charness, Feltovich, &
Hoffman, 2006). Although many domains have already been
investigated, there are virtually no studies on expertise in
the domain of clinical psychology and psychological
psychotherapy. At the 2006 Cognitive Science conference,
we presented first results on expertise development in this
domain that were gained by studying psychology students
and graduated trainee therapists (Hauser, Spada, Rummel, &
Meier, 2006). The present paper aims at shedding further
light on how practical experience influences expertise in
clinical psychology by comparing students and trainees with
experienced psychotherapists.
The combined insights from our first study on expertise in
clinical psychology and existing research in medicine (e.g.
Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992) were used to address a further

Expertise in Medicine

1061

Medical expertise has attracted a great deal of research
attention since the 1970s, resulting in a large body of
literature (e.g. Boshuizen, 2004; Boshuizen & Schmidt,
1992). In order to examine expertise development in the
domain of medicine, researchers have usually constructed a
text-based case study and have asked medical doctors and
novices to think aloud while working on it (Boshuizen &
Schmidt, 1992). After diagnosing the case, participants are
asked to elaborate on their assessment of the signs and
symptoms (post-hoc pathophysiological explanations).
Using this approach, novices, intermediate and advanced

students of medicine, and physicians with several years of
experience in therapy have been compared.
Regarding the quality of diagnoses, an increase up to the
level of expert physicians was found (e.g. Boshuizen, 2004).
In terms of the development of knowledge with growing
domain expertise, Boshuizen and colleagues postulated
three steps (e.g. Boshuizen, 2004): (1) Medical students
acquire large amounts of declarative biomedical knowledge.
The representation of this knowledge can be understood as a
loosely connected semantic network. (2) With some clinical
experience, declarative knowledge is then encapsulated
under clinical knowledge. Thus, encapsulated knowledge
pertains to higher-order concepts (clinical knowledge) under
which lower-order concepts (biomedical knowledge) are
subsumed. In routine work, experts verbalize only higherorder concepts. Researchers have detected knowledge
encapsulations by comparing post-hoc explanations with the
think-aloud protocols. Compared to less experienced
persons, experts verbalized fewer case-related statements in
the think-aloud protocols, but their post-hoc explanations
showed an increase in the amount of pathophysiological
explanations. These explanations matched with the
statements that experts had verbalized in the think-aloud
protocols and could therefore be interpreted as knowledge
encapsulations. (3) In a final step, medical experts develop
illness scripts for each disease. An illness script consists of
information on enabling conditions (conditions and
constraints of a disease), the fault (major malfunctions in
bodily processes), and consequences (signs and symptoms).
Medicine and clinical psychology are related in that in
both domains, illnesses are diagnosed and specific
treatments are applied that have been developed based on
scientific knowledge. However, three main differences
between clinical psychologists and physicians have been
described and attributed to differences in their training
(Kingsbury, 1987): (1) Students of psychology learn to view
science as a body of scientific methods that help them to
experimentally test theories whereas medical students learn
to view science as a body of facts. (2) For physicians, there
is a stronger association between particular diagnoses and
specialized treatments than for psychotherapists. (3) At
German universities, the first years of the psychology
curriculum focus on a scientific education in the general
field of psychology. Not until their third or fourth year can
students decide to specialize in clinical psychology, and
only after finishing their university education can they
engage in clinical training. Medical students, in contrast,
usually start their studies with the goal of becoming a
physician, and after two preclinical years they receive
clinical training. Against the background of the
commonalities and differences described, we investigated
whether expertise in clinical psychology and psychological
psychotherapy develops in a similar manner to expertise in
medicine.

Study One
Method
Participants and Design Psychologists on five levels of
experience in clinical psychology participated in our study.
We chose the experience levels in a way that mirrored
important steps in the formal psychology training in
Germany: Novice students were in their second year of
university studies and had learned about basic principles of
human psychology (topics such as learning, cognition, and
emotion). Intermediate students were in their third year and
had learned about the application of these basics. Advanced
students were in their final two years and had chosen to
focus on clinical psychology. Trainee therapists were at
least in the second year of their on-the-job training after
graduation. In Germany, psychologists have to complete
postgraduate professional training in order to become a
psychotherapist. The psychological psychotherapists taking
part in our study (experienced therapists) were behavior
therapists practicing in Freiburg, Germany and had worked
for at least ten years in their profession. It should be noted
that therapists taking part in our study had not undergone
postgraduate professional training comparable to that
received by trainee therapists today because in Germany this
was not obligatory before 1998.
Altogether, 55 students (20 novice students, 20
intermediate students, and 15 advanced students), 15 trainee
therapists, and 15 experienced therapists took part in our
study. All participants received financial compensation for
their voluntary participation. Students and trainee
psychotherapists were recruited during lectures and
workshops. The psychotherapists were contacted by letters
and by phone in their practices.

1062

Material and Dependent Variables To guarantee their
relevance for clinical practice, all materials were developed
in close collaboration with clinical psychologists holding
substantial expertise in both clinical research and
psychotherapy (Prof. Dr. Franz Caspar and Dipl.-Psych.
Katrin Wenning). All participants completed a computerbased instrument consisting of three parts.
(1) A knowledge test comprised 12 multiple choice
questions on three content areas: Knowledge on basic
principles of psychology (e.g. “What is the result of
classical conditioning?”), knowledge on the application of
these basics to clinical psychology (e.g. “What kind of
learning processes are part of Mowrer’s two-factor theory of
avoidance learning?”), and knowledge on clinical
psychology (e.g. “What does Beck call the negatively biased
thoughts in depression?”). We assessed the percentage of
correct answers for each content area.
(2) In two open-format questions, participants were asked
to write down everything they knew about (a) a basic
concept (schedules of reinforcement) and (b) a clinical
concept (schizophrenia). We measured the amount of
correct answers by comparing them to a model solution, and

counted the amount of technical terms. Interrater-reliability
was satisfactory (ICC > .82) for all variables.
(3) The main part consisted of two case studies. The first
case study described a patient with social phobia, and the
second a patient with an obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Similar to the studies in the domain of medicine, we
instructed participants to scan the case, recall important
information, diagnose the case, and finally to explain the
disorder they had diagnosed. In the recall phase, we
assessed the amount of correctly recalled statements and
counted the amount of higher-order concepts used. For the
diagnosis, a score from 0 (no or wrong diagnosis) to 1.25
(correct and elaborated diagnosis) was assigned. In the
explanation phase, we measured the amount of correct
explanations by comparing them to a model solution. The
interrater-reliability was sufficient (ICC > .74) for all
variables.

Open-Format Questions
Regarding the first open-format question (schedules of
reinforcement), the levels differed significantly in their use
of technical terms (F (4, 80) = 3.0, p = .02, η² = .13).
Experienced therapists used fewer technical terms than
trainee therapists (t (4, 80) < 1, n.s.). With regard to the
amount of correct statements (F (4, 80) = 2.0, n.s.), no
significant differences were found.
With regard to the second open-format question
(schizophrenia), the levels differed significantly in terms of
both the amount of correct statements (F (4, 80) = 10.4, p <
.01, η² = .34) and the technical terms used (F (4, 80) = 8.3, p
< .01, η² = .29). In both variables, knowledge increased up
to the level of trainee therapists. Experienced therapists
scored much lower than trainee therapists (amount of
correct statements: t (4, 80) = 3.8, p <.01); technical terms
used: t (4, 80) = 3.4, p < .01).

Results

Table 1: Sketch of the descriptive results of Study 1
(↓ = general decrease, ↑ = general increase, → = stability
over the levels).

A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) with
subsequent ANOVAs was used to compare the five levels of
experience (Pillai’s Trace, F(4, 60) = 2.55, p < .01, η² =
0.36). Four a priori contrasts were computed. Due to
shortage of space and because of our focus on effects of
practical experience, in the present paper we include only
the fourth contrast, comparing the experienced therapists
and the trainee therapists. For all statistical tests, an alpha
level of .05 was used. Table 1 gives a sketch of the
descriptive results; we are currently preparing a longer
publication describing the results in detail. Levels of
Education summarizes the trends from novice, to
intermediate and to advanced students, up to the level of
trainee therapists. Levels of Experience summarizes the
trends from trainee therapists to experienced therapists.
There was no difference regarding the overall time
participants spent completing the instrument (F (4, 80) =
1.94, n.s.).

Levels of
Education
Novice to
Trainee

Levels of
Experience
Trainee to
Experienced

Knowledge Test

Knowledge Test
Basic Knowledge
↓
↓
Application of Basic Kn.
→
↓
Clinical Knowledge
↑
↓
Open Format Question on Schedules of Reinforcement
Correct Statements
↓
↓
Technical Terms
↓
↓
Open Format Question on Schizophrenia
Correct Statements
↑
↓
Technical Terms
↑
↓
Case Study 1: Social Phobia
Recall: Correct Statements
↑
↓
Recall: Higher-order
Concepts
→
↓
Diagnosis: Correctness
↑
↓
Explanation: Correct
Statements
↑
↓
Case Study 2: Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Recall: Correct Statements
↑
↓
Recall: Higher-order
Concepts
→
↓
Diagnosis: Correctness
↑
→
Explanation: Correct
Statements
↑
↓

Regarding basic principles of psychology, the ANOVA
revealed a marginally significant effect (F (4, 80) = 2.3, p =
.06, η² = .10). The novice students scored the highest, and
knowledge then decreased. The trainee therapists
outperformed the experienced therapists (t (4, 80) = 1.68,
n.s.). On the subscale application of basic principles, there
was an increase at the level of intermediate students, and
knowledge then decreased continuously up to the
experienced therapists (F (4, 80) = 4.42, p <.01, η² = .18, t
(4, 80) < 1, n.s). The levels differed significantly on the
questions on clinical psychology (F (4, 80) = 7.7, p < .01, η²
= .28). Knowledge increased up to the level of trainee
therapists, with a rather strong increase at this level.
Experienced therapists scored lower than trainee therapists
(t (4, 80) = 2.0, n.s.).

Case Study 1: Social Phobia

1063

Participants differed significantly in the amount of recalled
statements (F (4, 80) = 5.6, p < .01, η² = .22) and the
amount of higher-order concepts used (F (4, 80) = 4.8, p <
.01, η² = .19) across experience levels. Up to the trainee

therapists, the participants recalled approximately the same
amount of statements, while the experienced therapists
recalled significantly fewer statements than the trainees (t
(4, 80) = 3.4, p <.01). Regarding the higher-order concepts,
there was an increase up to the level of trainees and a
decrease at the level of experienced therapists (t (4, 80) =
2.0, p = .06).
In terms of the quality of the diagnosis, the experience
levels differed significantly (F (4, 80) = 6.7, p < .01, η² =
.25). Diagnosis improved at the level of intermediate
students and then leveled off. Experienced therapists scored
slightly lower than trainees (t (4, 80) = 1.8, n.s.).
With regard to the explanation, the levels differed
significantly in the amount of correct statements (F (4, 80) =
4.1, p < .01, η² = .17). Again, the already familiar picture
was found, with the trainees scoring the best. The
experienced therapists scored lower than trainee therapists (t
(4, 80) = 1.7, n.s.)

Case Study 2: Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

knowledge, particularly in clinical knowledge. It should be
noted that the experienced therapists did not undergo a
certified on-the-job training comparable to that of today’s
trainees and thus our results can partly be explained by
differences among these cohorts. A systematic training
program for practitioners would probably help to keep their
knowledge up to date and counteract the trend we found.
These results contradict findings in medicine that have
shown a continuous increase in biomedical knowledge (e.g.
Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992). An explanation for this may
be that studies in medicine have usually looked at persons
with about 4 years of experience at the highest level. Our
study, by contrast, examined persons with at least 10 years
of practical experience. This long period may have led to the
therapists forgetting theoretical clinical knowledge. In the
variables measuring practical clinical competencies – the
diagnoses – experienced therapists scored as highly as
trainee therapists. This may be due to the fact that
diagnosing is an activity that is very familiar for expert
therapists.
As stated above, up to now, research on expertise has
concentrated on studying individual problem solving, while
in their daily work, experts often have to work in an
interdisciplinary fashion. On the basis of the findings of our
first study, we conducted a second study to examine how
growing domain experience affects the collaboration of
physicians and psychological psychotherapists on a
complex, interdisciplinary case study. We examined
collaboration via a videoconferencing system. Compared to
face-to-face collaboration, this setting allows recording the
collaboration more easily, and enables to attribute single
statements or action in the shared editor to the contributor.

Participants differed significantly across experience levels
in the amount of higher-order concepts used (F (4, 80) =
3.1, p = .02, η² = .13). Again, there was an increase up to
the level of trainee therapists and then a decrease at the level
of experienced therapists (t (4, 80) = 1.4, n.s.). Regarding
the amount of correct statements, the experience levels did
not differ significantly (F (4, 80) = 1.5, n.s.).
In terms of the quality of the diagnosis, the levels again
differed significantly (F (4, 80) = 3.2, p = .02, η² = .14).
Diagnosis improved at the level of intermediate students and
then leveled off. Experienced therapists scored as highly as
trainee therapists (t (4, 80) < 1).
With regard to the explanation, the data showed the usual
picture, with the trainees scoring best. The levels differed
significantly in the amount of correct statements F (4, 80) =
5.3, p < .01, η² = .20). Again, the experienced therapists
scored lower than the trainee therapists (t (4, 80) = 1.4, n.s.).

Study Two
Assumptions

Discussion of Study One

For our second study, we used findings from our first study
in order to predict collaboration process as well as process
outcome:
For the collaboration process, we assumed that knowledge
encapsulation (Boshuizen & Schmidt, 1992) or even loss of
theoretical knowledge (see above) leads to a reduced
capability to exchange domain-specific information. Thus,
communication processes such as grounding (Clark &
Brennan, 1991) should be more complicated with growing
domain expertise. Moreover, Dreyfus & Dreyfus (1986)
postulated that experts’ decision making is more intuitive,
leading us to the assumption that experienced persons do
not discuss their arguments as much as less experienced
persons.
Making assumptions for the joint solution was more
difficult: For the planning of therapy steps, research on
expertise is lacking, even in medicine (Norman, Eva,
Brooks, & Hamstra, 2006). Expertise research on
diagnosing ability revealed that experienced persons
generally diagnose as correctly as or even more correctly
than less experienced ones. However, predictions are

The goal of this study was to shed light on expertise
development in clinical psychology and compare the
insights gained to existing research in medicine.
Psychologists with different amounts of experience
completed an instrument measuring theoretical basic and
clinical knowledge. Up to and including the level of trainee
therapists, the results can be predicted from the organization
of the university curriculum in psychology in Germany. At
the beginning of university studies, students are taught
mainly basic principles of psychology and their application,
and we consequently found that these students outperformed
the other levels on these variables. Later on, students also
learn clinical knowledge, and we therefore found
improvements in clinical knowledge at this level. After
graduation, trainee therapists deepen their knowledge in
clinical psychology further; and consequently, we found
another substantial increase. However, at the level of
experienced therapists, our results point to a decrease in
1064

difficult because the quality of joint solution is not only
influenced by the individual ability of the collaborating
partners but also by the quality of the collaboration process.
In our study, the medical members of a dyad served as
authentic partners with whom psychologists often
collaborate. Medical expertise is not investigated in this
study. Instead, we focused on the psychological part of the
process and the outcome.

Method
Participants and Design Three levels of domain experience
(student dyads, trainee dyads, and experienced dyads) were
compared. At the student level (n = 11 dyads), medical
students who were in at least their third clinical semester
(fourth year of study) collaborated with students of
psychology who had completed their specialization in
clinical psychology (also in the fourth year). At the trainee
level (n = 10 dyads), residents who had been working in a
hospital for at least one year after graduation collaborated
with trainee therapists who were in at least the second year
of their on-the-job training after graduation. Finally, at the
experienced level (n = 6 dyads), physicians working as
general practitioners collaborated with psychotherapists.
The experienced persons had worked in patient care for at
least 10 years. All participants received financial
compensation for their voluntary participation.

psychometric properties of this instrument have been found
to be satisfactory (see Meier et al., 2007).

Results
Collaborative Process A multivariate analysis of variance
(MANOVA) of the ten process variables revealed a
significant overall effect for the experience level (F (2, 24)
= 1.9, p = .05, η² = .62). Subsequent ANOVAs showed that
the trainee dyads scored best, followed by the students and
then the experienced dyads. Figure 1 illustrates this pattern
by showing the results for reciprocal interaction.
Altogether, eight out of ten dimensions followed this
pattern. We found significant differences between the
experience levels on the dimensions of information pooling
(F (2, 24) = 3.34, p = 0.05, η² = 0.22), technical
coordination (F (2, 24) = 6.39, p = 0.01, η² = 0.35), and
reciprocal interaction (F (2, 24) = 4.46, p = 0.02, η² = 0.27).
On five other variables, the same pattern was found
(sustaining mutual understanding, dialogue management,
reaching consensus, task division, task orientation
psychological participant), although the group differences
did not reach the significance level.
4,0
3,5
3,0
2,5

Setting and Procedure During their collaboration,
participants communicated via a desktop videoconference
system. They were provided with individual text editors to
take notes, and a shared text editor to compile the joint
solution. After they had successfully completed a technical
training, participants were given 15 minutes to read the case
study individually and to skim the textbooks that were
available for their aid. In the next 60 minutes, dyads
collaborated on a threefold task: They were asked to (1)
diagnose the case, (2) state differential diagnoses, and (3)
plan medical and psychological therapy steps.
Dependent Variables To assess the quality of the outcome,
the written solutions of all dyads were blind-rated by one of
the psychotherapeutic experts who had helped to construct
the case study. The expert rated the quality of the diagnoses,
differential diagnoses and therapy steps on a six-point scale
(1 = very bad to 6 = very good), resulting in three
psychological ratings.
The videotaped collaboration was assessed by a trained
rater with the help of a rating scheme consisting of nine
dimensions (Meier, Spada, & Rummel, 2007): sustaining
mutual understanding, dialog management, information
pooling, reaching consensus, task division, time
management, technical coordination, reciprocal interaction,
and task orientation. In contrast to all other dimensions, task
orientation was assessed on the individual level. Thus, ten
variables resulted. Each dimension was rated on a five-point
rating scale ranging from 0 (very bad) to 4 (very good). The

2,0
1,5
1,0
0,5
0,0
Students

Trainees

Experienced

Figure 1: Results for the dimension reciprocal interaction
Joint Solution The dyads differed significantly in terms of
the psychological differential diagnoses. The trainee dyads
scored best, followed by the student dyads and the
experienced therapist dyads (F (2, 24) = 4.63, p = .02, η² =
0.28). Although not significant (F (2, 24) = 1.78, p = 0.19,
η² = 0.13), the same descriptive pattern could be found in
the psychological diagnoses. No significant differences were
found regarding the therapy steps (F (2, 24) < 1).

Discussion of Study Two

1065

Study 2 examined the effects of growing domain experience
on the collaboration of persons with medical and
psychological backgrounds. Student dyads, trainee dyads,
and experienced dyads worked via a videoconferencing
system on an interdisciplinary case study. Data were
gathered from the collaboration process with a rating
scheme developed by our research team in earlier studies
(Meier et al., 2007) and from the joint solution with the help
of domain experts.
As expected, trainee dyads showed the best collaboration,
followed by the advanced students, and then the experienced
dyads. The results in the joint solutions were more mixed.

The experience levels only differed in the psychological
ratings of differential diagnoses and marginally in the
ratings of the diagnoses. One explanation might be that the
joint solution is not only affected by individual
competencies of the collaboration partners but also by the
quality of the collaboration. Thus, one can assume that
enhancing the quality of collaboration, for example by
providing model collaborations before the real collaboration
takes place (Rummel & Spada, 2005), would also enhance
the quality of the joint solution.

reviewers for their comments and support. Due to the
limited space some of their comments could not be included
in the present paper, but we will certainly take account of
them in the planned article.

References

Overall Discussion

Bedard, J., & Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Expertise. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 1(4), 135-139.
Boshuizen, H. (2004). Does practice make perfect? In H.
Boshuizen, R. Bromme & H. Gruber (Eds.), Professional
learning: gaps and transitions on the way from novice to
expert (pp. 73-93). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Boshuizen, H., & Schmidt, H. (1992). On the role of
biomedical knowledge in clinical reasoning by experts,
intermediates and novices. Cognitive Science, 16(2), 153184.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1988). The mind's eye in
chess. In A. M. Collins & E. E. Smith (Eds.), Readings in
cognitive science: A perspective from psychology and
artificial intelligence. (pp. 461-494): Morgan Kaufmann,
Inc.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S., E. (1991). Grounding in
Communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. D.
Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives in socially shared cognition
(pp. 127-149). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
De Groot, A. D. (1965). Thought and choice in chess. The
Hague: Mouton.
Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. (1986). Mind over machine. The
power of human intuition and expertise in the era of the
computer. New York: Free Press.
Ericsson, K. A., Charness, N., Feltovich, P. J., & Hoffman,
R. R. (2006). The Cambridge handbook of expertise and
expert performance. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Hauser, S., Spada, H., Rummel, N., & Meier, A. (2006).
Expertise development in clinical psychology. In R. Sun,
N. Miyake & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the
28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. (pp. 1458-1463). Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Kingsbury, S. J. (1987). Cognitive differences between
clinical psychologists and psychiatrists. American
Psychologist, 42(2), 152-156.
Meier, A., Spada, H., & Rummel, N. (2007). A rating
scheme for assessing the quality of computer-supported
collaboration processes. International Journal of
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 63-86.
Norman, G., Eva, K., Brooks, L. R., & Hamstra, S. (2006).
Expertise in medicine and surgery. In K. A. Ericsson, N.
Charness, P. J. Feltovich & R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), The
Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance
(pp. 339-353). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to Collaborate:
An Instructional Approach to Promoting Collaborative
Problem Solving in Computer-Mediated Settings. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.

The two studies presented in this paper aimed to fill in two
gaps in the research on expertise development. The first is
the lack of research on expertise development in the domain
of clinical psychology. Although it is related to the wellstudied domain of medicine (e.g. Boshuizen, 2004), we
found – besides commonalities – relevant differences
between the two domains in the way in which expertise
develops. In both domains, students first acquire basic
knowledge. Then, clinical knowledge is acquired and basic
knowledge is encapsulated under clinical knowledge. At the
highest level of experience, however, in contrast to
medicine, our results point towards a decrease in theoretical
clinical knowledge. A further study is underway, examining
illness scripts in psychology.
A shortcoming of expertise research is the exclusive
investigation of individual problem solving, whereas in
reality, experts often have to work with experts from other
domains. As experts are often not co-located, they are
frequently forced to collaborate in a computer-based
manner. Consequently, the second study examined the
effects of growing domain experience on the computerbased interdisciplinary collaboration of physicians and
psychological psychotherapists. As expected from findings
on expertise, we found that high domain experience
complicates collaboration processes. These detrimental
effects of experience partly affected the outcome of
collaboration negatively. Thus, we proposed the
development of support measures to enhance the
collaboration process.
It must be noted that the sample sizes in both studies were
relatively small. In addition, the studies took place in a
laboratory setting, using carefully constructed materials.
Thus, our results allow only tentative generalizations.
In conclusion, it should be emphasized that the present
studies attempted to connect basic research on expertise
development with more applied research, e.g. on computerbased interdisciplinary collaboration.

Acknowledgements
The present research was supported by the German Science
Foundation (DFG) with project grants to the second author
and Franz Caspar (Sp 251/ 16-3) and a scholarship granted
to the first author. We would like to thank Anne Meier
Christine Kalweit, Katrin Manner, Ann-Kristin Reinhold,
Britta Stumpf, Katrin Wenning and five anonymous
1066

