UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
To Teach by Concept or by Procedure? Making the Most of Self-Explanations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74z4f833

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Matthews, Percival G.
Rittle-Johnson, Bethany

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

To Teach by Concept or by Procedure? Making the Most of Self-Explanations
Percival G. Matthews (percival.g.matthews@vanderbilt.edu)
Bethany Rittle-Johnson (b.rittle-johnson@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA
Abstract
Self-explanation prompts (prompts that encourage students to
give explicit explanations for the content they study) have
emerged as a promising method for promoting learning, but
questions remain about how to maximize their utility. The
current experiments investigated how instruction on concepts
versus procedures affected the quality of self-explanations
and subsequent learning outcomes when solving math
equivalence problems (e.g. 7+3+9=7+_). Second through
fifth-grade children learned about these problems under
conditions varying on whether they were instructed on
concepts or procedures (Experiment 1) and whether or not
they were prompted for self-explanation after conceptual
instruction (Experiment 2). The conceptual instruction group
generated higher quality explanations and showed greater
gains in conceptual knowledge and similar gains in procedural
knowledge when compared to the procedural instruction
group. No differences were found for the self-explanation
manipulation. The results suggest that, in some circumstances,
conceptual instruction is more efficient than procedural
instruction and can improve knowledge enough to make selfexplanation unnecessary.
Keywords: psychology, education, problem solving, skill
acquisition and learning, instruction and teaching.

Introduction
Prompting students to generate explicit explanations of
correct material and procedures (i.e. self-explanation) has
emerged as a potentially powerful tool for promoting
learning and transfer. While generating self-explanations
has been shown to facilitate learning, less is known about
how these explanations interact with different types of
instruction. The current experiments examined a) whether
the type of instruction affects conceptual knowledge,
procedural knowledge, and explanation quality, and b)
whether self-explanation prompts are beneficial when
combined with conceptual instruction.
In their seminal study on the self-explanation effect, Chi,
Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser (1989) found that, when
studying new material, the best learners spontaneously
explained the material to themselves, providing
justifications for each action in a solution sequence.
Subsequent studies have shown that prompting students to
self-explain leads to increased learning and transfer in
domains ranging from arithmetic (Rittle-Johnson, 2006) to
probability calculation (Große & Renkl, 2003) to biology
text comprehension (Chi, DeLeeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher,
1994). Moreover, several of these experiments have shown
causal effects for self-explanation prompts (e.g. Aleven &
Koedinger, 2002; Chi et al, 1994; Siegler, 1995).
Nevertheless, there are substantial differences in
1283

explanation quality among individuals, and these differences
are associated with differential learning outcomes (Chi et al,
1989; Renkl, 1997). Chi et al (1989) found that the
explanations of successful learners tend to exhibit certain
qualities. Namely, they (1) more frequently consider the
goals of operators and procedures; (2) give more principlebased explanations; and (3) less frequently show illusions of
understanding. Even when prompted, however, many
participants continue to generate superficial explanations
that fail to promote optimal learning (Renkl 1997; Chi et al,
1994). Indeed, a careful review of the literature reveals that
prompting learners to self-explain sometimes fails to
improve learning at all (e.g. Conati & Vanlehn, 2000; Große
& Renkl, 2003).
It is also unclear how much of the self-explanation effect
is due to simply increasing time on task. A majority of prior
experimental studies held the number of examples or
problems studied constant, resulting in students in the selfexplanation condition spending more time on task (e.g. Chi
et al 1994; Rittle-Johnson, 2001; Siegler, 1995). Only one
published study has found a benefit for self-explanation
while controlling for time on task, and it differed from
typical self-explanation studies along several dimensions
(e.g. students in the self-explanation condition were
explicitly instructed to reference a glossary containing
conceptual information and received feedback on the
explanations (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002).
Thus, while the benefits of self-explanation prompts for
learning and transfer have been documented and replicated,
much work remains to be done in elucidating the conditions
under which they are most effective. Investigating methods
to promote higher quality explanations therefore seems
critical for unleashing the full potential of self-explanation
as a pedagogical tool.
One such unexplored avenue is the possibility that the
type of instruction preceding prompts for self-explanation
may influence subsequent explanation quality. We chose to
compare procedural instruction against conceptual
instruction because the historical debate over the
comparative merits of the two remains unresolved (see
Baroody & Dowker, 2003 or Rittle-Johnson & Siegler, 1998
for a summary). Furthermore, competing accounts of the
mechanisms by which self-explanations operate suggest that
different types of instruction might lead to different
outcomes.
Importantly, the relations between conceptual and
procedural instruction and the types of mathematical
knowledge they support remain unclear (Rittle-Johnson &
Siegler, 1998). In the present study, we assessed learning
outcomes for both procedural (i.e. action sequences for

solving problems) and conceptual knowledge (i.e. explicit or
implicit understanding of the principles that govern a
domain).
The current experiments investigated these relations using
math equivalence problems (i.e. problems of the type 7 + 3
+ 9 = 7 + _). Math equivalence problems pose a relatively
high degree of difficulty for elementary school children
(70% of 4th and 5th graders fail to solve the problems
according to Alibali, 1999). These problems directly tap the
understanding of mathematical equivalence, which is a
fundamental concept in arithmetic and algebra (Knuth,
Alibali, McNeil, Weinberg & Stephens, 2005). Because they
occupy an intermediate step between simple arithmetic and
more advanced algebra, these problems provide a
potentially fruitful field for exploration of the relations
between conceptual and procedural knowledge in
mathematical thinking more generally.
Recent experiments using this task have revealed two
essential findings: first, that interventions can increase both
procedural and conceptual knowledge in the domain; and
second, that promoting one of the two types of knowledge
can cause increases in the other (Perry, 1991; Rittle-Johnson
& Alibali, 1999). Still, the question of whether one type of
instruction is more productive in promoting overall learning
and transfer remains to be answered.
Less still is known about how these types of instruction
might interact with self-explanations. Different theories on
the mechanisms of the self-explanation effect suggest that
different types of instruction may differentially affect selfexplanation quality and volume. Chi argues that selfexplanations work primarily by facilitating revision of
existing domain models (Chi et al, 1994). Based on this
concept centered account, we might expect for conceptual
instruction to lead to higher quality self-explanation. By
both directly augmenting knowledge and directing attention
to conceptual structure, conceptual instruction may help
prime the type of analysis that self-explanation helps to
drive. Thus, through its effects on knowledge and attention,
conceptual instruction may augment the benefits of selfexplanation prompts.
Alternatively, a limited-resources account might predict
for procedural instruction to fare better. On this view, the
capacity of working memory constrains all aspects of
problem solving and analysis (Sweller, Van Merrienboer &
Paas, 1998). Instruction offering a robust procedure may
reduce the cognitive load involved in solving problems
relative to conceptual instruction that places heavy demand
on working memory. Thus, procedural instruction may free
up resources to reflect on why a given solution method
works. Prompts to self-explain may be necessary, however
to employ these newly freed cognitive resources for the type
of reflection that will promote deeper explanation and
understanding (Rittle-Johnson, 2001).

1284

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Initial participants were 121 second- through fifth-grade
children from a parochial school. Children correctly solving
more than half of the mathematical equivalence problems
targeted for intervention at pretest were excluded from the
study (36% of 2nd graders, 58% of 3rd graders, 75% of 4th
and 5th graders). The final sample consisted of 40 children
(22 female). Children participated in the spring semester.
Procedure
Children completed a pretest, an intervention, an
immediate posttest, and a delayed posttest. The written
pretest and retention test were given in their classrooms,
each in 30-min sessions. The one-on-one intervention and
immediate posttest were given in one session lasting
approximately 45 min.
Children were randomly assigned to either the procedural
instruction (n = 22) or the conceptual instruction condition
(n = 18). Children in the procedural instruction condition
were taught an add-subtract procedure (e.g. First add up all
the numbers on the one side and subtract the amount on the
second side).
Children in the conceptual instruction
condition were given an explicit definition of the equal sign,
focusing on its relational properties (e.g. the things on both
sides of the equal sign are equal or the same). No solution
procedures were discussed in the conceptual instruction
session. Instruction in both conditions took approximately
six minutes, was centered around five sentences, and
required student responses to ensure they were attending to
instruction.
The remainder of the intervention session was the same
for both conditions. Intervention problems were six standard
mathematical equivalence problems with a repeated addend
on both sides of the equation, and they varied in the position
of the blank after the equal sign (e.g. 4+9+6 = 4 + _ and 3 +
4 + 8 = _ + 8). For each of the six problems, all children
solved the problem, reported how they solved the problem,
and received accuracy feedback. Children were then
prompted to self-explain. They were shown the answers
that two children at another school had purportedly given,
one correct and one incorrect. The experimenter then asked
the participants both how the other children had gotten their
answers and why each answer was correct or incorrect.
Assessment
On the procedural knowledge assessment, there were two
learning problems, each with the same format as the
intervention problems, and six transfer problems of various
formats (see Table 1). An accuracy score was calculated
based on the percentage of problems children solved using a
correct procedure, regardless of whether they made an
arithmetic error.

included to control for prior knowledge differences. There
was a main effect for type of instruction such that accuracy
was higher for the procedural instruction group than the
conceptual instruction group, F(1, 34) = 4.78, p = .036, 2 =
.123.
To investigate effects of explanation quality, we
conducted two one-way ANCOVAs, both with condition as
a between-subject factor, but with frequency of conceptual
explanations and frequency of procedural explanations as
the dependent variables.
Children who were given conceptual instruction provided
a conceptual rational on over half of all explanations (M =
.54, SD = .34), while children in the procedural instruction
condition (M = .15, SD = .28)rarely did so, F(1,39) = 15.29,
p < .001, 2 = .287. Accordingly, children in the procedural
instruction condition provided a procedural rationale much
more frequently (M = .53, SD = .33) than those in the
conceptual condition (M = .05, SD = .09), F(1,39) = 37.81, p
= .001, 2 = .499. Type of instruction clearly influenced the
quality of students’ self-explanations.
Posttest and retention
As shown in Table 1, there was a general improvement in
procedural knowledge from pretest to posttest, with a small
decrement from posttest to retention test.
Across
conditions, children improved on both procedural learning
and transfer problems from pretest to posttest.
A series of repeated measures ANCOVAs were
conducted for procedural learning, procedural transfer, and
conceptual knowledge scores, respectively, with time of
assessment (posttest v retention) as a within-subject factor
and type of instruction as a between-subject factor. Again,
the aforementioned control variables were included as
covariates to control for prior knowledge differences.
For procedural learning and transfer, there was no effect of
condition, F(1, 32) = .04, p = .843, 2 = .001 and F(1, 32) =
.93, p = .341, 2 = .028, respectively. Hence, while children
in the conceptual instruction condition were never given
explicit exposure to a solution procedure, conceptual
instruction enabled students to generate and transfer correct
solution procedures.

The items on the conceptual knowledge assessment
measured children’s knowledge of two key concepts of
equivalence problems – the meaning of the equal sign and
the structure of equations. The five items asked students to
define the equal sign, to reproduce four equivalence
equations from memory after a 5s delay, to recognize the
correct use of the equal sign in multiple contexts, to
indentify the two sides of an equation, and to state the
meaning of the equal sign in the context of a specific
problem. All items were adapted from Rittle-Johnson
(2006). Each of the five items was worth one point; scores
were converted to percentages.
Data Analysis
To control for prior knowledge differences, pretest
conceptual and procedural knowledge scores as well as
grade level were included in all analyses as covariates.
Preliminary analyses indicated that student grade level never
interacted with condition, so this interaction term was not
included in the final models.
Participants’ explanations of why solutions were correct
and incorrect were also coded as procedural explanations
(e.g. explicitly referencing a correct procedure with no other
rationale), conceptual explanations (e.g. referring to making
the two sides of an equation equal), and other (e.g.
referencing incorrect procedures or vague responses).

Results & Discussion
Pretest
Children began the study with some procedural and
conceptual knowledge of mathematical equivalence (see
Table 1). Though children were randomly assigned to
condition, there was a difference at pretest in conceptual
knowledge between the conceptual and procedural
instruction conditions, t(38) = 2.18, p = .036.
Intervention
A repeated measures ANCOVA was conducted on
accuracy scores during the intervention. Problem type (i.e.
whether the blank came before or after the equal sign) was a
within-subject factor and type of instruction was a betweensubject factor. The control variables noted above were

Table 1: Knowledge Assessment Score by Type of Instruction, Experiment 1

Conceptual Knowledge Score

Procedural Knowledge – Trained
Problems
A+B+C=A+_
A+B+C=_+C

Procedural Knowledge –
Transfer Problems
A + B + C = D + _; A + B + C = _ + D
A + B – C = A + _; A + B – C = _ + C
A + _ = A + B + C; _ + C = A + B + C

PreTest

Post-Te s t

Retent i o n

PreTest

Post-Te s t

Retent i o n

PreTest

Post-Te s t

Retent i o n

Conceptual
Conditi o n

0.55

0.84

0.74

0.25

0.88

0.79

0.35

0.85

0.79

S.D

0.21

0.15

0.2

0.34

0.32

0.38

0.38

0.29

0.32

Procedural
Conditi o n

0.43

0.5

0.52

0.07

0.93

0.74

0.2

0.76

0.57

S.D.

0.2

0.23

0.2

0.18

0.18

0.42

0.29

0.26

0.42

1285

learning in combination with conceptual instruction or if the
learning could be promoted by conceptual instruction alone.

For conceptual knowledge, there was a main effect of
condition, with children in the conceptual condition
performing significantly better, F(1,32) = 16.13, p < .001,
2 = .335. This effect was over and above the main effect of
conceptual knowledge at pretest, F(1, 31) = 5.99, p = .020,
2 = .158. Hence, conceptual instruction led to equivalent
gains in procedural knowledge and superior gains in
conceptual knowledge compared to procedural instruction.
To ascertain whether or not explanation quality was
predictive of learning, similar separate repeated measures
ANCOVAs were conducted on procedural learning,
procedural transfer, and conceptual knowledge scores, with
the exception that this time the frequency of conceptual
explanations was included in the analysis.
The frequency of conceptual explanations was predictive
of learning outcomes on all three measures: for procedural
learning problems, F(1,31) = 7.71, p = .009, 2 = .199,
procedural transfer problems, F(1, 31) = 11.72, p = .002, 2
= .274, and for conceptual knowledge F(1,31) = 13.69, p =
.004, 2 = .234. This positive relation existed even after
controlling for condition and prior knowledge, suggesting
that neither the similarity in our criteria for conceptual
explanations to our conceptual instruction nor prior
conceptual knowledge accounted for this relation.
The data from Experiment 1 indicate that, when compared
to procedural instruction, conceptual instruction promotes
similar gains in procedural knowledge and superior gains in
conceptual knowledge. Providing conceptually oriented
self-explanations was also predictive of gains in all three
outcomes.

Method
Participants
Initial participants were 98 third- through fifth-grade
children from a parochial school. Children correctly solving
more than half of the mathematical equivalence problems
targeted for intervention at pretest were excluded from the
study (31% of 3rd graders, 47% of 4th and 76% of 5th
graders). One additional child was dropped from the study
for failing to complete the intervention. The final sample
consisted of 48 children (26 female). Children participated
in the fall semester.
Procedure
The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1 with
the following exceptions. All children received the
conceptual instruction provided in Experiment 1. Children
were then randomly assigned to either a self-explain (n =
23) or no self-explain condition (n = 25). Children in the
self-explain condition solved the same 6 problems and
received the same prompts as those in Experiment 1.
Children in the no self-explain condition were not prompted
to explain and solved 12 problems instead of 6, to help
control for time on task.
Total time spent on the
intervention problems was similar across self-explain, (M =
12.54 min, SD = 2.89 min) and no self-explain conditions
(M = 12.01 min, SD = 4.60 min, t(46) = .473, p = .638). All
assessments, scoring methods, and coding schemes were
identical to those of Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion

Experiment 2

Pretest
Children included in the study began with little
knowledge of correct procedures for solving mathematical
equivalence problems at pretest. There were no differences
in accuracy across the different conditions (see Table 2).
Intervention
Because students solved different numbers of problems
by condition, our intervention analysis was broken into two
components. First, we compared the mean accuracy of

Experiment 1 demonstrated that quality of explanation
varied by type of instruction and predicted learning.
Because all students received the self-explanation prompts,
however, it was unclear what role the prompts played in
promoting learning. Prior research indicates that selfexplanation improves procedural transfer independently of
procedural instruction (Rittle-Johnson, 2006). Experiment 2
examined whether self-explanation prompts facilitated

Table 2: Knowledge Assessment Score by Explanation Condition, Experiment 2

Conceptual Knowledge Score

Procedural Knowledge – Trained
Problems
A+B+C=A+_
A+B+C=_+C

Procedural Knowledge –
Transfer Problems
A + B + C = D + _; A + B + C = _ + D
A + B – C = A + _; A + B – C = _ + C
A + _ = A + B + C; _ + C = A + B + C

PreTest

Post-Te s t

Retent i o n

PreTest

Post-Te s t

Retent i o n

PreTest

Post-Te s t

Retent i o n

Self-Explain
Conditi o n

0.27

0.84

0.74

0.17

0.57

0.52

0.13

0.50

0.49

S.D

0.17

0.15

0.2

0.29

0.43

0.46

0.28

0.38

0.44

No SelfExplanation
Conditi o n

0.24

0.5

0.52

0.10

0.54

0.62

0.12

0.48

0.55

S.D.

0.20

0.23

0.2

0.25

0.45

0.48

0.23

0.42

0.43

1286

for self-explanation between conceptually instructed groups
on measures of procedural or conceptual knowledge (given
that no-explanation students had additional problem-solving
practice). This suggests that the comparative advantage of
the conceptual instruction group from Experiment 1 might
be due to type of instruction alone. Taken together, the data
lend support to two important conclusions: 1) that there is
an asymmetry to the relations between conceptual and
procedural knowledge; and 2) that there are constraints
under which self-explanations may be effective, and that
conceptual instruction can push these constraints, potentially
rendering self-explanation prompts unnecessary.
Past research has suggested an asymmetric relationship
between procedural and conceptual knowledge, with
conceptual knowledge sometimes proving more facilitative
of gains in procedural knowledge than vice versa (RittleJohnson & Alibali, 1999; Perry, 1991; Hiebert & Wearne,
1996). The current data support this contention. Increased
conceptual knowledge, via direct instruction, led to gains in
procedural knowledge. In contrast, increased procedural
knowledge, via direct instruction, was less effective in
promoting conceptual knowledge gains. Hence, conceptual
instruction may be a more efficient method for improving
both conceptual and procedural knowledge.
Moreover, type of instruction may constrain the benefits
of prompting for self-explanation.
In Experiment 2,
prompts to self-explain did not lead to additional knowledge
gains compared to conceptual instruction with additional
problem-solving practice. Conceptual instruction, in this
case, may be sufficient to promote conceptual and
procedural knowledge acquisition with sufficient time on
task, even without prompts to self-explain. We propose
three methods by which conceptual instruction may render
explanation prompts unnecessary.
As a first mechanism, in certain circumstances,
conceptual instruction may help children build sufficiently
rich mental models that self-explanation is not needed. Chi
et al. (1994) argue that self-explanations operate by aiding
students in the repair of faulty mental models. To the extent
that conceptual instruction edifies existing mental models, it
may leave less room for repair, reducing the effects of
subsequent self-explanation prompts.
This proposed mechanism may help reconcile RittleJohnson’s (2006) finding independent effects for selfexplanation when using procedural instruction with the null
findings of the current study. As was mentioned above,
several studies show that procedural instruction alone is not
always highly supportive of conceptual knowledge. If we
equate mental model repair with increases in conceptual
knowledge, it follows that procedural instruction might be
less adept than conceptual instruction at promoting the
repair of mental models.
Alternatively, conceptual instruction may render prompts
unnecessary because conceptual instruction encourages
more spontaneous self-explanation in the absence of explicit
prompting. If conceptually instructed students must
reference the knowledge that they do have (conceptual

student performance on the first six problems in both
conditions. There was no difference in accuracy for
students in the explain, M = 3.04, SD = 2.72, and no explain
conditions, M = 2.8, SD = 2.7, t(46) = .310, p = .758. Next,
we compared the mean accuracy of student performance in
the no explain condition on the last six problems of the
intervention with their performance on the first six
problems. There was a significant difference between
performance on the first six, M = 2.8, SD = 2.7, and last six
problems for students in the no explain condition, M = 3.68,
SD = 2.44, t(24) = 4.18, p < .001). Thus, the additional
practice seems to have helped students in the no explain
condition, even though their time on task was similar to
students in the explain condition.
Posttest and retention
As shown in Table 2, there was general improvement in
conceptual and procedural knowledge from pretest to
posttest, and little change from posttest to retention test.
A series of repeated measures ANCOVAs were
conducted for the procedural learning, procedural transfer,
and conceptual knowledge scores, with time of assessment
(posttest v retention) as a within-subject factor and selfexplanation prompt (present v absent) as a between-subject
factor. Again, the prior knowledge control variables noted
above were included as covariates.
There was no effect of condition on procedural learning,
F(1,41) = .489, p = .488, 2 = .012, procedural transfer,
F(1,41) = .244, p = .624, 2 = .006, or conceptual
knowledge, F(1,41) = .43, p = .239, 2 = .034. Thus, selfexplanation prompts did not facilitate learning.
Although there was no main effect of condition, within
the self-explain condition, the frequency of conceptual
explanations was predictive of outcomes for procedural
learning problems, F(1,17) = 5.91, p = .026, 2 = .258, and
showed a marginal trend for procedural transfer problems,
F(1, 17) = 3.11, p = .096, 2 = .155. In contrast to
Experiment 1, the frequency of conceptual explanations was
not predictive of gains in conceptual knowledge F(1, 17) =
.003, p = .954, 2 = .000.
In Experiment 2 we found no effect for self-explanation
prompts on procedural learning and transfer or conceptual
knowledge, and a limited effect of explanation quality on
performance within the self-explanation condition. These
data suggest that gains for students in the conceptual
condition of Experiment 1 may have been due to the type of
instruction independent of the self-explanation prompt. This
suggests an alternative source for the variation in
explanation quality that needs to be explained.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, compared to procedural instruction,
conceptual instruction on the meaning of the equal sign
promoted similar procedural knowledge and superior
conceptual knowledge when all students self-explained.
Notably, students in the conceptual instruction group
generated high quality explanations as well as correct
solution procedures. In Experiment 2, there was no effect
1287

knowledge) in order to generate procedures, they may
effectively have to engage in self-explanation to generate
procedures in the first place.
These proposed mechanisms are quite distinct. On the
first view, conceptual instruction may render explanation
prompts ineffective because there is little repair work left
for self-explanation to do. On the second view, there is
work for self-explanation to do, but conceptual instruction
motivates spontaneous self-explanations without prompting.
The first pathway posits that the effect of self-explanation
prompts may be constrained by prior knowledge conferred
by a given type of instruction while the second pathway
suggests that the effect may be constrained by the selective
attention patterns encouraged by a given type of instruction.
A third, more general, mechanism might partially account
for the benefits of self-explanation; self-explanation
generally increases time on task. We controlled for time on
task by increasing the number of practice problems in the
no-explanation condition. Given that prompting for selfexplanations requires more time per problem than
instruction without self-explanations, we should consider
the tradeoffs in terms of constraints prompting for
explanation imposes on the number of practice problems
experienced.
In summary, in conjunction with self-explanation,
conceptual instruction was more efficient than procedural
instruction because it supported learning of both
mathematical procedures and concepts about equivalence.
In fact, conceptual instruction seemed to replace the benefits
of self-explanation prompts. Conceptual instruction may
sometimes be a more efficient means for supporting deep
learning in mathematics than procedural instruction or selfexplanation prompts. Whether these findings generalize to
other mathematical tasks and to classroom settings are
important areas for future research.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part from funding from IES
Predoctoral Training Grant #R305B040110 and funding
from Vanderbilt University.

References
Alibali, M. W. (1999). How children change their minds:
Strategy change can be gradual or abrupt. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 127 – 145.
Aleven, V.A.W.M.M. & Koedinger, K.R. (2002). An
effective metacognitive strategy: learning by doing and
explaining with a computer-based Cognitive Tutor.
Cognitive Science, 26, 147-179.
Baroody, A. J., & Dowker, A. (2003). The development of
arithmetic concepts and skills: Constructing adaptive
expertise. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P.,

1288

& Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How student
study and use examples in learning to solve problems.
Cognitive Science, 13(2), 145-182.
Chi, M.T.H., DeLeeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., & LaVancher, C.
(1994).
Eliciting
self-explanations
improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Conati, C., & VanLehn, K. A. (2000). Toward computer
based support of meta-cognitive skills: A computational
framework to coach self-explanation. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 11, 398415.
Crowley, K., & Siegler, R. S. (1999). Explanation and
generalization in young children’s strategy learning. Child
Development, 70, 304 – 316.
Große, C.S. & Renkl, A. (2003). Example-Based Learning
with Multiple Solution Methods Fosters Understanding.
Proceedings of the European Cognitive Science
Conference 2003 (pp. 163-168). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1996). Instruction,
understanding, and skill in multidigit addition and
subtraction. Cognition and Instruction, 14, 251 – 283.
Knuth, E.J., Stephens, A.C., McNeil, N.M., & Alibali,
M.W. (2006). Does understanding the equal sign matter?
Evidence from solving equations. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 37, 4, 297-312.
Perry, M. (1991). Learning and transfer: Instructional
conditions
and
conceptual
change.
Cognitive
Development, 6, 449 – 468.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from Worked-Out Examples: A
Study on Individual
Differences. Cognitive Science,
21(1), 1-29.
Rittle-Johnson, B. (2006) Promoting transfer: effects of selfexplanation and direct instruction. Child Development,
77(1), 1-29.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999). Conceptual
and procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one
lead to the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91,
175 – 189.
Rittle-Johnson, B. & Siegler, R.S. (1998). The relation
between conceptual and procedural knowledge in learning
mathematics: A review.
In C. Donlan (Ed.) The
Development of Mathematical Skills. Hove: Psychology
Press.
Siegler, R. S. (1995). How does change occur: A
microgenetic study of number conservation. Cognitive
Psychology, 28(3), 225-273.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251 – 296.

