UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Towards a Textual Cohesion Model that Predicts Self-Explanations Inference Generation as a
Function of Text Structure and Readers' Knowledge Levels

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6mr5n71f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Bellissens, Cedrick
Jeuniaux, Patrick
Duran, Nicholas D.
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Towards a Textual Cohesion Model that Predicts Self-Explanations Inference
Generation as a Function of Text Structure and Readers’ Knowledge Levels
Cédrick Bellissens (mcbllssn@memphis.edu)
Patrick Jeuniaux (pjeuniau@memphis.edu)
Nicholas D. Duran (nduran@memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnamr@memphis.edu)
Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis, 365 Innovation Drive
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

McNamara (2004) described six different reading
strategies that the trainees use when producing selfexplanations. At a surface level, readers represent a text
segment by (i) repeating the wording, without enriching its
meaning (repeating) or (ii) by generalizing the content of a
text segment (paraphrasing). At a textbase level, readers
make inferences in order to (iii) maintain the coherence of
the mental representation of the text, and use the encoded
information from the text read so far (bridging). At the
situation model level, readers (iv) create explicit and
enriched relations in the text (elaborating), and/or (v) try to
construct an efficient situation model by making logical
links between text segments (using logic) or (vi) by
predicting facts or upcoming events (prediction).
As a function of readers’ knowledge and skills, it is more
or less difficult to go beyond a textbase representation to
construct an elaborated self-explanation. Elaborated selfexplanation contains inferences that not only maintain the
text-based coherence of the mental representation (i.e., by
bridging) but also the continuity of the situation exposed by
the text (i.e., by elaboration). As such, the ability to make
elaborative inferences is an indication of higher-order text
comprehension. While prior knowledge has been shown to
play a role in the types of inferences readers make (Caillies
Denhière, & Kintsch, 2002), there is also evidence that the
structure of the text favors one type of inference over
another (Magliano, Zwaan & Graesser, 1999; Zwaan,
Langstone & Graesser, 1995). Thus, in this study, we
examine the contribution of prior knowledge and text
structure in predicting when students make bridging or
elaborative inferences in iSTART.

Abstract
The Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active Reading and
Thinking (iSTART) is an intelligent tutoring system that
provides students with automated training on reading
strategies. In particular, iSTART trains students to selfexplain target sentences so as to integrate encoded
information into a coherent mental representation. The goal of
this study was to investigate the relation between text
structures and the generation of bridging and elaborative
inferences during self-explanation. We developed a
computational model in which textual cohesion was
interpreted as matrices of textbase cohesion values, such as
argument overlap or semantic similarity, but also as matrices
of situation model cohesion values such as causality. The
model successfully predicted the different types of selfexplanations as a function of the textual cohesion. We also
found that students’ prior knowledge interacts with the textual
cohesion effect when cohesion was based on situation model
indices.
Keywords: bridging; elaboration;
situation; dependency; cohesion.

iSTART;

textbase;

Self-explanations in iSTART
The Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active Reading and
Thinking (iSTART) is a computational tool that provides
students with automated training on appropriate reading
strategies (van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983) to use while reading
difficult texts (McNamara, Levinstein & Boonthum, 2004).
iSTART is grounded on the success of Self-Explanation
Reading Training (SERT, McNamara & Scott, 1999). SERT
incorporates theories of text comprehension (Kintsch, 1998)
and active thinking (Chi, Sotta, & de Leeuw, 1994) to train
students on reading strategies that help them understand
difficult texts.
Students work with iSTART in a three-step sequence,
including the introduction phase, demonstration phase, and
practice phase. During the introduction phase, students
watch a discussion on self-explanation strategies between
artificial agents (a teacher and two students). In the
demonstration phase, students are asked to identify and
locate strategies used in computer-generated examples of
self-explanations. Finally, during the practice phase,
students self-explain sentences from texts while attempting
to use the reading strategies learned in the previous steps.

Bridging and Elaboration
A large body of research has addressed how the linguistic
representation of a text guides the formation of a bridging or
elaborative inference during text comprehension
(Gernsbacher, 1990; Kinstch, 1993; McKoon & Ratcliff,
1992; McNamara & Kinstch, 1996; Zwaan et al., 1995).
Based on Kintsch (1998) we can distinguish between
inferences that bridge or elaborate information at a textbase
level, and those which integrate the content of a text at a
situation model level.

815

readers benefits from high cohesion texts were more
apparent on textbase measures than on situation model
measures. Therefore, high knowledge readers benefited
from low cohesion texts when they were able to elaborate
their mental representation, mostly at a situation model
level.
In other studies, it was also found that the interaction
between cohesion and prior knowledge was modulated by
readers’ skills: high knowledge and low skilled readers
benefited from low cohesion texts; in contrast, high
knowledge and high skilled readers benefited from high
cohesion texts (McNamara, 2001; O’Reilly, & McNamara,
2006). Moreover, the authors found that reading skill tended
to help low knowledge readers build a situation model when
reading a high cohesive text. They also found that prior
knowledge helped less skilled readers comprehend low
cohesive texts when comprehension was assessed at a
textbase level.
The findings of McNamara et al. (1996), McNamara
(2001) and O’Reilly and McNamara (2006) are consistent
with theories of encoding such as long-term working
memory (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995; Kintsch, 1998). Longterm working memory theory predicts that readers are able
to encode information by associating it with cues that
belong to a mental retrieval structure. At a textbase level,
reading skill is mainly needed to associate information with
previously encoded information by means of argument
overlap (Kintsch, 1988; Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978) or
semantic distance (Foltz, et al., 1998; Shapiro &
McNamara, 2000). In particular, related information in the
textbase representation plays the role of retrieval cues. At a
situation model level, when a rupture disturbs the smooth
process of text comprehension, skilled and/or
knowledgeable readers are able to link the non-related
information to a general representation of the text by
elaborating a macrostructure that results from the
generalization of the encoded information based on their
prior knowledge (Bellissens & Denhière, 2004; Ericsson &
Delaney, 1999). When knowledge is necessary or sufficient
to fill in gaps in the linguistic representation of the text,
elaboration plays the role of semantic cue associated with
encoded information in long-term working memory.

At a textbase level, both bridging and elaborative
inferences are generated. Textbase coherence is mainly
maintained by the presence of argument or semantic
overlaps (Foltz, Kintsch, & Landauer, 1998). When local
coherence can be maintained automatically, readers are able
to make bridging inferences automatically without
generating elaborative inferences unless the readers’ goal is
to strategically make elaborative or forward inferences
(McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992). However, when bridging
information is not readily accessible, knowledge
elaborations can be accessed rapidly (retrieval time of about
400 ms) through long-term working memory (Ericsson &
Kintsch, 1995; Kintsch, 1993). For example, in “A car
stopped. The door opened”, knowing that a door is a part of
car is quite effortless.
When local coherence cannot be maintained automatically
in working memory, it is well accepted that a new mental
text sub-structure can be formed (Gernsbacher, 1990;
Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995). Indeed, at some point of
reading, students often need to make a link between a main
topic and a subtopic of the text. In such circumstances,
students need to rely on a highly integrated representation
(i.e., a situation model) to create links between propositions
currently processed and previously encoded information. As
such, situation model coherence tends to follow different
rules than textbase coherence rules. A theory of situation
model coherence has been described by Zwaan and
Radvansky (1998) that incorporates five dimensions of
coherence: temporal, causal, intentional, spatial and
agentive information. By using a task in which participants
needed to explicitly self-explain narratives, Magliano et al.
(1999) demonstrated that a deficit of situational cohesion in
a text resulted in readers making more elaborations than
bridging inferences.
Because of the difference between local coherence and
situation model coherence, we can predict that bridging
inferences are more likely to be generated when texts are
cohesive because local coherence can be maintained
automatically and there is no need to add a new substructure to the mental representation of the text. We can
also predict that elaborative inferences are generated when,
for example, the local coherence cannot be preserved
automatically or when the text is directed toward a new
subtopic: the textual cohesion is disturbed or lowered, and
readers are forced to rely on their domain knowledge to selfexplain the text.

Hypotheses
Text comprehension and memory theories lead us to
formulate the following hypotheses: (i) When textual
cohesion is preserved, bridging inferences are more likely to
be generated. In contrast, (ii) when textual cohesion is
disturbed, elaborative inferences are more likely to be
generated. Moreover, based on McNamara et al. (1996) and
O’Reilly and McNamara (2006), we assume that, reading
medium cohesive texts, (iii) high and low knowledge
readers are able to understand and explain a text at a
textbase level, but it seems high knowledge readers can
show an advantage for a medium zone of performance and
deeply understand at a situation model level too, hence we
expect an interaction between prior knowledge and textual

Knowledge, Levels of Understanding and Cohesion
McNamara, Kintsch, Songer, and Kintsch (1996) have
shown how text cohesion and prior knowledge interact to
influence comprehension. High knowledge readers are more
accurate than low knowledge readers on text comprehension
assessments. The authors assessed comprehension at two
levels of understanding, textbase and situation model, and
found that high knowledge readers were able to take
advantage of low cohesion texts to improve accuracy on
situation model measures. In contrast, low knowledge

816

that combined cohesion measures to create causality,
temporality, spatiality, and intentionality relationships. Both
types were used in this study. The first type included a
measure of the proportion of word stem overlap between
sentences and a measure of the semantic similarity between
sentences, given by LSA (Landauer & Dumais, 1997), using
the General-Reading-up-to-1st-year-college TASA corpus
(Touchstone Applied Science Associates, Inc.). For the
second type of measures, we computed a situation model
measure that includes a causality index.
The original Coh-Metrix causality index is computed by
considering the number of causal verbs and causal particles
per 1000 words. That measure is an approximation of the
amount of causality relationships in a text. Because we
wanted to get an approximation of the causal links between
pairs of sentences, we combined these counts with other
measures. The rationale behind this combination was based
on the postulate that if there was a causal link between two
sentences, then there should be, at the very least, argument
overlap and/or sufficient semantic similarity between the
two sentences. As a result, a causal relationship C between
two sentences was defined as:

cohesion when the textual cohesion indices includes a
measure of situational cohesion. Finally, (iv) high
knowledge readers should generate more inferences than
low knowledge readers.

Textual Cohesion and Sentence Dependency
Model
We address these hypotheses in the construction of a model
that is intended to evaluate sentences’ dependencies to
previous sentences as a function of textual cohesion (local
and situation-based). Our goal is to predict the conditions
that lead students to elaborate self-explanation with
information from previous text or their own knowledge.

Textual Cohesion and Coh-Metrix
Coh-Metrix is a computational tool that measures more than
400 cohesion indices (Graesser, McNamara, Louwerse &
Cai, 2004). All those measures can be taken to define a
textual cohesion factor.
Textual cohesion is viewed in two complementary ways.
First, text sentences are more or less related to preceding
sentences by means of many kinds of relationships, such as
semantic similarity, argument overlap, co-reference,
causality, and so on, which can be classified either as
textbase or situation model relationships. Second, in order to
define textual cohesion we state that the dependency of a
target sentence si corresponds to a value that is a function of
all relationships that it shares with preceding sentences in
the text.

(1)

C=

c( S + L)
2

where c is a normalized causal link approximation from
Coh-Metrix, S is a normalized stem overlap measure, and L
a normalized semantic similarity measure between two
sentences.
To summarize, we computed textual cohesion at two
levels of understanding. At a textbase level, textual cohesion
relied on (i) stem overlap, and on (ii) semantic similarity,
between sentences; at a situation model level, textual
cohesion relied on a causality measure expressed by
equation (1).

Sentence Dependency Model
Our primary goal was to determine the dependency of text
sentences as a function of textual cohesion. We used a
network model in which each node was a text sentence and
links between sentences were weighted by cohesion values.
Textual cohesion was defined as the connectivity in the
network, such that, the higher the connectivity, the greater
the textual cohesion. The cohesion values were defined by
Coh-Metrix cohesion indices.
Partly based on the integration phase of the ConstructionIntegration model (Kinstch, 1988; 1998), the model
operationalized the hypothesis that the greater the textual
cohesion between a target sentence si and preceding
sentences, the more that si is dependent. Conversely, the
lower the textual cohesion, the more that si is independent.
Hence, in the model, the sentence dependency was an
activation value, resulting from a relaxation process
(Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986) applied to a network in
which each node was a text sentence and each link was
weighted by a measure of sentence relationship, obtained
from Coh-Metrix.

Textual Cohesion Network For a given text of n sentences,
a relationship value was calculated between each pair of
sentences. As a result, we had an original nXn matrix, with
sentences in rows and columns and their relationship value
in the cells. Textual cohesion determined the dependency of
each sentence. Hence, we used the original matrix to
construct one matrix per target sentence, with all preceding
sentences and the target sentence in rows and columns and
their cohesion values in the cells. For example, if the text
comprised five sentences, the original matrix was a 5X5
matrix. From this matrix we constructed a 2X2, 3X3, 4X4
and 5X5 matrices to eventually compute the dependency of
the second, the third, the fourth and the last sentences of the
text, respectively. For each matrix, we referred to the last
sentence as the target sentence.

Sentence Cohesion Values We distinguished two types of
cohesion values: (i) textbase cohesion measures, which
were co-referential cohesion and semantic similarity
measures in Coh-metrix; and (ii) situation model measures

Dependency Computation As we depicted it, textual
cohesion is connectivity in a network, where each node is a
sentence, and the links between nodes are weighted by
cohesion values. In such a net, after the relaxation process,

817

inferences. Hence, in this study, 77 high school students
produced an equal number of bridging and elaborative
inferences.

which simulates spreading activation in the network, greater
connectivity results in greater final activation values of the
target sentence. Hence, a dependent sentence is a sentence
that receives relatively more activation, and an independent
sentence is a sentence that receives little activation. An
intermediate level of dependency for a sentence is defined
relative to the average of the activation values.

Textual Cohesion Model
The Textual Cohesion Model was applied to the six texts
used in the experiment. For each text, we used the three
measures of sentence relationships between all text
sentences that we specified earlier: (i) word stem overlap;
(ii) LSA semantic similarity; and (iii) causal cohesion
calculated by equation (1).
For each of the three measures of sentence relationships,
eight textual cohesion networks were constructed per text,
one for each target sentence. The dependency value of the
eight target sentences was calculated after spreading
activation in each textual cohesion network. Sentences with
high final activation values were categorized as Dependent,
and those sentences with the low final activation values
were categorized as Independent. Sentences with medium
values were categorized as Intermediate.

Experiment and Simulation
Participants
Participants were 77 high school students who were paid to
participate in the experiment.

Procedure of the Experiment
Participants were asked to read six texts that were
approximately 400 words in length. Texts were extracted
from science, history and literature textbooks. The
participants wrote a self-explanation for eight of the
sentences in each text. These eight target sentences were,
signaled by red font on the computer screen. Hence, 3696
self-explanations were collected.
We also assessed participants’ prior knowledge by asking
them to answer questions on a prior knowledge assessment
test. The test consisted of 30 four-option multiple-choice
questions that covered topics on science, history and
literature.

Results
Textbase Cohesion Measure
As described above, textbase cohesion was represented here
by stem overlap and semantic distance. For each index, we
conducted a two-way within-subjects ANOVA, including
sentence
dependency
(Dependent,
Intermediate,
Independent) and type of generated inference (Bridging,
Elaborations), with the number of generated inferences as
the dependent variable.

Self-explanations Coding
Two experts scored the 3696 self-explanations in terms of
the presence of bridging and elaborative inferences. They
determined whether the participants added information in
their self-explanation in comparison to the target sentence,
and whether added information came from the text itself
(i.e., bridging inferences) or from information outside of the
text (i.e., elaborative inferences). The coding scheme
considered three dimensions: (i) the extent to which a selfexplanation overlapped with the text, and particularly the
last sentence read (i.e. the target sentence); (ii) the extent to
which a self-explanation added information to the text or the
target sentence, and (iii) whether the source of any added
information was from the text itself or from the reader’s
prior knowledge. When the information contained in a selfexplanation came only from the target sentence, it was
coded as a paraphrase or a repeat. When it came from
previous sentence, they coded it as a bridging inference.
When the information was not present in the text, they
coded it as an elaborative inference. Reliability was
established between two raters on the basis of a sample of
the self-explanations (kappa = 0.67), then each of the raters
coded half of protocols.
Of the 3696 self-explanations; 9% contained both
bridging and elaborative inferences, 49% consisted of only
paraphrasing or repeating the target sentences, 21%
contained bridging inferences but no elaborative inferences,
and 21% contained elaborative inferences but no bridging

Stem Overlap Cohesion Sentence dependency, based on
stem overlap continuity, did not have a significant effect on
the number of inferences generated in self-explanations,
F(2, 152) = 1.14, p = .32. However, sentence dependency
had a significant effect on the type of inferences generated.
Indeed, as predicted, more Elaborations than Bridging were
generated when the target sentence was Independent; and
fewer Elaborations than Bridging were generated when the
target sentence was Dependent, .33 vs. .27 and .28 vs. .33,
respectively, F(2, 152) = 12.34, p< .01.
Semantic Similarity Cohesion Sentence dependency,
based on semantic similarity, had a significant effect on the
number of inferences made in self-explanations, F(2, 152) =
4.05, p = .01. The quadratic contrast was also significant,
indicating that significantly more inferences were produced
for Dependent and Independent target sentences than for
Intermediate target sentences, .31, .30, .28, respectively,
F(1, 76) = 7.39, p < .01.
Sentence dependency also had a significant effect on the
kind of inferences produced in self-explanations: more
Elaborations than Bridging were generated for Independent
target sentences, whereas the reverse was found for
Dependent target sentences, .32 vs. .30 and .28 vs. .32,
respectively, F(2, 152) = 3.16, p < .05.

818

dependent sentence at the situation model level is
continuous with previous text in terms of causal cohesion.
We predicted that self-explaining a dependent sentence
would not necessitate a lot of elaboration, because
information relevant to bridging was in the text itself. In
contrast independent sentences would necessitate greater
elaboration by the reader in order for it to be linked with the
text. Therefore, iSTART trainees would generate more
bridging than elaborative inferences when they encountered
dependent sentences, and more elaborative than bridging
inferences when they encountered independent sentences.
We also expected that textbase elaboration required less
knowledge than situation model elaboration. Hence we
predicted an interaction between prior knowledge and
textual cohesion only when the textual cohesion measure
included a index of situational cohesion.
Indeed, as a function of target sentence dependency,
determined by the Textual Cohesion Model, participants did
not generate the same type of inferences. As predicted,
when target sentences were independent, participants
produced more elaborative than bridging inferences; and
when target sentences were dependent, they generated more
bridging than elaborative inferences. Finally, high
knowledge participants generated more inferences than
intermediate and low knowledge participants, and prior
knowledge interacted with sentence dependency effects
when the dependency was computed on the basis of a
situation model cohesion measure, such as the causality
calculated by the equation (1).
In future research, we will vary levels of cohesion and
vocabulary complexity in texts in order to examine whether
greater effects of textual cohesion occur. It is expected that a
greater range of cohesion variation should allow further
investigation on the interaction between skills, knowledge,
and cohesion.
As a conclusion, we demonstrate that it is possible to
automatically predict the number and type of inferences
generated during self-explanations by taking into account
target sentence dependencies and participants’ prior
knowledge. We implemented this process into the Textual
Cohesion Model by computing different types of textual
cohesion networks. Thus, it is possible to assess effects of
different kinds of independent textual cohesion on inference
generation in students’ self-explanations. Knowing how
students are able to use text-based and/or knowledge-based
information to self-explain a text, as well as knowing the
level of understanding they can use to better express their
comprehension, could be key information that helps
teachers and tutoring technologies to improve diagnostics
and remediation.

Situational Cohesion Measure
Sentence dependency based on causal relationships had a
significant effect on the number of generated inferences,
F(2, 152) = 4.07, p < .05. The linear contrast was
significant, indicating that more inferences were generated
after Dependent target sentences than after Intermediate and
Independent target sentences, .32, .30, .29, respectively,
F(1, 76) = 7.25, p < .01.
Sentence dependency also exerted a significant effect on
the type of inferences made in self-explanations: here again,
more Elaborative than Bridging inferences were generated
for Independent target sentences, whereas the reverse was
found for Dependent target sentences, .33 vs. .24 and .28 vs.
.35, respectively, F(2, 152) = 24.85, p < .01.

Knowledge Effects
To better understand the effect of prior knowledge on the
number and the type of generated inferences, we used a
mixed model with Sentence dependency and Inference type
as within-subjects factors and Prior knowledge as a
between-subjects factor. Three categories were formed
based on the prior knowledge test (high, medium, low).
Generally, Prior knowledge had an effect on the number of
generated inferences: High knowledge participants produced
more inferences than Intermediate and Low knowledge
participants, .39, .30, .20, respectively, F(2, 74) = 8.38, p <
.01.
Prior knowledge significantly influenced the effect of
Sentence dependency on the type of generated inference
only within the situational cohesion model. Specifically, the
two-way interaction including Sentence dependency,
Inference type and Prior knowledge was significant: F(4,
148) = 4.29, p < .01. In a separate Sentence dependency x
Inference type analysis, High knowledge participants made
significantly more Bridging inferences with Dependent than
with Independent sentences, and more Elaborations with
Independent than with Dependent sentence, F(2,44) =
27.50, p < .01. The same trend was found for Intermediate
knowledge participants. However, Low knowledge
participants generated the same number of Elaborative and
Bridging inferences after an Independent target sentence,
.21 vs. .22, respectively, in a separate analysis, the
interaction between Sentence dependency and Inference type
was not significant, F(2, 40) < 1.

Discussion
Predicting inference generation as a function of text
cohesion and knowledge can be very useful when the goal is
to train students to use particular reading strategies, such as
bridging and elaboration. In order to predict the number of
bridging and elaborative inferences that students would
generate while self-explaining a text, we constructed a
Textual Cohesion Model that automatically determines
target sentence dependencies. As defined in the model, a
dependent sentence at a textbase level shares arguments and
meaning with previous sentences in the text, whereas, a

Acknowledgements
The research was supported an Institute for Educational
Sciences (IES R305G020018-02) and a National Science
Foundation (NSF REC0241144) awards to the 4th author.
Any
opinions,
findings,
and
conclusions
or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the

819

authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the IES
or the NSF. We would like to thank all the CSEP Lab
members who participated in the collect of the data, and
particularly Yasuhiro Ozuru.

McKoon, G., and Ratcliff, R. (1992) Inference during
reading. Psychological Review, 99, 440-466.
McNamara, D. S. (2001). Reading both high-coherence and
low-coherence texts: Effects of text sequence and prior
knowledge. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55, 51-62.
McNamara, D. S. (2004). SERT: Self-explanation reading
training. Discourse Processes, 38, 1-30.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning from
texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence.
Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., & Scott, J. L. (1999). Training reading
strategies. Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 387392). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch,
W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of
text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B., & Boonthum, C.
(2004). iSTART: Interactive strategy training for active
reading and thinking. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 222-233.
O'Reilly, T., & McNamara, D. S. (2006) Reversing the
Reverse Cohesion Effect: Good texts can be better for
strategic, high-knowledge readers. Discourse Processes,
43, 121-152.
Rumelhart, D.E. & McClelland, J.L. (1986). PDP models
and general issues in cognitive science. In D. Rumelhart J.
McClelland & The PDP Research Group (eds.), Parallel
distributed processing. Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press.
Shapiro, A. M., & McNamara, D. S. (2000). The use of
latent semantic analysis as a tool for the quantitative
assessment of understanding and knowledge. Journal of
Educational Computing Research, 22, 1-36
van Dijk, T. A., and Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of
discourse comprehension. New York: Academic Press
Zwaan, R. A, Langston, M. C., Graesser, A. C. (1995). The
construction of situation models in narrative
comprehension: An event-indexing model. Psychological
Science, 6, 292-297.
Zwaan, R. A., Radvansky G. A., (1998). Situation models in
language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123, 162-185.

References
Bellissens, C., & Denhière, G. (2004). Retrieval structure
construction during reading: Experimentation &
simulation. In Proceedings of the Twenty Sixth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 90-95).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Caillies, S., Denhière, G., & Kintsch, W. (2002). The effect
of prior knowledge on understanding from text: Evidence
from primed recognition. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 267-286.
Chi, M. T. H., Sotta, J. D., & de Leeuw, N., (1994). From
things to processes: A theory of conceptual change for
learning science concepts, Learning and Instruction, 4,
27-43.
Ericsson, K. A., & Delaney, P. F. (1999). Long-term
working memory as an alternative to capacity models of
working memory in everyday skilled performance. In A.
Miyake & P. Shah (Eds.), Models of Working Memory:
Mechanisms of Active Maintenance and Executive
Control, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working
memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Foltz, P. W., Kintsch, W., & Landauer, T. K. (1998). The
measurement of textual coherence with Latent Semantic
Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 285-308.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Graesser, A. C., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., &
Cai, Z. (2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion
and language. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments
and Computers, 36, 193-202.
Kintsch W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: a constructive-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-82.
Kintsch, W. (1993). Information accretion and reduction in
text processing: Inferences. Discourse Processes, 16,
193–202.
Kintsch, W. (1998) Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Towards a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological
Review, 85, 363-394.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997) A solution to
Plato's problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Magliano, J. P., Zwaan, R. A., & Graesser, A. (1999). The
role of situational continuity in narrative understanding.
In H. van Oostendorp & S. R. Goldman (eds.), The
construction of mental representations during reading.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

820

