UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding Decrements in Knowledge Access Resulting from Increased Fatigue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72z8h3q6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Gunzelmann, Glenn
Gluck, Kevin A.
Kershner, Jeffrey
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding Decrements in Knowledge
Access Resulting from Increased Fatigue
Glenn Gunzelmann (glenn.gunzelmann@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Kevin A. Gluck (kevin.gluck@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
Air Force Research Laboratory; 6030 South Kent Street; Mesa, AZ 85212 USA

Jeffrey Kershner (jeffrey.kershner@mesa.afmc.af.mil)
L3 Communications at Air Force Research Laboratory
6030 S. Kent St., Mesa, AZ 85212-6061 USA

Hans P. A. Van Dongen (hvd@wsu.edu)
Sleep and Performance Research Center, Washington State University Spokane
P.O. Box 1495; Spokane, WA 99210-1495, USA

David F. Dinges (dinges@mail.med.upenn.edu)
Division of Sleep and Chronobiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
1013 Blockley Hall; 423 Guardian Drive; Philadelphia, PA 19104-6021 USA
to offset the negative effects of fatigue (e.g., Åkerstedt &
Ficca, 1997, Bonnet et al., 2005), and the development of
biomathematical models to predict general alertness as a
function of circadian rhythms and sleep history (e.g., Hursh
et al., 2004, Jewett & Kronauer, 1999).
Our research draws heavily on advances being made in
these areas and provides a means of extending those efforts.
The goal is to identify mechanisms within a cognitive
architecture to represent the impact of general alertness on
the cognitive system. In this research, we are using the
Adaptive Control of Thought-Rational architecture (ACT-R;
Anderson et al., 2004). Our approach is to use existing
biomathematical models of fatigue to drive parameter
changes in ACT-R, to produce de
c
r
e
me
n
t
si
nt
h
emode
l
’
s
performance like those observed in human participants.
In previous papers (Gross, Gunzelmann, Gluck, Van
Dongen, & Dinges, 2006; Gunzelmann, Gluck, Van
Don
g
e
n
,O’
Conn
or
,& Di
ng
e
s
,200
5)
,wepr
e
s
e
n
t
e
damode
l
that captured the deleterious effects of fatigue on a highly
procedural task testing sustained attention – the
psychomotor vigilance test (PVT; Dinges & Powell, 1985).
Although that work allowed us to identify important
mechanisms within ACT-R that appear to be impacted by
fatigue, it was only the first step in a more ambitious
research agenda. The goal is to develop a general account of
fatigue that addresses performance changes across different
components of the human cognitive system.
In this paper, we present efforts at extending our account
of fatigue to tasks involving a more substantial declarative
memory component. Specifically, we model changes in
performance
on
the
Walter
Reed
Serial
Addition/Subtraction Task (SAST) (Thorne et al., 1985).
This task and the experimental data we are using for
validation are described next.

Abstract
Understanding the impact of fatigue on human cognition
represents an important challenge in applying research in
cognitive science to real-world situations. In this study, we
explored the cognitive mechanisms responsible for
performance decrements in people doing the Walter Reed
Serial Addition/Subtraction Task (SAST) periodically during
88 hrs of total sleep deprivation. In our model, performance
on the SAST relies heavily on declarative knowledge of
mathematical facts, allowing us to extend fatigue mechanisms
associated with procedural knowledge from previous research
to include analogous parameters and mechanisms in
declarative knowledge in the Adaptive Control of ThoughtRational (ACT-R) cognitive architecture. This research
contributes to a comprehensive theory of how the human
arousal system impacts cognition and performance.
Keywords: Fatigue; Memory; Arithmetic; Sleep Deprivation;
Cognitive Model; ACT-R; Alertness.

Introduction
Across a variety of tasks and situations, human performance
varies as a consequence of dynamic changes in general
alertness. In addition to progressive declines associated with
time awake, alertness varies throughout the day as a
function of circadian rhythms (Borbély & Achermann,
1999; Van Dongen & Dinges, 2005a). This is important
because modern society places increasing pressure on
people to operate on inadequate sleep and at times of the
day when the circadian system is at its low point (e.g., shift
work & long-haul airline flights). Working under such
conditions of reduced alertness has been identified as a
contributing factor in a number of industrial and commercial
disasters (e.g., Caldwell, 2003; Dinges, 1995).
Research on fatigue has been targeted at developing
strategies for managing alertness levels to maximize
performance and minimize the likelihood of fatigue-related
errors. This research has taken a variety of forms, including
the evaluation of a variety of psychopharmacological agents

The Serial Addition/Subtraction Task
The SAST involves solving one-digit addition and
subtraction problems. However, if the result of an addition

329

is greater than 10, the participant is asked to subtract 10 and
respond with that result. Alternatively, if the result of a
subtraction is less than 0, then the participant is instructed to
respond with the result of adding 10 to that number. Thus,
the SAST is a mod task, where the correct response is the
result of the operation, mod 10.
The difficulty of the task is increased by presenting the
components of the problem only briefly. For every trial,
each element of the problem is presented for 200 ms, spaced
by 200 ms with nothing on the screen. The first number is
presented, followed by the second number, followed by the
operator. The correct operation is N1 <operator> N2.
Participants are instructed to respond as quickly and as
accurately as possible. Participants were instructed to guess
at the answer if for some reason the stimuli were not
observed or the calculation could not be completed.

course of the 88 hr period while response times increased. In
addition, there was a daily rise and fall in these measures
due to circadian rhythmicity interacting with homeostatic
sleep drive.

A Theory and Model of Fatigue
Our approach to explaining the effects of fatigue on
cognitive performance is to link predictions of general
alertness, which can be obtained from existing
biomathematical models of alertness, to specific
mechanisms and parameters within the ACT-R cognitive
architecture. Biomathematical models embody mechanisms
that capture the influence of time awake and circadian
rhythms on overall cognitive functioning (e.g., Hursh et al.,
2004; Jewett & Kronauer, 1999). Although they have
limitations, they perform well under conditions of total
sleep deprivation (see Van Dongen, 2004). However, these
models lack mechanisms for predicting in situ cognitive
performance; predictions about performance must be scaled
post hoc to dependent measures in particular tasks (e.g., Van
Dongen, 2004).
We can enhance the predictive power of biomathematical
models by linking them to a general theory of human
cognition. ACT-R contains mechanisms for perception,
cognition, and action, with a number of parameters
influencing the speed and effectiveness of those processes
(Anderson et al., 2004). We view the primary impact of
fatigue as influencing the values of those parameters. In the
next section, we describe the ACT-R architecture, focusing
on the mechanisms in the architecture that are critical for
our model of the SAST. Then, we illustrate how the
negative impact of fatigue on human performance can be
captured in a computational model by systematically
varying the parameter values influencing those mechanisms.

Empirical Data
Dinges and colleagues conducted a controlled laboratory
study in which participants were kept awake for 88
continuous hrs (Van Dongen et al., 2001; Van Dongen &
Dinges, 2005b). This sleep deprivation period followed 3
days of acclimation, where participants were given 8 hrs in
bed (11:30 PM – 7:30 AM) per night for sleep. The
acclimation period helped both to reduce any existing sleep
debt and to stabilize the circadian rhythm. Subjects were
awakened after the third night at 7:30 AM, and were kept
awake for 88 hrs until 11:30 PM three days later (after
mi
s
s
i
n
g3ni
gh
t
s
’s
l
e
e
p)
.
Baseline

1.00

Day 2 TSD

Day 1 TSD

Day 3 TSD

4000

0.90

Proportion Correct

0.70

3000

Accuracy - Humans

0.60

Response Time - Humans
0.50

2500

0.40
2000

0.30
0.20

Response Time (ms)

3500

0.80

ACT-R

1500

0.10
0.00

1000
0

8

16

24

32

40

48

56

64

72

80

Time Awake (hrs)

Figure 1: Human performance (accuracy and response
times) on the SAST (N=8) across 88 hrs of total sleep
deprivation (TSD).
While the participants were awake, they completed a set
of neurobehavioral performance tasks, including the SAST,
at 2 hr intervals. The full set of tasks required approximately
30 minutes to complete. In each session of this study, the
SAST required participants to respond to 50 trials as quickly
and accurately as possible. Participants received feedback
on their responses to the first 10 trials in each of these
s
e
s
s
i
on
s(
e
i
t
h
e
r‘
C’or‘
E’wa
sf
l
a
s
h
e
df
or200msf
ol
l
owi
ng
the response). Average response time and overall accuracy
were recorded and are presented in Figure 1, averaged
across 8 subjects. As is shown, accuracy decreased over the

330

ACT-R is a cognitive architecture that instantiates a general
theory of human cognition. The theory posits a division
between declarative and procedural knowledge, the
existence of specialized information processing modules,
and a serial bottleneck in central cognition, which in ACT-R
is a serial production system (Anderson et al., 2004). Within
the constraints of the architecture, accounts of human
performance have been developed for tasks in a variety of
domains of psychological research (see Anderson &
Lebiere, 1998).
Performance on mathematics tasks is a central part of the
history of the development of ACT-R, including accounts of
how individuals solve simple addition and subtraction
problems like those involved in the SAST (e.g., Anderson &
Lebiere, 1998; Lebiere, 1999; Terao, Koedinger, Sohn,
Anderson, & Carter, 2004). Thus, the SAST provides a
useful context for exploring an understanding of how
fatigue may impact mechanisms in the architecture.

Model Description
Models of mathematics performance in ACT-R focus on the
acquisition and strengthening of declarative knowledge
representing particular mathematical facts and problems.

The conceptualization of mathematics expertise in ACT-R
is typically that, over a lifetime, these facts are rehearsed in
a variety of situations and settings, resulting in fast and
accurate access (Lebiere, 1999). The data presented in
Figure 1 illustrate this. In the baseline period of the study,
overall accuracy was 89.8%, and response times were 1.11 s
on average. In contrast, by the third day of the 88 hrs of
total sleep deprivation (TSD), accuracy was reduced to
83.7% overall, and response times had risen to 1.78 s. This
is a substantial increase in both errors and response latency
compared to performance during the baseline period.
As noted above, the SAST involves rapid presentation of
two digits, followed by an operator. To do the task, the
model encodes each of these elements of the problem as
they are presented, generating a representation of the entire
problem. The model then uses this information to probe
memory for a chunk of declarative knowledge that encodes
the solution. Because all of the participants in the study
were adults with at least high school education, we did not
include knowledge for more time-intensive alternative
strategies, like counting, which may be used to compute,
rather than retrieve, an answer (Siegler & Schrager, 1984).
The model uses the answer to the math fact retrieved from
memory to identify the solution to the problem. If it is
greater than 10, the model retrieves the ones-digit of the
solution and uses that to respond. If the answer is negative,
the model probes memory a second time for a solution to
the problem of the initial result plus 10. When the answer is
determined, the model responds by making a virtual key
press. The response and the response latency are recorded
for each trial.

similarity values between numbers in our model are
proportional to the ratio between them. Thus, numbers
closer in value are more easily confused, as seen in
empirical research (e.g., Siegler & Schrager, 1984).
Fatigue Mechanisms In addition to errors, there is
variability in the response latencies to problems across the
experimental protocol. In Gunzelmann et al. (2005), we
presented a model of the psychomotor vigilance test (PVT),
which tests sustained attention by having participants
monitor a known location and respond to the onset of
stimuli appearing at random intervals, for the duration of a
10-minute session,. In the model for the PVT, response
latencies increased under conditions of fatigue as a
c
on
s
e
qu
e
n
c
eof‘
mi
c
r
o-l
a
ps
e
s
’i
nt
h
ef
un
c
t
i
oni
ng oft
he
production system resulting from changes in numerical
procedural parameters. We have evaluated using the same
mechanism in the model for the SAST, and determined that,
by itself, the occurrence of micro-lapses is unable to
produce decrements in both accuracy and response times
that mirror the effects observed in the human data.1
Because the mechanisms we identified in earlier research
are not adequate to account for performance changes in the
SAST, we extended the set of mechanisms producing
fatigue-related declines in t
h
e mode
l
’
s performance.
Specifically, we incorporated parameters in ACT-R’
s
declarative memory module, which are analogous to the
parameters we have already identified as being influential in
procedural knowledge. To ensure that this research is
cumulative in the sense of generating a comprehensive and
general account of fatigue, we vary the previously identified
procedural parameters in this model as well, under the
assumption that fatigue has global, task-independent effects
on human information processing mechanisms.
The parameters we identified in Gross et al. (2006)
included the parameter G, which is involved in selecting and
executing a single production on each cognitive cycle, and
the utility threshold, Tu, which impacts the likelihood of any
cognitive action being performed at all on a cognitive cycle.
In our account, we associated G with alertness within the
procedural system, and we manipulated Tu to represent
attempts by individuals to compensate for the deleterious
effects of fatigue on attentional vigilance. Manipulations to
both parameters were tied to predicted levels of general
alertness stemming from existing biomathematical models
(Gross et al., 2006).
The additional parameters we now manipulate in
declarative memory to produce the model predictions
presented below are the base-level activation, Ai, of
declarative knowledge (particularly of numbers and math
facts), combined with the retrieval threshold, Tr. The
activation of knowledge plays a role for declarative
knowledge similar to the role G plays in procedural
knowledge. In addition, there is a direct correspondence in

Sources of Errors The data in Figure 1 clearly illustrate
that human performance is not perfect. Even during the
baseline period, participants make errors on approximately
10% of the trials. This is probably due to the speeded
presentation of the problem elements combined with an
emphasis on responding quickly. There are multiple
opportunities for errors in the model’
s performance,
including encoding errors/omissions and retrieval errors.
The first opportunities are when the elements of the problem
are presented. The model may fall behind in encoding them,
resulting in missing elements in the problem to be solved. In
these cases, the model is forced to probe memory using an
incomplete representation of the problem, which essentially
means guessing at the correct answer.
In addition to failures to encode, the model can make
errors as a result of retrieving inaccurate information from
memory. This can occur when encoding problem elements
from the screen (misidentifying what number is presented),
when retrieving math facts from memory, and when
retrieving the representation of the response digit from
memory. This is possible because of a similarity-based
partial matching mechanism in ACT-R (Anderson et al.,
2004), which allows items in memory that are similar to the
requested chunk to be retrieved. Due to Gaussian noise
added to the calculations of the activation of declarative
chunks in the retrieval process, the activation of partially
matching chunks may exceed the activation of the
appropriate chunk of knowledge. Following Lebiere (1999),

1

In fact, by the time the frequency of micro-lapses increases
sufficiently to produce latencies like those seen in the human data,
the model is reduced to near-chance levels of performance in terms
of accuracy, because it almost always fails to accurately encode the
elements of the problem.

331

function between Tr and Tu in ACT-R, in that both
pa
r
a
me
t
e
r
sc
on
t
r
olh
ow ‘
a
c
t
i
v
e
’or‘
us
e
f
u
l
’i
nf
or
ma
t
i
oni
n
memory must be in order to be accessed.
To represent decreased arousal within the declarative
memory system, Ai is decremented. This has an immediate
impact on the speed with which information is retrieved
from memory because retrieval time in ACT-R is explicitly
dependent on activation:

Ti F * e Ai
In this equation, the time to retrieve chunk i from memory
decreases as its activation, Ai, increases. F is a scaling
parameter, which we leave at its default value of 1.
When retrievals are slowed there are two observable
consequences in the model. First, failure to fully encode the
problem elements becomes more likely, because retrieving
the propositional representation of the visual information
takes longer, leading to delays that can interfere with
encoding subsequent items in the problem. Second,
latencies increase directly due to longer retrieval times after
the problem has been encoded.
In addition to decrementing Ai in the fits presented below,
we also raise the retrieval threshold, Tr, as a consequence of
fatigue. This suggests that additional effort is required to
access declarative memory under conditions of fatigue, in
addition to the decreased availability of that knowledge
reflected in lower activation values. This role for Tr
contrasts with the theoretical role of Tu in our model of the
PVT described in Gross et al. (2006), where Tu was
decreased under conditions of fatigue to represent explicit
attempts at compensating for the negative consequences of
reduced alertness. This is an issue to be addressed in future
research.
In the next section, we evaluate the ability of these
parameters to influence t
h
e mode
l
’
sperformance in a
manner that is consistent with the declines associated with
sleep deprivation in humans. To constrain this effort, we
relate changes in ACT-R parameter values to predictions of
general alertness in a biomathematical model of fatigue.

performance of the model. First, slower retrievals lead to
increased response times by increasing the latency between
when the problem is encoded and when the response is
retrieved from memory. In addition, slower retrievals have
t
h
epot
e
n
t
i
a
lt
oi
mpa
c
tt
h
emode
l
’
se
n
coding of the problem,
as noted above. If encoding one element of the problem
takes too long, then the model will fail to encode the next
element, forcing the model to guess when responding.
Besides increasing retrieval latencies, decreased
activation levels can lead to failures to retrieve knowledge
from declarative memory, when chunks fail to exceed the
retrieval threshold, Tr. A retrieval failure in this model leads
to a need to guess about the correct response. When a
retrieval failure occurs, another retrieval is attempted, but
the context of the original request is lost, meaning that the
chunk retrieved from memory is essentially random.
However, because the information in this task is welllearned, retrieval failures rarely occur, except at the most
extreme parameter values, which typically are not
appropriate even under conditions of lowest general
alertness as predicted by the biomathematical model. In
contrast, for less well-learned information, the impact of
retrieval failures could be critical, and exploring this issue is
one direction of our current research.

Relating Parameters to General Alertness
One of the goals in this research is to develop a set of
mechanisms to systematically map levels of general
alertness to parameter values in the architecture, thereby
reducing or eliminating the need to do unstructured searches
through parameter spaces to fit the data. At this stage of our
research, we are exploring the potential for such a
systematic mapping by using biomathematical models of
alertness to control how parameter values in ACT-R change
as a consequence of fatigue. This limits the degrees of
freedom and significantly constrains t
h
emode
l
’
sbe
h
a
vi
or
.
Since we have no previous research to use as a basis for
estimating the relationship between general alertness and
model parameter values for declarative tasks, we used bestfitting parameter values for each session of the human data
to infer a function mapping between alertness predictions
from the biomathematical model and ACT-R parameter
values. In this initial model evaluation, we limited our
search to linear functions. Thus, using best-fitting
parameters for each session, we estimated a function of the
form:

Evaluating the Model
Not surprisingly, manipulations to the overall activation of
declarative knowledge and retrieval threshold, combined
with the previously investigated parameters influencing
procedural knowledge in central cognition, can capture the
full range of human performance shown in Figure 1, in
terms of both accuracy and response times. More important
than fitting the data, however, is to understand the impact of
fatigue on performance by assessing what is changing in the
mode
l
’
si
n
f
or
ma
t
i
onpr
oc
e
s
s
i
n
gt
h
a
ti
sresponsible for the
changes in overall performance. This is a key issue for
understanding the impact of fatigue that cannot be addressed
with biomathematical models of alertness, illustrating an
important contribution of using a cognitive architecture in
this area.
In the case of the SAST, the activation level (Ai) appears
to be the main driver of performance changes in the model.
Decreasing activation reduces the availability of knowledge
in declarative memory. This has complex effects on the

Vx ma x b
Where Vx is the value for the parameter at session x. We
estimated the values for m and b for each of the four
parameters in the model using the least squares method. To
produce predicted parameter values for each session, then,
the equation was solved using the predicted value of
alertness for that session (ax) to drive the prediction.
Whereas we manipulated all four parameters in the model, it
should be noted that the model is relatively insensitive to the
values for G and Tu, because the effects are driven more by
changes in the availability of knowledge, rather than the use
of that knowledge in central cognition, as described above.

332

In this paper, we present the predictions based on this
method for a single biomathematical model, namely the
Circadian Neurobehavioral Performance and Alertness
(CNPA) model developed by Jewett and Kronauer (1999).
The CNPA model is typical of a class of biomathematical
models of fatigue in that it incorporates processes to account
for (a) circadian rhythms and (b) progressive declines in
alertness as time awake increases (see Van Dongen, 2004,
for a comparison of 7 such models). It is distinct in that it
also includes components to account for sleep inertia (low
alertness immediately upon awakening) and for the impact
of light on the circadian component. See Jewett and
Kronauer (1999) for a more detailed discussion of this
model and how it is applied in understanding fatigue. Figure
2 presents the average performance of the model over 250
iterations using parameter values estimated using the
alertness predictions from the CNPA model as described
above. The resulting model performance roughly
corresponds with the overall average pattern of the human
data (r=.62, RMSD=.071 for accuracy; r=.69, RMSD=278
ms for response times).
Baseline

1.00

Day 2 TSD

Day 1 TSD

Day 3 TSD

as severe as the decrements observed on the last morning of
the study for the human participants. It is likely that using a
non-linear function to map general alertness to model
parameters could improve this prediction somewhat, and we
intend to evaluate other potential functions as this research
progresses. Although these discrepancies between the model
and the data exist, we find the overall correspondence
between the model and the data to be encouraging evidence
for the utility of our approach. We sum up the important
contributions of this research in the conclusion, and also
identify some additional avenues for future research.

Conclusions
In this paper, we have demonstrated how parameters within
a cognitive architecture can be manipulated to account for
the impact of fatigue on cognitive performance. The
research is an extension of previous efforts (e.g., Gross et
al., 2006; Gunzelmann et al., 2005), increasing the breadth
of our account to include the impact of fatigue on
mechanisms in declarative knowledge. There is evidence
that fatigue has global effects on cognitive functioning, and
thus it is not surprising that we have identified mechanisms
and parameters in multiple processing systems that are
needed to account for the negative consequences of
decrements in alertness across multiple tasks. As this
research progresses, we anticipate that additional
information processing mechanisms in ACT-R may be
implicated in accounting for how fatigue changes cognitive
performance.
The mechanisms implicated in performance impairment
on the SAST relate to the availability of declarative
knowledge, in conjunction with mechanisms associated with
the selection and execution of procedural knowledge that we
identified previously in our research on the PVT. The
declarative parameters we manipulated are analogous to
those manipulated in ACT-R’
spr
oc
e
du
r
a
ls
y
s
t
e
m,providing
a consistent account of the impact of fatigue across these
two information processing systems, though we need to
evaluate the contrasting roles of the threshold parameters.
As our research on how fatigue impacts human
information processing progresses, we will continue to
extend our account to include additional components of the
cognitive system and seek to identify theoretically
motivated parameters that reflect changes in cognitive
functioning. A challenge of this research is to create a
parsimonious, globally coherent account of the impact of
fatigue that produces accurate predictions of performance
across tasks. Specifically, manipulating new mechanisms in
developing an account for performance in a new task can
only be considered progress if the entire set of mechanisms
and parameters can provide an account of performance
across the full set of tasks. Such coherence is a focus of
validation efforts. For instance, we plan to re-run our PVT
model while including manipulations to the declarative
parameters identified here to demonstrate that the account
still holds.2

4000

0.90

Proportion Correct

Accuracy - Humans

0.70

3000

Accuracy - Model
0.60

Response Time - Humans
Response Time - Model

0.50

2500

0.40
2000

0.30
0.20

Response Time (ms)

3500

0.80

1500

0.10
0.00

1000
0

8

16

24

32

40

48

56

64

72

80

Time Awake (hrs)

Figure 2: Model performance and human data, with model
parameters estimated using a linear transformation of the
biomathematical model (CNPA) predictions of general
alertness.
The discrepancies between the model and the human data
in Figure 2 illustrate several aspects of this modeling work.
Since we are using predictions of alertness from an existing
biomathematical model, we are tied to those predictions
about the temporal dynamics of general alertness, including
the high- and low-points in human performance over the
course of the day. It appears in this case that those
predictions from the biomathematical model are slightly
misaligned relative to the performance dips found in the
human data, particularly in the morning following the
second day without sleep.
In addition to the misalignment between the predicted and
observed performance low-points, the biomathematical
model also predicts that the most severe decrements in
performance will occur in the morning of the last day of the
sleep deprivation period. Consequently, the ACT-R model
does not fully capture the drop in human performance in the
morning following the second night without sleep, which is

2

It can be shown that manipulations of the declarative parameters
will not impact the PVT model, since no information is retrieved
from declarative knowledge while the model performs the task.

333

Our further research and validation efforts will ensure that
the mechanisms we develop provide a robust and general
account of how increased levels of fatigue degrade cognitive
functioning. This will establish a foundation for making
performance predictions in complex, dynamic tasks where
empirical data regarding human performance may be
unavailable. As noted above, the ultimate value of
understanding fatigue using a cognitive architecture is in
making predictions in applied settings, to avoid situations
where errors stemming from fatigue have consequences that
may be dramatic and catastrophic.

Acknowledgments
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not reflect the official policy or position of the
Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. This
research was sponsored by the Air Force Research
La
bor
a
t
or
y
’
s(
AFRL) Wa
r
f
i
g
h
t
e
r Re
a
di
n
e
s
s Re
s
e
a
r
c
h
Division and by grant 04HE02COR from the Air Force
Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR). Human data
collection was sponsored partly by AFOSR grants F4962095-1-0388 and F49620-00-1-0266, and by NIH grant
RR00040. HVD was supported by AFOSR grant FA955005-1-0086, and DFD was supported by AFOSR grant
FA9550-05-1-0293. We appreciate the thoughtful comments
of three anonymous reviewers.

References
Åkerstedt, T., & Ficca, G. (1997). Alertness-enhancing
drugs as a countermeasure to fatigue in irregular work
hours. Chronobiology International, 14(2), 145-158.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review, 111, 1036-1060.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. L. (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Bonnet, M. H., Balkin, T. J., Dinges, D. F., Roehrs, T.,
Rogers, N. L., Wesensten, N. J. (2005). The use of
stimulants to modify performance during sleep loss: A
review by the Sleep Deprivation and Stimulant Task
Force of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
Sleep, 28(9), 1144-1168.
Borbély, A. A., & Achermann, P. (1999). Sleep homeostasis
and models of sleep regulation. Journal of Biological
Rhythms, 14, 557-568.
Caldwell, J. (2003, Fall). Wake up to the importance of
sleep for air safety! Flightline, 30-33.
Dinges, D. F. (1995). An overview of sleepiness and
accidents. Journal of Sleep Research, 4(2), 4-11.
Dinges, D. F., & Powell, J. W. (1985). Microcomputer
analyses of performance on a portable, simple visual RT
task during sustained operations. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers 17(6), 652-655.
Gross, J. B., Gunzelmann, G., Gluck, K. A., Van Dongen,
H. P. A., & Dinges, D. F. (2006). Computational
modeling of the combined effects of circadian rhythm and

334

sleep deprivation. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (p. 297-302). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Gunzelmann, G., Gluck, K. A., Price, S. C., Van Dongen,
H. P. A., & Dinges, D. F. (2007). Incorporating the
effects of sleep deprivation into a cognitive architecture.
In W. D. Gray (Ed.), Integrated Models of Cognitive
Systems. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gunzelmann, G., Gluck, K. A., Van Dongen, H. P. A.,
O’
Conn
or
, R. M.
, & Di
n
g
e
s
, D. F. (
2005)
.A
neurobehaviorally inspired ACT-R model of sleep
deprivation: Decreased performance in psychomotor
vigilance. In B. G. Bara, L. Barsalou, and M. Bucciarelli
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 857-862). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hursh, S. R., Redmond, D. P., Johnson, M. L., Thorne, D.
R., Belenky, G., Balkin, T. J., et al. (2004). Fatigue
models for applied research in warfighting. Aviation,
Space, and Environmental Medicine, 75(3), A44-60.
Jewett, M. E., & Kronauer, R. E. (1999). Interactive
mathematical models of subjective alertness and alertness
in humans. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 14, 588-597.
Lebiere, C. (1999). The dynamics of cognition: An ACT-R
model of cognitive arithmetic. Kognitionswissenschaft.,
8(1), 5-19.
Siegler, R. S., & Shrager, J. (1984). Strategy choices in
addition and subtraction: How do children know what to
do? In C. Sophian (Ed.), Origins of cognitive skills (pp.
229-293). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Terao, A., Koedinger K., Sohn, M-H., Anderson, J. R., &
Carter, C. S. (2004) An fMRI study of the interplay of
visual-spatial systems in mathematical reasoning. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, and T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1327-1332). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Thorne, D. R., Genser, S. G., Sing, G. C., & Hegge, F. W.
(1985). The Walter Reed performance assessment battery.
Neurobehaviora. Toxicology and Teratology, 7, 415-418.
Van Dongen, H. P. A. (2004). Comparison of mathematical
model predictions to experimental data of fatigue and
performance. Aviation, Space, and Environmental
Medicine, 75(3), A15-A36.
Van Dongen, H. P. A., & Dinges, D. F. (2005a). Circadian
rhythms in sleepiness, alertness, and performance. In M.
H. Kryger, T. Roth, and W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles
and Practice of Sleep Medicine, 4th ed. (pp. 435-443).
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders.
Van Dongen, H. P. A., & Dinges, D. F. (2005b). Sleep,
circadian rhythms, and psychomotor vigilance. Clinical
Sports Medicine, 24, 237-249.
Van Dongen H. P. A., Price N. J., Mullington J. M , Szuba,
M. P., Kapoor, S. C., & Dinges, D. F. (2001). Caffeine
eliminates sleep inertia: Evidence for the role of
adenosine. Sleep, 24, 813–
819.

