UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding the Distribution of Infant Attention: A Dynamical Systems Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1zz3h2rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Goldberg, Joshua
Schoner, Gregor

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding the Distribution of Infant Attention: A Dynamical Systems
Approach
Joshua Goldberg (joshgoNOSPAM!
ld@alumNOSPAM!
ni.indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405-7007 USA

Gregor Schöner (gregor.schNOSPAM!
oener@neuroinformatik.ruhr-uni-bochNOSPAM!
um.de)
Institut für Neuroinformatik, Ruhr-Universität
44780 Bochum, Germany
Abstract

imental procedures. In particular, we compare infant control
versus fixed trial lengths, and paired versus single stimulus
presentations.
The specific hypothesis formulated with this account is that
the patterns of looking observed in infant experiments may be
accounted for by a process with the following key features:
(a) Targets of gaze shifts are driven by raw salience. (b) Perceptual information is accumulated in time. And (c) release
of fixation is modulated by perceptual activation. These assumptions imply a fourth: that the relevant processes driving
looking are not based on learning what is where in space.

A process model is presented to account for infant looking patterns in habituation and preferential looking experiments. The
model emphasizes the infant’s own role in controlling exposure to stimuli. Operating on the level of individual fixations
in continuous time, the model ties cumulative looking times
to patterns of individual looks. The process described does
not make use of a spatial map of stimuli. We explore the
behavior of the model using fixed trials, infant-controlled trials, paired presentations, and preferential looking procedures,
examining both group and individual measures of cumulative
looking times and individual fixations.
Keywords: Attention; Habituation; Visual Paired Comparison; Dynamical Systems Theory; Dynamical Field Model; Infant

The Model
Background and overview

Introduction
The principal vehicle of the study of infant cognition is the
measurement of visual attention in the laboratory. Countless
studies have built on Fantz’s (1964) observation that looking
times can be used as a signature of recognition and memory.
Still, there is little theoretical or experimental work examining infant looking as a process. Although infants spend a
significant portion of an experiment looking away, the fine
structure of looks and looks away, beyond cumulative measures of looking time, is rarely reported.
We come to this study with the hypothesis that there is
more to be learned from patterns of how infants look and
look away by examining and accounting for their behavior
on multiple scales of measurement. Is there a functional and
adaptive purpose to the noisy patterns of looking we observe?
Can we understand more about the processes underlying attention and perceptual learning—the processes we hope are
indexed by looking time measures—if we more closely account for and understand the fine-scale structure of fixations
and gaze shifts? A prerequisite to answering these questions
is to understand how perceptual experience depends on, and
in turn shapes, patterns of looking.
As a step toward addressing such questions, we have built a
process model of infant looking, where the model’s own spatially directed looks, controlled in continuous time, are what
determine its exposure to stimuli. The model allows us to
relate moment-to-moment patterns of looks in space to the
more familiar macro-scale measures of cumulative looking
times and preferences. It also gives us a useful tool for understanding how looking is affected by differences in exper-

Dynamical field models provide a general account for the selection and stabilization of a decision from among competing
inputs. Reflecting the dynamics of populations of neurons
with overlapping receptive fields, a “peak” of highly activated
neurons in an otherwise-inhibited field specifies a value along
the dimension of the field. Locally cooperative and distally
inhibitive interactions within the field assure that only one
value (a single peak) is selected. Once a peak is formed, hysteresis makes it is unlikely for the decision or peak location to
change. This stability is essential in Dynamical Field Theory
in order that the same process by which a decision is made
can account for the control of temporally extended, embodied behaviors.1
Figure 1 illustrates the overall structure of the model.
There are two fields in our model. A peak in the perceptual field specifies a percept of what is currently foveated. A
peak in the motor field specifies a plan for the gaze system,
either to fixate or to shift the gaze. Both fields receive input
from the retina, but the perceptual field gets input only from
the currently attended stimulus in the fovea. More intense or
complex stimuli are treated in the model as inputs of higher
amplitude. An additional input condenses all of the possible
1 The general mathematical form for a dynamical field is τu̇

(x,t) =
R
g[u] + S(x,t) , where g[u] = −u(x,t) + h + w(x − x0 )σ(u(x0,t) )dx0
u(x,t) is the activation level of the field at location x and time t.
S(x,t) is input to the field, h is a negative resting level, and w(x − x0 )
is a homogeneous interaction kernel. The kernel is typically of the
form: wexcite − winhib exp(−1/2((x − x0 )2 /σ2 )); and σ(u) = 1/(1 +
exp(−β · u)) is a sigmoidal function.

1043

Perceptual
ea
fov

World

Perceptual

stabilizes
fixation

World

activation

memory

+

perceptual features

foveated
stimulus

f

f

–

f

graded boost to
motor fixation peak

gaze

Figure 2: The perceptual system. The activation field generates a peak corresponding to the currently foveated stimulus.
Excitatory and inhibitory preshape traces reflect past exposure to different stimuli.

Motor

Figure 1: Overview of the field model
other targets of infant attention—lights, experimental equipment, clothing, mom—into one reserved location and percept. This “away” input is weaker than most stimuli and is
always presented as part of the stimulus array.
The peak in the perceptual field varies in strength due to
stimulus-specific memory effects. This activation level is
transmitted as an input to modulate the stability of fixation
in the motor field. The essence of our account is that a simple model of accumulation of excitatory and inhibitory perceptual history effects can replicate many features of looking
patterns found in a variety of infant looking procedures.

Because the memory traces are localized in feature-space,
the perceptual field can respond differently to two different
stimuli, depending on the history and timing of past stimulus exposure. Most typically, for example, this means a reduced response to a habituated stimulus relative to a fresh
one. Memory traces are built up such that with continued exposure to a particular stimulus, excitation dominates early on,
while inhibition dominates later. Since a look away might include a variety of different, uncontrolled visual inputs, we assume that memory traces for those looks do not have a chance
to build up coherently. The perceptual peak for the “away”
percept stays at a default level of activation.

Motor field and gaze

Perceptual field
Figure 2 illustrates the perceptual system.2 The dimension
of the perceptual field spans the space of possible percepts,
where neighboring field locations represent similar percepts.
The perceptual field receives input represented in this perceptual space from the particular stimulus that is foveated. It
generates a peak of activation in the corresponding location
in the field.
This field is also coupled to two memory, or preshape,
fields, one excitatory and the other inhibitory. The memory
fields are defined in the same perceptual dimension. Memory
traces build up slowly in both memory fields at the field location where the activation field has a peak. Memory traces in
non-activated field-locations decay. The strength of the peak
in the activation field in turn varies due to input from these
excitatory and inhibitory traces.
2 The perceptual activation field u
p( f,t) , and its excitatory
(p p( f,t) ) and inhibitory (v p( f,t) ) memory, or preshape, fields are defined as follows:
R
τu u̇ p( f,t) = g[u p ] + p p( f,t) − v p( f,t) +Cp,S ν(x)S( f, x+gaze(t),t) dx
τ p ṗ p( f,t) = −p p( f,t) +Cp σ(u p( f,t) )
τv v̇ p( f,t) = −v p( f,t) +Cv σ(u p( f,t) )
S( f, x,t) is the stimulus description in perceptual and (worldcentered) spatial coordinates. gaze(t) is the position of the eyes as
controlled by the motor system. ν(x) = exp x2 /σ2fovea is a gaussian
bump centered at x = 0.

Figure 3 illustrates the motor and gaze control system.3 The
dimension of the motor field spans the space of possible looking directions, represented in retinal coordinates. A peak at
the fovea specifies continued fixation. A peak at an extrafoveal location specifies a shift of the gaze with the corresponding direction and magnitude.
The motor field receives retinotopic input from the array
of visible stimuli, including the input for “away” looks. For
example, the foveated stimulus provides input at the center
of the field, x = 0. Inputs are stronger for more salient stimuli but do not distinguish between different, equally salient
stimuli. Finally, an additional input corresponding to the total amount of perceptual field activation is provided to the
central (foveal) region of the field. This input adds stronger
or weaker support to the fixation peak. The duration of each
fixation—when to shift the gaze—is determined by stochastic
competition between the fixation peak and the various potential gaze targets.
Gaze is controlled by the peak in the motor field. It is held
steady when a fixation peak is active. When a motor planning
3 The motor field is defined as follows:
R
τu u̇m(x,t) = g[um ] − Cfix∆ ν(x) + Cm,S S( f, x+gaze(t),t) d f +
R
Cm,p ν(x) σ(u p( f,t) )df + reset ·[−Ckillp +Cfixreset ν(x)] + noise(x,t)
reset is 1 during the final portion of a gaze shift, and 0 otherwise.
noise(x,t) is spatially correlated, gaussian, white noise.

1044

World

Gaze

fants per condition and plotted with standard error bars. After
a ramp-up not evident in Colombo et al. (1997), we see a similar subtle decline of looking in all stimulus conditions. Like
cumulative looking times, mean look durations (not plotted)
also decreased in the model after an initial ramp-up. This illustrates how cumulative looking is tied to fixation length in
the model. Stimulus intensity also led to more total looking,
similar to the experimental data. In the final trials, the model
demonstrates a novelty preference, looking more across trials
11 and 13 than in trials 12 and 14.

graded boost to
fixation from
perceptual field

Motor
retinotopic space

potential
motor plan

x

fixation
peak

Fixed trial habituation: simulated

Colombo, Frick & Gorman (1997)

Figure 3: The motor and gaze system. The motor planning
field generates either a fixation peak or a peak that determines
the magnitude and direction of a gaze shift. These two possibilities compete in the presence of noise. Fixation is more
stable when perceptual activation is stronger.

8
6
4
2
0
0

First we examine the model’s behavior in a straightforward
habituation paradigm. In this procedure a single stimulus
is presented on a fixed schedule of presentations and intertrial intervals. Fixed-length trials are less common than one
might expect, used more in studies of attention for its own
sake rather than in broader studies of cognitive development.
Using a fixed trial procedure, Colombo et al. (1997) found
a decline in cumulative looking over trials, as well as a decline
in mean fixation length over trials. They also reported that
more complex stimuli elicited greater looking overall Note
that in this procedure, looking decrements are not as dramatic
as the steep, exponential shape found in infant-controlled procedures.
Similar to Colombo et al. (1997), we presented the model
with 10 trials of 10 seconds each, using 10 second inter-trial
intervals. We also added a test phase, where presentations of
a novel stimulus (trials 11 and 13) alternate with the familiar
stimulus from the earlier phase.
Figure 4 shows cumulative looking time data for simulations using three different stimulus strengths, as well as data
for comparison from Colombo et al. (1997). Group data here
and throughout the paper are averaged over 16 simulated in-

5

10

15

8
6
4
2
0

4x4
10x10
20x20
2

4
trials

6

8

Figure 4: Cumulative looking times by trial for a simulated
fixed length habituation procedure with three values of stimulus strength. Data from Colombo et al. (1997) are presented
on the right for comparison. In the simulated data, trials 11
and 13 after the black line are presentations of a novel stimulus.

Simulation Results

Habituation with fixed length trials

s1 (weak)
s2
s3 (strong)
trials

peak arises, a shift of the specified magnitude and direction is
generated without feedback over a fixed duration to bring the
gaze to the corresponding location. Technically speaking, the
motor planning peak is stable, but it is short-lived: At the end
of a gaze shift, the motor field is reset to reestablish a fixation
peak at its center.

In this section we illustrate how the model performs in a variety of infant looking paradigms. We look at groups and
individuals, using different scales of measurement, including
individual fixations as well as cumulative looking times and
preference scores.

10
cumulative looking time (s)

cumulative looking time (s)

10

Finally, we can compare the distribution of lengths of individual fixations produced by infants and the model. We
are not aware of reports of fixation distributions in a fixed
trial procedure, but the general exponential-like shape seems
largely independent of procedure. Similar results are reported
by Fisher-Thompson & Peterson (2004) for preferential looking and Richards & Gibson (1997) for a single, long stimulus
presentation. Figure 5 presents histograms of look lengths to
compare this simulation with data from Fisher-Thompson &
Peterson (2004). In both the simulations and the data, short
looks are common, and long looks occur occasionally. The
model generates similar distributions of look lengths in other
procedures as well, owing largely to the motor dynamics:
Over a short time interval where habituation is not significant, the likelihood of a break of fixation is approximately
equiprobable at any moment.

Infant controlled trials
Criteria based on looking are often used to determine the
schedule of stimulus presentations, including trial onsets, offsets and number of trials before habituation is presumed.
Stimuli may be turned on only when the infant looks at the
display; stimulus presentations may continue until the infant
looks away for a set amount of time; and trials may continue
until the infant’s cumulative looking on a number of trials is
less than a habituation criterion, usually a percentage of initial looking. In these simulations we examine effects of infant controlled trial offsets and habituation criteria. Note that
without a process model that generates looks in time, it is not
1045

Fi-ation distribution: simulated

Fisher!Thompson C Peterson (2004)
40
number of fi-ations

100

50

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 ) 10
fi-ation length (s)

30

individual infants’ habituation profiles in their study, which
used infant-controlled offset and habituation criteria. The
categories are exponential decrease for infants whose looking declines steadily from baseline to criterion; increasedecrease for those that show an increase in looking, or sensitization, before declining back to criterion; and fluctuating,
for infants whose looking time curve has multiple peaks and
valleys before reaching criterion. Cases of each profile arise
in the model. Figure 7 shows comparisons between sample
runs of the simulator with infant data from Feng et al. (Submitted). In simulations, these are generated with the same
parameter settings. Thus they are not a product of stable individual differences. This illustrates how nonlinear instabilities can amplify early fluctuations in looking, causing distinct
patterns to emerge.
Stimulus salience can, however, affect the likelihood of different categories of habituation profile. In simulations of this
procedure, a stronger stimulus generated fewer fluctuating
profiles and more exponential decreasers. This seems to fit
with the overall pattern of the two studies that report counts
of such categories. The proportion of exponential-decrease
was lowest for Feng et al.’s (Submitted) low intensity condition (a simple animal shape in motion); higher for Feng et
al.’s high intensity (the same stimulus with a face) and Bornstein & Benasich’s (1986) geometric condition (bulls-eye or
grating); and highest for Bornstein and Benasich’s social condition (photos of faces). Although Bornstein & Benasich argued the opposite in a footnote, we suspect that the profile
which emerges is related to the baseline. A low baseline is
harder to reach, so the experiment is likely to continue for
more trials, creating more opportunity for fluctuation. For
Bornstein & Benasich (1986) and in our simulations, fluctuators took more trials on average to reach criterion than exponential decreasers. Increase-decrease profiles are the rarest of
the three, both in the experiments and in our simulations.

20
10
0
0

5
10
15
fi-ation length (s)

20

Figure 5: Histogram of fixation times in a simulated habituation experiment (left) and in infant data from FisherThompson & Peterson (2004).
possible to realistically replicate procedures where stimuli are
contingent on looking.
Infant controlled procedures also elicit a decline in looking over trials, sometimes much more dramatically than seen
with fixed trials. Very long initial looks are not uncommon (Horowitz et al., 1972). Feng et al. (Submitted), also
reported that, as with fixed trials, more salient stimuli elicit
longer looking.
Figure 6 shows simulated group data with three stimulus strengths for an infant control task design. Any look
away was treated as sufficient to end each trial. We found
longer initial looking and a more dramatic decline in looking than that found in the fixed habituation simulations.4 We
also show again that overall looking increases with stimulus
salience.
Infant controlled habituation: simulated
140
s1 (weak)
s2
s3 (strong)

100
80

Habituation profiles: simulated

60
40
20
0

60
40

0

4

6

8

10

trials

Incr!Decr
Fluct
ExpDecr

30
20
10

20

2

Feng et al. (Submitted)
40

Incr!Decr
Fluct
ExpDecr

80
look time (s)

cumulative looking time (s)

120

look time (s)

number of fi-ations

150

2

4

6
trial

8

10

0
0

5
trial

10

Figure 7: Examples of exponential, fluctuating, and increasedecrease habituation profiles from simulations (left) and Feng
et al. (Submitted). Plots stop at the trial where a habituation
criterion is met

Figure 6: Group data comparing stimuli of varying salience
in an infant controlled habituation procedure.
Bornstein & Benasich (1986) suggested three categories of
4 We have also verified in the model that backward averaging—
where subjects’ trial data are aligned backwards from the trial on
which each subject reaches criterion—shows the same artifactual
peak immediately before criterion that was discussed by Cohen &
Menten (1981). For the same reasons they elaborated, the effect
here is artifactual as well, not reflecting a pattern found in individual
profiles.

Paired presentations
Until here, we have discussed the effects of changes to the
temporal structure of the task: infant control versus fixed trial
schedules. The structure of the model also makes it straightforward also to examine the effects of spatial structure of ex1046

periments. Here we examine the effects of adding a second,
simultaneously presented stimulus. First, (not pictured) our
model accounts for two observations by Ruff (1975). There
is more looking overall when two identical stimuli are presented side-by-side for familiarization, rather than just one.
And individual fixations are on average shorter in the identical paired condition. Both effects are straightforward to
understand in the model. With paired presentations, gaze
shifts compete among two strong looking sites and one weak
(away) site. Therefore more shifts result in looks at a true
stimulus. Fixations are shorter in the paired condition because there is always a strong extra-foveal target to compete
with the fixation peak.

Visual Paired Comparison

Visual paired comparison: simulated
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0

5
trial

10

Our model derives from an earlier dynamical field
model (Schöner & Thelen, 2006), which used a similar pattern of accumulation of excitation and inhibition to account
for habituation. The earlier model used an activation level to
indicate looking or not looking. Because it did not generate
looks in space, it could not model experiments with paired
stimulus presentations. The lack of space in this model also
meant that it had no mechanism for reengagement after a look
away without the start of a new trial. Thus that model was
silent on the perceptual basis for spatial patterns of looking.
Finally, with the current motor system, we have been able
to move beyond simplifications used by Schöner & Thelen
(2006) and similarly by Gilmore (2001) in modeling infantcontrol procedures. Here we can realistically implement the
contingency of stimulus presentations on looking at the same
time as we allow the system to truly control its own stimulation.

Fantz (1964)
% looking to familiar stimulus

% looking to familiar stimulus

Familiarity preference scores provide an additional measure
that we can examine in the model. Fantz (1964) presented infants with a series of trials, where one stimulus, called the familiar, was presented repeatedly, but was always paired with
a different novel stimulus. We calculate the familiarity preference on each trial, the percentage of total looking at experimental stimuli that was to the familiar. Fantz’s infants acquired a preference to look more at the novel stimulus. Figure 8 compares the model’s preferences over trials to those
from a subset of Fantz’s data.

On the surface, it might seem more straightforward to account for looking preferences with a process using a map of
stronger or weaker points of attraction in the visual field.
In practice, though, to control gaze in this way requires
continual realignment of retinal and body-centered reference
frames—a substantial achievement. Here, we suggest that a
simpler “myopic” mechanism of modulating release from fixation accounts for observed patterns of looking without the
need for keeping track of space.

0.65

An additional difference from the earlier model points beyond the experimental data presented here. In the new model,
the perceptual system is centered on an active peak specifying the percept. This allows us to discuss how the system
would behave when the gaze settles where there is no visual structure to form a peak. (We would expect gaze not
to linger.) Further, the perceptual field enables us to examine
how looking and perceptual representations depend on similarity between presented stimuli—the overlap between their
perceptual representations. Perone et al. (In press) in this proceedings have used this kind of analysis to examine how overlap between stimuli contributes to categorical effects in infant
looking.

0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0

5
trial

10

Figure 8: Group preference scores in a Visual Paired Comparison procedure with data for comparison from Fantz (1964).

General discussion

We share the same basic conceptual framework, a committment to a process model of habituation based on neuronal dynamics, with another recent model of habituation (Sirois &
Mareschal, 2004). Sirois & Mareschal go further than we do
in relating their model to neurophysiology. Their model was
not aimed to account for looking in detail. It generates cumulative looking times from differences in activation, similar
in spirit to Schöner & Thelen (2006). A recent robotic implementation (Sirois, 2005) does has a vision sensor which
moves. The visual information provided by the sensor to the
model contains the entire scence, translated into the spatial
frequency domain so that the effects of retinal shifts are neutralized. In that sense this robotic model does not yet control
stimulation through its own actions. An architectural difference between the models is that their primary driver of habituation is the complement of our approach: control over where

In our account, planning of gaze shifts is based on a retinotopic salience map, with no perceptual information, and there
is no memory for locations of prior looks. Thus the motor
system does not represent “what,” and “where” is only represented in a transient, retinotopic sense. The perceptual system, where stimulus-specific history effects take place, is ignorant of space, generating a response only to the stimulus in
the fovea at each moment. Variation in the stability of fixation, rather than search, underlies novelty and familiarity effects. In sum, our account relies on no associations between
space and content in memory or in active representation—
besides what is given naturally by the structure of the world.
The idea that habituation may be governed by fixation is compatible with theory by Cohen (1972) regarding the separation
of attention-getting and attention-holding processes.
1047

to choose to look, rather how long to fixate. Note that assuming that looks are directed to stimuli as a function of how activated their representations are presupposes that the system
knows “what is where,” that is, has a spatial map of perceptual
objects. In contrast, assuming that perceptual activation modulates fixation does not require this to be the case. The two
models thus make substantially different assumptions. There
is some evidence pointing in the direction of our assumption:
Fixation time, but not latencies or probabilities of looks, decreases with stimulus exposure (Cohen et al., 1975; FisherThompson et al., 2004). More work is required, though, to
thoroughly tease apart these possibilities.
To gather information safely in an unpredictable world, babies have to find a balance between focused examination of
objects and exploration of what is out there to see. Babies
(with some exceptions) do not wait until habituation to look
away. In order to account for how infants control exposure
to stimuli by directing their gaze, our model generates highly
variable patterns of looking in many experimental situations.
This variability is borne out in experimental data of looking
patterns from individual experiments, but we may also consider whether it is a practical necessity for the straightforward
control of exploration without global information. Thus the
variability we observe in infant looking may be adaptive in
achieving a healthy balance between examination and exploration. Our account suggests that this balance is achieved by
deciding not where to look, but when to look away.

Colombo, J., Frick, J. E., & Gorman, S. A. (1997). Sensitization during visual habituation sequences: Procedural effects and individual differences. Journal Of Experimental
Child Psychology, 67, 223–235.
Fantz, R. L. (1964). Visual experience in infants: Decreased
attention to familiar patterns relative to novel ones. Science, 146, 668–670.
Feng, J., Schöner, G., Clearfield, M., & Thelen, E. (Submitted). The effects of stimulus features and intensity on infant
looking; a test of the dynamic field model of habituation.
Fisher-Thompson, D., & Peterson, J. A. (2004). Infant side
biases and familiarity–novelty preferences during a serial
paired-comparison task. Infancy, 5(3), 309–340.
Fisher-Thompson, D., Poeller, T., & Nelson, K. (2004, May
05–08). Where infants look: Do behavioral strategies simplify the task? Poster presented at the 14th Biennial International Conference on Infant Studies. Chicago, IL.
Gilmore, R. O. (2001). Models of the learning process that
habituation indexes. In Annual meeting of the society for
research in child development. Minneapolis.
Horowitz, F. D., Paden, L., Bhana, K., & Self, P. (1972).
An infant-control procedure for studying infant visual fixations. Developmental Psychology, 7(1), 90.
Perone, S., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G.(In press). A dynamic
field theory of visual recognition in infant looking tasks. In
Proceedings of the twenty-ninth annual conference of the
cognitive science society.
Richards, J. E., & Gibson, T. L.(1997, Dec). Extended visual
fixation in young infants: Look distributions, heart rate
changes and attention. Child Development, 68(6), 1041–
1056.
Ruff, H. A. (1975). The function of shifting fixations in the
visual perception of infants. Child Development, 46, 857–
865.
Schöner, G., & Thelen, E. (2006). Using dynamic field theory to rethink infant habituation. Psychological Review,
113(2), 273–299.
Sirois, S.(2005). Hebbian motor control in a robot-embedded
model of habituation. In Proceedings of the International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN 2005) (pp.
2772–2777).
Sirois, S., & Mareschal, D. (2004). An interacting systems
model of infant habituation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(8), 1352–1362.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NIH grant HD 22830
awarded to Esther Thelen.

References
Bornstein, M., & Benasich, A. (1986). Infant habituation:
Assessments of individual differences and short-term reliability. Child Development, 57, 87–99.
Cohen, L. B. (1972). Attention-getting and attention-holding
processes of infant visual preferences. Child Development,
43, 869–879.
Cohen, L. B., DeLoache, J. S., & Rissman, M. W.(1975). The
effect of stimulus complexity on infant visual attention and
habituation. Child Development, 46, 611–617.
Cohen, L. B., & Menten, T. G. (1981). The rise and fall of
infant habituation. Infant Behavior and Development, 4,
269–280.

1048

