UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Gestalt Principles to Compute Analogies of Geometric Figures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3cv444fx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Schwering, Angela
Krumnack, Ulf
Kuhnberger, Kai-Uwe
et al.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Gestalt Principles to Compute Analogies of Geometric Figures
Angela Schwering, Ulf Krumnack, Kai-Uwe Kühnberger, Helmar Gust
(aschweri | krumnack | kkuehnbe | hgust@uos.de)
Institute for Cognitive Science, Albrechtstr. 28
Osnabrück, 49076, Germany
Figure 1 shows a proportional analogy problem between
geometric figures as it is commonly used in intelligence
tests. There are several geometric figures possible as
solutions for this analogy problem, however they might not
be equally plausible and often depend on the perception of
the elements A and B.

Abstract
Analogy making is a highly sophisticated cognitive process in
which two stimuli are compared and analyzed for common
patterns. Analogical reasoning is the adaptation of knowledge
about one stimulus such that it can be applied to the second
stimulus and new analogous inferences can be drawn.
Analogy making requires intelligence, since such analogous
patterns and transfers often are not obvious and require a
certain conceptualization of the stimuli. Intelligence tests
often use proportional analogies, where subjects have to find
a follow-up for a series of geometric figures.
Heuristic-Driven-Theory-Projection (HDTP) is a formal
system for analogy making and analogical reasoning. This
paper shows how HDTP can be used to analyze proportional
analogies between geometric figures. It uses VREG, a
language of perception developed by Dastani (1998), to
compute different Gestalts from 2-dimensional geometric
figures. Depending on the Gestalt perception, HDTP proposes
analogical inferences at different levels of cognitive
plausibility.
Since HDTP describes stimuli formally in first-order logic, it
is possible to separate the description of a concrete stimulus
from the specification of general Gestalt principles of
perception. Therefore it is possible to generate conceptualizations of geometric figures on the fly (called
re-representation). The ability of automatic re-representation
is one of the central advantages of HDTP compared to other
analogy models.

?
Figure 1: Proportional Analogy.

Keywords: analogy making, proportional analogy, analogical
reasoning, Gestalt perception of geometric figures

Introduction
Analogy making is a high-level cognitive process of
transferring knowledge from a source domain to explain
unknown phenomena or solve novel problems in a new
situation (the target domain). The difficulty of analogy
making is identifying parallels between the different
elements, e.g. find two elements which play comparable
roles in the overall structure.
Proportional analogies have the general form (A:B)::(C:?)
where A, B and C are given elements and the question is
which element is suitable for “?” in order to have the same
structural relations between the source elements A and B as
between the target elements C and “?”. While analogies are
often built across different domains, in proportional
analogies the source and the target elements typically come
from the same domain. Proportional analogies were studied
in the natural-language domain (Indurkhya; 1989, 1992), in
the string domain (Hofstadter & Mitchell; 1995) and with
respect to geometric figures (Dastani; 1998, Dastani &
Indurkhya; 2001, Dastani, Indurkhya, & Scha; 1997, Evans;
1969, O'Hara; 1992, O'Hara & Indurkhya; 1995).

When the human sensory system observes a geometric
figure, it transforms the unstructured information into a
structured representation of a pattern or a set of objects.
Human perception tends to follow a set of Gestalt principles
of organization (Wertheimer; 1912).
A formal analogy model computing proportional
analogies between geometric figures requires a good
computational model for Gestalt perception. This paper
shows how “Heuristic-Driven Theory Projection”, a formal
model for analogy making, can be used to compute
proportional analogies of geometric figures formalized with
Visual REGularities (VREG), a language to formalize
different Gestalt perceptions of visual stimuli.
Heuristic-Driven Theory Projection (HDTP) is a
computational approach for analogy making and analogical
reasoning. It represents the source and the target stimulus
via two formal theories based on first-order logic. In the
analogy identification process, HDTP compares both
theories for common patterns using anti-unification: The
formulas of both theories are compared to find a
generalization subsuming both, the source and the target
formula. The result is a generalized theory describing
formally the common patterns of the source and the target
stimulus and the analogical relation between them.
The formal basis of HDTP allows not only the
representation of the geometric figure, but also the general
description of the Gestalt principles of perception. The
separation of the knowledge about the stimulus and the
abstract knowledge of how humans perceive Gestalts allows
HDTP to compute different conceptualization of the same
geometric figure on-the-fly based on different Gestalt
principles. Like humans, HDTP proposes different possible
analogies depending on the conceptualization of the figure.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In the
next section, we introduce VREG, the language of
perception used to formally represent geometric figures. The
third section explains the analogy making and analogical
reasoning mechanisms of HDTP. In the fourth section we

1485

first introduce an example for a proportional analogy, which
is used to demonstrate how HDTP computes analogies. We
end by summarizing the paper and giving directions for
future work.

preferred to A-B and C-D, because the latter one involves a
sharp turn.

Language of Perception
Dastani et al. (Dastani; 1998, Dastani & Indurkhya; 2001,
Dastani et al.; 1997) developed a language of perception to
describe two-dimensional geometric figures conceptualized
following the principles of Gestalt psychology.

Figure 3: According to the principle of good continuation
humans tend to perceive two lines of circles A-D and B-C.

Gestalt Psychology
In human perception, the numerous pixels detected by the
visual sensory system are restructured and composed to
form coherent shapes and figures. The law of Prägnanz says,
that humans tend to experience stimuli in a possibly good
Gestalt way, i.e. as regular, simplistic, ordered or
symmetrical as possible (Koffka; 1935, Köhler; 1929,
Wertheimer; 1912, 1954). The Gestalt psychology identified
different principles according to which humans construct
Gestalts of geometric figures:
• The principle of proximity states that elements being
spatially close together tend to organize into units
(figure 2).
• According to the principle of good continuation humans
tend to group elements together which follow one
continuous direction (figure 3).
• Humans tend to perceive shapes as closed forms, e.g.
four connected lines are perceived as a quadrangle
rather than as separated lines (closure principle).
• According to the similarity principle, same and similar
elements are perceived as groups.
• The principle of symmetry states that humans group
symmetric figures together regardless of their distance.
• The principle of habit says that the perception of
humans is based on their experience and humans prefer
well-known Gestalts to new Gestalts.

A Language for Visual REGularities
The Visual REGularities language VREG is an algebraic
language to describe two-dimensional figures. The
representation of a geometric figure in VREG is an iterative
process: it starts with a list of all primitive visual elements
(figure 4 consists of three elements e1, e2 and e3).
Afterwards different transformations or functors can be used
to describe elements by their relation to other elements:
Instead of describing each element separately, the pattern in
figure 4 can be described as an iteration of squares moved
two units to the right along the x-axis.
i
Iter (e1, movexpos
, 3)
i
movexpos
= 2 * (i − 1)

Figure 4: Iteration of squares moved along the x-axis.
The language VREG is defined over the signature
< E , Ω, Ψ, Iter, Sym, Comp,Unit > :
•
E is the set of primitive visual elements, e.g. the circles
or the squares in the geometric figure.
• Ω is the set of parameterized transformations and Ψ is
the
set
of
reflection
transformations,
e.g.
i
movexpos
(i ) = 2 * (i − 1) or shape = {(circle, square)} .
•

Figure 2: According to the principle of proximity humans
tend to perceive three groups of two circles.
Applying the various Gestalt principles to the same figure
might result in different perceptions: Although there have
been identified certain rules which Gestalt principle is
cognitively preferred (Wertheimer; 1912), there does not
exist a fixed hierarchy of Gestalt principles. The perception
of geometric figures may differ among humans and among
contexts.
The principle of proximity and continuous direction will
be important for our example analogy of geometric figures
in the paper. Figure 2 and 3 show Gestalts based on these
two principles: in figure 2, humans perceive three pairs of
two circles rather than 6 separate circles. In figure 3 the
grouping of circles to the two lines A-D and B-C is

are four functor names,
Iter, Sym, Comp, Unit
corresponding to iteration, symmetry, composition and
unit of visual patterns (Dastani; 1998, p. 62).
Dastani has proposed a measure of complexity which shall
reflect the cognitive plausibility of the representation.
The computation of a cognitively plausible representation
for a geometric figure is Gestalt-driven. Of course, no
algorithm coding the human Gestalt perception exists.
However, there are several approaches which approximate
the different principles relatively well. The organization into
units according to the proximity principle can be computed
for example by the agglomerative hierarchical clustering
(Dubes; 1993, Jain & Dubes; 1988): this algorithm
calculates spatial distances between all primitive elements
and groups the two nearest into one unit. This process is
iteratively repeated with all remaining primitive elements
and units. The optimal grouping in units is reached and the
algorithm stops when the spatial distances exceed some
threshold.

1486

Similarly we can find algorithms to approximate other
Gestalt principles: continuation can be computed by
searching for element chains where the angle of two
following chain sections is approximately 180°.

transformation differs in the parameters which are
represented by a variable at the general level (figure 6).
strech( s ) = X * s

X ←1 2

Heuristic-Driven Theory Projection
HDTP is an analogy model with a mathematical sound
basis: The source and the target domain are represented by
theories based on first-order logic. In the domain of
geometric figures the formal representations of the source
and the target figure reflect the human Gestalt perception.
HDTP computes different possible analogical solutions,
which are ranked according to their cognitive plausibility.
HDTP distinguishes between domain knowledge—facts and
laws holding for one specific domain only—and background
knowledge, which is generally true for all domains.
Concerning our application area of analogies between
geometric figures, background knowledge provides a
vocabulary to model geometric situations and rules to
describe equivalence of different modelings, while domain
knowledge describes only individual figures.
HDTP (Gust, Kühnberger, & Schmid; 2006) uses antiunification to identify common patterns in the source and
target. Anti-Unification (Gust, Kühnberger, & Schmid;
2003, Plotkin; 1970, 1971) is the process of comparing two
formulae and identifying the most specific generalization
subsuming both formulae. We use anti-unification to
compare the source theory with the target theory and
construct a common, general theory which subsumes a
possibly great common structure of the source and the target
domain. We illustrate the mapping process with an example
from the geometric domain: the primitive visual elements in
figure 5 can be expressed via different transformations: the
transformations from the white circle to the white oval
(marked with 1) is a move along the x-axis
movexpos ( x) = x + 4 and a stretch strech( s) = 2 ∗ s . On the
target side we apply the same move transformation and a
stretch transformation stretch( s) = 1 2 ∗ s .

source
2

6
4

target
2

6
4

3

3

2

stretch ( s ) = 1 2 * s

strech( s ) = 2 * s

Figure 6: Anti-unification of two transformations.
The transformations 2 in figure 5 are a colour change
colour = {( white, grey)} in the source domain and a
stretch( s) = 1 2 ∗ s in the target domain. Two different
transformations are aligned via anti-unification with a
generalized transformation T. Not all transformations in the
source domain have to align to a transformation in the target
domain: the colour change colour = {( white, grey)} marked
as transformation 3 in figure 5 does not have a
corresponding transformation on the source side.
HDTP also compares and aligns the primitive visual
elements: in the example, both circles could be aligned. In
this case the generalization would be again a circle. Another
possibility would be to align the circle and the square which
results in a generalization to a generic visual element. The
selection process is determined by the heuristics of HDTP
which can incorporate Gestalt principles in the case of the
geometric domain.
As mentioned above, HDTP is able to represent factual
knowledge about the domain—e.g. the shape and colour of
elements—but also to represent abstract coherences such as
transformation rules or rules for Gestalt perception. Being a
formal model, HDTP can automatically compute inferences
from the theories describing the domains: In the context of
geometric figures, this means that HDTP can compute new
representations of the figure on-the-fly and automatically
propose different Gestalts perceptions. The ability of
automatic re-representation is considered to be one of the
main advantages of logic-based analogy models: Usually,
domains are not represented in advance in a way that the
analogy can be perceived immediately. Analogies often
have a very specific perspective and the conceptualization is
highly context dependent. The conceptualization of a
domain must be modified and adapted to make analogous
patterns to another domain obvious. Logically consistent
inferences allow for re-representation without changing the
semantics.

2
1

X ←2

Proportional Analogies of geometric figures

1

This section introduces the running example with different
solutions to the proportional analogy. Afterwards it explains
how HDTP computes these analogies.

2
4
6
2
4
6
Figure 5: Anti-unification of functors in geometric
figures.

Running Example

HDTP anti-unifies both move transformations and both
stretch transformations: since the move transformations are
identical they need no generalization. The stretch
1487

Depending on the Gestalt perception of the geometric
figure, humans complete the same proportional analogy

differently. However, usually you can identify one or two
cognitively preferred solutions.
Figure 7 shows one potential analogy: according to the
proximity principle, the square s1 is grouped to the circle s2
(unit1) and s3 is grouped to s4 (unit2)1. The second unit is
an iteration of the first unit with the circle moved towards
the square.
Having this perception of the geometric figure of the
source domain, the analogy is completed by repeating the
“iteration and move” transformation in the target domain:
the target domain repeats the same figure upside down.

Analogy between geometric figures in HDTP

Figure 7: According to the law of proximity, the circle
and the square below are grouped together. The analogy is
complete by repeating the source figure upside down.

For the investigation of proportional analogies of geometric
figures we concentrate on the Gestalt principles proximity,
continuous direction, closure, and similarity. Since these
principles refer to single primitive visual elements they are
relatively straightforward to implement (principles referring
to “external” knowledge like the principle of habit cannot be
taken into account by HDTP since a memory would be
required). We then could calculate different Gestalts from
the formally described geometric figures. Afterwards we
applied HDTP to compute the analogies: The analogy
making process was executed as follows: The source
domain consists of four primitive visual elements. Applying
the Gestalt principles, we could compute two different
representations of the source domain: following the
proximity principle the source domain was formalized as
shown in figure 9 (two units consisting of a square and a
circle above, while the second unit is a slightly modified
iteration of the first unit) and following the continuity
principle it was formalized as shown in figure 10 (two
squares on the same hight and two circles moving
downwards). The representation of the source domain
according to certain Gestalt principles takes place before the
actual analogy making process. As shown in the following
two formalizations, the analogy model HDTP receives as
input a source domain already represented as one Gestalt.
The target domain, however, is represented simply by its
primitive visual elements: the position, shape and colour of
element t1 and t2. HDTP re-represents the geometric figure
in the target domain depending on the perception of the
source domain. Therefore the anti-unification process ends
up with a different generalization for the different
perceptions.

Figure 8 proposes a different analogy for the same
geometric figure: according to the principle of similarity,
the squares form one unit and the circles another. While the
squares have the same height level, the circles form a line
with a downwards direction. Following the principle of
good continuation, the analogy is completed by a square t3
at the same height level and a circle t3 lower than circle t1.

Source Domain:
position(s1,2,2).
shape(s1,square).
colour(s1,white).
transform(s1,[move(p(0,2)),shape,colour],s2).
unit(u1,[s1,s2]).
iter(u1,[move(p(4,0)),approx-y(s2,s1,1)],2).
Target Domain:
position(t1,2,2).
shape(t1,circle).
colour(t1,grey).

Figure 8: According to the principle of good continuation,
the circles are grouped together and the squares. The
analogous picture is created by transferring the continuous
downward direction of the circles.

position(t2,2,4).
shape(t2,square).
colour(t2,white).

Our pre-tests provided an indication that the solution shown
in figure 7 was slightly preferred to the solution in figure 8.
The analogy in figure 11 was hardly ever mentioned. The
experimental investigation of cognitive plausibility of
analogies, however, is subject to future work.
1
The visual elements on the source side are numbered by s1 to
s4 bottom-up and left-right (the square at (2,2) is s1, the circle at
(2,4) is s2, the square at (6,2) is s3 and the circle at (6,3) is s4. The
elements on the target side are numbered by t1 to t4 respectively.

1488

Generalization:
position(O1,2,Y).
shape(O1,square).
colour(O1,white).
Transfer:
transform(O1,[move(p(0,DY)),shape,colour],O2).
unit(u1,[O1,O2]).
iter(u1,[move(p(4,0)),approx-y(O2,O1,1)],2).

Figure 9: The formalization of source and target domain
and the generalization according to the proximity principle.

In the proximity case, element t2 is aligned to element s1,
because they have the same shape and colour. Element O1 is
the variable representing s1, respectively t2 in the
generalization of both theories. Since the y-coordinate of s1
and t2 differ, they are anti-unified to the variable Y in the
generalization.
The source domain contains additional information on
how to construct elements s3 and s4 from the starting
elements s1 and s2: the element s2 can be created via
moving s1 along the y-axis and changing its shape and
colour. Then, s1 and s2 are grouped into one unit. s3 and s4
are created via an iteration moved along the x-axis and
moving the circle towards the square. The generalized
operations to transform the elements and iterate the units are
transferred to the target domain. The following list shows
the anti-instances and their substitutions in source
respectively target domain:
O1 → s1/t2
O2 → s2/t1
Y → 2/4
DY → 2/-2
If the principle of good continuation is used to structure the
source domain, the square and the circle are perceived as
separate primitive visual elements. The circle s3 is created
by a transformation “move square s1 four units along the xaxis”. The circle s4 is created by the transformation “move
circle s2 four units along the x-axis and one unit downwards
the y-axis”.

HDTP now re-represents the target domain to construct a
good alignment and generalization of both theories. The
analogy is completed by transferring the transformation
operations to the target domain. The following
generalizations are created during the anti-unification
process:
O1
O2
Y1
Y2

→ s1/t2
→ s2/t1
→ 2/4
→ 4/2

We clearly separate between the process of computing
different Gestalts perceptions of the geometric figures and
the analogy making process itself: the solution to the
analogy problem proposed by the human subjects depends
on the previously perceived Gestalt, but the process of
analogy making is carried out separately.
Besides both mentioned analogies, HDTP comes up with
another possible analogy shown in figure 11: instead of
moving the circle to the square, the square is moved towards
the circle. This solution results from an alignment of visual
elements according to their position: the white square at
(2,2) is aligned with the grey circle at (2,2), the grey circle
at (2,4) with the white square at (2,4) etc. This analogy is
possible, however it was not mentioned often by subjects in
the pre-test and seems to be less preferred and plausible.
Assumedly, because it does not follow any Gestalt
principles and moreover contradicts the similarity principle.

Source Domain:
position(s1,2,2).
shape(s1,square).
colour(s1,white).
position(s2,2,4).
shape(s2,circle).
colour(s2,grey).
transform(s1,[move(p(4,0))],s3).
transform(s2,[move(p(4,-1))],s4).
Target Domain:
position(t1,2,2).
shape(t1,circle).
colour(t1,grey).
position(t2,2,4).
shape(t2,square).
colour(t2,white).
Generalization:
position(O1,2,Y1).
shape(O1,square).
colour(O1,white)
position(O2,2,Y2).
shape(O2,circle).
colour(O2,grey).
Transfer:
transform(O1,[move(p(4,0))],O3).
transform(O2,[move(p(4,-1))],O4).

Figure 11: This possible analogy does not follow any
Gestalt principles.
Besides the specifications of the source and the target
figure, HDTP has some background knowledge on
operations applicable to geometric figures, e.g. the spatial
relation between two visual elements in the coordinate
system can be described via a move operation. Two
identical visual elements can be represented via an iteration
combined with a move operation: the square s3 is an
iteration of the square s1, but moved 4 units to the right.
This background knowledge is essential for the automatic
re-representation process.

Summary and Future Work
Solving proportional analogy problems between geometric
figures is a sophisticated, cognitive process and is often
used in intelligence tests. The solution to proportional

Figure 10: The formalization of source and target domain
and the generalization according to the continuity principle.

1489

analogies between geometric figures often differs among
humans, because they perceive different conceptualizations
of the same figure. This paper shows how Gestalt principles
can be used to specify different conceptualizations of
figures and how, depending on the conceptualization, the
formal analogy model HDTP computes different analogies.
HDTP uses first-order logic to represent domains. This
allows to represent general rules and do automatic reasoning
to infer new representations of the geometric figures.
Automatic re-representation is one of the central advantages
of HDTP which take effect in computing analogies of
geometric figures: the system can compute different Gestalt
conceptualizations on-the-fly and use such conceptualizations for analogy making.
The pre-tests evaluating the cognitive plausibility have
been promising. However, we are planning a large-scale
experiment to investigate psychological preferences among
different geometric proportional analogies. Standard IQ
tests provide interesting material and benchmark criteria for
such experiments. These results have to be included in the
heuristics of HDTP. Moreover we will extend the current
implementation to enable the computation of Gestalt
principles such as similarity and closure.

Acknowledgement
The work has been supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) through the project "Modeling of
predictive analogies by Heuristic-Driven Theory Projection"
(grant KU1949/2-1). The publication was supported by the
Universitätsgesellschaft Osnabrück.

References
M. Dastani. (1998). Languages of Perception. Unpublished
PhD Thesis, Universiteit van Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
M. Dastani, & B. Indurkhya. (2001, July 27 - 30, 2001).
Modeling context effect in perceptual domains. Paper
presented at the 3rd International and Interdisciplinary
Conference on Modeling and Using Context.
M. Dastani, B. Indurkhya, & R. Scha. (1997). An algebraic
method for solving proportional analogy problems. Paper
presented at the Mind II - Computational Models of
Creative Cognition, Dublin, Ireland.
R. C. Dubes. (1993). Cluster analysis and related issues. In
C. Chen, L. F. Pan & P. S. P. Wang (Eds.), Handbook of
Pattern Recognition and Computer Vision: World
Scientific.

T. G. Evans. (1969). A program for the solution of a class of
geometric-analogy intelligence-test questions. In M.
Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information processing (pp. 271353): MIT Press.
H. Gust, K.-U. Kühnberger, & U. Schmid. (2003). Solving
predictive analogy tasks with anti-unification. Paper
presented at the Joint International Conference on
Cognitive
Science
(ICCS/ASCS-2003),
Sydney,
Australia.
H. Gust, K.-U. Kühnberger, & U. Schmid. (2006).
Metaphors and heuristic-driven theory projection
(HDTP). Theoretical Computer Science, 354(1), 98-117.
D. R. Hofstadter, & J. C. Mitchell. (1995). The copycat
project: A model of mental fluidity and analogy-making.
In D. R. Hofstadter & F. A. R. group (Eds.), Fluid
Concepts and Creative Analogies (pp. 205-267): Basic
Books.
B. Indurkhya. (1989). Modes of Analogy. Paper presented at
the International Workshop on Analogical and Inductive
Inference (AII) 1989.
B. Indurkhya. (1992). Metaphor and cognition. Dodrecht:
Kluver.
A. K. Jain, & R. C. Dubes. (1988). Algorithms for clustering
data. New Jersey, USA: Prenctice-Hall.
K. Koffka. (1935). Principles of Gestalt Psychology. New
York: Harcourt.
W. Köhler. (1929). Gestalt Psychology. New York:
Liveright.
S. O'Hara. (1992). A model of the "redescription" process in
the context of geometric proportional analogy problems.
Paper presented at the International Workshop on
Analogical and Inductive Inference.
S. O'Hara, & B. Indurkhya. (1995). Adaptation and redescription in the context of geometric proportional
analogies. Paper presented at the Adaptation of
Knowledge for Reuse, Fall Symposium.
G. D. Plotkin. (1970). A note on inductive gneralization.
Machine Intelligence, 5, 153-163.
G. D. Plotkin. (1971). A further note on inductive
generalization. Machine Intelligence, 6 B.
M. Wertheimer. (1912). Experimentelle Studien über das
Sehen von Bewegung. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 61,
161-265.
M. Wertheimer. (1954). Productive Thinking. New York:
Harper & Row.

1490

