UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Instructions in Procedural Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8477b5z3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Eiriksdottir, Elsa
Catrambone, Richard

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Instructions in Procedural Tasks
Elsa Eiríksdóttir (gtg702v@mail.gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, 654 Cherry Street
Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA

Richard Catrambone (rc7@prism.gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, 654 Cherry Street
Atlanta, GA 30332-0170 USA
The nature of the procedural task is important in terms
of how easy or difficult it is to learn and perform. The
complexity of a procedural task is contingent upon
various factors, for instance the materials needed (e.g.,
tools and parts), the physical manipulations required for
the task, the affordances, or the acts permitted by the
materials used in the task, and prior experience with
similar tasks (Norman, 1988). Most consumers base their
decision to read the instructions on whether they think the
product needs instructions (Schriver, 1997).
This
indicates that the complexity of a task will influence
whether people use instructions or not; instructions
become presumably more important if a task is unfamiliar
and involves complicated manipulations.
Traditionally, procedural instruction documents have
been designed to be read before the learner attempts the
task and it is assumed that the knowledge is first learned
from the instructions and then applied to the task (Carroll,
Mack, Lewis, Grischkowsky, & Robertson, 1985; Ganier,
2004; Schriver, 1997). This is a linear process because
the learner reads through the instructions step by step
before applying the information to the task. This linear or
instruction-based strategy is commonly used by novices
or cautious users. Another strategy often seen, but not
commonly supported by instructional materials, is more
interactive. The learner attempts the task and uses the
instructions for referencing. This task-based strategy is
preferred by experienced users and a subset of novices
(Ganier, 2004; Schriver, 1997).
In order to use
instructions as references the learner must have some idea
about what he or she has to do. The task cannot be too
complex or unfamiliar. Given that learners employ
different strategies for using instructions when
approaching procedural tasks, which strategy, the taskbased or the instruction-based, is more helpful? More
specifically, how does the strategy affect one-time
procedural performance on one hand and procedural
learning on the other?
It seems that learners could clearly benefit from using
an instruction-based strategy because it provides them
with clear delineation of what to do and how to go about
doing it. This might be more beneficial to one-time
procedural performance, but it might actually be
detrimental to procedural learning because the learner
does not necessarily actively engage in what he or she is
doing. Research on procedural tasks indicates that the
key to effective procedural learning is to get the learner

Abstract
The study examined whether an instruction-based strategy
(studying the instructions before attempting the task) or
task-based strategy (attempting the task and referencing
instructions) is more effective for procedural performance
and learning. Four groups of participants performed two
macramé tasks, and received detailed instructions at
different times in the process of attempting the tasks.
Performance was measured with task completion time. The
results indicated that the instruction-based strategy helped
procedural performance as compared to the task-based
strategy. Participants not made to use a specific strategy
showed the best performance and participants not having
access to detailed instructions did the worst. When
repeating the tasks a week later without instructions there
was no performance difference among the groups.
Keywords: Procedural tasks; Instructions; Learning.

Introduction
People engage in procedural tasks many times a day,
and some of these tasks are well learned and performed
effortlessly, such as tying shoelaces or driving. Others
are unfamiliar or seldom encountered, like assembling
furniture or setting up a stereo system, in which case
instructions of some kind are needed to help perform the
task.
The most common kind of instructions for
procedural tasks consists of pictures and text explaining
each step of the procedure in a linear fashion. Given that
instructions are needed and available, how do people
make use of them? It is often assumed that instructions
should be read before performing a task, but more often
than not people do not look at the instructions until they
do not know (or cannot guess) what to do next (Ganier,
2004).
A procedural task can be thought of as a series of steps,
where each step consists of actions applied if certain
conditions are met, according to some production rules
(Anderson, 1993; Newell & Simon, 1972). A distinction
can be made between two different goals of performing a
procedural task. In some cases the goal is simply to
perform the task only once, without any intention to learn
the procedure. An example of this kind of one-time
procedural performance is when new furniture is
assembled. In other cases the goal is to learn to perform
the procedure from memory, and be able to apply it across
situations. An example of this kind of procedural
learning is when children learn to tie their shoelaces.

959

actively engaged with the task. For instance, Vakil,
Hoffman, and Myzliek (1998) showed that active training
(learners actively explored the materials) resulted in better
performance on a procedural task compared to passive
training (following auditory step-by-step instructions).
Similarly, work comparing learning for groups that were
either presented with goal-free training problems or
solved problems with explicitly stated goals, has shown
that the goal-free method is more effective for subsequent
transfer (Sweller, van Merrienboer, & Paas, 1998). The
goal-free method emphasizes learning by encouraging the
learners to explore the problem space instead of focusing
on step-wise problem solving of a particular problem. In
addition, guided exploration where instructional materials
are designed to specifically encourage active learning has
been found to be more effective for learning to use word
processing software than a conventional step-wise study
manual (Carroll et al., 1985).
It intuitively seems straightforward that reading the
instructions beforehand would be the most logical course
of action. However, research has indicated that explicit
what-to-do information can lead learners to rely on a
simple rote rehearsal procedure and to not generate as rich
a task representation as they might form in a situation in
which they need to work out what to do (Duff & Barnard,
1990; Green, 2002). In another line of argument,
Alterman, Zito-Wolf, & Carpenter (1991) suggested that
instructions are difficult to understand when encountered
outside the context of action as they tend to be
abbreviated and assume the learner has an understanding
of the situation. Without context it is unlikely that the
learner can comprehend more than just a general sense of
what the instructions mean and the operations involved.
Also, instructions tend to be phrased in terms of concrete
actions and advice, and as such refer to actions that the
learner is supposed to be doing.
In sum there is evidence to suggest that a task-based
strategy could be more effective than an instruction-based
strategy because it encourages engagement with the task
and information is accessed in the context of action. This
is important because step by step instructions do not
require the learner to engage in active or elaborate
processing, but might instead encourage passive imitation
and promote the illusion of comprehension (Renkl, 1997).
In the current study (which is a part of a ongoing
research investigating strategies of instructions usage), we
manipulated whether participants engaged in a task-based
or an instruction-based strategy by introducing detailed
instructions at different times in the process of completing
two macramé knots (see Figure 1). One group of
participants studied the instructions before attempting the
task (instruction-based strategy; Before group), the second
group had to attempt the task for a few minutes before
receiving the instructions (task-based strategy; Later
group), the third received instructions and attempted the
task at the same time (Simultaneous group), and the fourth
did not receive detailed instructions (No-Instructions

group). The two groups that initially attempted the tasks
without detailed instructions (the Later and NoInstructions groups) were given pictures of the finished
tasks for guidance and to ensure they understood what the
task entailed. The tasks were chosen because most people
are somewhat familiar with tying knots, and they should
know what the tasks entail even if the macramé knots
themselves are presumably unfamiliar.
One-time procedural performance was measured by the
time it took the participants to complete the tasks
correctly. We expected that the Before group would have
better one-time procedural performance than the Later
group. Working out the procedure without detailed
instructions is presumably more time consuming and error
prone than following the stepwise instructions. We
expected the Simultaneous group to show the best
performance of all the groups because the participants
could use whichever strategy they were accustomed to.
Finally, we expected the No-Instructions group to have
the poorest performance because they did not have access
to detailed instructions to resolve ambiguities.
Procedural learning was assessed by having the
participants complete the tasks again a week later without
detailed instructions. After reviewing the literature we
were uncertain which group would show the best
performance in the second session. On the one hand an
instruction-based strategy (Before group) might allow the
learner to perform the task correctly more easily and
establish appropriate representations of the task from the
beginning. On the other hand, a task-based strategy
(Later group) might encourage the participants to become
more actively engaged in the task and lead to better
learning through more elaborative processing (e.g.
Sweller et al., 1998; Vakil et al., 1998).

Method
Participants
Participants (N = 80) were recruited from
undergraduate psychology courses at the Georgia Institute
of Technology, and were compensated for their
participation with extra course credit. Age range was 18
to 23 years (M = 19.1), and 48 were male (60%). All
participants were randomly assigned to one of the four
conditions, 20 participants in each.

Design
A four group between-subjects experimental design was
used. The Before group studied the instructions before
receiving the materials for the task. The Later group
attempted the task for a few minutes before receiving the
instructions.
The Simultaneous group received the
instructions and the task materials at the same time. The
No-Instructions group received only the task materials
and pictures of the finished task.

960

Participants completed two sessions; in the first session
participants completed the tasks using instructions as
determined by the condition. In the second session they
completed the tasks again without detailed instructions
(only using pictures of the finished tasks for guidance).
Time on task was measured in both sessions.

accompanied by supporting text explaining the step in
more detail (see Figure 2). The pictures of the finished
tasks showed the overall completed task and one knot
partially unraveled. This was found necessary because
pilot testing indicated it was impossible to infer the
makings of the knots when shown tightly knotted.
Computers were used to administer the experiment. For
all the groups only the pictures of the finished task were
shown by default. To view the instructions the participant
had to hold down the left mouse button (see Figure 2).
We did this in order to measure the time spent viewing
instructions separately from the time spent on doing the
task.

Materials
Participants were taught to tie two different macramé
knots, one at a time; a square knot and a pretzel knot
(Meilach, 1971). To tie the knots participants used a
wooden board with a horizontal bar onto which three
cords were fastened, each three feet long. The square
knot task consisted of tying a square knot five times, and
the pretzel knot task consisted of tying a series of three
knots in a row (see Figure 1).

Procedure
Participants were presented with the task materials
and/or instructions depending on the condition we
assigned them to. There was no time limit; participants
(with several exceptions noted below) performed the tasks
until they successfully completed them.
Participants in the Before condition were presented
with the detailed instructions and asked to study them for
3.5 minutes before attempting the task. After the
designated time had elapsed (indicated by an alert
window) the participants were given the task materials.
Participants in the Later condition started attempting the
task using only pictures of the finished task and the
partially unraveled knot. After 3.5 minutes elapsed they
had access to the instructions. The time limit was
determined by pilot testing; an average of 3.5 minutes was
needed for participants to attempt each knot. Participants
in the Simultaneous condition were presented with the
task materials and the instructions at the same time.
Participants in the No-Instructions condition were
presented with pictures of the completed tasks and asked
to perform each task using only the pictures of the
finished task for guidance.

Figure 1: Pictures of finished tasks, square knot on the
left and the pretzel knot on the right.
The instructions were based on published instructional
materials for doing macramé knots (Lunger, 1998;
Meilach, 1971). They represent the type of instructions
that are traditionally used for teaching procedural tasks,
consisting of pictures showing each step in the procedure

Figure 2: Instructions for the square knot. On the left side are the pictures of the finished task (visible by default). On the
right side are the detailed instructions showing each step of the procedure (only visible if left mouse button was held down).
961

12

The second session took place a week after the first (six to
eight days) and was identical for all four conditions. All
participants completed the knots again, but without detailed
instructions, receiving only pictures of the finished tasks for
guidance

Time on task (min)

Square knot

Results

10
Pretzel knot
8
6
4
2

The majority of participants completed both tasks
correctly in the first session (93.8% and 94.9% for square
knot and pretzel knot, respectively), and only data for the
correctly completed tasks were used in the analysis. This
criteria excluded five participants in the square knot analysis
and four participants in the pretzel analysis.
Time on task was calculated for each task in both
sessions. Time on task was defined for the first session as
the overall duration of task minus the time spent viewing the
instructions. Outliers (3 SD’s from the M) were removed
from the task duration variables for both sessions.
By excluding outliers and including only cases where the
task was correctly completed, there were a total of 74 cases
for the square knot and 72 cases for the pretzel knot, out of
80 in the first session.
Of the original 80 participants 73 returned a week later for
the second session, leaving 17 participants in the Before and
No-Instructions groups, 20 in the Later group and 19 in the
Simultaneous group. In the second session the majority of
all participants finished the tasks correctly (88.9% and
94.4% for square knot and pretzel knot respectively), and
only those cases were included in the analysis of time on
task. Using this criteria and by removing outliers, there
were a total of 63 cases for the square knot and 66 cases for
the pretzel knot.

0
Before

Later

Simultaneous

No-Instructions

Instruction manipulation

Figure 3: Time on task in minutes for both tasks and all
four conditions in the first session.
A post-hoc analysis (HSD) for the pretzel knot showed
that the Simultaneous group was significantly faster than the
Later group (p < .01). Unlike performance on the square
knot, there was no difference between the No-Instructions
groups and the Before and Simultaneous groups,
respectively.
Eta squared (η2) represents effect size or the proportion of
variance in the dependent variable accounted for by the
manipulation. For the square knot task η2 was .21,
indicating that 21% of the variance of the time on task for
the square knot can be attributed to the instruction
manipulation. For the pretzel knot task η2 was .17, and
therefore 17% of the pretzel knot time on task variance can
be attributed to the instruction manipulation.

Learning
In the second session the time on task was longer for the
square knot than the pretzel knot (see Figure 4). A one-way
ANOVA revealed no difference among the groups on either
task; square: F < 1, and pretzel: F < 1. The performance in
the second session was therefore very similar for all four
groups in terms of time on task.

Performance
In the first session, participants generally needed more
time for the square knot than the pretzel knot, but the pattern
of results is similar across both tasks; the Later and the NoInstructions groups had a longer time on task than the
Before and Simultaneous groups (see Figure 3).
For both knots planned linear comparisons between the
Before and Later groups revealed a significant difference in
time on task; square t(70) = -2.60, p < .05 (two-tailed), and
pretzel t(68) = -2.28, p < .05 (two-tailed).
One-way ANOVAs revealed a significant difference
among the conditions for both knots; Square: F(3,70) =
6.25, MSE = 29469.1, p < .01, and pretzel: F(3,68) = 4.58,
MSE = 17077.6, p < .01. Post-hoc analysis (HSD) for the
square knot revealed that the Simultaneous group was
significantly faster than the Later (p < .05) and NoInstructions groups (p < .01) and that the Before group was
significantly faster than the No-Instructions group (p < .05).

12

Time on task (minutes)

Square knot
10

Pretzel knot

8
6
4
2
0
Before

Later

Simultaneous

No-Instructions

Instruction manipulation

Figure 4: Time on task in minutes for both tasks and all
four conditions in the second session.

962

The time needed to complete each knot was compared for
each group across the sessions to investigate learning
effects. A paired sample t-test showed a significant shorter
time on task for the Later and No-Instructions groups (t(14)
= 2.56, p < .05 (two-tailed), and t(14) = 3.97, p < .01 (twotailed) respectively), but not for the Before and
Simultaneous groups. The same results were found for the
pretzel knot: Participants in the Later and No-Instructions
groups completed the tasks in a significantly shorter time in
the second session than the first (t(14) = 4.24, p < .01 (twotailed), and t(12) = 5.02, p < .001 (two-tailed) respectively),
but there was no difference in time on task found for the
Before and Simultaneous groups.

the second session could be taken to indicate a ceiling
effect. More complex tasks, even when successfully
completed under different training situations (Before, Later,
etc.) might produce different performance and transfer due
to different memory representations being formed as a
function of training condition. Thus, the question remains
unanswered as to whether the different instructional
strategies would have a differential effect on how well
procedural knowledge transfers to new tasks within the
domain or how well it is retained over a longer period.
It would also be interesting to explore in detail the
strategy used by the participants in the Simultaneous group
by analyzing when they use the instructions. This would
describe the default strategy people use when faced with an
unfamiliar procedural task.
Studying the effect of using instructions to perform and
learn procedural tasks can have implications for
instructional design and procedural training. By identifying
conditions for which a particular strategy is beneficial, there
is the possibility of structuring instructions or task context
to encourage the learner to adopt the more beneficial
instructional strategy.

Discussion
We expected that the Before group would show better
performance in the first session than the Later group. On
both knots there was a significant difference between the
two groups, giving support to the hypothesis. This indicates
that studying the instructions beforehand is beneficial for
one-time procedural performance as compared to using the
instructions as a reference later. The learner is able to
translate the instructions directly into actions which is less
time consuming and error prone than having to work out for
herself/himself what needs to be done.
We also expected that the Simultaneous group would
have the best performance in the first session and that the
No-Instructions group would have the worst. The results
partially support this prediction.
On one hand the
Simultaneous group had significantly shorter time on task
than both the Later and No-Instructions groups, but not the
Before group. On the other hand, the No-Instruction group
had significantly longer time on task than the Simultaneous
and Before groups (only on the square knot in the latter
case), but not the Later group. This indicates an ordering of
the groups, from fastest to slowest: Simultaneous, Before,
Later, and No-Instructions. There was little difference
between the Before group and Simultaneous groups,
suggesting that it is as beneficial to study the instructions
beforehand as using whichever the strategy is convenient
under the circumstances.
In the second session there did not appear to be any
difference in performance among the groups. This indicates
that once the procedure has been successfully carried out
once (in the first session), some baseline learning has taken
place and how it came about does not have an effect on
retention.
When analyzing the difference between sessions we
found significant decrease in time on task only for the Later
and No-Instructions groups. This supports the idea that
even if doing the tasks the first time was harder for
participants in these two groups their learning was as
effective as for the participants in the Before and
Simultaneous groups.
One concern, that would need to be addressed in further
studies, is that the tasks were not complicated enough. That
the majority of participants correctly completed the tasks on

Acknowledgments
Elsa Eiríksdóttir was supported by Fulbright graduate
award, as well as by the Thor Thors Memorial Fund
Fellowship of the American-Scandinavian Foundation.

References
Alterman, R., Zito-Wolf, R., & Carpenter, T. (1991).
Interaction, comprehension, and instruction usage. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1(3&4), 361 – 398.
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Problem solving and learning.
American Psychologist, 48(1), 35 – 44.
Carroll, J. M., Mack, R. L., Lewis, C. H., Grischkowsky, N.
L., & Robertson, S. R. (1985). Exploring exploring a
word processor. Human-Computer Interaction, 1, 283 –
307.
Duff, S. C., & Barnard, P. J. (1990). Influencing behavior
via device representation: Decreasing performance by
increasing instruction. Human-Computer Interaction –
INTERACT ‘90, 61- 66.
Ganier (2004).
Factors affecting the processing of
procedural instructions: Implications for document
design.
IEEE Transactions on Professional
Communications, 47(1), 15-26.
Green, A. J. K. (2002). Learning procedures and goal
specificity in learning and problem-solving tasks.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 14(1), 105 –
126.
Hart, S. G. & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of
NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and
theoretical research. In P.A. Hancock & N. Meshkati
(Eds.), Human mental workload, (pp. 139 – 183).
Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland.

963

Lunger, M. (1998). Hemp masters: Ancient hippie secrets
for knotting hip hemp jewelry. Liberty, UT: Eagle’s View
Publishing.
Meilach, D. Z. (1971). Macramé: Creative Design in
Knotting. New York: Crown Publishers.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The design of everyday things. New
York: Basic Books.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A

study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21(1), 1
– 29.
Schriver, K. A. (1997). Dynamics in document design.
Canada: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251 – 296.
Vakil, E., Hoffman, Y., & Myzliek, D. (1998). Active
versus passive procedural learning in older and younger
adults. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 8(1), 31 – 41.

964

