UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Verbal Ability and Structured Navigation on Learning with Hypertext

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/21h4k2kg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Martinez-Papponi, Brenda
Goldsmith, Timothy E.

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Verbal Ability and Structured Navigation on
Learning with Hypertext
Brenda Martinez-Papponi, M.S. (blmartin@unm.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1 University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87131-1161

Timothy E. Goldsmith, Ph.D. (gold@unm.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1 University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87131-1161
Abstract
Learners bring their unique individual perceptions,
preferences, and abilities to a learning situation. The effect of
individual differences on learning depends in part on how the
instructional system accommodates for these differences. The
current study examined the role of individual differences and
structured navigation in hypertext learning. It was predicted
that learning outcome would depend on how well the
hypertext design operates together with the learner’s
individual attributes. Ninety-seven participants participated
in one of four groups of a 2 X 2 between-subjects factorial
design, which focused on the interaction between the levels of
the navigation structure (unconstrained or expert constrained)
and the levels of the participants' verbal ability (high or low).
General support was found for the hypothesis. Overall,
learners with high-verbal ability performed better on an
unconstrained navigation structure than those with low-verbal
ability; whereas in an expert-constrained navigation this
difference between verbal ability levels was smaller. The
results have implications for the design of hypertext-based
learning systems.
Keywords: Learning; Individual Differences; Human Factors
and Human-Computer Interaction; Knowledge Representation

Introduction
Reading hypertext can be seen as an interaction between the
learner and the machine (Dillon, 1994). The learning
outcome will depend on how well the hypertext design
operates together with the reader’s individual attributes.
Both design and individual differences will influence this
interaction. The current study examined this interaction. In
particular, how do learners’ verbal ability and navigational
constraints affect learning from a hypertext system?
In hypertext, learners control the order in which they
receive information.
Learners move between topics
selecting their own learning sequencing. They may choose
a sequence based on previous knowledge, personal styles,
needs, or learning goals. Although flexibility and active
participation may benefit learning (Bruner, 1990), such
flexibility would seem to demand more cognitive resources
and hence adversely affect comprehension. Therefore,
hypertext requires a different balance of processing
resources than does traditional text. This additional

cognitive load is affected by the lack of coherence in a
hyperdocument due to the responsibility of the learner to
perform additional navigation among the units (Foltz,
1996).
Individuals will bring a variety of resources to learning
environments. High-verbal ability readers, in particular, are
good at predicting the next word or words in text because of
their prior knowledge (Massaro, 1989). High-verbal ability
learners can also hold more verbal information in working
memory and integrate that information into long-term
memory more efficiently than low-verbal ability learners.
Therefore, a high-verbal ability learner is not affected by
text fragmentation as much a low-verbal ability learner.
High-verbal ability learners are more likely to connect
hypertext units together (i.e., organize and build internal
connections) at the net-level, and are less likely to lose the
coherence of the document. For this reason, high-verbal
ability learners should have several advantages over lowverbal ability learner in a hypertext environment. If a
learner has high-verbal ability, he/she will tend to have
better comprehension skills in general and will be less
affected by the lack of coherence in the material. Therefore,
a hyperdocument that imposes a large amount of
navigational and cognitive load on the learner will put
learners with low-verbal ability at a disadvantage (Foltz,
1996).
In particular, learners with low-verbal ability will have a
greater amount of task interference from the additional task
of navigating among the units, due to the possible lack of
coherence among the units, and therefore have poorer
comprehension. Since high-verbal ability learners
comprehend text easily at the node-level, they may have
more cognitive resources to devote to comprehending the
organization of the document at the net-level. Specifically,
they will have more resources to devote to navigating and so
are less likely to become disoriented in a hypertext
environment. In contrast, since low-verbal ability learners
are less efficient at selecting, organizing and integrating
information, their cognitive resources will be more easily
depleted, and navigating choices will likely overwhelm

1271

them.
Therefore, too much control might result in
disorientation
One possible resolution to the navigational problem faced
by low-verbal ability learners is to restrict their navigational
freedom. By limiting the number of links available to a
learner, an author could better insure that bridging
inferences between links occur.
Interactive overviews are one method for providing
structure to hypertext systems, particularly in terms of
navigation. Interactive overviews have the organization of
the material embedded in the hypertext itself. One method
for developing a structured interactive overview is by using
experts’ knowledge representations of the concepts.
According to Trumpower & Goldsmith, “semantically
structured interactive overviews provide a means for
learners to integrate content by visually observing important
conceptual relationships depicted as hyperlinks” (p. 429430, 2004). Further, another possible benefit is that an
interactive overview would constrain the presentation order
of the material to interrelated concepts. By doing so,
coherence can be maintained and comprehension aided.
This is especially true for those learners who have difficultly
maintaining coherence on their own (i.e., low-verbal
ability).
Many findings indicate that high ability subjects do well
regardless of the method, while less-able subjects benefit
from tailoring an instructional approach (Cronbach & Snow,
1977). An expert-constrained navigation structure may be
one way to benefit learning.
Therefore, we expected that an interaction would occur
between a hypertext navigational structure and a learner’s
verbal ability. Learners with high-verbal ability were
expected to perform better on an unconstrained hypertext
structure than low-verbal ability learners; whereas in expertconstrained navigational structure this difference in
performance between the two levels of verbal ability was
expected to be smaller.

Methods
Participants
Ninety-seven (33 male, 64 female) undergraduates from the
University of New Mexico received course credit for their
participation. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
two groups: expert-constrained navigation (EN) or
unconstrained navigation (UN). Participants’ level of verbal
ability was determined from their performance on the
Gernsbacher Comprehension Battery (Gernsbacher, Varner,
& Faust, 1990). A median split was used to categorize
participants: high verbal (n=49) and low verbal (n=48).

Materials
The materials consisted of a participation questionnaire,
familiarity ratings on each of the 10 domain concepts, two

types of hyperdocuments of the learning material, concept
relatedness ratings, a definitional knowledge test, a
procedural knowledge test and the Gernsbacher
Comprehension Battery.
The participation questionnaire contained demographic
questions and also asked about their knowledge of and prior
courses in statistics. Participants also rated the familiarity
of each of the 10 statistics concepts using a five-point Likert
scale ranging from “less familiar” (1) to “more familiar” (5).
The learning material came from a statistics textbook
(Pagano, 2001). The material was segmented according to
central concepts. Psychology professors and graduate
students (who showed expert proficiency in the area) rated
the relatedness of 45 concept pairs based on a five-point
Likert scale ranging from “less related” (1) to “more
related” (5). Based on these relatedness ratings, the
navigational structure for the expert-constrained navigation
was determined through a Pathfinder analysis
(Schvaneveldt, 1990). The use of an expert navigational
structure to guide naive learners was justified in part from a
study that showed that experts offer the best referent
structure against which to assess the knowledge structures
of naive students (Goldsmith, Johnson, & Acton, 1991;
Trumpower & Goldsmith, 2004).
The learning material was then presented in one of two
types of hyperdocuments (see Figure 1). In the expertconstrained navigation (EN), each node represented one of
the ten concepts. The student chose a concept by clicking
on the concept node. This caused the concept’s information
to appear in the space below the list of concepts. The
concept’s information included: its definition, the formula
and an example. However, at that point his/her navigation
was constrained to only those other concepts that were
linked according to the expert structure. The navigational
choices would change based on which link the learner
chose. However, the participant was able to navigate
through the information in a large number of different paths.
In the second type of hyperdocument, the unconstrained
navigation (UN), the student chose a concept by clicking on
the concept node; below the list of concepts was the
definition, formula and example of the concept. However,
regardless of what concept was selected, the same
navigational choices were available at every situation. In
other words, the learner received the same menu of choices
regardless of the previous choice.
The Gernsbacher Comprehension Battery (Gernsbacher,
Varner, & Faust, 1990) was used to classify participants into
high and low-verbal ability. The correlation between verbal
SAT scores and performance on the Comprehension Battery
was .64 (Gernsbacher, 1990). The battery consisted of four
stories that were presented in written format. Each story
was about 600 words long. After reading each story at their
own pace, participants answered 12 multiple-choice
questions about the story.

1272

Central
T d
Standard
D i i

Deviation

Distributio

MEAN

Score

Sum of
S

Summation

Variability

z-score

matching term from a list of the 10 concepts. The order of
the questions was randomized individually for each subject.
Participants were instructed to complete the questions at
their own pace. The definitional test took approximated 5
minutes to complete. Finally, students’ procedural
knowledge of the concepts was tested using 15 multiple
choice questions that required participants to use the studied
concepts to solve a problem or make a prediction. The order
of the items was randomized separately for each subject.
The procedural test lasted approximately 15 minutes.
After participants completed the assessments, they were
given the Gernsbacher Comprehension Battery test.

The mean is the average value of a distribution of scores.
The mean (noted by….

Results

Central
T d
Standard
D i i

Deviation

Distributio

MEAN

Score

Sum of

Summation

Variability

z-score

Only 30% of the participants had any previous background
in statistics, which for the majority (28%) included a single
introductory course in statistics. However, there were no
significant differences in performance on the assessments
based on the participants’ background in statistics. Students
were generally unfamiliar with the ten concepts. These
results suggest that participants came in with low prior
knowledge on the learning domain and this was the case
regardless of which ability level they were categorized.
Therefore, the learning they demonstrated in the
performance assessments can be associated with the
learning done through the learning conditions.

The mean is the average value of a distribution of scores.
The mean (noted by….

Number of Nodes Visited
A trace of the sequence of path nodes each participant
followed as he navigated through the hypertext was
recorded. Low-verbal students visited significantly more
nodes then high-verbal learners in the UN (p=.017).
However, in the EN the number of nodes visited did not
significantly differ between the two levels of ability
(p=.988). (See Figure 2).

Figure 1: An example of the expert-constrained
navigation (top) and unconstrained navigation structures
(bottom) used in experiment.

Navigation Structure
Unconstrained

Procedure

Expert Constrained

Participants’ first task was to rate the relatedness of each of
the 10 concepts paired with each other. Next, they were
randomly assigned to an EN or UN hyperdocument. They
were allowed to read and study the concepts at their own
pace. However, only after they viewed all of the terms at
least once and 15 minutes had passed were they allowed to
proceed to the assessment part of the study.
Participants’ knowledge of the concepts were assessed in
three ways; definitional, procedural, and conceptual tests.
First, students once again rated the relatedness of the 10
concept pairs in the same way as before the study phase.
These post relatedness ratings took approximately 5 minutes
to complete. Next, students’ definitional knowledge of the
10 statistic concepts was tested by showing a definition of
one of the terms and then asking students to select the

1273

Mean # of Nodes visited

80

60

40

20

0
Low

High

Verbal Ability

Low

High

Verbal Ability

Figure 2: Mean number of nodes visited.

Knowledge Assessments
Definitional.
An ANOVA showed that high-verbal
students performed significantly better than low-verbal
students (F (1,93) = 12.474, p = .001, M = 75.9 and 62.7,
respectively) and students in the UN performed (marginally)
significantly better than those in the EN (F (1,93) = 3.224, p
= 0.076, M = 72.1 and 66.7, respectively). (See Figure 3).
Navigation Structure
Unconstrained

Expert Constrained

1.00

Mean Definition Test Score

0.80

Conceptual. A knowledge network was derived for each
student’s pre-learning and post-learning set of relatedness
ratings using Pathfinder and then compared to the expert’s
knowledge structure using an index of similarity called
PFSIM. An ANOVA on the post PFSIM scores showed
that there was a significant interaction (F(1, 93) = 5.558 , p
=.02) for navigation structure and verbal ability. Low-verbal
students using the EN had higher PFSIM scores than the
low-verbal students using the UN (F(1, 93) = 3.07, p =.083),
although the results were marginally significant. There was
no significant difference in the PFSIM scores between UN
and EN for the high-verbal students (p = .118).
Additionally, high-verbal learners had significantly higher
PFSIM scores than low-verbal learners in the UN (F(1, 93)
= 7.88, p =.006). However, in the EN, the PFSIM scores
did not significantly differ (p =.595). (See Figure 5).

0.60

Navigation Structure
Unconstrained

0.40

Expert Constrained

0.40

Mean Similarity Ratings Post

0.20

0.00
Low

High

Low

Verbal Ability

High

Verbal Ability

Figure 3: Graph of the definitional assessment performance.
Procedural. An ANOVA showed that high-verbal learners
performed significantly better than low-verbal learners (F
(1,93) = 7.211, p = .009, M = 73.3 and 64.9, respectively).
However, the difference between UN and the EN was not
significant (p= .850, M = 68.9 and 69.4, respectively). (See
Figure 4).

Mean Procedural Test Score

High

Verbal Ability

Discussion

Expert Constrained

From an instructional perspective, it is conceivable that
utilizing an appropriate hypertext structure should have the
advantage of facilitating learning by logically representing
the interrelationships between the different parts of
information within the hypertext. Furthermore, there would
appear to be a reasonable theoretical justification for
suggesting that the extent to which hypertext systems
influence learning will be dependent on an individual's level
of ability. The major goal of this study was to investigate
the relation between students’ verbal ability and type of
navigation used during learning a set of concepts in a
hypertext environment. Learners with high-verbal ability
were expected to perform better with an unconstrained
hypertext structure than low-verbal learners; whereas
performance differences based on verbal ability were
expected to be smaller for the expert-constrained

0.40

0.20

0.00
Low

Low

Figure 5: Mean PFSIM scores derived from post-similarity
ratings.

0.60

High

High

Verbal Ability

0.80

Verbal Ability

0.10

Low

1.00

Low

0.20

0.00

Navigation Structure
Unconstrained

0.30

High

Verbal Ability

Figure 4: Graph of the procedural assessment performance.

1274

navigational structure. This study found general support for
such a relationship between verbal ability and navigation
structure. However, the effect sizes found were rather small
(ranging from .024 to .118) and the significance levels were
sometimes marginal. We speculate that this may be due to
small sample size, as well as poor initial learning of the
definitions. Perhaps, instruction in an environment that
contains not only the navigational constraints, but also an
explicit visible depiction of that expert structure would
facilitate better learning of the concepts. This idea is
currently being explored.

Theoretical Implications
The results from the present study suggested that learners
with certain levels of verbal ability perform better in certain
types of navigation structures.
Low-verbal learners
performed better in the expert-constrained navigation than
in the unconstrained navigation structure as measured by the
procedural and conceptual assessments. According to
Gernsbacher et al., (1990) less skilled comprehenders need
assistance in forming concept associations and building the
inferences needed in order to form a mental representation
of information. Additionally, they found that less-skilled
comprehenders are less efficient at suppressing unrelated
information.
The expert navigation structure may have supported the
low-verbal learners in forming semantic associations
between related concepts and also by suppressing unrelated
associations.
It provided the learner with an implicit
channel to form an expert-like mental representation. This
expert mental representation was then better able to convey
the structural information necessary to perform the
procedural and conceptual tasks. This suggests that the
expert navigational constraints are important and can
facilitate acquisition of knowledge for learners who have
low-verbal ability.
In contrast, high-verbal learners tended to benefit less
from the expert-constrained navigation. Since they have
superior skills in selecting or focusing their attention to the
important information, as well as organizing and integrating
it, they were not disadvantaged as were the low-verbal
learners in the unconstrained navigation environment. As
discussed, it has been shown that high-verbal learners tend
to do well regardless of the coherence level of the text
(Cronbach & Snow, 1977). In fact, it was expected that it
would be less of a disadvantage for high-verbal learners to
be in the unconstrained navigation structure.
According to constructivism theory, the learner should
actively build knowledge by reflecting on experiences to
construct an understanding of the world (Bruner, 1990).
Bruner suggested that learners should be allowed to pursue
concepts on their own in order to gain a better
understanding. New information can then be understood

based on the knowledge already gained. Individuals with
high-verbal ability are superior in learning tasks such as
comprehension, because they find it easier to integrate new
information with existing knowledge than those with lowverbal ability. Because they have superior skills, high-verbal
learners may learn more from less coherent text, since it
forces them to actively process the information by making
additional inferences (McNamara et al, 1996).
Additionally, learning involves not only this integration
among concepts but also differentiation among concepts.
Learning how concepts are not related can be as valuable as
learning how they are related. In the expert-constrained
navigation, learners were only provided with direct links to
concepts that were highly related to one another. In this
navigation structure, navigation was encouraged between
concepts that were related, and was discouraged between
concepts that were not directly related. Since high-verbal
learners are better at suppressing unrelated associations than
low-verbal learners, it may have been the case that highverbal learners were able to learn more from viewing all
concepts and being allowed to integrate and differentiate
among them. Consequently, expert-constrained hypertext
may have been less advantageous for high-verbal students,
than it was for low-verbal students. In contrast, the
unconstrained navigation structure allowed high-verbal
learners to actively study concepts in their own way.
Hence, high-verbal learners were able to profit from the true
non-linearity of hypertext.

Practical Implications

1275

Research has found that over the course of learning,
students’ knowledge structures become more like an
expert’s structure. Further, students who have obtained
better knowledge structures have a tendency to perform
better on assessments (Jonassen, Beissner, & Yacci, 1993;
Trumpower & Goldsmith, 2004).
Trumpower and
Goldsmith (2004) found that an expert knowledge structure
offers a valid hypertext guide to aid students’ learning.
Further, they found that an expert knowledge structures
allow learner’s to generalize their knowledge to procedural
tasks that required integration of the learned material in a
manner that went beyond what was provided in the studied
material. The current study’s findings do suggest that the
expert navigational constraints are important and can
facilitate acquisition of structural knowledge, specifically in
those with low-verbal ability.
Together, these findings
suggest that the use of structural learning aids in a hypertext
environment provide a structure in which new information
can be meaningfully integrated with pre-existing
information and improve learning.
Therefore, text should be structured to support
comprehension. The authors of hypertext should develop
hyperdocuments to maximize reader comprehension.

Implementation of navigational constraints based on an
expert’s knowledge structure is one way of maximizing a
learners’ comprehension, especially those learners with lowverbal ability. The design of these systems should convey
the interrelationships of the concepts through the structure
of the interface itself. By doing so, it can accommodate to
learners at different levels of verbal ability.
In conclusion, in order to learn and instruct effectively
using hypertext technology, both learners and designers
should gain new levels of knowledge that will enable them
to take advantage of the benefits of learning with hypertext
systems. The learning outcomes will depend on how well
the hypertext design and the learners’ individual attributes
operate together.

Acknowledgements
Sincere gratitude and appreciation to Gordon Hodge, Ph.D.,
Karin Butler, Ph.D., Paul C. Amrhein, Ph.D., and Mark
McDaniel, Ph.D. whose vital contributions and
recommendations were greatly appreciated.

References
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cronbach, L. J., & Snow, R. E. (1977). Aptitudes and
instructional methods. New York, NY: Irvington.
Dillon, A. (1994). Designing usable electronic text:
Ergonomic aspects of human information usage.
Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Foltz, P. W. (1996). Comprehension, coherence, and
strategies in hypertext and linear text. In Rouet, J-F.,

Levonen, J. J., Dillon, A., & Spiro, R. J. (Eds.), Hypertext
and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gernsbacher, M. A. (1990). Language comprehension as
structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Varner, K. R., & Faust, M. E. (1990).
Investigating differences in general comprehension skill.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 16, 430–445.
Goldsmith, T. E., Johnson, P. J., & Acton, W. H. (1991).
Assessing structural knowledge. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 83, 88-96.
Jonassen, D. H., Beissner, K., & Yacci, M. (1993).
Structural knowledge: Techniques for representing,
conveying, and acquiring structural knowledge. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Massaro, D. W. (1989). Experimental psychology: An
information processing approach. San Diego, CA:
Harcourt Brace Jovanvich.
McNamara, D. S., Kintsch, E., Songer, N. B., & Kintsch,
W. (1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions of
text coherence, background knowledge, and levels of
understanding in learning from text. Cognition and
Instruction, 14, 1-43.
Pagano, Robert R. (2001). Understanding statistics in the
behavioral sciences (6th ed.), Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole.
Schvaneveldt, R. W. (1990). Pathfinder associative
networks: Studies in knowledge organization. Norwood,
NJ: Ablex.
Trumpower, D. L., & Goldsmith, T. E. (2004). Structural
enhancement of learning. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 29,426-446.

1276

