UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is More Memorable, Counterintuitive Concepts Interpreted Metaphorically or Literally?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5n39q70c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Author
M. Afzal, M. Afzal M. Afzal

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is More Memorable, Counterintuitive Concepts Interpreted Metaphorically
or Literally?
M. Afzal Upal (afzal@eecs.utoledo.edu)
Intelligent Agents & Multiagent Systems Lab
University of Toledo
Toledo, OH 43606 USA

flying oak). Not all of this comes as a surprise to marketing
researchers who have long known about the role played by
novelty in making advertisements memorable. Indeed
creative designers often employ elements that are designed
to violate and challenge consumer’s preconceived notions
about a brand (Lee & Schumann 2004). Several studies
show that incongruent ads are more likely to be perceived as
original, humorous, and produce positive affective
responses than congruent ads (Lee and Mason 1999; Alden,
Mukherjee, & Hoyer 2000). Hecklers and Childers (1992)
found that some types of incongruent ads are better recalled
than congruent ads.

Abstract
A survey of randomly selected sample of television
advertisements indicated that a significant number of these
ads contain counterintuitive concepts. This makes sense in
light of recent findings that suggest that minimally
counterintuitive ideas are more memorable than intuitive
ideas. However, a subsequent experiment performed to
investigate the role of context in the memorability of such
concepts suggested that counterintuitive concepts are only
more memorable when they are interpreted literally rather
than metaphorically.
Keywords: cognition and culture, counterintuitive concepts,
memory, language

Introduction
What is it that makes some ideas more memorable than
others? Why do people remember some messages while
forgetting others? Finding answers to such question is not
only important for cognition and culture researchers but also
for marketing experts, consumer researchers, and
advertisement designers who have to design ads that cut
through the clutter of hundreds, if not thousands, of
advertising messages that average consumer is bombarded
with every day (Lasn 1999). Advertisers have to make sure
that consumers remember their ads and recall them when
they make their purchasing decisions better than their
competitor’s ads. It is not surprising then that marketing
researches have considered a number of factors that are
thought to impact the memorability for advertisements.
These include relevance of an advertisement (Heckler &
Childers 1992), the emotional appeal of an ad (Huang
2004), and the incongruity of an ad with the customer
expectations, sometimes called the “shock-value” of an ad
(Dahl, Frankenberger, & Manchanda 2003).
Cognition and culture researchers, however, have
proposed another variable not considered, to date, by the
marketing researchers namely, the counterintuitiveness of an
idea. Boyer (1994), Sperber (1996), and others have argued
that everything else being equal, minimally counterintuitive
concepts (i.e., concepts that violate one ontological
expectation) such as the concept of a sobbing oak) are more
memorable than intuitive (concepts that do not violate any
ontological expectations (such as a green oak) and
maximally counterintuitive concepts (i.e., concepts that
violate multiple ontological expectation such as a talking

This evidence is supplanted by the work in social
psychology and schema theory which indicates that when
new information that is somehow incongruent with prior
expectations or schema is presented, individuals will engage
in more effortful or elaborative processing (Hastie and
Kumar 1979; Mandler 1982). This extra processing of
schema-violating
information results
in enriched
connections being established among the new piece of
information and existing knowledge structures which in turn
results in better recall for the new information. This may
explain why counterintuitive concepts are better recalled by
people than intuitive concepts. Counterintuitive ideas that
involve violations of expectations of basic categories should
specially have transmission advantages as knowledge about
such categories is shared by most people and hence are
likely to bee seen as incongruent by most people. However,
it does not explain as to why maximally counterintuitive
concepts which violate even more intuitive expectations and
hence should result in even more elaborate processing are
not recalled better than minimally counterintuitive concepts.
To explain the better recall for minimally counterintuitive
concepts (MCI), previously (Upal 2005) I have argued that
maximally counterintuitive concepts are not recalled well
because they cannot be coherently organized into an easy to
remember schema (or that they have low postdictability).
The memorability hypothesis (Upal 2005; Upal et al. 2007)
states that the concepts and the contexts that maximize the
(postdictability − predictability) value should be best
remembered by a learning agent that aims to build a
predictive model of its environment because they offer most
new information that cannot be foreseen by that agent.

1581

Given a concept embedded in a text such as the concept of a
flying cow shown in Figure 1, postdictability of a concept is
defined as the ease with which that concept’s inclusion in a
piece of text can be justified after the textual unit containing
that concept has been read and predictability of a concept is
the ease with which the occurrence of the concept can be
predicted prior to its having been read.

Odd News of the Day
Bowling Green (KY): July 18, 2004. “I
had just woken up and went to the kitchen
to prepare some coffee to drink,” said the
Kentucky farmer Edwin Smith. “That’s
when I saw the cow flying above the
trees. The twister had lifted the 500
pound creature well over 50 feet
above the ground and was rotating it
around like a doll. That was a scary
experience,” said Smith.

power in consumer’s minds. Further, if the memorability
hypothesis is true then cognition and culture researchers
may have some practical advice for advertisement designers
about how to manipulate the memorability of individual
concepts in ads. This paper studies the prevalence of
minimally counterintuitive (MCI) concepts in commercial
advertisements. The first study was designed to explore the
prevalence of such concepts in television advertisements.
The follow up study was designed how the context in which
such concepts are embedded in affects the recall for such
concepts.

Overview of Study One
This study was designed to see whether counterintuitive
ideas are widespread in commercial advertisements as they
are in religious contexts (Pyysiäinen, Lindeman, & Honkela
2003; Lisdorf 2004).

Material & Method

Figure 1: Prior context of the concept “cow flying above the
trees” is shown in italics and the posterior context is shown
in Arial type.
The memorability hypothesis explains that MCI concepts
are more memorable because they are not easy to predict
(low predictability) but are easily to explain once they have
been seen (high postdictability). Intuitive concepts are not
as memorable because they have high predictability and
high postdictability. Maximally counterintuitive concepts,
on the other hand, are less memorable than MCI concepts
because they have low predictability as well as low
postdictability. Minimally counterintuitive concepts thus
represent a cognitive optimal for learning because they
contain just enough new information that can be easily
integrated with the learner existing knowledge.
Since predictability and postdictability value of a concept
vary by the context in which a concept is embedded, the
memorability hypothesis allows us to predict how changes
in the prior and posterior context of a concept will impact
the memorability of a concept. Let us say that a concept C
embedded in a context T1 has D1 predictability and S1
postdictability. If we change C’s context to T2 which
changes its predictability to D2 and postdictability value to
S2 then this change will increase C’s memorability if and
only if decrease in predictability is less than the decrease in
the context’s postdictability i.e.,
D1 − D2 > T1 − T2.
Otherwise, C will be less memorable in the new context.
While minimally counterintuitive ideas have been mostly
investigated in the context of religion, if the claims about
MCI ideas being more memorable are true then it would be
surprising if they weren’t found in other domains such as
marketing with the pressure to produce ads that have staying

We randomly selected one hundred television
advertisements from AdCritic.com, the largest online tv
commercial data base. The selected ads were watched by
two hypothesis blind coders who were asked to look for the
presence/absence of any counterintuitive concepts (objects
or events) in the ads.

Results & Discussion
The two coders agreed on the ratings for 85% of the ads.
For the remaining 15%, one coder (the ‘liberal coder’)
found them to contain counterintuitive concepts while the
other coder (the ‘strict coder’) found them not to have a
counterintuitive object or event in those ads. Neither coder
found any ad containing maximally counterintuitive object
or event. The liberal coder found that 37% of all ads
examined had minimally counterintuitive concepts while the
strict coder only found 22% of the ads to contain such
concepts. Discussions aimed at resolution discovered a
pattern among the ads in dispute. These ads appear to have
features that can be classified as counterintuitive when the
definition of counterintuitiveness is strictly applied as an
object or event that has features that violate ontological
assumptions about objects of that category. For instance,
one of the ads shows a balloon popping out of an
individual’s head. The strict coder argued that this is a
metaphor for the person having a Eureka moment which
would make it intuitive since people can have Eureka
moments.
However, the liberal coder who literally
interpreted the concept found a balloon coming out of an
individual’s head as violating his intuitive expectations
about people since people’s heads do not pop balloons.
Even though both coders agreed that most of the
counterintuitive
concepts
were
unambiguously
counterintuitive, a significant number of such concepts (a
little over 40% of all counterintuitive concepts) could be
interpreted metaphorically which made them intuitive, in at
least the eyes of the strict coder. We wanted to see what

1582

the implications of this were for memorability. Does
interpreting counterintuitive concepts metaphorically make
them less expectation violating and hence less memorable or
does it make them more memorable because they are
instances of figurative use of speech which people find more
memorable?
We designed Study II to answer such
questions.

Overview of Study Two
Metaphors i.e., describing one thing in terms of another, are
a common linguistic expression (Lakoff & Johnson 2003).
Conventional wisdom indicates that metaphors and other
figurative uses of language make the language more
effective and persuasive. Students of rhetoric from Greeks
to the present day argue that metaphors and other figures of
speech can improve the quality and persuasiveness of one’s
speech (Aristotle 1952, Osborne & Ehninger 1962).
Numerous self-help guides on how to improve one’s speech
recommend the use of figurative language to improve one’s
public speaking ability.
Studies involving direct
comparisons of the recall rates of an idea expressed
metaphorically with the recall rate of the same idea
expressed literally suggest that metaphorical use leads to
better recall (Gibbs & Nagaoka 1985; Read, Cesa, Jones &
Collins 1990).
This may help explain why most
advertisements use figures of speech (75% according to a
survey of 2400 ads, Leigh 1994). However, the question
that we are interested has not been investigated by these
studies, namely, whether recall rates of the same textual
expression would vary as the context in which it is placed is
varied from one favoring the metaphorical interpretations to
one supporting the literal usage of those concepts.
The memorability hypothesis suggests that literally
interpreted concepts should be recalled better because they
have lower predictability values than metaphorically
interpreted concepts. Thus we expected the metaphorically
interpreted concepts to be recall less frequently than literally
interpreted concepts.

Material & Method
We designed two short stories (about 200 words each)
containing six counterintuitive concepts each (shown in
Appendix). Two versions of each story were designed for a
total of four stories.
One version reinforced the literal
interpretation while the other supported the figurative
interpretation of the embedded concepts.
Packets
containing two stories each were then designed. Each
packet contained literal version of one story and
metaphorical version of the other story. Four packets were
prepared by changing the order in which stories appear:
Packet 1 contained the literal version of Story 1 followed by
metaphorical version of Story 2, Packet 2 contained the
metaphorical version of Story 2 followed by literal version
of Story 1, Packet 3 had literal version of Story 2 followed
by metaphorical version of Story 1, and Packet 4 contained

the metaphorical version of Story 1 first and then the literal
version of Story 2. Twenty eight University of Toledo
undergraduate and graduate students ranging in age from 16
to 40 years participated in the experiments. Subjects were
asked to read both stories to understand them so that they
could answer questions to follow. Next, they were given a
distraction task involving simple arithmetic problems to
solve for one minute. Following this they were asked to
recall both stories.

Results & Discussion
Two hypothesis blind coders (same coders as used in
Experiment 1) were asked to code each response by whether
the subject had recalled a concept or not. Initially, coders
agreed on 97% of the concepts. The remaining differences
were resolved through discussion and a common coding
arrived at. This coding indicated that subjects recalled
64.3% (108 concepts out of 168 total concepts) of concepts
embedded in literal meaning supporting concepts while only
38.7% (65 out of 168 concepts) embedded in metaphorical
supporting concepts were recalled.
This means that
changing the context in which concepts are embedded from
literal to metaphorical, we were able to decrease the recall
for counterintuitive concepts. Memorability hypothesis
suggests that this happens because our subjects expected the
concepts we employed in our stories to be interpreted
metaphorically rather than literally and hence concepts in
metaphorical contexts had higher predictability values than
concepts in the literal contexts. However, since all the
counterintuitive concepts in metaphorically interpreted
stories are interpreted metaphorically and all the
counterintuitive concepts in literally interpreted stories are
interpreted literally, after reading the first few concepts
readers should be able to develop expectations about what
type of concept interpretations are to follow. That is if the
first few concept are also interpreted literally subjects will
have higher expectations for a literal interpretations of the
following concepts, and if the first few concepts are
interpreted metaphorically predictability ratings for the
following metaphorically interpreted concepts should be
higher. Thus if the observed difference between the recall
rates is due to higher predictability values for metaphorical
concepts then this difference should be most pronounced for
the concepts that appear first in the stories. That is the
memorability hypothesis predicts that differences in recall
rates between the first concepts read by the subjects under
the two conditions should be higher than differences
between the recall rates of the last concepts read by the
subjects under the two conditions. A second prediction of
the memorability hypothesis is that recall rates for the
concepts that appear first in the stories should be higher than
the concepts that appear last in the stories because by the
time readers reach the last concepts, they have developed
expectations e.g., whether these concepts are likely to be
metaphorically interpreted or literally interpreted. These
higher predictability values should result in lower recall for
the concepts that occur last in the stories.

1583

Boyer, P. (1994). The Naturalness of Religious Ideas: A
Cognitive Theory of Religion, Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.

Table 1: Number of times the first and the last concept were
recalled in literally and metaphorically interpreted versions.
The recall rates (i.e., the number of times each was recalled
divided by 28) are shown in parenthesis.

First Concept
Last Concept

Literal
Interpretation
28 (100.0%)
16 (57.1%)

Dahl, D., Frankenberger, K., & Manchanda, R. (2003) Does
it pay to shock? Reactions to shocking and nonshocking
advertising content among university students, Journal of
Advertising Research, 268-280.

Metaphorical
Interpretation
15 (53.6%)
7 (25.0%)

As Table 1 shows the difference between the recall rates of
the concepts read first (42.9%) are higher than differences
between the recall rates of the concepts read last (28.6%)
and the recall rates of the concepts read first are higher than
the recall rates of the concepts read last. This is what we
expected to find. These results add to the accumulating
evidence for the view that context plays a critical role in the
memorability of counterintuitive concepts (Upal 2005;
Gonce et al. 2006; Upal et al. 2007). Counterintuitiveness
is not the inherent property of the concepts themselves but
of the concepts along with the context in which they are
embedded.

Conclusions
Study 1 advances the state of research in cognition and
culture by showing that counterintuitive concepts are
widespread in a non-religious domain, namely, that of
commercial advertising. This further supports the notion
that such concepts have memorability advantages that help
them spread faster and farther. The second study further
supports the findings that context in which people encounter
concepts occur plays important role in making these
concepts more or less memorable. Our findings also
support the notion originally advanced by Franks (2003)
that counterintuitive conceptual representations do not
necessarily involve negation of ontological properties and
that, “a more plausible account may be forthcoming by
allowing a more complex approach to the representations,
deriving from understanding their nature as concept
combinations.” (page 41). Our analysis adds to that of
Franks by identifying metaphorical conceptual combinations
and by studying their impact on memorability.
These experiments also have important implications for the
marketing researchers and practitioners. First, we explain
why counterintuitive concepts are so prevalent in
commercial advertisements.
Second, our experiments
provide further empirical support for the memorability
hypothesis which can be used to design more memorable
messages.

Franks, B. (2003) The nature of unnaturalness in religious
representations: negation and concept combination,
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 3(1), 41-68.
L. Gonce, M. A. Upal, D. J. Slone, R. D. Tweney. (2006)
Role of Context in the Recall of Counterintuitive
Concepts, Journal of Cognition and Culture, 6 (3-4), 521547.
Hecklers, S. & Childers, T (1992) The role of expectancy
and relevancy in memory for verbal and visual
information: What is incogruency? Journal of Consumer
Research, 18, 475-492.
Huang, M. (2004) The Theory of Emotions in Marketing,
Journal of Business and Psychology, 16(2), 239-247.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (2003) Metaphors we live by, 2nd
edition, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Lasn, K. (1999) Culture jam: The uncooling of America,
New York: Eagle Brook.
Lee, E. & Schumann, D. (2004) Explaining the special case
of incongruity in advertising: Connecting classic theoretic
approaches, Marketing Theory, 4(1-2), 59-90.
Lisdorf, A. (2004) The spread of non-natural concepts,
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 4(1) 151-173.
Osborne, M. & Ehninger, D. (1962) The metaphor in public
address, Speech Monographs, 29, 223-234.
Pyysiäinen, I., Lindeman, M., & Honkela, T. (2003)
Counterintuitiveness as the hallmark of religiosity,
Religion, 33, 341-355.
Sperber, D. 1996. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic
Approach, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Upal, M. A. (2005) Role of context in memorability of
intuitive and counterintuitive concepts, In Proceedings of
the 27th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 2224-2229), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
M. A. Upal, L. Gonce, J. Slone, and R. Tweney (2007, in
press) Contextualizing counterintuitiveness: How context
affects
comprehension
and
memorability
of
counterintuitive concepts, Cognitive Science, (in press).

References
Aristotle (1952). In W. R. Roberts & W. D. Ross (Ed),
Rhetoric: The works of Aristotle (Vol 11), Oxford: UK,
Clarendon.

1584

It’s almost quitting time. I guess I’ll have to leave soon.
I hate going home to a chatty couch potato. I thought it will
stop talking after I peel its skin but it still talks.

Appendix
Story 1
Literal Meaning Supporting Version
When I went to the office this morning I saw a couple of
suits walking by. Most people in my office don’t wear suits
so I was surprised to see people in Armani suits.
I glanced at the headlines on the newspaper as I sat in my
chair. It said something about the crown announcing a
sharp reduction in the income tax. I was surprised to read
about a tax cut by the left wing labor government.
My boss called me into office his before lunch and told
me to work with the bright intern Monica we just hired. She
came highly recommended and the company hopes to hire
her permanently if she does well.
My secretary told me that she has to take the rest of the
day of to go to a relative’s wedding. Blanche has deep roots
in the area. She knows more about the area than anyone
would ever want to know.
It’s almost quitting time. I guess I’ll have to leave soon.
I hate going home to a chatty couch potato. He sits at the
couch all day long and complains about getting fat.
On my way home I usually listen to talk radio. Boy this
host has a sharp tongue. I have heard that he is just as quick
witted in real life as he is on the radio.
I took the leftover food from the fridge when I got home
and heated it up to eat it. I think I fell asleep as I was
watching tv.
Metaphorical Meaning Supporting Version
When I went to the office this morning I saw a couple of
suits walking by. No body was wearing the suits and I was
surprised to see them moving around without feet or legs.
I glanced at the headlines on the newspaper as I sat in my
chair. It said something about the crown announcing a
sharp reduction in the income tax. I was surprised to read
about a talking crown.
My boss called me into his office before lunch and told
me to work with the bright intern Monica we just hired. Her
whole body emits a greenish yellow light that can be seen
from quite a distance.
My secretary told me that she has to take the rest of the
day of to go to a relative’s wedding. Blanche has deep roots
in the area. She carries a knife with her so that she can cut
her roots whenever she needs to walk.

On my way home I usually listen to talk radio. Boy this
host has a sharp tongue. I have heard his tongue is made out
of steel and he uses it to cut objects.
I took the leftover food from the fridge when I got home
and heated it up to eat it. I think I fell asleep as I was
watching tv.

Story 2
Literal Meaning Supporting Version
Bob got a letter from an old flame. Bob thought about
how a flame could have written a letter. Why didn’t the
paper burn when the flame tried to write on it? The letter
said, “thanks for your note, Sweetheart. You are a heart
made out of sugar and I am a flame. We can never be
together.“ “Clearly this letter is not addressed to me,” Bob
thought. I have not written to anyone lately. He stuffed the
letter back into the envelope and put it in a mailbox.
An interesting week I’m having he thought. Just last
week, he found out that he had been accepted at the school
of his dreams. He was walking on air. Gravity seemed to
have no effect on him. People below him were surprised to
see him walking in the air above their heads.
This weekend he met a girl with smoldering eyes. He was
worried that fire in her eyes would burn something and
thought about pouring some water on her face to put it out.
He felt an instant magnetic attraction towards her. Her
body was made out of magnetic material that attracted
objects towards her. He wasn’t feeling very good so he
decided to leave the party. On the way home his car broke
down. It had been coughing for weeks. He gave her cough
syrup yesterday evening but to no avail. He could hear her
coughing all night long from his bedroom. He left the car
by the side of the road and walked home.
Metaphorical Meaning Supporting Version
Bob got a letter from an old flame. Bob thought about what
she must have been thinking as she wrote the letter. Could
she be thinking of getting back together. The letter said,
“thanks for your note, Sweetheart. I appreciate your desire
to get back together but we are not meant for each other.“
“Clearly this letter is not addressed to me,” Bob thought. I
have not written to anyone lately. He stuffed the letter back
in the envelope and put it in the mailbox.
An interesting week I’m having he thought. Just last
week, he found out that he had been accepted at the school
of his dreams. He was walking on air. He was just so

1585

happy. His friends were also happy to see a smile on his
face after such a long time.
This weekend he met a girl with smoldering eyes. He met
her at a friend’s party and had liked her the first time he saw
her. “I’m lucky to have met her,” he thought.
He felt an instant magnetic attraction towards her. It was
as if something was pulling him towards her. All of a
sudden, he wasn’t feeling very good so he decided to leave
the party. On the way home his car broke down. It had
been coughing for weeks. He thought it was just the muffler
but the engine had finally stopped. He left the car by the
side of the road and walked home.

1586

