UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why do People Prefer Historically Intended Functions?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2df4282v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 29(29)

Authors
Chaigneau, Sergio E.
Castillo, Ramon D.
Martinez, Luis

Publication Date
2007-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why do People Prefer Historically Intended Functions?
Sergio E. Chaigneau (sergio.chaigneau@uai.cl)
Escuela de Psicologia, Universidad Adolfo Ibanez, Diagonal Las Torres 2640
Penalolen, Santiago-Chile

Ramon D. Castillo (racastillo@utalca.cl)
Facultad de Psicologia, Universidad de Talca, Avenida Lircay s/n
Talca-Chile

Luis Martinez (lmartinez@utalca.cl)
Escuela de Fonoaudiologia, Universidad de Talca, Avenida Lircay s/n
Talca-Chile

In the manifest view, people perceive an event where
typically an agent acts intentionally with or on an object,
which in turn behaves to cause the desired outcome. This
event is somehow represented (e.g., by scripts, Schank &
Abelson, 1977; by simulations, Barsalou, 1999; by causal
models, Pearl, 2000) and used to reason about function (see
Chaigneau, Barsalou & Sloman, 2004). In contrast, the
historical view has generally been framed in the context of
intentions. People assign proper function according to the
perceived but most of the time inferred intention of the
designer.
Evidence for the historical view comes mainly from the
following observation. Imagine you have a hammer, and
that you are using it as a paperweight. What is this object’s
proper function? Most people judge that its proper function
is to pound nails in place, and that it is only currently being
used to hold down sheets of paper. The HIF is seen as
preeminent over the manifest function. This bias of
assigning objects their historically intended function (from
now on, the HIF bias), as opposed to their manifest or
current function, was first described by Lance Rips (1989),
and has since then been shown in different paradigms both
with children and adults (e.g., Defeyter & German, 2003;
Gelman & Bloom, 2000; Jaswal, 2006; Matan & Carey,
2001). Why do people tend to believe that the HIF is the
proper function? As will be explained below, both the
manifest and the historical views can account for this bias.

Abstract
When presented with a hammer that is being used as a
paperweight, most people judge that its proper function is to
pound nails in place rather than to hold down pieces of paper.
The bias to assign proper function based on historically
intended function rather than on manifest or current function,
can be explained as a memory effect (we have learned that
hammers are used to pound nails), as abduction—a form of
causal reasoning (a hammer’s structure is not explained by the
function of being a paperweight), or as a form of
intentional/social reasoning (whoever was responsible for
creating the hammer, decides what its function is). The
experiments reported here rule out memory and abduction as
sufficient explanations.
Keywords: Concepts; Function; Intentions.

Most objects that surround us were created to fulfill a
function.
In order to efficiently operate in their
environment, an important task that humans face is to
acquire the proper functions of these objects. Some
functions (e.g., that a glass is used to contain liquids) appear
to be rapidly acquired in the course of development (e.g.,
Aguiar & Baillargeon, 1998; Caron, Caron, & Antell, 1988).
Most functions, however, need more extensive learning
(e.g., that a hammer is used to pound nails in place). How
are these more complex proper functions assigned to
objects?
At a broad level, two answers have been proposed for this
question. One is that proper functions are assigned based on
direct experience (e.g., Madole & Oakes, 2004). Hammers
have the proper function of pounding nails in place, either
because we have seen people perform this function, or
because we have done it ourselves (the manifest view of
function). A contrasting answer is that proper functions are
assigned based on knowledge of the historically intended
functions (HIF). In this view, hammers have the proper
function of pounding nails in place, not because our direct
experience with them, but because we have been told or
have somehow inferred that this is what they were made for
(the historical view of function).

Memory
The manifest view gives a deflationary explanation for the
HIF bias: manifest functions become entrenched in memory.
Experience has taught people that the hammer in our
example has pounding nails, and not holding down paper as
its associated function. Most studies on the HIF bias have
not ruled out this explanation, partly because they have used
common everyday objects as materials (but see Defeyter &
German, 2003). By using novel objects, we were able to
test the entrenchment explanation in Experiment 1.

851

is not created by the artist, but simply placed in a museum.
In this view an object’s function is what the designer
intended it to be (e.g., a hammer’s function is to pound nails
in place because that is what it was intended to do).

Causal Updating
This account is also consistent with the manifest view. If
provided with a causal model that relates the HIF (i.e., the
cause) to an object’s physical structure (i.e., the effect),
people can use it to reason. When people need to predict
what an object will do, they use this model to infer that the
object is physically fit to perform its HIF better than other
possible alternative functions (Chaigneau et al., 2004; cf.,
Dennett, 1987). The hammer in our recurrent example has
the function of pounding nails in place, because—as it was
designed to pound—that is what it should be predicted to do
best. In this view, the HIF bias occurs because when a
historical function is known it leads us to infer that the
object performs its HIF better than an alternative function
(i.e., reasoning from cause to effect).

Moral Responsibility Theory
In this theory (consistent with the historical view, and
presented here for the first time as explanation for the bias),
designer’s intentions are also relevant, but only insofar as
they reflect responsibility. The HIF bias occurs because of a
reasoning akin to moral responsibility judgments (e.g.,
Knobe, 2003; Mele, 2003). Note that responsibility is a
complex construct and does not require intention nor direct
causality (see Spellman, 1997). For example, expectations
about typical behaviors can influence responsibility
judgments (e.g., a parent who does not rescue his or her
child from drowning may be deemed responsible). In this
view, a HIF is judged to be the proper function because
people reason that if the designer is responsible for the
creation of an object, then that intended function should be
honored.

Abduction or Inference to the Best Explanation
This is also a causal account, but consistent with the
historical view. The HIF bias occurs because people
spontaneously build a causal model where history is the
cause and manifest function the effect, and reason
backwards—from the effect to the cause—to assign proper
function (Bloom, 1996, 1998, 2000). When people perceive
a manifest function, they do not take it for granted. Instead,
they perform an inference to the best explanation, looking
for its central cause. People reason backward in their causal
model to corroborate if a designer could have intentionally
created an object with that particular manifest function in
mind. They use their knowledge of design to reason about
the most likely intention of the designer when creating a
particular object. Consequently, people perceive that
intention to be the object’s proper function. In this view,
the hammer in our example has the function of pounding
nails in place, because that HIF explains it having a heavy
head with a flat striking surface and a long handle, better
than does the putative HIF of holding down sheets of paper.
The abduction theory predicts that a well-formed and
causally efficient manifest function, is evidence of a
historically intended function (e.g., pounding nails for a
hammer), but that a not well-formed and causally inefficient
manifest function is evidence contrary to that particular
function being the object’s historically intended function
(e.g., being a paperweight cannot be a hammer’s HIF,
because that account leaves unexplained many of the
hammer’s physical features). We test the abduction account
in Experiment 2.

In the experiments reported here, we tested entrenchment
and abduction against intention and responsibility theories
by presenting our participants with scenarios where an
object was described physically (verbally and pictorially),
along with its design history, and its subsequent use for a
different but possible alternative function (see Figure 1 for
an example). After learning about each object, participants
had to answer questions about the object’s function (i.e., is
its function the historically intended or the alternative
function?, Experiments 1 and 2), or about its causal efficacy
(i.e., is the object efficient when performing each function?,
Experiment 2).

Experiment 1
We had two goals in this experiment. First, we wished to
show that the HIF bias could be observed with our paradigm
and materials. Second, we wanted to test the entrenchment
explanation. This is the least theoretically interesting
account, and we wanted to show that the phenomenon
occurs even when there is little room for entrenchment.
Most prior experiments that report the bias, have used
common everyday objects. In contrast, we created novel
objects for which participants presumably had little prior
knowledge (i.e., the object did not have an associated
function). If entrenchment were the only factor responsible
for the HIF bias, participants should not prefer historically
intended functions over alternative functions when judging
novel objects. If participants did exhibit the HIF bias with
our novel objects, then entrenchment is an insufficient
explanation.

Pure Intention Theory
In this account, consistent with the historical view, a
designer’s genuine intention that an object belongs to a
certain category, imbues that object with the category’s
essence (Bloom, 1996). Think of an urinal being put in a
museum and categorized as a work of art. Importantly, in
this theory, being causally relevant in the creation of the
object is not a factor that explains the HIF bias. The urinal

852

and once the alternative function). Ratings were done on a
7 point scale, where 1 meant “no”, 7 “yes”, and 4 “to some
extent”. Materials were presented in a booklet, and the
experimenter read the instructions out loud to the
participants. It took them an average of 10 minutes to
complete the experiment.
Materials were designed and selected in a preliminary
experiment. We created seven novel objects, with physical
descriptions and drawings, and each affording two different
functions. An independent sample (n = 20) judged the
causal efficacy of the two different functions. For this
experiment we selected three objects whose two possible
functions were judged to be about equally efficient. This
was done to reduce variability in judgments, but which of
both functions was historical and which alternative was
completely counterbalanced across conditions in the current
experiment.

Method
Design and Participants We used a 2 x 3 fully within
participants design. The two factors were function (two
functions, X and Y, could be described as the historically
intended function or the alternative function) and object
(objects A, B and C, see Figure 1 for an example). Which
function (X or Y) was historical and which was alternative,
scenario structure (whether historical or alternative function
was described first in the scenario), and rating order
(historical first or alternative first) were completely crossed,
to produce 8 basic versions of the materials. Object order
was counterbalanced and crossed with the 8 basic versions,
to produce 24 final versions.
Participants were 48
University of Tarapaca undergraduate students, 18 males
and 30 females, who participated for course credit.
Physical Description: In an ancient culture, there was an
inventor who worked with an assistant. One of his or her
inventions was a wooden stake that had been sharpened on one
of its tips and rounded on the other. The stake was partially
covered by a metallic tube with a sharp edge (as shown in the
drawing below).

Results and Discussion Data were submitted to a 2
(function: historically intended, alternative function) by 3
(object: A, B, C) fully within participants ANOVA. As
predicted, we found a main effect of function favoring the
historically intended over the alternative function (F(1, 47)
= 6.88, MSe = 8.27, p < .05, R2 = .13, power = .73).
Participants were biased into believing that the objects’
functions were the historically intended and not the
alternative functions. We found no effect of object and no
interaction (respectively, F(2, 94) = 1.96, MSe = 2.36, p <
.25, R2 = .04, power = .40; F (2, 94) = 1.89, MSe = 4.17, p <
.25, R2 = .04, power = .38). As shown in Figure 2, all three
objects showed the same pattern of results.

Function X: The inventor used the object to decorate the body.
People in that culture liked to decorate their bodies during
different rituals. The inventor dipped the sharp point into ink,
and holding the tube firmly, repeatedly hit the rounded side with
his or her hand. As he or she did this, the sharp point pierced
the skin, introducing the ink into the skin, and creating a tattoo.

Historical

Alternative

7
Mean Function Ratings

Function Y: The assistant used the object to eat a type of fruit.
In that culture, there was a type of fruit of bitter and hard husk,
but having a sweet and soft center. The assistant pressed the tip
of the stake to the husk, and then pushed the tube all the way
through the fruit. As he or she did this, he or she was able to
extract the fruit’s center and eat it, leaving the husk aside.

Figure 1: Example of novel objects used in the experiments.
Participants did not receive the underlined headings, which
are presented here only for reference.

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
A

Materials and Procedures Participants read scenarios
describing three novel objects. Each scenario contained a
graphical depiction of the object, its physical description,
and two equally afforded functions: one being the
historically intended, and the other an alternative function to
which the object had been put to use (see Figure 1). After
learning about an object, participants had to rate both
possible functions (Do you think the function of this object
is X?, where X was once the historically intended function,

B

C

Object

Figure 2: In Experiment 1, mean function ratings for
historical and alternative functions. Error bars are standard
errors.
Because subjects rated three consecutive scenarios,
learning was a concern. If subjects learned something about

853

the design, any bias they showed should increase from the
first to the last scenario. To test for learning effects, we
computed for each individual and each scenario the
difference between historical and alternative function
ratings (historical minus alternative). Positive delta values
(i.e., higher rating for historical than alternative function)
reflected the HIF bias. Zero and negative delta values
reflected no HIF bias. When we submitted delta values to a
repeated measures ANOVA, first, second and third position
scenarios did not differ in the size of the bias they produced
(F < 1). In fact, the first object showed a nominally greater
bias than the second and third objects.
Another concern was raised by an anonymous reviewer
who pointed out that ratings hovered around the center of
the scale (see Figure 2). Presumably, a pure historical view
would have subjects rating historical functions with a 7 and
alternative functions with a 1, thus predicting that ratings for
the historical function should be significantly greater than 4
and ratings for the alternative function significantly lower
than 4. As Figure 2 shows, this is not generally the case.
We think this pattern of results is due to task demands.
Subjects rated two functions for a each object, which may
have induced them to balance their ratings. Had we used a
design where subjects rated only one function (i.e., either
historical or alternative), it is likely their ratings would have
been more extreme.
To reduce these concerns and to provide further evidence
for the bias, we averaged delta values across scenarios for
each subject, and compared the number of subjects with a
positive average delta (i.e., subjects who showed the bias)
versus the number of subjects with zero or negative average
delta (i.e., subjects who showed a pattern inconsistent with
the bias). Taken as a group, our sample was biased. Over
60% of our subjects had positive average deltas, about 10%
showed no preference, and about 30% behaved contrary to
our predictions (χ2 (2, N = 48) = 18.38, p < .001).
In all, we were able to produce the HIF bias with our
paradigm and materials. Most important, Experiment 1
showed that the effect is not simply due to the entrenchment
of historical functions in memory. It is possible that
entrenchment happens with common everyday objects, but
our data shows this is not the sole factor accounting for the
phenomenon. Finally, the effect showed for all three
objects, and appears not to be due to learning. The bias
showed from the first trial, and did not depend on
participants learning something about the task.

perform its function poorly. Consequently, if participants
reason causally about manifest functions to make inferences
about history, they should conclude that an inefficient
function is unlikely to be a true historical function. There
were two levels of the efficiency factor. Each participant
learned about two objects, one that performed its historical
function efficiently (but its alternative function poorly), and
one that performed its historical function poorly (but its
alternative function efficiently).

Method
Design and Participants We used a mixed 2 x 2 x 2 design,
with rating (functional, causal) as the between participants
factor, and function (historically intended, alternative) and
efficiency (efficient historical function, inefficient historical
function) as within participants factors. All participants
learned about one object which performed its historical
function with efficiency, and about another object that
performed its historical function without efficiency.
Participants rated both, the historical and the alternative
functions, and were randomly assigned to perform either
functional or causal ratings. Abduction predicts that, for
functional ratings, function and efficiency will interact.
Only an efficient, but not an inefficient, historical function
should produce the bias. Intentional and responsibility
theories predict that, for functional ratings there will be a
main effect of function (historical > alternative)
independently of efficiency.
Sixteen versions of the materials were constructed by
crossing scenario structure (whether historical or alternative
function was described first in the scenario), object order
(D-E or E-D, see below), which object was assigned to each
level of the efficiency factor, and rating order (historical
first or alternative first).
Participants were 128 (64 for each rating type) University
of Talca and University of Tarapaca undergraduates (48
males, 80 females), who volunteered to participate.
Materials and Procedures For this experiment we selected
two additional objects from our preliminary experiment.
For these additional objects (labeled D and E), participants
in the preliminary experiment had agreed that one of their
possible functions was afforded significantly better than the
other. Thus, we were able to create scenarios where the HIF
was inefficient relative to the alternative function or vice
versa. Participants went through a procedure similar to that
of Experiment 1. Half our subjects rated function (do you
think the function of this object is X?, where X was once the
historically intended function and once the alternative
function) and half rated causality (is the object efficient
when performing X?, where X was once the historically
intended function and once the alternative function). It took
subjects an average of 8 minutes to complete the task.

Experiment 2
Abduction predicts that a well-formed and causally efficient
manifest function, is evidence of a historically intended
function, but that a not well-formed and causally inefficient
manifest function is evidence contrary to that particular
function being the object’s historically intended function.
In Experiment 2 we tested this account by using objects that
performed one function more efficiently than the other.
Presumably, designers would not create an object to

Results and Discussion Data were submitted to a mixed 2 x
2 x 2 ANOVA (see Figure 3). This analysis revealed no

854

main effect of efficiency (F < 1), and only a marginal effect
of function and rating (respectively, F(1, 126) = 3.28, MSe =
3.91, p < .07, R2 = .03, power = .44; F(1, 126) = 3.07, MSe =
2.69, p < .08, R2 = .02, power = .41). However, function
interacted with rating (F(1, 126) = 7.81, MSe = 3.91, p <
.01, R2 = .06, power = .79) and there was a three-way
interaction between function, efficiency and rating (F(1,
126) = 7.91, MSe = 4.91, p < .01, R2 = .06, power = .80).

To follow the three-way interaction, we analyzed
functional and causal ratings separately. For ratings about
function, we found no main effect of efficiency (F < 1), an
effect of function (historical > alternative, F(1, 63) = 8.54,
MSe = 4.85, p < .01, R2 = .12, power = .82), and no
efficiency by function interaction (F < 1). The lack of
interaction shows that participants had a preference for the
historical function, irrespective of how efficiently it was
performed (see Figure 3, Panel A), as predicted by intention
and responsibility theories. Separate comparisons for each
level of efficiency, showed that when the historically
intended function was efficient, the HIF bias was in the
predicted direction although not significant (F(1, 63) = 1.58,
MSe = 6.06, p < .25, R2 = .02, power = .24). Importantly,
when the historically intended function was inefficient, the
HIF bias was significant in the predicted direction (F(1, 63)
= 6.54, MSe = 5.52, p < .05, R2 = .09, power = .71).
When we analyzed ratings about causality, a different
pattern of results emerged. We found no main effect of
efficiency (F(1, 63) = 2.49, MSe = 2.77, p < .25, R2 = .04,
power = .34), no effect of function (F < 1), but a function by
efficiency interaction (F(1, 63) = 14.73, MSe = 3.09, p <
.001, R2 = .19, power = .97). Participants perceived that one
object performed its historical function efficiently, while the
other performed its historical function inefficiently,
reflecting that participants perceived objects’ causality as
we intended (see Figure 3, Panel B).
The three way interaction between function, efficiency
and rating, tells us that participants perceived differences in
causal efficiency of historical and alternative functions, but
did not use these differences when deciding which function
to assign to an object. This pattern of results is what
intention and responsibility theories predicted, but not what
the abduction theory predicted. If this last theory were
correct, we should have found no HIF bias when objects
performed their historically intended function poorly. In
contrast, we found the bias remained irrespective of
efficiency. To ensure that the whole pattern remained when
each object was considered separately, we computed
separate means for participants that learned about an
efficient object D and an inefficient object E, and for
participants that learned about an inefficient object D and an
efficient object E. On both cases, means reflected a similar
overall pattern (this is a pattern of means and not of
statistical significance).

A
Historical

Alternative

Mean Function Ratings

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Efficient History

Inefficient History
Efficiency

B
7

Mean Causal Ratings

6
5
4
3
2
1
Efficient History

Inefficient History
Efficiency

General Discussion
The HIF bias does not require the entrenchment of functions
in memory nor reasoning by abduction. We are not denying
that entrenchment does happen with everyday objects. After
many repeated encounters with instances of the category,
one can hardly think that adults will question what a
hammer’s function is. However, participants showed the
bias even when little room for entrenchment was left, which
shows some other process is at work.

Figure 3: In Experiment 3, Panel A: mean function ratings
for historical and alternative functions when historical
functions were efficiently or inefficiently performed. Panel
B: mean causal ratings for historical and alternative
functions when historical functions were efficiently or
inefficiently performed. Error bars are standard errors.

855

A similar argument can be made about inference to the
best explanation. Abduction is likely to occur in situations
where the need for deliberate reasoning exists (e.g., problem
solving), or when the task makes explanations of this kind
salient. Our point here is that participants did not
spontaneously engage in the kind of causal analysis
necessary to assign function abductively. This was not
because they could not appreciate the causal implications of
the stimuli they received. To the contrary, participants
noticed the differences in efficiency when explicitly asked
to do so. But when asked to assign proper function, their
reasoning appears to have corresponded to a different
process. This strongly suggests that abduction does not play
a role in everyday assignment of function.
Currently, we are conducting experiments in our
laboratory to test the remaining theories. Prior research
(Chaigneau et al., 2004) shows that causal updating operates
when there is limited information about an objects’
affordances, but that its influence diminishes as this
information becomes increasingly available. This suggests
that in normal interactions—at least with relatively simple
objects—where much information about affordances
becomes rapidly available through perception and action,
causal updating plays a limited role in linking history and
manifest or current function.
Based on preliminary results, our preferred theory now is
that proper function is assigned based on a reasoning similar
to the attribution of responsibility. If a designer is causally
and intentionally involved in the coming into being of a
functional object, his or her assignment of function counts
as the proper function, although causal reasoning may show
the object can efficiently perform several different
functions. We believe this kind of reasoning may not
happen frequently in everyday situations, but that it may be
very important in certain moments of development, both
phylo- and onto-genetically. In the course of the evolution
of our species, sharing consensual functions may have
allowed modern humans to manage an increasing number of
tools and create a complex culture (cf., Mithen, 1996;
Searle, 1995). In the course of individual development, the
capacity to rapidly affix a preferred function to an object
may allow people to efficiently reason within their culture
(cf., Defeyter & German, 2003).

Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577-660.
Bloom, P. (1996). Intention, history, and artifact concepts.
Cognition, 60, 1-29.
Bloom, P. (1998). Theories of artifact categorization.
Cognition, 66, 87-93.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Caron, A., Caron, R., & Antell, S. (1988). Infant
understanding of containment: An affordance perceived
or a relationship conceived? Developmental Psychology,
24(5), 620-627.
Chaigneau, S.E., Barsalou, L.W., & Sloman, S. (2004).
Assessing the causal structure of function. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 601-625.
Defeyter, M.A., & German, T.P. (2003). Acquiring an
understanding of design: evidence from children's insight
problem solving. Cognition, 89(2), 133-155.
Dennett, D.C. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gelman, S.A., & Bloom, P. (2000). Young children are
sensitive to how an object was created when deciding
what to name it. Cognition, 76, 91-103.
Jaswal, V.K. (2006). Preschoolers favor the creator’s label
when reasoning about an artifact’s function. Cognition,
99, B83–B92.
Knobe, J. (2003). Intentional Action in Folk Psychology:
An
Experimental
Investigation.
Philosophical
Psychology, 16, 309-324.
Madole, K.L. & Oakes, L.M. (2004). Infants' attention to
and use of functional properties in categorization. In L.
Carlson & E. van der Zee (Eds.), Representing functional
features for language and space: Insights from
perception, categorization and development. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Matan, A., & Carey, S. (2001). Developmental changes
within the core of artifact concepts. Cognition, 78, 1-26.
Mele, A. (2003) Intentional action: Controversies, data, and
core hypotheses. Philosophical Psychology, 16, 325–340.
Mithen, S. (1996). The Prehistory of the Mind: The
Cognitive Origins of Art, Religion and Science. London,
UK: London. Thames and Hudson.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rips, L.J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Schank, R. & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and
understanding: an inquiry into human knowledge
structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Searle, J.R. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality.
New York, NY: The Free Press.
Spellman, B. (1997). Crediting Causality. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 126(4), pp. 323-348.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grant 1050481 from the Fondo
Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (FONDECYT) of the
Chilean government. Part of this work was carried out
while the first author was faculty at the Universidad de
Tarapaca.

References
Aguiar, A., & Baillargeon, R. (1998). Eight-and-a-halfmonth-old infants' reasoning about containment events.
Child Development, 69(3), 636-653.

856

