UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A coincidence detector neural network model of selective attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2j35f52r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Avraamides, Marios
Koushiou, Maria
Neokleous, Kleanthis
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A coincidence detector neural network model of selective attention
Kleanthis Neokleous1 (kleneokl@cs.ucy.ac.cy)
Maria Koushiou2 (maria_koushiou@yahoo.com)
Marios N. Avraamides2 (mariosav@ucy.ac.cy)
Christos Schizas1 (schizas@ucy.ac.cy)
1

Department of Computer Science, 2Department of Psychology
University of Cyprus
P.O Box 20537, Nicosia, Cyprus

Abstract
A computational model of selective attention is implemented
to account for findings from an experiment on selective
attention that was conducted. The model successfully
reproduces the latency data of human participants by relying
on the interaction between a bottom-up saliency map and the
top-down influences from spatial and semantic goals. The
model offers a biologically-plausible way of operationalizing
perceptual load and provides insights about the possible brain
mechanisms that underlie related empirical findings.
Keywords: selective attention, perceptual load, coincidence
detector, neural synchronization.

Introduction
At every moment of conscious life a person experiences a
plethora of information that is present in the environment.
As processing all available stimulation would represent a
daunting task for the perceptual apparatus, a person selects
only a subset of information from what is available and
discards the rest. The process of focusing mental resources
on part of the visual stimulation to allow further processing
while ignoring everything else is commonly referred to as
selective attention.
Over the years a theoretical debate arose over the locus of
selection in the information processing stream. On one
hand, early-selection theories of attention (Broadbent, 1958)
had posited that selection occurs at an early stage of
processing based on the physical characteristics of the
stimuli (e.g., intensity, tone). According to these theories,
unattended stimuli are discarded from further processing
with only some of their physical characteristics being
registered. These stimuli are therefore discarded prior to any
semantic analysis. On the other hand, late-selection theories
(Deutsch & Deutsch, 1963) have placed selection at a later
processing stage. These theories have argued that all stimuli
enter short-term memory and are thus processed
semantically. Those stimuli that are deemed as more
important or relevant to the task are then selected and guide
response execution.

More recently, Lavie (1995) provided results showing that
selection may be early or late depending on task
characteristics. In one of Lavie’s studies participants were
asked to determine whether a presented stimulus was the
letter x or the letter z. In one condition, termed the highload, the letter was flanked by 5 other letters. In another
condition, termed the low-load condition, the target was
presented accompanied by no flanking letters. In both
conditions a distractor letter was presented nearby the target.
In a subset of trials the distractor was incompatible to the
target designating the alternative response (i.e., if the target
was x the distractor was z and vice-versa). In other trials, the
distractor was a neutral letter. Results revealed that the
interference exerted by the incompatible distractor,
evidenced as increased latency for identifying the target,
was greater in the low than the high load condition. Lavie
accounted for these findings by arguing that in the high-load
condition all attentional resources are consumed by the main
task leaving no spare resources to process the distractor; that
is, the distractor is discarded at an early stage of processing.
In contrast, in the low-load condition the task does not
exhaust all available resources leaving spare resources to
process the distractor. In this case, the distractor is discarded
at a later-stage.
Although the Perceptual Load theory offers an appealing
account for how selection of information can occur either
early or late, it has been recently criticized and challenged.
For example, Johnson, McGratth, and McNeil (2002) have
shown that an endogenous cue priming the location of the
target (i.e., a central arrow presented prior to the target
display) eliminates any distractor interference in the lowload condition. As the presentation of a cue does not alter
the amount of spare resources, this result is problematic for
at least a strong version of the Perceptual Load theory.
Furthermore, Elitti, Wallace, and Fox (2005) provided
evidence that the critical variable might be the saliency of
distractors and not perceptual load per se. In their
experiments that manipulated the onsets and offsets of
targets and distractors, Elitti et al. showed that interference
can be present with high-load provided that the distractor is

1446

made more salient. Finally, Torralbo and Beck (2008) have
criticized the Percepetual Load theory on two grounds. First,
they argued that the term perceptual load is not clearly
defined. Second, they claimed that the concept of exhausted
capacity of attentional resources cannot be reconciled easily
with what is known about brain mechanisms. Torralbo and
Beck (2008) proposed that the neural basis for perceptual
load is the extent of competition among stimuli to gain
representation in the visual cortex and the strength of a topdown biasing mechanism that is needed to resolve the
competition and select a stimulus.
Although Torralbo and Beck (2008) offer a more concrete
definition of what constitutes perceptual load, their proposal
still seems vague. For example, it is not clear what the
nature of the top-down biasing mechanism is and how
exactly it operates. In the present study we adopt a
computational modelling approach to provide a
biologically-plausible account of how perceptual load
effects may arise in behavioral experiments. Computational
modelling offers an appealing approach towards
understanding psychological phenomena as the level of
specificity it requires hinders the formulation of vague
theories. We have implemented a coincidence detector
neural network model of selective attention that accounts for
the basic pattern of results obtained in perceptual load
experiments, explains how cues may interact with
perceptual load, and takes into account the effects of
salience. The model is based on recent findings about the
neural synchronization between cortical areas during the
execution of attentional tasks (Fries, Reynolds, Rorie, &
Desimone, 2001) and it also provides for competitive
interactions among stimuli at an early stage of processing as
suggested by Torralbo and Beck (2008). We compare results
from simulations with behavioral data obtained from a
perceptual load experiment that involves high and low
perceptual load visual searches executed with and without
spatial cues. To preview our findings, the model succeeds in
accounting for behavioral results, providing thus insights
about the possible nature of the neural mechanisms that
underlie the perceptual load findings and selective attention
in general.

A model of selective attention
Overview
The model is based on evidence that attention is guided by
both bottom-up and top-down information (Corbetta &
Shulman, 2002). As seen in Figure 1, information in the
model is processed at two stages. During the first stage a
pre-attentive saliency map is created to represent the lowlevel features of incoming visual stimuli. At a second stage,
the firing rates of neurons in the saliency map are modulated
by top-down goals regarding spatial expectations. In
addition, a correlation control module assesses the degree of
semantic correlation between stimuli and endogenous goals
and gradually causes synchronization in neural activity. It
should be noted that, in the literature of attention, rate-based

selection and synchronization of neural activity are often
proposed as the underlying neural mechanisms of perceptual
selection (Buehlmann & Deco, 2008; Niebur, Hsiao, &
Johnson, 2002).

Figure 1. A coincidence detector model of selective
attention

Encoding of Stimuli
Encoding in the model is implemented on the basis of the
temporal coding hypothesis, that is, the idea that the nervous
system uses information about the timing of neural spikes.
Synthetic spike trains (i.e., a streams of binary events where
the presence or absence of an action potential is represented
by 1’s and 0’s) were produced based on the algorithm
proposed by Mikula and Niebur (2008) and Niebur (2007).
Reference spike trains were defined to represent the
targets (i.e., letters X and Z). When a visual stimulus
entering the receptive field coincided with a target letter, the
spike trains of its neurons exhibited a strong correlation
with the reference spike train and were therefore more likely
to switch their state to that of the reference spike.

Saliency Map
The first stage of processing is responsible for the
adjustment of the output firing rate of each neuron in the
corresponding receptive field. This is performed based on
the salience value of each stimulus in a pre-attentive
saliency map that is created on the basis of bottom–up
information as suggested by Zhaoping (1999a, 1999b,
2002). According to Zhaoping and Dayan (2006) this
saliency map is created in the primary visual cortex (V1)
with the receptive field of the most active neuron defining
the location that will most likely be selected. This proposal
is compatible with findings from the literature showing that
the response of a V1 neuron is significantly suppressed by
contextual inputs outside but nearby its receptive field
(Nothdurft, Gallant, & Van Essen, 1999; Sillito, Grieve,
Jones, Cudeiro, & Davis, 1995; Wachtler, Sejnowksi, &
Albright, 2003). That is, the response of a neuron to its
preferred input feature, (e.g., a specific orientation, color,
motion direction etc.), is suppressed when similar inputs are
present nearby (Zhaoping & Dayan, 2006). Examples of
such suppressions have been documented for a variety of
features, e.g., iso-orientation suppression (Knierim,

1447

Gerstner, & van Hemmen, 1998), iso-color suppression
(Wachtler et al., 2003), and iso-motion-direction
suppression (Jones, Grieve, Wang, & Sillito, 2001). Based
on the idea of a pre-attentive saliency map, Zhaoping (2002)
implemented a biologically-plausible computational model
of V1. The model was successful in simulating performance
on a variety of tasks including parallel and conjunctive
visual search. Following the proposal of Zhaoping (2002), a
bottom-up saliency map in which inhibitory interactions
among neurons take place was included in the present
model.

goals may selectively increase activity in earlier visual
areas.
The neural activation of each stimulus after the first and
second stage of processing will provide the input to working
memory. A response will be selected based on the stronger
activation. The level of activation also determines the
latency for selecting the response. To that purpose, working
memory consists of recurrent nodes that fire continuously
until the activation of one stimulus reaches to a threshold
that is needed to select a response.

Top-down influence and synchronization of neural
activity
The firing rates of neurons in the salience map represent
biddings of stimuli for attention. However, as shown in
Figure 1 the rates of neurons in the saliency map are
modulated by top-down factors. We argue that endogenous
goals referring to expectations about the possible location of
the upcoming target may modulate the rate of neurons in the
saliency map (see also Poghosyan & Ioannides, 2008). This
is compatible with recent evidence showing that activity in
V1 may appear before the presentation of the stimulus when
its position is primed by a cue (Shibata et al., 2008; Silver,
Ress, & Heeger, 2007).
In addition to influence from top-down spatial goals, the
neural activation of each stimulus is progressively
modulated by top-down signals of semantic information.
We propose that a correlation control mechanism that
includes coincidence detector neurons determines the
correlation between semantic goals (e.g., to locate an X or a
Z) and the neural activity representing semantic information
in processed stimuli (Figure 2). Coincidence detectors
represent neurons that fire only if two inputs fire temporally
close to each other. This is analogous to the synchronous
generation of post synaptic potentials by two input neurons
in the brain, which pushes the membrane potential of a
target neuron over the threshold required to create an action
potential. Based on the degree of correlation between
stimuli and semantic goals, an amplification or suppression
is exerted on the neural activation of the corresponding
stimulus.
The operation of the correlation control module leads to
the gradual synchronization of neural activity between
neurons representing stimulus information and relevant
endogenous goals. The direct connection of top-down
attention with synchronization is supported by many recent
studies (Gross et al., 2004; Niebur et al., 2002). For
example, Saalmann, Pigarev, and Vidyasagar (2007)
recorded neural activity in the posterior parietal cortex and
area V4 of the brain of macaques while they were
performing a visual matching task and observed
synchronization in the timing of neural activity in the two
regions when the animal selectively attended to a location.
This has provided evidence that parietal neurons which
presumably represent neural activity of the endogenous

Figure 2. The correlation control module
To implement the model in a perceptual load task, we
have conducted a behavioral experiment. The experiment is
described next followed by the results from the
computational simulations.

Experiment: the effects of perceptual load
A behavioral experiment was carried out in an attempt to (1)
replicate the basis pattern of findings obtained with
perceptual-load experiments, (2) examine the interaction
between cuing and perceptual load, and (3) to generate data
that would allow a comparison with the model’s output.
The experiment conducted was similar to that of Johnson et
al., (2002) with the exception that an 80%-valid peripheral
cue was used. In their experiment Johnson et al. (2002) have
used a 100%-valid central cue.

Method
Participants Twenty-four undergraduate students from the
University of Cyprus participated in this experiment in
exchange of course credit.
Materials and Design A 2 (perceptual load: high, low) × 3
(cue: no cue, valid, invalid) × 3 (distractor compatibility:
neutral, compatible, incompatible) within-subject design
was used. The experiment was designed and presented using
the E-Prime software package. During testing participants

1448

were seated approximately 50-60cm from a computer
screen.
Procedure Participants were asked to perform a visual
search task in which 6 letters arranged in a circular array in
the center of the screen were presented after a fixation cross.
In the high load condition, the search array comprised of the
target (X or Z) and 5 letters (M, K, N, H, W) that shared
features with the two possible targets (Figure 3). In the low
load condition the target appeared among 5 O’s (Figure 4).

X
H

M

N

K

Z
W
Figure 3: High-load trial with incompatible distractor 1

Each participant carried out 216 experimental trials, 50%
in the low load condition and the other 50% in the high load
condition. In each load condition there were 96 valid cue
trials (i.e., 80% of the total cue present trials), 96 no cue
trials, and 24 invalid cue trials. Reaction time (RT) and
accuracy scores were recorded and were used for data
analysis.

Results and Discussion
A Repeated Measures ANOVA on median RTs2 with load
(high vs low), cue (valid cue vs no cue) and compatibility
(compatible, incompatible, neutral) as factors was carried
out. Invalid cue conditions were excluded from the analysis
due to their proportionately small number of experimental
trials.
As predicted, the analysis revealed a main effect of load,
with participants being faster in the low load than in the
high load condition, F(1,23) = 41.13, p< .001. Furthemore,
latency was shorter for valid than invalid cue trials, F(1,23)
= 58.61, p< .001. Also, latency was shorter for trials with
neutral than either compatible or incompatible distractors,
F(2,46) = 6.23, p< .05. In addition, a significant load × cue
interaction was obtained, F(1,23) = 15.69, p< .05. More
importantly though, a significant 3-way interaction (load ×
cue × compatibility) was found, F(2,46) = 3.43, p< .05.

Z
O

O

O

O

Z
O
Figure 4: Low-load trial with compatible distractor1.
Figure 5: Median latency for high load condition

In both conditions, a larger distractor letter (X, Z or L)
appeared simultaneously on the left or on the right of the
circular array and it was compatible (identical to the target),
incompatible (calling for the alternative response) or neutral
(the letter L) in 1/3 of the trials. Participants were requested
to ignore the distractor letter and focus on identifying the
target (X or Z) in the 6-letter search array. They were
instructed to press “0” for X and “2” for Z as fast as possible
using their thumb and their index finger respectively on the
numeric keyboard. The search array remained onscreen for
200 ms and was replaced by a mask. Participants were
allowed to enter their response for up to 2000 ms after the
offset of the search array.
In cue-present trials an asterisk was presented for 150 ms
after the offset of the fixation point. The cue was located
either in the same location as the target letter (valid cue), or
in another position in the circle (invalid cue).
1

Error bars represent standard errors

Figure 6: Median Latency for low load condition
2
Accuracies were also analyzed but they are not reported here
for the sake of brevity

1449

As seen in Figure 5, no difference between the cue
conditions was observed in the high load condition, p = .52.
However, distractor interference in the low load condition
was significantly reduced when a valid cue was provided
(Figure 6). Indeed, a paired sample t-test revealed a
significant difference between incompatible and neutral
trials in the low load condition, t(23) = 4,04, p< .001.
The pattern of results obtained in the experiment
replicated the typical pattern of findings of perceptual-load
studies (Lavie, 1995). Furthermore, it showed that cueing
interacts with perceptual load. Johnson et al., (2002) have
shown that a 100% valid central cue diminished interference
from incompatible distractors in the low-load condition,
equating in fact the extent of interference in the low and
high load conditions. The present experiment provided
evidence that an 80% valid peripheral cue was similarly
effective. The present results are incompatible with at least a
strong version of the perceptual-load theory as they show
that even in low-load conditions, in which spare resources
exist to process a distractor, interference may be absent.

Figure 7: Simulation results for high load condition

Computational simulations
The coincidence detector model of selective attention was
used to simulate performance in all conditions included in
the experiment. The basic pattern of the perceptual load
findings is simulated by means of the inhibitory interactions
among neurons representing stimuli in the saliency map and
the top-down spatial and semantic influences.
In the high load condition the encoding mechanisms
adopted in model yielded similar neural activity for each
stimulus in the circular array (i.e., target and flankers) while
in the low load condition the neuron representing the target
had enhanced activity relative to its flankers. This is because
target and flankers share more features in the high load
condition than in the low load condition; this is compatible
with what is known about iso-feature suppression (see
Zhaoping, 2002). There is no effect of an icompatible
distractor in the high load condition because, although it has
high activation from its correlation with semantic goals, the
distractor also shares features with all stimuli on the screen.
As a result, it competes with all other items and is therefore
prone to inhibition from many sources. In contrast, the
effect of an incompatible distractor in the low load condition
is high. This is because (1) the distractor has high activation
due to its semantic correlation with the endogenous goals,
and (2) it only competes with the target as it shares no
features with the flankers.
The effects of a spatial cue were modeled by adding a
spatial goal (i.e., “look first for the item that will appear in
this location”). In the simulations, the item that appeared in
the cued location received a boost in its activity due to its
correlation with the spatial goal. All other items received
inhibition.
Figures 7 and 8 present the predictions of the model after
100 runs in each condition.

Figure 8: Simulation results for low load condition

Conclusion
The computational model of selective attention
implemented here was able to account for the findings from
the behavioral experiment on perceptual load which
produced not only the basic pattern of findings reported by
other studies (Lavie, 1995) but also the findings on the
interaction of spatial cueing with perceptual load (Johnson
et al., 2002). Thus, the model offers an explicit hypothesis
about the possible neural mechanisms that give rise to these
findings without relying on a vague use of the term
perceptual load. To that respect, the model is compatible
with the conjecture of Torralbo and Beck (2008) that
perceptual load effects are a product of the competitive
interactions among stimuli for neural representation. In
addition, the model suggests that the correlation between
input and endogenous goals (spatial and semantic) may
represent the biasing mechanism proposed by Torralbo and
Beck (2008) as the means for resolving the competition.
Importantly the model was designed based on what is
currently known about the underlying neural methancims of
selective attention. The presence of a saliency map, the
modulation of firing rate of neurons in V1, and the
synchronization of activity in populations of neurons during
selective attention are all supported by research in
psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Clearly, further
research is needed to determine which of these mechanisms
provide indeed an index of selective attention. Also, more
research is needed to evaluate the validity of the presented

1450

model. To that respect, it is important for future work to
examine whether the model is capable, without any tuning,
to account for other findings from the attention literature.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a research grant from the
Cyprus Research Promotion Foundation. We thank Vahe
Poghosyan for his insightful comments and suggestions.

References
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication.
Oxford: Pergamon.
Buehlmann, A., & Deco, G. (2008). The neuronal basis of
attention: rate versus synchronization modulation. The
Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 7679-7686.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goaldirected and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 201-215.
Deutsch, J. A., & Deutsch, D. (1963). Attention: Some
theoretical considerations. Psychological Review, 1963,
283-321.
Elitti, S., Wallace, D., & Fox, E. (2005). Selective target
processing: perceptual load or distractor salience.
Perception & Psychophysics, 67, 876-885.
Fries, A. K., Reynolds, J. H., Rorie, A. E., & Desimone, R.
(2001).
Modulation
of
oscillatory
neuronal
synchronization by selective visual attention. Science,
291, 1560-1563.
Gross, J., Schmitz, F., Schnitzler, I., Kessler, K., Shapiro,
K., Hommel, B., et al. (2004). Modulation of long-range
neural synchrony reflects temporal limitations of visual
attention in humans. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of United States of America, 101,
13050-13055.
Johnson, D., McGratth, A., & McNeil, C. (2002). Cuing
interacts with perceptual load in visual search.
Psychological Science, 13, 284-287.
Jones, H. E., Grieve, K. L., Wang, W., & Sillito, M. A.
(2001). Surround suppression in primate V1. The Journal
of Neurophysiology, 86, 2011-2028.
Knierim, J. J., Gerstner, W., & van Hemmen, J. (1998).
Neuronal responses to static texture patterns in area V1 of
the alert macaque monkey. Journal of Neurophysiology,
67, 961-980.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition
for selective attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21,
451-468.
Mikula, S., & Niebur, E. (2008). Exact Solutions for Rate
and Synchrony in Recurrent Networks of Coincidence
Detectors. Neural Computation, 20, 2637-2661.
Niebur, E. (2007). Generation of synthetic spike trains with
defined pairwise correlations. Neural Computation, 19,
1720-1738.

Niebur, E., Hsiao, S. S., & Johnson, K. O. (2002).
Synchrony: a neuronal mechanism for attentional
selection? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 12, 190-194.
Nothdurft, H. C., Gallant, J. L., & Van Essen, D. C. (1999).
Response modulation by texture surround in primate area
V1: correlates of ”popout” under anesthesia. Visual
Neuroscience, 16, 15-34.
Poghosyan V, & Ioannides, A. A. (2008). Attention
modulates earliest responses in the primary auditory and
visual cortices. Neuron, 58, 802-13.
Saalmann, Y. B., Pigarev, I. N., & Vidyasagar, T. R. (2007).
Neural Mechanisms of Visual Attention: How Top-Down
Feedback Highlights Relevant Locations. Science, 316,
1612-1615.
Shibata, K., Yamagishi, N., Goda, N., Yoshioka, T.,
Yamashita, O., Sato, M. A., et al. (2008). The effects of
feature attention on prestimulus cortical activity in the
human visual system. Cerebral Cortex, 18, 1664-1675.
Sillito, M. A., Grieve, K. L., Jones, H. E., Cudeiro, J., &
Davis, J. (1995). Visual cortical mechanisms detecting
focal orientation discontinuities. Nature 378, 492-496.
Silver, M. A., Ress, D., & Heeger, D. J. (2007). Neural
correlates of sustained spatial attention in human early
visual cortex. The Journal of Neurophysiology, 97, 229237.
Torralbo, A., & Beck, D. M. (2008). Perceptual-Loadinduced selection as a result of local competitive
interactions in visual cortex. Psychological Science, 19,
1045-1050.
Wachtler, T., Sejnowksi, T. J., & Albright, T. D. (2003).
Representation of color stimuli in awake macaque
primary visual cortex. Neuron, 37, 681-691.
Zhaoping, L. (1999a). Contextual influences in V1 as a
basis for pop out and asymmetry in visual search.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
United States of America, 96, 10530-10535.
Zhaoping, L. (1999b). Visual segmentation by contextual
influences via intracortical interactions in primary visual
cortex. Network: Computation and Neural Systems, 10,
187-212.
Zhaoping, L. (2002). A saliency map in primary visual
cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9-15.
Zhaoping, L., & Dayan, P. (2006). Pre-attentive visual
selection. Neural Networks, 19, 1437-1439.

1451

