UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A functional brain imaging study on the neural correlates of altruism in social decisionmaking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/16m5r6v6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fangmeier, Thomas
Greenlee, Mark
Knauff, Markus
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A functional brain imaging study on the neural correlates
of altruism in social decision-making
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Giessen

Thomas Fangmeier (thomas.fangmeier@uniklinik-freiburg.de)
Experimental Neuropsychiatry, University Clinic Freiburg

Markus Raabe (markus.raabe@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Regensburg

Mark W. Greenlee (mark.greenlee@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Regensburg
fMRI study that compared decisions on a set of social problems with non-social problems. In the social problems, the
participants were faced with a decision to make an egoistic
choice (which would lead to their own benefit, but to the
harm of another person) or an altruistic choice (which denies their own benefit but would be in the interest of the
other person). In the non-social problems, the participants
were requested to make choices in which no other person
was involved. The social problems resembled the Prisoner's
Dilemma game, which is the most widely used paradigm in
behavioral sciences to study the roots of cooperation and
conflicts between individuals and social groups (Axelrod,
1984). In a Prisoner's Dilemma, an individual can choose
between two strategies, either to "cooperate" with another
person or to "defect". Each person gains when both cooperate. If only one of them cooperates, the defector gains more.
If both defect, both gain very little but not as much as the
"cheated" cooperator whose cooperation is not reciprocated.

Abstract
An fMRI study was conducted to explore the neural basis of
altruism in social decision-making. The participants were
confronted with a non-monetary version of the Prisoner's Dilemma which is one of the earliest games developed in game
theory. They could make a choice between that which would
lead to their own benefit, but to the harm of another person,
and one which denies one’s own benefit but would be in the
interest of the other person. A comparison between these social problems and a set of matched non-social problems (in
which no other person was involved) revealed that a complex
neural network of cortical and sub-cortical brain areas is involved in making altruistic or selfish decisions. The findings
indicate that the decision to behave altruistically relies on the
interactions between cognitive control processes in prefrontal
cortex and emotional control processes in the amygdala.
Keywords: social cognition; social neuroscience; altruism;
egoism; prisoner’s dilemma

Introduction

Development of relatively realistic social dilemmas – A Pilot study

The present study is part of recent endeavors to understand
the neural correlates of social cognition. The general conjecture of this line of research is that humans have developed
neural mechanisms for social cognition that produce appropriate responses in social interaction with other people. As
part of this research area, important work on the neural correlates of social cognition has been done, for instance, in the
fields of social cooperation, moral decision-making, the
ability to understand the thoughts and feelings of other people (an ability usually referred to as “theory of mind”), and
the differences in neural activity during social mentalizing
in the first-person and from the third-person perspective.
For all these research areas many good review articles are
available (social cognition in general: Adolphs, 2001, 2003;
Amodio & Frith, 2006; moral reasoning: Greene & Haidt,
2002; Moll, Zahn, de Oliveira-Souza, Krueger, & Grafman,
2005; theory of mind: Frith & Frith, 1999; Leslie, Friedman,
& German, 2004; first-person vs. third-person perspective in
social mentalizing: Vogeley & Fink, 2003).
With the present work we want to contribute a new aspect
to the field of social cognitive neuroscience. We report an

We started with a pilot study to finds a set of relatively
realistic social dilemmas. This study was conducted in a
class room prior to the brain imaging study. We constructed
a pool of 45 narrative episodes which contained social problems and 45 related episodes of analogous topics but addressing non-social problems. Subjects could either respond
in an egoistic or in an altruistic manner to the social problems. The social problems described a profound conflict of
interest between the protagonist and another person. The
participants could either make a choice which will be to
their own interests, but at the cost of harm to the other person. Or they could sacrifice their own benefit in favor of the
other persons’ interest. Here is an example of a social problem:
You are on a diving tour with another person. You have an
accident under water. The other’s air tank is broken, and
you are both jammed in the rocks. The dilemma is that the
air of the remaining air tank might be enough for one person to survive until help will arrive, but not for both. If you

538

keep the entire air for yourself, you have a 50% chance to
survive, but the other person has only a 5% chance of survival. If you share the air, you both have a 20% chance to
survive. If you both try to keep the air for yourself, it comes
to a fight, and the chances for both of you are only 10%.
The absolute numbers for wins and losses varied to avoid
learning and transfer effects from one task to the other. We
also varied how the chances were expressed by partly using
absolute values and partly percentages. However, the “qualitative” payoffs were the same in all problems. These relative
payoffs are presented in Table 1. The participants could win
much if they make an egoistic decision but only if the other
(fictive) person would make an altruistic choice. They also
could profit, albeit to a lesser extent, if both are altruistic
because they get the reward for mutual cooperation. They
could lose if both are egoistic but they could lose more if
they made an altruistic decision which was not reciprocated
by the other person (see Table 1).

Results
Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of the episodes
that were selected for scanning. As can be seen in the Table,
the group of episodes that were selected as most likely to
result in altruistic decisions differed significantly from the
group that should result in egoistic decisions. The difference
between the groups was statistically significant (WilcoxonTest, Z = 4.98; p < 0001). In the non-social problems we
selected the 15 problems that were closest to the mean average rating (Min = 2.2, Max = 6.6; M 4.45; SD 1.16).

Protagonist
(participant)

altruistic

Win

egoistic

win much

Max

M

SD

Altruistic

1.5

2.3

2.0

0.67

Egoistic

3.2

4.6

3.7

0.71

All

1.5

4.6

2.9

0.60

Table 2: Results of the norming study.

Fictive person
Altruistic

Min

The neural correlates of altruism in social decision-making – The Imaging study

egoistic
lose much

We tested six male and six female participants. Data from
two of the women had to be excluded (due to uncorrectable
head movements) from further analyses. The remaining four
female and six male participants were all right-handed German native speakers between 19 and 28 years with normal
or corrected to normal vision, normal hearing, and no neurological disturbances (mean age 23.7 years, SD 3.09).
Prior to the experiment, the participants were given instructions. Then they were placed in the scanner. The 30
dilemmas and 15 non-social episodes were presented in
three runs, each of them consisting of 10 dilemmas and 5
non-social episodes which were randomly selected from the
pool and presented in a random sequence. The presentation
was implemented as text through a series of three visual
displays. The first display posed the scenario, the second
introduced the dilemma, and the third posed a question.
From the scenario on the first display it was not clear which
sort of dilemma (social or non-social) would appear on that
trial. In the question, participants were asked what they
would do in this situation, for instance, if they would share
the air or not. The three displays were presented for a fixed
duration of 12, 27, and 9 seconds, respectively, plus a 12 sec
inter-trial interval (making a total of exactly 1 minute). During the third display the participants had to press one of two
keys for YES (e.g. “share”) or No (e.g. “don’t share”) at
their own pace and their responses were recorded. Given
that the participants made their choice early within the decision-making period (M = 2912 ms, SD = 1392 ms, including
reading times), it seems likely that the 27 seconds period
during which the dilemmas were presented on the display
involved the main part of the decision making process. For
this reason all analyses of hemodynamic responses are
based on this second epoch (for the methods of Data acquisition and analysis see the “Appendix”).

lose

Table 1: Payoff matrix
The structure of the non-social problems was very similar
to social problems. The only difference was that the participants here were requested to make choices in which no
other person was involved. Here is the non-social version of
the preceding example:
You are on a diving tour and have an accident under water. The air tank is broken, and you are jammed in the
rocks. The dilemma is that the air of your air tank might be
not enough to survive until help will arrive. If you stay quiet
you save air, but the chance that it is enough until help will
come is 50%. If you try to breathe flat you might have a
70% to survive until help will come, but there is also a 30%
risk that you become unconscious. If you try to release
yourself you might be able to reach the water surface, but
you use up much more air, and thus there is a 20% risk that
your air tank will be empty by the time you reach the water
surface.
Thirty undergraduate students from the University of
Oldenburg were tested in two separate sessions with a paper-and-pencil procedure in a classroom. A seven-point
scale was used for each problem, ranging from “definitely
egoistic” to “definitely altruistic”. However, the poles were
not labelled with these phrases, but rather with phrases directly related to the problem. From the whole pool of 45
episodes we determined a set of 15 episodes in which we
could expect participants to make altruistic decisions and a
set of 15 dilemmas in which they most likely will decide
egoistically. We excluded 15 social episodes with average
ratings. For the selection of the non-social episodes we
chose the 15 problems that were rated closest to the mean
rating.

539

Results
Table 3 summarizes the behavioral data collected during
scanning. Overall, the participants generated more altruistic
decisions than egoistic decisions (Wilcoxon-Test: Z = 2.809; p < 0.01). Moreover, although subjects were allowed
to respond at their own pace, the non-social decisions took
more time than the social decisions. The differences in the
response times are statistically significant (mean of the altruistic and egoistic versus individual response time t-Test: t
= -2.512; p < 0.05), while the separate differences in response times nearly reach the 5% level of significance (altruistic versus non-social, t-Test: t = -2.115; p = 0.064; and
egoistic versus non-social, t-Test: t = 2.216; p = 0.054).

Altruistic
social choices
Egoistic social choices
Non-social
choices

M
(%)

SD
(%)

M
(RT in ms)

SD
(RT in
ms)

70

7.2

2948

574

29

6.9

2965

646

99

2.8

3240

637

Table 3: Mean percent and standard deviation of the chosen
alternative altruistic or egoistic social choices and the nonsocial choices during scanning.

Figure 1. Activated cortical areas. See text for details and
explanation.

The differences in neural activity are presented in Figure 1.
All activations were significant at the cluster level calculated with SPM2 (threshold p = 0.001; p ≤ 0.05, corrected).
Panel A) illustrates the activated brain clusters in the
comparison between social choices and non-social choices.
Significant variations in the levels of activation were found
in three different cortical regions. The first included areas
located in the orbito-frontal cortex (OFC), corresponding to
BA 11. The second was situated in the right dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC, BA 46 and BA 46/9). The third
included large areas of the left and right posterior parietal
cortex (PPC) corresponding to the precuneus and the superior and inferior parietal lobule (BA 7, 40). All these areas
were more active during social problem processing than
during the processing of non-social problems.
Panel B) shows brain areas related to altruistic social
choices versus non-social choices. Here portions of the OFC
(BA 10, 11), the DLPFC (BA 46), and in the PPC (BA 7,
40) were more active during altruistic decisions.
Panel C) shows the activity related to egoistic socialchoices versus non-social choices. This comparison also
resulted in differences in areas in the PPC, but there was no
significant increase of activity in the OFC and DLPFC.
Panel D) shows the direct comparison between altruistic
and egoistic choices. Only the PPC cluster reached the significant level (threshold t = 4.3, corrected). However, there
is a cluster in the DLPFC under a slightly liberal threshold (t
= 4.0, p = 0.002, uncorrected) No cluster could be found in
the opposite contrast (egoistic versus altruistic social choices). Details can be found in Knauff, Fangmeier, Raabe, and
Greenlee (2009).

The analyses also revealed significant differences between
the conditions in sub-cortical areas. These results are
shown in Figure 2. The comparison between social and nonsocial problems revealed that a significant portion of the
dorsal amygdala bilaterally was less activated by the social
than by the non-social problems. The comparisons within
the social problems revealed a second focus of activation in
the ventral portions of the right hemispheric amygdaloid
complex and showed relatively lower activity during altruistic in comparison to egoistic and social choices. The bar
graphs show that this effect is caused by a decrease of activation in this area, which is elicited by the egoistic responses.

Discussion
We conducted a functional brain imaging study to distinguish the neural correlates of social and non-social decisions
and to gain insights in differences of the neural processing
of egoistic and altruistic choices. Our materials were a nonmonetary version of the Prisoner's Dilemma, which is one of
the earliest games developed in game theory (Axelrod,
1984). The paradigm is often used by behavioral scientists
to study the roots of cooperation and conflict, between individuals, social groups and even among nations. However,
our tasks differ in many respects from other brain imaging
studies within the prisoner’s dilemma paradigm. While the
studies by Rilling et al. (e.g. 2004) and the majority of behavioral prisoners dilemma studies used a monetary context
in which the participants could gain or lose a certain amount
of money, in our problems the cost and reward of altruistic

540

and egoistic decisions could not be calculated in terms of
monetary units. Instead, the problems consisted of dilemmas
in which the participants had to make highly moral or ethical decisions. In this respect our approach builds on the
study by Greene et al. (2001). A second difference to other
studies is that our problems were carefully piloted and that
the context was varied over the entire set of problems, i.e.
each problem was embedded into another situation. These
“cover stories” were quite realistic: they were presented to
the participants as narrative episodes and the participants
were requested to play the role of the protagonist.
The imaging data show that a complex neural network of
cortical and sub-cortical brain areas is involved in making
altruistic or egoistic decisions. The activated cortical brain
areas were portions of the orbito-frontal cortex (BA 11,
right), the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (BA 46, right), and
the posterior parietal cortex (BA 7, 40, bilaterally). Here an
increase of activation was found for social problems and
altruistic choices. The sub-cortical brain areas included portions of the amygdala. Here social problems overall resulted
in a decrease of activation in the dorsal amygdala whereas
the altruistic decisions led to a relative decrease of activation in the ventral portions of the right amygdala.
The most plausible explanation for the increase of
activation in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) during social
and altruistic choices is that our participants had to make a
decision under conditions in which a conflict of interest
occurred and that they thus might have taken into account
the potential reward value of the different alternatives of
action. With this interpretation we follow the suggestions of
Elliott, Dolan, & Frith (2000), who argued that social decisions are based on a feeling of “rightness” and that this is an
example of a selection on the basis of the likely reward
value (Elliott et al., 2000; p. 308). In fact, our finding is in
good agreement with the widely accepted position that the
OFC is involved whenever individuals have to generate behavior that is flexible and adaptive rather than “slavishly
determined by the current input” (Elliott et al., 2000; p.
308). Many different theories have characterized the OFC as
a flexible control system that is involved in executive control (Baddeley, 1986), supervisory attention (Shallice,
1988), and top-down regulation of decision processes (Frith
& Dolan, 1997).
The reliance of social and altruistic choices on the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) could reflect the role of
this area in overriding the emotional bias to make a selfish
choice and in a down-regulating mechanism of emotional
responses as described by Blair et al. (2007). This account is
consistent with evidence showing that the DLPFC is involved in the execution of cognitive control and response
inhibition (Aron, Robbins, & Poldrack, 2004). Many studies
have shown that the DLPFC is active when a task requires
individuals to suppress an action or if in a Stroop task they
have to inhibit reading while naming the color in which a
word is written (Bush et al., 1998). In the present context it
is also important to mention that other studies have shown
that the DLPFC is involved when people must control their

thoughts or memories (Bunge, Ochsner, Desmond, Glover,
& Gabrieli, 2001). The study by Spitzer et al. (2007) in
which individuals’ norm compliance was positive correlated
with activations in the right DLPFC (and the OFC) points in
this direction. Greene et al. (2004) in their study on the neural bases of cognitive control in moral judgments, found
increased activity in DLPFC when a moral dilemma required regulative control to suppress amoral behavior.

Figure 2: Activated sub-cortical areas. See text for details
and explanation.
The findings of our region of interest analysis in the
amygdala might also have to do with the down-regulating of
negative emotion (Blair et al., 2007). We found decreased
activation in bilateral dorsal portions of the amygdala during
social choices and decreased activation in ventral portions
of the right amygdala during altruistic choices. This is in
agreement with several neuroimaging studies examining the
neural correlates of the cognitive control of emotion (e.g.
Levesque et al., 2003). Similar to the cognitive control that
is mediated by prefrontal areas Ochsner and colleagues proposed a theory in which the emotion-modulatory effects are
based on the interactions between cognitive control processes in prefrontal (and cingulate regions) and emotional

541

processes of reappraisal implemented in multiple emotionrelated brain areas, including the amygdala (Ochsner &
Feldmann Barrett, 2002). The present findings agree with
this view and also fit nicely with other neuroimaging studies
that found increased prefrontal and decreased amygdala
activation in problems in which the individuals were required to reappraise and to down-regulate negative emotion
(Ochsner et al. 2002).
The differential activation in the posterior parietal cortex
(PPC) is difficult to explain. One problem is that the PPC is
a large area that encompasses numerous functions (see the
overview in Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000). It has been related
visual mental imagery (Knauff, Kassubek, Mulack, &
Greenlee, 2000; Ganis, Thompson, & Kosslyn, 2005), working memory (e.g. Smith & Jonides, 1998), and deductive
reasoning (Knauff, Mulack, Kassubek, Salih, & Greenlee,
2002; Knauff, Fangmeier, Ruff, & Johnson-Laird, 2003;
Fangmeier, Knauff, Ruff, & Sloutsky (2006). Another problem is that particular areas in the PPC show taskindependent activity in the so-called “resting-state”. Some
authors have argued that this activity might reflect a baseline of brain function involving a specific set of mental operations (Raichle & Snyder, 2007). As the PPC is wellknown to be involved in visuo-spatial processing and the
representation of the visual periphery, it has been argued
that measured activity in PC could simply be “associated
with the representation of the world around us” (Gusnard &
Raichle, 2001; p. 690). However, other authors have
strongly argued against the assumptions that are generally
made in accepting the importance of the “default mode”.
These authors question the value of studies of the resting
state and argue that the idea of “meaningless” default mode
has little utility (Morcom & Fletcher, 2007).
How can altruism be achieved? One corollary from the
present study is that emotional and cognitive processes must
work closely together in suppressing the spontaneous tendency of the egoistic organism that “naturally” tends to behave selfishly and to promote its own interests. A second
corollary is that Richard Dawkins might be right when he
advises “Let us try to teach generosity and altruism … because we are born selfish”.1 If, as our study suggests, altruism and cooperation is based on learning and experience it
is an open question how social life will be altered if on a
longer term egoism is rewarded instead of being punished.

Baddeley, A. (1986). Working Memory. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Blair, K. S., Smith, B. W., Mitchell, D. G. V., Morton, J.,
Vythilingam, M., Pessoa, L., et al. (2007). Modulation of
emotion by cognition and cognition by emotion. Neuroimage, 35, 430-440.
Bunge, S. A., Ochsner, K. N., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G.
H., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2001). Prefrontal regions involved
in keeping information in and out of mind. Brain 124,
2074– 2086.
Bush, G., Whalen, P. J., Rosen, B. R., Jenike, M. A., McInerney, S. C., & Rauch, S. L. (1998). The counting Stroop:
An interference task specialized for functional neuroimaging: Validation study with functional MRI. Human Brain
Mapping, 6(4), 270–282.
Cabeza, R. & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging Cognition II: An
empirical review of 275 PET and fMRI studies. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1-47.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University press.
D’Esposito, M., Postle, B. R., & Rypma, B., (2000). Prefrontal cortical contributions to working memory: Evidence from event-related fMRI studies. Experimental
Brain Research, 133, 3– 11.
Elliott, R., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2000). Dissociable
functions in the medial and lateral orbitofrontal cortex:
Evidence from human neuroimaging studies. Cerebral
Cortex, 10, 308–317.
Fangmeier, T., Knauff, M., Ruff, C. C., & Sloutsky, V.
(2006). The neural correlates of logical thinking: An
event-related fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 320-334.
Frith, C. D. & Frith, U. (1999). Interacting minds - A biological basis. Science, 286,1692 - 1695.
Frith, U., & Frith, C.D., 2003. Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London Series B - Biological Sciences, 358 (1431), 459– 473.
Ganis, G., Thompson, W. L., Kosslyn, S. M. (2005). Brain
areas underlying visual mental imagery and visual perception: an fMRI study. Cognitive Brain Research, 20, 226241.
Greene, J., & Haidt, J. (2002). How (and where) does moral
judgment work? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 517523.
Gusnard, D. A. & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a
baseline: functional imaging and the resting human brain.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 685–694.
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Raabe, M., & Greenlee, M.W.
(2009). The neural basis of altruism in social decisionmaking. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C., & Johnson-Laird, P.
N. (2003). Reasoning, models, and images: Behavioral
measures and cortical activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 4, 559–573.
Knauff, M., Kassubek, J., Mulack, T., & Greenlee, M. W.
(2000). Cortical activation evoked by visual mental im-

References
Adolphs, R. (2001). The neurobiology of social cognition.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 11, 231–239.
Adolphs, R. (2003). Cognitive neuroscience of human social
behaviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 165-78.
Amodio, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2006). Meeting of minds:
the medial frontal cortex and social cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 268-277.
Aron, A. R., Robbins, T. W., & Poldrack, R. A., (2004).
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 170.
Axelrod, R. (1984). The Evolution of Cooperation. New
York: Basic Books.

542

agery as measured by functional MRI. NeuroReport, 11,
3957-3962.
Knauff, M., Mulack, T., Kassubek, J., Salih, H. R., &
Greenlee, M. W. (2002). Spatial imagery in deductive
reasoning: A functional MRI study. Cognitive Brain Research, 13, 203-212.
Kosslyn SM, Thompson WL (2003). When is early visual
cortex activated during visual mental imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 723-746.
Lancaster, J. L., Woldorff, M. G., Parsons, L. M., Liotti, M.,
Freitas, C. S., Rainey, et al. (2000). Automated Talairach
atlas labels for functional brain mapping. Human Brain
Mapping, 10, 120–131.
Leslie, A. M., Friedman, O., & German, T. P. (2004). Core
mechanisms in ‘theory of mind.’ Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 528–533.
Maldjian, J. A., Laurienti, P. J., Kraft, R. A., & Burdette, J.
H. (2003). An automated method for neuroanatomic and
cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data
sets. NeuroImage 19, 1233– 1239.
Moll, J., Zahn, R., de Oliveira-Souza, R., Krueger, F., &
Grafman, J. (2005). Opinion: the neural basis of human
moral cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 799809.
Morcom, A. M. & Fletcher, P. C. (2007). Does the brain
have a baseline? Why we should be resisting a rest.
NeuroImage, 37, 1073-1082.
Ochsner, K. N. & Feldmann Barrett, L. (2002). A multiprocess perspective on the neuroscience of emotion (pp.
38–81.). In: Mayne, T.J., Bonanno, G.A. (Eds.), Emotions: Current Issues and Future Directions. New York,
NY: The Guilford Press.
Raichle, M. E. & Snyder, A. Z. (2007). A default mode of
brain function: A brief history of an evolving idea. NeuroImage, 37, 1083-1090.
Rilling, J. K., Sanfey, A. G., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E.,
& Cohen, J. D. (2004). The neural correlates of theory of
mind within interpersonal interactions. NeuroImage, 22,
1694-703.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith E. E., & Jonides, J. (1998). Neuroimaging analyses of
human working memory. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 95,
12061-8.
Spitzer, M., Fischbacher, U., Herrnberger, B., Grön, G., &
Fehr, E. (2007). The Neural Signature of Social Norm
Compliance. Neuron, 56 (1), 185-196.
Vogeley, K. & Fink, G. R. (2003). Neural correlates of the
first-person-perspective. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7,
38–42.

Appendix
Magnetic resonance imaging were performed with a 1.5 Tesla scanner
(Magnetom Sonata, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) equipped with an echoplanar imaging (EPI) booster for fast gradient switching and a parallel 8channel radio-frequency (RF) receive-transmit headcoil (MRI-Devices
Europe, Würzburg, Germany). High-resolution, sagittal T1-weighted images were acquired with an MP-RAGE (magnetization prepared, rapid
acquisition gradient echo) sequence to obtain a 3D anatomical scan of the
head and brain. Functional imaging was performed with T2*-weighted
gradient echo-planar imaging (EPI). The time to echo corresponded to TE
= 50 ms, total scan repetition time was TR = 3 sec, the flip angle corresponded to 90°, and we used a field of view FOV = 192 mm, with an isotropic voxel size of 3 3 3 mm. We acquired volumes with 34 contiguous slices and a distance factor of 0-10%. The acquisition sequence of
the slices was interleaved. The slices were rotated approximately 10° relative to the AC-PC line; thereby allowing us to image the entire neocortex.
The stimulation protocol consisted of 3 runs with 302 volumes each.
The preprocessing and statistical analyses of the data was performed using SPM2 (2002). The functional images were corrected for acquisition
delay (slice timing), and realigned. The structural image was co-registered
with the functional series and normalized to the MNI152 template. Subsequently, the functional images were normalized and smoothed with a
FWHM of 8 mm. Statistical analyses was conducted using a general linear
model with a block design, modeling each class of the episodes (socialegoistic, social-altruistic, non-social) with a separate regressor. The regressor was composed of the presentation of the passage “dilemma” as a box
car function which was convolved with the canonical HRF function and its
time derivatives. Low frequencies confounds were excluded from the model with a high-pass filter of 128 seconds, and the auto regression AR (1)
excluded the variance explained by the previous scan.
For the statistical inference we contrasted social against non-social episodes, altruistic choices against non-social problems, egoistic choices
against non-social problems, and altruistic against egoistic choices. A contrast image was made for each of the participants and contrasts. These
images were used for the random effects analysis on 2nd level. The contrast
images (Figure 2A-C) were initially thresholded with p = 0.001 (uncorrected for multiple comparisons). Clusters surpassing a threshold of p ≤
0.05 (corrected for multiple comparisons) were considered as significantly
activated. To complement the results we extracted beta values of all subjects for the three neocortical areas (PPC, DLPFC, OFC) which resulted
from the comparison social- vs. non-social choices and for two sub-cortical
areas (amygdala left, right) which we derived from the present literature
(Adolphs, Tranel, & Damasio, 1998; Adolphs, 2003).
For the region of interest analysis (ROI analysis) in the amygdala we
first used the PickAtlas software toolbox (Lancaster et al., 2000; Maldjian,
Laurienti, Kraft, & Burdette, 2003). Then the analysis was conducted a
second order analysis within SPM2 (theshold p = 0.01; family wise error;
corrected for multiple comparisons; voxel-level). The different portions of
the dorsal and the ventral amygdala were found in two different contrasts.
The cluster in the dorsal amygdala was found in the contrast non-social
choices versus social choices and the cluster in the ventral amygdala was
found in the contrast egoistic social choices versus altruistic social choices.
The peak voxels of the ventral and the dorsal amygdala were not identical
and the two clusters did not overlap.
In order to analyze the different ROIs within the amygdala we first determined the size of the dorsal and ventral cluster within the amygdala (10
voxels and 12 voxels, respectively). The shape of the ROI was that of the
activated cluster itself. Then, we extracted the beta values for each voxel in
the dorsal and the ventral cluster and for each condition (altruistic social,
egoistic social and non-social) separately. Finally, the beta values were
analyzed within the statistical software packaged SPSS. Differences between the conditions for each cluster were analyzed with the paired t-test
(df = 9).

543

