UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Multi-Agent Systems Approach to Gossip and the Evolution of Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/96g32880

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Mulder, Maurice
Slingerland, Inge
Verbrugge, Rineke
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Multi-Agent Systems Approach to Gossip and the Evolution of Language
Inge Slingerland (i.slingerland@student.rug.nl)1
Maurice Mulder (mmulder@ai.rug.nl)1
Elske van der Vaart (e.e.van.der.vaart@rug.nl)1,2
Rineke Verbrugge (l.c.verbrugge@rug.nl)1
1

Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 407
9700 AK Groningen, the Netherlands
2
Theoretical Biology, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 14
9750 AA Haren, the Netherlands

Abstract
In his book Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of
Language, biologist Robin Dunbar (1997) proposes a new
way of looking at the evolution of language. According to this
view, language evolved to provide a new social bonding
mechanism: Gossiping. This allows humans to live in larger
groups than other primates, which increasing predation risks
forced our ancestors to do. We use a computational multiagent model to test the internal workings of this hypothesis,
with interesting results. Our work provides a fundamentally
new kind of evidence for Dunbar’s theory, by experimentally
demonstrating that greater group sizes can stimulate the
evolution of language as a tool for social cohesion.
Keywords: Evolution; language; multi-agent systems.

Introduction
As humans, we spend a great deal of time talking to each
other. Most of this time is also spent talking about each
other: Approximately 65% of our conversations focus on
social topics (Dunbar, 2004). Given the amount of time we
spend on all this gossip, it seems it must serve an important
function. According to Robin Dunbar's (1997) theory of the
evolution of language, it does: Gossip, he claims, is what
allows humans to maintain social coherence in very large
groups, and the selective pressure to do so is what drove us
to evolve language in the first place. According to this
theory, before humans learned to gossip, something else
must have kept our groups together. The likeliest candidate
is the mechanism still employed by other primates:
Grooming. This keeps individuals clean, but it also serves
an important social function. The exchange of grooming
allows group hierarchies to be established and maintained,
alliances to be formed, and apologies to be made (Seyfarth,
1977). For other primates, then, grooming is a very effective
form of social glue. The only problem is that for groups
comprising many individuals, grooming becomes a very
time-intensive way of maintaining social bonds. As group
size increases, so does the time primates invest in grooming
(Dunbar, 2004). This is because larger group sizes create
more ecological competition, as local food sources are more
quickly exhausted. This creates fights, which makes
effective alliances more important. But the effectiveness of
an alliance directly depends on the time the members of that
alliance devote to grooming each other (Dunbar, 2004).

Of course, primates cannot groom all the time - they also
need to eat and look for food. This means that there is an
upper limit to the time that can be devoted to grooming,
which, according to Dunbar (2004), is about 20% of an
individual's waking hours. Consequently, there is a
maximum group size in which it is possible to maintain
sufficiently strong alliances by means of grooming.
According to Dunbar (2004), this maximum group size is
approximately 80 individuals. However, somewhere over
the course of human history, increasing predation risks
forced our ancestors to live in groups larger than that.
Modern humans seem to have a natural group size of about
150, which is the typical size of most religious communities
and military units (Dunbar, 1993). This figure is known as
Dunbar's number, and also follows from his analysis of
neocortex size (Dunbar, 1992). By looking at living primate
groups, he has found a fixed relationship between the a
primate species’ neocortex size and its group size. Dunbar
concludes from this that neocortex size determines how
many social contacts one can maintain. By extrapolating this
measured relationship to humans, the same maximum group
size of 150 individuals appears (Dunbar, 1993).
However, like other primates, we only spend about 20% of
our time on social activities (Dunbar, 2004). Therefore, our
social bonding mechanism must be more effective than
grooming is. Gossip, or talking about social topics, fits the
bill. Like grooming, it is a social activity that allows us to
display selective interest in other individuals, strengthening
relationships. But it also has a number of advantages over
grooming: It can involve more than two participants at once,
and it allows individuals to exchange social information, so
they can learn about events they did not see themselves
(Dunbar, 2004). In short, gossiping makes maintaining of
social bonds much more efficient. But gossip also has
disadvantages, the primary one being that it is less intimate.
The physical aspects of grooming release endorphins, and
when people want to share deep feelings and emotions with
each other, they tend to do it by touching, rather than talking
(Dunbar, 2004). According to Dunbar’s hypothesis, then, at
some point in our evolutionary history, we traded much of
the intimacy of grooming for the efficiency of gossip, which
was necessary to allow our ancestors to live in larger
groups. In essence, humans evolved language and large
neocortices to be able to talk about each other.

1609

In this paper, we present a new approach to Dunbar's theory
by examining its assumptions in a computational multiagent system. This methodology has already provided many
new insights into related questions in cognitive science, and
seems very suitable for investigating this particular
hypothesis. In a multi-agent system, individual agents and
their actions are explicitly simulated, so that the collective
outcome of their behaviors can be analyzed. This offers a
unique perspective on social and evolutionary processes,
which can otherwise be difficult to break down into their
component parts. Previous models of both primate social
structure and the evolution of language have proven quite
successful. Charlotte Hemelrijk’s DomWorld (2002)
simulation, for instance, closely replicates the dominance
hierarchies of macaque species, while modeling work by
Luc Steels and Tony Belpaeme (2005) demonstrates how
shared communication may emerge across generations.
As far as we know, however, our work is the first attempt
to evaluate Dunbar’s hypothesis using this technique. By
simulating populations of agents and their social
interactions, we aim to investigate the fundamental trade-off
between grooming and gossip. In our model, every time
step, an agent can choose a social act to engage in.
Grooming provides a higher social reward, but gossip can
be shared among multiple agents, and allows them to
exchange information about other social events. A single
variable determines which action an agent is likely to
choose, and this variable can evolve over time. Agents with
higher fitness are preferentially reproduced, and this fitness
depends on the social reward agents have collected, but also
on their knowledge of other social events. We repeat this
procedure for different group sizes, and examine which are
most likely to evolve ‘gossip’ as their primary means of
social interaction. In this way, we should be able to provide
the first experimental support for Dunbar’s hypothesis that
larger group sizes can promote the evolution of language by
virtue of its role as a social bonding mechanism.

Model
In this section a description of the model is given. The
model is individual-oriented but not spatially explicit. It is
likely that the coevolution of systems like a neo-cortex large
enough to allow for theory of mind and a vocal tract to
allow for accurate speech played a large role in the
evolution of language (Dunbar, 1997; Hauser, Chomsky, &
Fitch, 2002; Malle, 2002; Ritchie & Kirby, 2006), but these
factors are not considered in our model. In contrast, we
focus solely on the pressure that living in larger groups has
on the trade-off between grooming and gossip.

Every generation of agents then reproduces, after which the
new generation socializes. This is repeated until the
population has evolved for nGenerations. Both
nGenerations and nRounds need to be large enough for a
population to converge to the gossip probability maximizing
its fitness. The parameter nRounds is arbitrarily set at 30
rounds, while nGenerations is set at 210 generations,
approximately the number of generations it takes for the
slowest evolving groups to maximize their fitness. Larger
groups of agents evolve faster than smaller groups, due to
the larger search space. To speed up evolution in group sizes
smaller than 100, a population several times larger than the
desired group size is divided into smaller groups of the
desired size. Social actions between agents are confined to
the smaller groups, while selection takes place over the
entire population.

Agents
An agent in our model is composed of just two
characteristics: A gossip probability and a memory.
An agent’s gossip probability is the probability of that
agent initiating a gossip event given that it has the
opportunity to initiate a social event. Consequently, the
grooming probability for an agent is complementary to its
gossip probability. An agent’s gossip probability is the only
genetic material passed on to offspring and is evolved in this
simulation to find the value that maximizes an agent's
fitness for a particular group size.
An agent's memory contains a list of social events, added
when the agent either participated in the event, witnessed it
as an observer, or heard of it through gossip. The number of
social events in an agent’s memory directly contributes to its
fitness, which will be explained in a later section.

Assigning Actions
In each round performed by a generation, a fraction of that
group’s agents are randomly drawn and allowed to initialize
a social event by either gossiping or grooming. A round is
over when all agents have either initiated grooming or
gossiping with a number of other agents, or become
engaged into a social event initiated by another agent, or
been excluded from social interaction for this round because
there are no potential partners left. If a randomly drawn
value exceeds an agent’s gossip probability, it will choose
to groom; if it does not, the agent will gossip. At what value
gossip probability is initiated has little influence on our
results; only the speed of the evolutionary process is
affected by it.

Grooming
Structure of the Simulation
In the model, populations of agents live in different group
sizes. Per group size, a population of agents first socializes
for a number of rounds, nRounds. In each round, social
actions are randomly assigned to agents according to their
gossip probability, their main variable. These social actions
define the fitness of each agent in the population.

When an agent chooses to groom, a single available partner
is randomly drawn from the group of agents that this agent
can socialize with in its lifetime. The resulting grooming
event rewards both participants with an increase of their
social fitness as a result of the bond that is forged or
strengthened between them. In addition, the grooming event
itself is added to their memory.

1610

Information fitness depends on the number of social events
that the agent has in its memory, and thus the knowledge
that it has about its social group. In real life, this might help
an agent for instance by making it possible for the agent to
identify coalitions between other agents and a rival,
therewith knowing who would help either the agent or its
rival if they were to fight each other. Neither high nor low
fitness imply that the agent is either dominant or
subordinate. Information about its social group and alliances
with other agents will help an agent and increase its chances
to reproduce, regardless of an agent's social status.
The precise contribution of an agent’s social fitness, fsocial,
and its information fitness, finformation, to its total fitness, f, is
shown in Equation 1. Fitness was chosen to be the product
of social fitness and information fitness, because these two
factors are represented on different scales but need to
influence the total fitness equally.

Gossip
When instead an agent chooses to gossip, between one and
three partners are drawn from the group of agents that this
agent can socialize with in its lifetime. This upper limit of
four agents per conversation is inspired by the fact that four
is thought to be the upper limit of individuals who can
spontaneously interact within a conversation (Dunbar,
Nettle, & Duncan, 1995). An effective gossip event, just like
a grooming event, rewards all of its participants with an
increase of their social fitness. This increase is smaller than
that for grooming events because gossiping is less intimate
than grooming. We have chosen for gossiping to be 80% as
intimate as grooming. However, gossip also has an
advantage over grooming, which is that gossiping agents
can exchange information. During a gossiping event, one of
the conversation’s participants is randomly selected, and 10
of its memories are selected as gossip topics. These can be
memories of any social event the agent is aware of, so it
could have obtained its knowledge of them through
participation, observation, or earlier gossip. Every agent that
does not yet know about these 10 social events will then
have them added to its memory. In addition, of course,
every agent will remember the gossip event itself.

f  f social  f information

(1)

Social Fitness In Equation 2, the evaluation of the social
part is shown, where Egroom is the set of grooming events
agent has taken part in, Egossip is the set of gossip
that the
events the agent has been in, and px is the number of agents
that have participated in event x. For grooming events, px is
always two; for gossip events it lies between two and four.
The contribution of each event to social bonds has been
divided by the number of partners. The intimacy of a social
event decreases with the number of participating agents, so
it contributes less to friendships. Grooming events are also
inherently more useful to the creation of bonds because of
the physical aspect of grooming and the endorphins
released. This is why the fitness value of grooming events is
multiplied by 5, and that of gossip events only by 4.

Observation
Every social event can be observed by other agents. Such
observation is achieved by randomly selecting a number of
agents and adding the social event to their memory. The
basic model takes four observers for each social event. Any
agent may observe an event, except for those engaged in it.
Thus, in any one round, an agent can be directly involved in
only one bout of grooming or gossiping, but can be an
observer for any number of other social events.

Evolution
When a generation has gone through its social rounds, a new
generation must be produced. Every agent is evaluated and
assigned a fitness value. Selection is then done according to
the elitism selection mechanism (De Jong, 1975): The top
scoring 5% will have two children, the lowest 5% will have
none, and the remaining agents will have one child in the

following generation. Reproduction is asexual: An agent's
offspring inherits its predecessor’s gossip probability save
for a possible mutation. For every reproduction there is a
1% chance of mutation occurring, deviating the new agent's
gossip probability with 5% at most.

Fitness Function
In this model, fitness represents an agent’s social aptness. A
high fitness makes for an agent that functions well in a
group. We distinguish between two types of fitness: A
social part and an information part. Social fitness depends
on the number of social events the agent has engaged in, and
is considered to reflect the strength of its social bonds, and
thus the likelihood that it can count on effective alliances.





1 
1 
f social  5 
 4  


p 1 
p 1 
x E groom x

x E gossip x






(2)

Information Fitness The information part is the squared
number of memories an agent has gathered in its lifetime.
The motivation behind this choice is that information
becomes increasingly more useful when more of it is
available: On the bases of the combination of more pieces of
information, more new information can be deduced and
more false possibilities can be eliminated. See Equation 3,
where M is the number of events in the agent's memory.
In reality, information may at some point become
increasingly redundant, as it will only confirm what was
already predicted. This would result in a sigmoid curve
instead of the polynomial curve used in the model.
However, implementing this would make the model more
complex than desired. Squaring information fitness was
deemed a satisfactory approximation.

1611

f information  M 2



(3)

Experiments
In the model described in the previous section, we capture
the fundamental trade-off between grooming and gossip
from the perspective of an individual agent. Grooming
strongly reinforces its social bonds, while gossip is slightly
less intimate, but provides social information. If the agents
were real primates competing for dominance, strong bonds
would help them form effective alliances, while social
information would allow them to predict the likelihood of
other alliances forming. Thus, both grooming and gossip
contribute to reproductive success, if in slightly different
ways. This is reflected in our model’s fitness function,
which rewards agents both for the strength of their social
bonds and for the amount of social information that they
have. Whether agents prefer to groom or gossip depends on
their gossip probability, which can evolve over time. Now,
to test Dunbar’s hypothesis, the question is whether or not
this basic setup will cause agents in larger group sizes to
evolve to higher gossip probabilities than agents in lower
group sizes. To investigate this, we run three experiments
where we allow agents to evolve for nGenerations, set to
200, in group sizes that range from 1 to 200.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we start agents with gossip probabilities of
0.1, and record the average gossip probabilities of the last
generations of agents at different group sizes.
Results The results of this Experiment can be seen in Figure
1. For each group size, five different runs are plotted. It
shows a strong correlation between group size and gossip
probability. A gradual increase of gossip probability is
apparent, until a limit of about 0.7 is reached once group
sizes pass 150 individuals. In other words, our model’s
basic assumptions clearly predict that individuals in larger
groups are more likely to benefit from the ability to gossip.
Discussion In our model, the fact that larger group sizes
cause agents to evolve higher gossip probabilities can be
accounted for as follows: For gossip probability to increase,
it needs to provide agents with higher fitness. Because the
social payoff of gossip is structurally lower than the social
payoff of grooming, the information payoff of gossip needs
to be high enough to outweigh its social costs. For this to
occur, agents need to acquire enough new information while
gossiping. In smaller group sizes, this will be difficult, as
the number of potential gossiping partners and topics is
limited. Because of this, agents will tend to discuss the same
topics repeatedly, and gain no fitness increases by
participating in conversation. To illustrate this with an
example: Any given social event is always experienced by
at least six agents, directly or indirectly: Two participants,
and four observers. In a group of ten agents, this means at
least 60% of agents is aware of it; in a group of 160 agents,
this drops to 3.75%. This means that gossip is virtually
useless to agents in small group sizes, while it can bring
considerable benefits to agents in large group sizes.

Figure 1: Gossip probability of the last generations of agents
at different group sizes.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we attempt to further investigate the
relationship between gossip probability and group size by
examining the evolutionary process across generations. To
this end, we start agents in group sizes of 10, 50, 130, 150
and 190 with gossip probabilities of 0.5, and record their
average gossip probabilities every generation.
Results The results of this Experiment are plotted in Figure
2, averaged over the outcomes of five different runs. It
appears that converging to lower gossip probabilities is
generally a faster process than converging to higher gossip
probabilities; at group size 10, agents can lose 0.3 points of
gossip probability in just 100 generations, while agents in
group size 190 have only increased their gossip probability
by half that amount. This suggests that, even without the
additional challenge of evolving language in the first place,
evolving gossip as a primary means of maintaining social
cohesion is rather difficult, and may take many generations.

Figure 2: Evolution of gossip probability across generations,
for five different group sizes.

1612

Discussion The difference in evolutionary speed visible in
Figure 2 can be explained by the uncertain benefits that
gossip brings in our model, compared to the stable payoffs
of grooming. When grooming, an agent’s social gain is
fixed, but when gossiping, an agent may learn little new
information, either because its conversation partners have
none, or because chance causes the gossip to concern
information it already has. It is this unpredictability that
slows the convergence to high optimal gossip probabilities.

Robustness of Results

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we look at the trade-off between grooming
and gossip in more detail. Specifically, we are interested in
whether or not gossiping agents have relatively more
knowledge of the dynamics of their social group as
compared to agents who cannot gossip. We do this by
comparing our basic model against a null model, where
agents can only groom, and gossip probabilities play no
role. For the basic model, we start agents with gossip
probabilities of 0.1, and for both models, we record the
average percentage of social events that the last generations
of agents at different group sizes know about.
Results In Figure 3, we plot a scaled information fitness
value, which reflects the percentage of social events that
agents are aware of. For both models, as group sizes get
larger, scaled information fitness decreases. However,
agents in the basic model clearly are relatively more
informed about the social events occurring in their group
than the agents in the null model are.

The results of Experiments 1, 2 and 3 are dependent on the
model’s parameters. Most of the model’s parameters within
their reasonable limits seem only to affect the speed of
evolution, but one parameter does affect the results, namely
the number of observers per event. An increase in the
number of observers per event makes gossiping less
necessary because agents can obtain a large part of the
information needed to maximize fitness through observation.
If the possible number of observers per event were as large
as the group itself, there would be no need for gossiping at
all: Every agent would be aware of each event, always.
Because of this, agents in the null model have a greater
fitness when there are more observers.
There is no consensus on the average number of primates
that observes an event. This number depends on a multitude
of environmental and social factors that are hard to estimate
or observe and different for each population and species. To
name a few of those factors: The density in which they live
together, the likeliness of group members being obscured by
foliage, possible protection of privacy by hiding when
grooming or gossiping, and possibility of individuals to
actively look for each other. The chosen number of
observers in the basic model is four, which is our own
estimation and is not based on empirical research.
To illustrate the influence of the number of observers, the
model was run with different values for the number of
observers. The results were as predicted: The more
observers, the lower the final gossip probability. In this way
the model indicates that the number of observers must be
limited for gossiping to become favored over grooming at
all. It should be noted that the number we are looking for is
not the average number of agents to merely see a social
event happening. Our model directly adds the social event to
the memory of the observers. This means that an observer
needs to be interested in a social event in which the agent
itself is not involved. It needs to recognize what actually
happens and which agents are involved, without
misinterpreting. The number of such effective observers
may well be significantly smaller than the average number
of agents to merely see the social event. Thus, four
observers may not be an implausibly low estimate after all.
To sum up, the model is quite robust, provided that the
values of the parameters are kept within reasonable limits.

Further Work
Figure 3: Average scaled information fitness at different
group sizes, for the basic model and the null model.
Discussion In the null model, the fact that agents in larger
group sizes are always relatively less informed, is perhaps
not surprising: As group sizes get larger, the total number of
social events increases, while the number of observers per
event stays fixed. However, one might have expected
gossiping agents to be able to compensate for this effect by
exchanging information; this does not seem to be the case.

In further research several additions could be made to the
model to make it more realistic. Primates have a social
hierarchy where special privileges are reserved for the most
dominant. Dominant primates are groomed more often than
they groom others (Seyfarth, 1977). Secondly, they are more
closely watched by group members than nondominant
primates are. One could imagine that also in gossip,
dominant and subordinate agents are treated differently. Not
only could dominance be relevant to partner choice for
grooming and gossip sessions, it could also influence the
choice of topics. In our model, partners and topics are

1613

chosen at random. By implementing a social hierarchy one
could model these social interactions with more detail and
control. Results could provide insight in how well a social
hierarchy can be maintained through grooming and gossip.
Another simplification made is that the basic model only
takes the gossip probability of the initiator of the event into
account, and not the preferences for grooming or gossiping
of the randomly chosen partners. This is not biologically
plausible: If a primate starts grooming another primate who
would rather do something else, the action is likely to be
terminated. The model can be extended by letting each
initiator choose his partners. This way, agents can deduce
preferences of other agents by looking in their own memory
about the other agent's usual actions. In this extended
model, the information fitness is even more important
because agents need information, gained mainly by
gossiping, in order to choose good partners.
Thirdly, the organization of social events could be
modeled more realistically. At present, agents all get a
number of rounds in which they either gossip or groom
once. The fact that gossiping takes a smaller amount of time
than grooming is represented in how many topics are
discussed in a single conversation. This simplification
assumes that gossiping agents keep gossiping within the
same group for the same amount of time as a grooming
event. However, by gossiping about fewer topics and in
several different groups, agents may be more successful in
increasing their information fitness, especially if they avoid
talking about previously discussed topics. Implementing this
change could prove troublesome. Agents might become
socially isolated: Agents that were previously involved in a
shorter lasting gossip event will in the next round only find
potential partners that gossiped as well. This way smaller
and smaller groups of agents that only socialize with each
other will form with time. This can be avoided by instead
treating time like a limited resource. Each agent is given a
number of time points. Every time an event occurs, time
points are subtracted from the participating agents so that all
agents can participate equally. This way, events can still be
organized as they are in our model without any asynchrony.

Conclusions
In this paper, we have described a multi-agent system,
where social agents can choose to groom or gossip. From
just two fundamental assumptions - namely, that grooming
is the most effective way of strengthening social bonds,
while gossip has the additional advantage of providing
social information - we show that the ability to gossip
becomes relatively more beneficial as group sizes become
larger. Thus, we provide new support for Robin Dunbar’s
(1997) theory of the evolution of language. His hypothesis
is that language evolved when increasing predation pressure
forced humans to live in larger groups, requiring the
invention of gossip to maintain social cohesion; our model
provides the first experimental demonstration that greater
group sizes can indeed favor gossip over grooming. In
addition, we show that evolving towards gossip is slower

than evolving towards grooming, and that gossiping agents
are always fundamentally more informed than grooming
agents are, even in small group sizes. These results seem to
be robust and are not drastically altered by most variables
when they remain within a plausible range of values, with
the exception of the number of observers per social event.
This number will be physically limited in reality however,
and although it is difficult to estimate, it will probably not
drastically alter the model’s outcomes.

Acknowledgements
Elske van der Vaart would like to thank NWO, the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research, for
funding her doctorate, TopTalent grant 021.001.089.

References
De Jong, K. (1975). Analysis of the behavior of a class of
genetic adaptive systems. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on
group-size in primates. Journal of Human Evolution,
22(6), 469-493.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size,
group size and language in humans. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 16(4), 681-735.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1997). Grooming, gossip and the
evolution of language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (2004). Gossip in evolutionary perspective.
Review of General Psychology, 8(2), 100-110.
Dunbar, R. I. M., Nettle, D., & Duncan, N. D. C. (1995).
Size and structure of freely forming conversation groups.
Human Nature, 6(1), 67-78.
Hauser, M., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, T. (2002). The faculty
of language: What is it, who has it, and how did it evolve?
Science, 298, 1569 - 1579.
Hemelrijk, C. K. (2002). Despotic societies, sexual
attraction, and the emergence of male 'tolerance': An
agent-based model. Behaviour, 139, 729-747.
Malle, B. F. (2002). The relation between language and
theory of mind in development and evolution. In T. Givon
& B. F. Malle (Eds.), The evolution of language out of
pre-language (pp. 265-284). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Ritchie, G., & Kirby, S. (2006). Modelling the transition to
learned communication: An initial investigation into the
ecological conditions favouring cultural transmission. In
A. Cangelosi & A. Smith & K. Smith (Eds.), The
evolution of language: Proceedings of the 6th
international conference on the evolution of language (pp.
283-290). Singapore: World Scientific Press.
Seyfarth, R. M. (1977). A model of social grooming among
adult female monkeys. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
65(4), 671-698.
Steels, L., & Belpaeme, T. (2005). Coordinating
perceptually grounded categories through language: A
case study for color. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28,
469-529.

1614

