UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A New Investigation of the Nature of Abstract Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5vd4b16x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dry, Matthew J.
Storms, Gert
Stukken, Loes
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A New Investigation of the Nature of Abstract Categories
Loes Stukken (Loes.Stukken@student.kuleuven.be)
Steven Verheyen (Steven.Verheyen@psy.kuleuven.be)
Matthew J. Dry (Matt.Dry@psy.kuleuven.be)
Gert Storms (Gert.Storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
University of Leuven, Department of Psychology
Tiensestraat 102, B-3000, Leuven Belgium

Abstract
Concrete and abstract categories are alike in that they show
graded structure. They are also said to differ in that the degree
of feature overlap between a category and its exemplars can
predict the graded structure of the former, but not of the latter
kind of category. We show how one can improve upon this
prediction by taking distinctive features into consideration
and argue that concrete and abstract categories might not be
that differently structured after all.
Keywords: abstract categories; graded structure; typicality;
characteristic features; polymorphous concept; familiarity.

Introduction
Well-defined categories (e.g., odd numbers, plane geometry
figures, Armstrong, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1983), ad hoc
categories (e.g., ways to make friends, things that could fall
on your head, Barsalou, 1983), abstract categories (e.g.,
beliefs, crimes, Hampton, 1981), and well-established,
concrete categories (e.g., fruit, vehicles, Rosch, 1973) are
alike in that they all present with graded structure. That is,
some of their exemplars are consistently judged to be more
typical of or representative for the category than others.
Graded category structure also becomes apparent in
category verification where the more typical an exemplar is,
the faster it will be judged a true category member. Rosch
(1973) was among the first to demonstrate this relationship
in concrete categories. Armstrong et al. (1983) and Hough
and Pierce (1989) showed it also holds in well-defined and
ad hoc categories, respectively. In addition, typical
exemplars are generally among the first to be generated in
response to the category label and across participants they
are generated more often than less typical category members
(for early demonstrations in concrete and ad hoc categories
see Mervis, Catlin, & Rosch, 1976 and Barsalou, 1985,
respectively). Other processing advantages of typical over
atypical category members have been shown in concrete
categories, but attempts to demonstrate similar effects in
well-defined or ad hoc categories have generally not been
undertaken. Studies pertaining to the internal structure of
abstract categories are even rarer.
The presence of graded structure in a varied range of
categories need not necessarily indicate that these are all
represented in the same manner. The most generally
accepted account of graded structure to have arisen from the
study of concrete categories is probably the one in which

category members are represented by characteristic features.
The more of these features an exemplar shares with the
category as a whole, the more typical the exemplar is of the
category (Hampton, 1979; Rosch & Mervis, 1975). As
penguins do not have the features <can fly> and <build nests
in trees> in common with most other birds, they are
considered to be among the atypical category members. The
internal structure of many ad hoc and well-defined
categories does not adhere to this shared feature account,
however. Barsalou (1985) illustrates how participants’
estimates of the number of times they had previously
encountered an item as a category member and the item’s
ability to fulfill the goal served by its ad hoc category,
provide a better account of the item’s judged typicality.
Those food items that are often thought of as diet products
and those that are ideally suited for minimizing one’s intake
of calories, Barsalou found to be the worst examples of the
ad hoc category foods not to eat on a diet for instance.
Larochelle, Richard, and Soulières (2000) ascribe welldefined categories’ apparent graded structure in category
verification to the exemplars’ familiarity and category
dominance. When the influences of these variables are
controlled for, reliable categorization time differences no
longer come about.
With categories considered the building blocks of
cognition (Pinker, 1997) the question of which categories
constitute truly distinct kinds (and which ones do not)
becomes one of central importance in cognitive science. In
what follows, we will review evidence that pertains to the
possibly different nature of concrete and abstract categories.
As we already indicated, studies addressing the internal
structure of abstract categories are scarce, but nevertheless
seem to suggest its origin differs from that of concrete
categories. Especially a study by Hampton (1981) favours
this conclusion. Hampton found that the polymorphous
concept - a measure of the number of characteristic features
shared by category and exemplar, originating from the
concrete categories literature - did not prove adequate in
predicting the graded structure of a number of abstract
categories. We will show how one can improve upon this
prediction by taking distinctive features into consideration
and argue that concrete and abstract categories might not be
that differently structured after all.

2438

Kinds of Categories
Much of our theorizing about the nature of categories arises
from the study of well-established, concrete categories like
fruit or vehicles. The vast amount of work currently
available on this subject matter, testifies to the fruitfulness
of this particular approach to semantic cognition. Medin,
Lynch, and Solomon (2000) nevertheless argue that
extending the scope of studies to include other kinds of
categories, is a praiseworthy endeavour. They consider three
major reasons for doing so: (i) it allows for a test of the
generality of prevailing theories, (ii) it might reveal
interesting peculiarities of certain kinds of categories, and
(iii) different categories may differ in the ease with which
they allow the investigation of topics of interest. Of course,
leaving the familiar domains of apples and oranges and of
bicycles and cars for that of abstract beliefs as evolution and
patriotism, will only yield these benefits if concrete and
abstract categories are in fact shown to be truly distinct
kinds of categories. Medin et al. discern two (interrelated)
criteria that can be used to argue for the different nature of
concrete and abstract categories. These criteria pertain to the
processing differences and the structural differences
between both types of categories1.
Lakoff (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Lakoff & Turner, 1989)
introduces the idea that abstract entities are processed
through reference to more concrete entities. The notion of
anger is traditionally held up as an example. Its meaning is
said to be understood by referring to water that comes to a
boil. According to this idea, abstract categories are
processed differently from concrete ones, in that the latter
ones do not require metaphorical mapping. Structural
differences support such claims in that the features that are
generated in response to abstract entities are less specific
than the characteristic features concrete categories present
with (Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, 2005). Additional structural
differences come about in feature generation tasks. Abstract
categories invoke more introspective features than concrete
categories do, but do not activate as much entity features.
When generating relational features for abstract categories,
participants emphasize agents, actions, and social aspects.
When generating relational features for concrete categories,
participants mainly recall objects, living things, locations
and functions (Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, 2005;
Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, 2005).
A feature generation task is also at the basis of Hampton’s
investigation of the structure of abstract categories
(Hampton, 1981). Hampton had participants generate
characteristic features for eight abstract categories.
Subsequently, he had a different group of participants judge
whether these features were applicable to the categories’
exemplars. The degree to which category and exemplars
1

Medin et al. (2000) include content-laden principles as a third
criterion, but we will not discuss it here since as far as we know no
principled attempts have been made to distinguish concrete and
abstract categories on the basis of the causal explanatory
frameworks they invoke.

share features had proven to be predictive of exemplars’
typicality in concrete categories (Hampton, 1979), but the
so-called polymorphous concept measure did not predict
rated typicality in all of the studied abstract categories.

Aim
Dry and Storms (2009) have recently demonstrated how the
polymorphous concept (Hampton, 1979, 1981) can be
generalized to include both shared and distinctive features.
In all but four of the eleven concrete categories studied by
Dry and Storms allowing distinctive features to influence
the prediction of rated typicality improved the predictive
power of the polymorphous concept model. As Hampton
(1981) is up until now the only study addressing the graded
structure of abstract categories, we felt it important to
attempt to replicate the findings and to establish whether the
poor predictions by the polymorphous concept model for
some of the abstract categories could not be attributed to
exclusion of distinctive feature information. Note that this
would not detract from the finding that the features that
make up the polymorphous concept in concrete and abstract
categories differ regarding the nature of the information
they communicate (Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, 2005;
Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, 2005). To the contrary, it would
establish the generality of the model across featural content.

The Generalized Polymorphous Concept
The polymorphous concept model (Hampton, 1979, 1981)
assumes that features are the representational units of
semantic concepts and that the more of these features a
particular exemplar and its category share, the more typical
the exemplar is considered to be. If both the category and
the exemplars are represented by binary feature vectors (v)
of length k in which the presence or absence of each
characteristic feature is signified by 1 and 0 respectively,
then the typicality of an exemplar i with respect to category
A can be formalized as:
PC (i, Α ) = ∑ vik v Ak

(1)

k

Because of the multiplicative nature of Equation (1) only
those features that are shared by i and A contribute to
exemplar i’s typicality. Earlier we already gave the example
of the penguin, an animal considered to be atypical among
birds as it cannot fly or does not build its nest in trees like
other birds do. Penguins, however, also <live on icy
planes> and <have flippers>. These are features that are
distinct to the penguin and might plausibly impact on its
perceived typicality as a bird. Dry and Storms (2009) have
made the relevance of distinctive features for typicality
judgments more salient by casting the polymorphous
concept model in terms of category-exemplar similarity.
From the work of Tversky (Gati & Tversky, 1984; Tversky,
1977) it has become apparent that both shared and
distinctive features contribute to similarity. Following
Tversky’s contrast model (1977) the similarity siA between

2439

an exemplar i and a category A can be expressed as a
weighted combination of the features that i and A share (vi
∩ vA), the features that are distinct to i (vi – vA), and the
features that are distinct to A (vA - vi):

 

siA = θ ∑ vik v Ak  − (1 − θ )∑ vik (1 − v Ak )
k
 k
 


concept (Hampton, 1979) with those by the generalized
polymorphous concept (Dry & Storms, 2009).

Exemplar Generation

(2)



− (1 − θ )∑ (1 − vik ) v Ak ,
k



where θ is a single parameter (ranging form 0 to 1) that
weighs the contributions of shared and distinctive features
(Navarro & Lee, 2004). Setting θ to low values emphasizes
distinctive features, whereas setting θ to high values
emphasizes common features.
Dry and Storms (2009) note that the first and third terms
in Equation (2) are collinear. Consider the example feature
vectors in Table 1. Exemplars i and j differ from one
another in that exemplar i has one more feature in common
with category A than exemplar j. Because i and A share the
third feature, while j and A do not, vi ∩ vA equals 2, while vj
∩ vA equals 1. This difference is, however, also reflected in
the fact that category A has one more distinctive feature in
regards to exemplar j than it has in regards to exemplar i.
Because of the same (category) feature that was missing in j,
but not in i, vA - vi equals 1 while vA - vj equals 2. In
Equation (2) vikvAk and (1-vik)vAk thus act as communicating
vessels. This has important implications for the categoryexemplar similarity calculation in that even when θ is set to
0, siA will still be inversely affected by feature commonality
if vA - vi is included in the calculation. In order to address
this Dry and Storms re-formulate Equation (2) by dropping
the third term such that the expression for the generalized
polymorphous concept becomes:

 

GPC (θ , i, A) = θ ∑ vik v Ak  − (1 − θ )∑ vik (1 − v Ak )
k
 k
 


(3)

Table 1. Example feature vectors and corresponding indices
of commonality and distinctiveness.
vi
1
1
1
0

vj
1
1
0
0

vA
1
0
1
1

vi ∩ vA
1
0
1
0

vA - vi
0
0
0
1

vj ∩ vA
1
0
0
0

vA - vj
0
0
1
1

Study 1
In this section we start by describing the gathering of the
materials necessary to allow a replication of Hampton
(1981). First, we elaborate on the selection of abstract
categories and their exemplars. Then we discuss the
gathering of typicality ratings, features, and feature
applicability judgments, which will allow a comparison of
the predictions made by the traditional polymorphous

Seven categories were selected for inclusion in this study.
All of them adhered to Hampton’s (1981) definition of an
abstract category in that they had as referents things that are
not physical, concrete objects. As part of a large exemplar
generation study that included 30 categories of a varied
nature, 80 first year students of the University of Leuven
produced eight exemplars for the categories art forms,
crimes, diseases, emotions, media, sciences, and virtues. A
tally was kept of the number of times a particular exemplar
was generated in response to a category label. This tally
informed the selection of exemplars. As previous work on
concrete and ad hoc categories (Barsalou, 1985; Mervis,
Catlin, & Rosch 1976) has established a strong relationship
between generation frequency and typicality, we hoped to
obtain exemplars that differed considerably in typicality by
selecting 15 exemplars that spanned the range of generation
frequencies for a particular abstract category.

Typicality Judgments
A group of 30 first year students of the University of
Leuven provided typicality judgments for the 15 selected
exemplars of each of the seven abstract categories. They
received a booklet containing seven pages with on each
page the 15 exemplars of one of the seven categories. The
participants were asked to indicate for every item on the
page how good an example it was of the category mentioned
on top of the page. They were required to provide their
answer by indicating a value on a scale ranging from 1 (a
very bad example) to 20 (an excellent example). If they did
not know one of the presented exemplars, they were asked
to indicate this by drawing a circle around it. Every
participant rated the typicality of all the exemplars of every
category. There were two different presentation orders for
the categories and three different presentation orders for the
exemplars within a category. This resulted in six different
booklets that were each completed by five participants.
The reliability of the typicality judgments within each of
the categories was estimated using the split-half correlation
with Spearman-Brown correction. The reliabilities for six of
the categories lay between .94 and .98. The reliability for
diseases proved somewhat lower with a value of .80. To
confirm the validity of the exemplar selection procedure
described above, the correlation between the typicality
judgments and the generation frequencies was calculated for
each category. The correlations were .76 for art forms, .52
for crimes, .49 for diseases, .79 for emotions, .84 for media,
.73 for sciences, and .69 for virtues. All these correlations
proved significant at the .05 level (one-tailed t). These
results thus indicate that the commonly found relationship
between typicality and generation frequency also holds in
abstract categories.

2440

Feature Generation
Thirty University of Leuven students completed a task
intended to elicit the features associated with each of the
categories. They answered three questions for each of the
category labels. (i) Which features do you feel are important
for this category? (ii) Which features have to be present for
something to be considered a member of this category? (iii)
Which features determine whether something is a better
example of this category than something else? Every
participant answered these questions for each of the seven
abstract categories. Each participant was presented with a
different order of categories. Participants could generate as
many (or few) features as they felt necessary. Across
participants and questions 46 different features were
generated for art forms, 38 for crimes, 50 for diseases, 44
for emotions, 35 for media, 46 for sciences, and 40 for
virtues.

Feature Applicability
The exemplars and features that were generated in response
to the category labels were combined in an exemplar-byfeature matrix. The exemplars (in alphabetical order) made
up the columns of the matrix, while the features (also in
alphabetical order) made up the rows of the matrix. Hence,
every exemplar-feature-pair was represented by a single cell
in the matrix. Five University of Leuven students indicated
for each exemplar-feature-pair whether the feature applied
to the exemplar or not, by entering a 1 or a 0 in the
corresponding matrix cell. Participants performed the task at
home and could freely choose when they worked on it. They
were given the choice to work on the task row-wise or
column-wise, but they were asked not to pause until a row
or column was finished. The reliability of the exemplar-byfeature judgments was again assessed using the split-half
correlation with Spearman-Brown correction. There are only
ten different ways to divide five participants into two half
groups. The ten possible estimations of the reliability
averaged .76 for art forms, .82 for crimes, .81 for diseases,
.82 for emotions, .74 for media, .72 for sciences, and .77 for
virtues, indicating considerable agreement between the five
judges.

Model Analyses
The empirical data gathering now allows us to evaluate the
predictive power of the (generalized) polymorphous concept
with regards to the graded structure of abstract categories.
The five exemplar-by-feature matrices were combined into a
single matrix by determining the majority judgment for each
cell. The resulting binary matrix provided the exemplar
feature vectors vik that enter into Equation (3). The category
feature vector vAk in Equation (3) held ones for those
features that were generated in response to the category
label in the feature generation task, and zeros for those that
were not. For each of the seven abstract categories the
generalized polymorphous concept was then implemented
by varying θ from 0 to 1 in increments of .0005. For every
value of θ the correlation with judged typicality was

computed2. The bold lines in Figure 1 display for each
category the correlation of the generalized polymorphous
concept with judged typicality across the entire range of θ.
The results replicate those of Hampton (1981) in that the
original polymorphous concept proves a good predictor of
the graded structure of some of the abstract categories, but
not of all. When θ equals 1, indicating that only those
features that the exemplars and the category share are taken
into account, the correlation reaches .88 for media and .72
for art forms, crimes, and emotions. The correlations for
diseases (.42) and virtues (.04) do not reach significance at
the .05 level, however (one-tailed t). The .48 correlation for
sciences, albeit low, does. Importantly, Figure 1 also shows
that the prediction of typicality in the latter categories can
be improved considerably by taking distinctive features into
account. Allowing θ to differ from 1 yields an increase in
the correlation with typicality to .73 for diseases (θ = .61),
.49 for virtues (θ = .37), and .69 for sciences (θ = .52).
Unlike the correlations for θ = 1, these correlations are all
significant. Some evidence for a contribution of distinctive
features is also found for the categories art forms (θ = .90)
and emotions (θ = .90) where the correlation increases with
.02. Obviously, the increase in correlation observed for
these categories is negligibly small when compared to the
.31, .45, and .21 increase observed for diseases, virtues, and
sciences. The latter improvements and corresponding θ
values suggest that the inability of the original
polymorphous concept model to predict the graded structure
of some abstract categories might arise from its exclusion of
distinctive features.

Study 2
In Study 1 we have shown that the generalized
polymorphous concept allows good to excellent predictions
of the graded structure of abstract categories by utilizing
both shared and distinctive feature information. However,
one could argue that the evidence found for an influence of
distinctive features follows from the entanglement of
typicality and familiarity. Several researchers have brought
the existence of a relationship between typicality and
familiarity under the attention for concrete categories (e.g.,
Malt & Smith, 1982; McCloskey, 1980). Larochelle,
Richard, and Soulières (2000) make a similar claim for
well-defined categories. Hampton (1981) speculates that
familiarity of exemplars might influence the graded
structure of some abstract categories to a large extent. If a
relationship were to exist between an item’s judged
familiarity and the number of distinctive features that
characterize it (Is an elephant familiar because it is one of
the few mammals that has marked features such as a trunk
and big, floppy ears?) and familiarity and typicality were to
cohere in abstract categories, the influence of distinctive
2
Using the individual exemplar-by-feature matrices as input to
the model analyses and averaging across the resulting correlations
yielded results that were virtually identical to the ones displayed in
Figure 1.

2441

features should considerably weaken or disappear when the
shared variance between typicality and familiarity is
partialed out. To test this we obtained familiarity ratings for
each of the studied exemplars, used regression analyses to
partial out the shared variance between the typicality and
familiarity ratings, and subjected the resulting residuals to
the model analyses employed in Study 1.

Figure 1 display for each category the correlation of the
generalized polymorphous concept with these residuals.
As can be seen from the figure, the procedure employed
in Study 2 did not impact heavily upon the results. If
anything, the evidence for an influence of distinctive
features on abstract categories’ graded structure became
more apparent with crimes being the only category for
which θ = 1 resulted in the optimal correlation (r = .60). The
other θ values that yielded optimal predictions were .78 for
art forms (r = .67), .57 for diseases (r = .62), .87 for
emotions (r = .78), .82 for media (r = .70), .61 for sciences
(r = .74), and .27 for virtues (r = .60). These results are most
likely due to the weak relationship between the familiarity
and the typicality judgments for the majority of the
categories. Only for art forms (r = .53) and media (r = .60)
did the correlation reach significance at the .05 level (twotailed t) and as a result affected the shape of the curve in
Figure 1. It would appear that familiarity does not impact
strongly upon typicality and can therefore not be held
responsible for the influence of distinctive feature
information on abstract categories’ graded structure.

Familiarity Judgments
Familiarity judgments were obtained in much the same
manner as the typicality judgments were. A group of 30 first
year students of the University of Leuven received a booklet
containing seven pages with on each page the 15 exemplars
of one of the seven categories. The participants were asked
to indicate for every item on the page how familiar they
were with it. They were required to provide their answer by
indicating a value on a scale ranging from 1 (never seen,
heard, or used) to 7 (seen, heard, or used very often). As
was the case in the typicality judgment task, there were two
different presentation orders for the categories and three
different presentation orders for the exemplars in a category.
The judgments proved very reliable with Spearman-Brown
corrected split-half correlations ranging from .92 for
emotions to .98 for media. Only the reliability of crimes
proved a little lower with an estimation of .81.

Summary and Discussion
Abstract categories can be considered different from
concrete categories. There is evidence to suggest that they
are processed differently (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Lakoff
& Turner, 1989) and there are said to be structural
differences between them (Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings,
2005; Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, 2005). It is questionable,
however, whether they also differ with regard to the origin
of their graded structure. Hampton (1981) found that the
polymorphous concept - a measure of the number of
characteristic features shared by category and exemplars -

Model Analyses
Regression analyses were employed to partial out the shared
variance between the typicality and familiarity ratings. The
model analyses introduced earlier were then repeated but the
generalized polymorphous concept predictions were now
correlated with the residuals resulting from the regression
analyses instead of with typicality. The dotted lines in

r value

Art forms

Crimes

Diseases

Emotions

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1
0

0.5

1

-1
0

Media

0.5

-1
0

1

Sciences

0.5

1

-1
0

0.5

1

Virtues

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

typicality

-1
0

0.5

1

-1
0

0.5

-1
0

1

residual

0.5

1

θ value

Figure 1: Correlation between graded structure and generalized polymorphous concept across θ values.

2442

did not prove adequate in predicting the graded structure of
a number of abstract categories, while it did do a good job
predicting the graded structure of concrete categories
(Hampton, 1979). However supportive Hampton’s results
might seem for the proposition that abstract categories are a
structurally different kind of categories than concrete ones,
the shared feature model does not fare equally well in all
concrete categories either (Hampton, 1979 reports Kendall’s
τ values that range from .61 to .78). In addition, Dry and
Storms (2009) have generalized the polymorphous concept
to include both shared and distinctive features. In seven of
the eleven concrete categories studied by Dry and Storms
allowing distinctive features to influence the prediction of
rated typicality improved the predictive power of the
polymorphous concept. The resulting predictions
nevertheless still varied considerably, with Pearson
correlation coefficients ranging from .47 to .91. Here we
applied the generalized polymorphous concept to seven
abstract categories and found similar results. In five of the
categories the optimal correlation with typicality was
obtained through a weighted combination of shared and
distinctive features. As was the case for the concrete
categories, the resulting correlations varied considerably,
with values ranging from .49 to .88. This suggests that the
graded structures of concrete and abstract categories do not
necessarily have a different origin, but opens up the
question of what might account for the differences found
amid concrete and abstract categories.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by grants G.0513.08 of
the Research Foundation – Flanders and OT/05/27 of the
Leuven University Research Council awarded to Gert
Storms. The two first authors contributed equally to this
manuscript. They are listed alphabetically. Steven Verheyen
is a research assistant at the Research Foundation - Flanders.

References
Armstrong, S. L., Gleitman, L. R., & Gleitman, H. (1983).
What some concepts might not be. Cognition, 13, 263308.
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211-227.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 629654.
Barsalou, L. W., & Wiemer-Hastings, K. (2005). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R. Zwaan (Eds.),
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thought. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Dry, M. J., & Storms, G. (2009). Features of graded
category structure: Generalizing the family resemblance
and polymorphous concept models. Manuscript submitted
for publication.

Gati, I., & Tversky, A. (1984). Weighting common and
distinctive features in perceptual and conceptual
judgements. Cognitive Psychology, 16, 341-370.
Hampton, J. A. (1979). Polymorphous concepts in semantic
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 18, 441-461.
Hampton, J. A. (1981). An investigation of the nature of
abstract concepts. Memory & Cognition, 9, 149-156.
Hough, M. S., & Pierce, R. S. (1989). Exemplar verification
for common and ad hoc categories in aphasia. In T.
Prescott (Ed.), Clinical Aphasiology. Austin, TX: PROED.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). The metaphorical
structure of the human conceptual system. Cognitive
Science, 4, 195-208.
Lakoff, G., & Turner, M. (1989). More than cool reason: A
field guide to poetic metaphor. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Larochelle, S., Richard, S., & Soulières, I. (2000). What
some effects might not be: The time to verify membership
in “well-defined” categories. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 53A, 929-961.
Malt, B. C., & Smith, E. E. (1982). The role of familiarity in
determining typicality. Memory & Cognition, 10, 69-75.
McCloskey, M. (1980). The stimulus familiarity problem in
semantic memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 19, 485-502.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., & Solomon, K. O. (2000). Are
there kinds of concepts? Annual Review of Psychology,
51, 121-147.
Mervis, C. B., Catlin, J., & Rosch, E. (1976). Relationships
among goodness-of-example, category norms, and word
frequency. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 7, 283284.
Navarro, D. J., & Lee, M. D. (2004). Common and
distinctive features in stimulus similarity: A modified
version of the contrast model. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 11, 961-974.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works. New York, NY:
Penguin Books.
Rosch, E. (1973). On the internal structure of perceptual and
semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive
Development and the Acquisition of Language. New
York, NY: Academic Press.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352.
Wiemer-Hastings, K., & Xu, X. (2005). Content differences
for abstract and concrete concepts. Cognitive Science, 29,
719-736.

2443

