UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Activation-Based Account of Belief Bias in Relational Reasoning: The Effect of Concurrent
Working Memory Load

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0gw0w79g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Banks, Adrian

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Activation-Based Account of Belief Bias in Relational Reasoning: The Effect of
Concurrent Working Memory Load
Adrian P. Banks (a.banks@surrey.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Surrey
Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK
The Rock ‘n’ Roll era was before the Punk music era
Grunge music was popular before the Punk music era
‘The Silence of the Lambs’ was released during the Punk
music era
‘Jailhouse Rock’ was released during the Rock ‘n’ Roll era
Therefore, ‘The Silence of the Lambs’ was released after
‘Jailhouse Rock’

Abstract
Working memory plays an important role in explaining
reasoning performance. A model of belief bias in relational
reasoning is presented here which explains the typical belief
bias effects through the activation level of conclusions in
memory. This account is formalized in an ACT-R model. The
model predicts that a concurrent working memory load will
increase the effect of belief on responses to reasoning
problems, specifically on indeterminately invalid problems.
This prediction is confirmed experimentally.
Keywords: Relational reasoning; Belief bias; ACT-R

Introduction
Prior knowledge has frequently been shown to influence
deductive reasoning, an effect known as belief bias. Current
explanations of this phenomenon are typically dual process
theories, suggesting that belief bias arises from an
interaction of rapid, automatic, heuristic processes with
slow, controlled, analytic processes (e.g. Evans, 2006;
Stanovich, 2004). The analytic processes rely on limited
working memory resources and so explaining the role of
working memory in reasoning is critical to understanding
belief bias. However, descriptions of working memory are
varied. The concept has been used to describe the inhibition
of heuristic responses (De Neys, 2006) and as a limited
capacity store for the representations used in reasoning
(Quayle & Ball, 2000) and serving both of these functions
(Evans, 2008). The purpose of this paper is to further
understanding of the role of working memory by developing
and testing a well-specified account of its role in reasoning.
This account is derived from ACT-R theory (Anderson,
2007). Specifically it suggests that the activation level of the
representations involved in reasoning affects their chance of
retrieval from working memory and therefore the influence
they have on judgments of validity. This activation-based
account explains belief bias effects and makes a novel
prediction about the influence of concurrent working
memory load on belief bias which is tested here.

Belief Bias in Relational Reasoning
Relational reasoning problems can be constructed such that
the conclusions vary independently in terms of belief and
logic. Here is an example from Roberts and Sykes (2003):

Participants are asked to accept only conclusions that
necessarily follow from the premises, i.e. logically valid
conclusions. The conclusion here is both believable and
logical and is commonly accepted. Problems where the
conclusion necessarily follows, that is it is consistent with
all possible interpretations of the premises, are referred to as
determinately valid. If the conclusion is consistent with no
possible interpretation of the premises it is determinately
invalid. If the conclusion is consistent with some but not all
interpretations, it is possible but not necessary and so is
indeterminately invalid. Typically it is found that (a) valid
conclusions are accepted more than invalid conclusions; (b)
believable conclusions are accepted more than unbelievable
conclusions; and (c) the effects of belief are stronger on
indeterminately invalid conclusions than determinately
invalid or valid conclusions (e.g. Roberts & Sykes, 2003). A
model of belief bias in relational reasoning must account for
these three phenomena.

ACT-R Model of Belief Bias
There are two stages to the model of belief bias presented
here. Firstly, in the construction stage of the process, mental
models are constructed based on the premises and
conclusions are drawn from these mental models, referred to
here as ‘initial conclusions’. Secondly, in the retrieval stage
of the process, these initial conclusions are retrieved and
compared with the conclusion presented in the problem. If
they all match then the problem is evaluated as valid. If one
or more do not match then it is evaluated as invalid. If no
conclusions are retrieved (i.e. they have all been forgotten)
then the response is a guess. It is in this retrieval stage that
the activation level of the conclusions determines the
likelihood of their retrieval and it is through this process that
belief exerts its influence. The construction and retrieval
stages are described in detail below.

Construction Stage
Most theories of relational reasoning suggest that people
construct a representation which integrates the information
in the premises into mental models (e.g. Schaeken, Johnson-

3010

Laird, & d’Ydewalle, 1996). Each mental model represents
a layout consistent with the premises. There is some debate
about the exact form of these mental models however (e.g.
Vandierendonck, Dierckx & De Vooght, 2004). The model
presented here assumes that reasoners initially attempt to
construct a single mental model which integrates all of the
information in the premises. This model is similar to the
‘isomeric’ mental models described by Schaeken, Van der
Henst and Schroyens (2006). These mental models retain
the ambiguous relationship between some of the elements in
the premises. For example:
A happens before B
C happens before B
D happens at the same time as B
E happens at the same time as C
Therefore, E happens before D
In this case it is not certain whether A occurs before C and E
or afterwards, both are possible. A mental model is therefore
constructed in which A, C, and E are represented as
occurring before B and D. For example:
A
C
E
Prior to Time2

B
D
Time2

Time is represented spatially, running from left to right. An
initial conclusion can be drawn from this model by focusing
on the two elements mentioned in the conclusion (E & D)
and retaining their relative position in a new representation.
This leads to the initial conclusion that E happens before D.
Sometimes, the problem can refer to elements that are
ambiguously represented in the model. For example:
A happens before B
C happens before B
D happens at the same time as A
E happens at the same time as C
Therefore, E happens before D
This leads to the following model:
A
D
C
E
Prior to Time2

B
Time2

Focusing on the two elements in the conclusion, D and E,
does not lead to an unambiguous new representation. This
ambiguity triggers further mental models to be constructed
in which the ambiguity is resolved by explicitly considering
all the possible layouts:

C
E

A
D

B

A
D

C
E

B

Time1

Time2

Time3

Time1

Time2

Time3

A conclusion can now be drawn from both of these, leading
to the initial conclusions ‘E before D’ and ‘D before E’.

Retrieval Stage
ACT-R does not have separate modules for working
memory and long term memory. Instead, working memory
is ‘equated with the portion of declarative memory above a
threshold of activation.’ (Anderson, Reder & Lebiere, 1996,
pp. 221-222). In this model the most influential factor in
determining activation is Base level activation. A chunk
(symbolic representation) in declarative memory begins
with a given level of activation which decays over time but
is raised again whenever the chunk is retrieved or
encountered again. Hence rehearsing a chunk will maintain
its higher activation level through repeated retrievals, and if
the chunk is experienced again in the course of reasoning
the new chunk will merge with the existing chunk to create
a merged chunk of higher activation.
The believability of a problem is modelled by placing a
chunk in declarative memory before reasoning begins. This
chunk takes the same form as a conclusion and represents
the relationship between the two elements in the conclusion.
It is the prior belief about the relationship between those
two elements. If the conclusion presented in the problem
describes the same relationship as this memory then it is a
believable conclusion, else it is unbelievable.
The influence of this prior belief is twofold. Firstly, it
can be unintentionally retrieved. In the retrieval stage of the
model the intended goal is to retrieve the initial conclusions
that have been drawn from the mental models to evaluate
the problem. However the prior belief takes a similar form
and may be recalled and used in this evaluation process
instead or as well as the initial conclusions. In other words,
the conclusion to the problem is familiar and is judged as
valid but the source of this memory has been wrongly
attributed to an initial conclusion that has just been drawn.
In fact it stems from the matching of the conclusion in the
problem to the prior memory chunk.
Secondly, the initial conclusions drawn from the mental
models can merge with the prior belief chunk if they
describe the same relationship. The initial conclusions
formed for each problem type as a result of this process are
presented in Table 1. Prior belief initially has the lowest
activation level, less than a newly created conclusion, but if
the conclusion merges with prior belief the activation of this
chunk will be the highest.
The believable valid and unbelievable determinately
invalid conditions lead to initial conclusions which match
prior belief, and so form highly active ‘merged
conclusions’. These are very likely to be retrieved. In the
believable valid condition this chunk matches the

3011

Table 1: Merging of conclusions and prior belief chunks in each condition

Believable
Unbelievable

Valid
Matching
Nonmatching
PB + C
C
PB

Determinately Invalid
Matching
Nonmatching
PB
C
PB + C

Indeterminately Invalid
Matching
Nonmatching
PB + C
C
C
PB + C

Matching = chunk matches the conclusion in the problem, Non-matching = chunk does not match the conclusion in the
problem, PB = prior belief chunk, C = conclusion chunk, PB + C = prior belief merged with conclusion, ‘-’ = no chunks.
Relative activation levels: PB+C > C > PB.
conclusion in the problem and so it will be judged as valid
whereas in the unbelievable determinately invalid condition
it does not match and will be judged invalid.
The unbelievable valid and believable determinately
invalid conditions lead to initial conclusions which do not
merge with prior belief. They are still active and likely to be
retrieved, but not as likely as the previous two conditions.
Therefore these conclusions are less likely to be judged as
valid because the initial conclusion is more likely to be
forgotten. Also, the weaker prior belief chunk may
occasionally be retrieved. This does not match the
conclusion in the unbelievable valid problems and does
match the conclusion in the believable determinately invalid
problems and so the logically incorrect response will
sometimes be made. (This is the situation in which the prior
belief is retrieved in unintentionally).
Finally, the indeterminate problems differ from the
determinate problems because two initial conclusions will
be drawn, as described above. One of these will always
match the conclusion in the problem and one will not, and
so there will be one merged conclusion and one unmerged
conclusion. In the believable indeterminately invalid
condition the merged chunk will match the conclusion in the
problem whereas in the unbelievable indeterminately invalid
condition the merged conclusion will not match the
conclusion. As the merged chunk is most likely to be
retrieved, the conclusion presented in the problem is more
likely to be supported in the believable condition and
rejected in the unbelievable condition. Hence merging
explains the interaction of belief and logic that exists with
indeterminately invalid problems but not in the other
conditions.
In summary, this model outlines a reasoning process in
which mental models are created, conclusions drawn and
then retrieved from working memory to evaluate the
problem. This explains the three main effects found in belief
bias experiments. The main effect of logic arises from the
mostly successful retrieval of initial conclusions drawn from
mental models. The main effect of belief arises from the
increased likelihood of retrieving believable conclusions
because of their higher activation. The interaction of belief
and logic arises only in indeterminate problems because
here both matching and non-matching initial conclusions are
retained in working memory and the merging process means
that the matching conclusion will be more active in the

believable conclusions and the non-matching conclusion
more active in the unbelievable conclusion.

The Experiment
An experiment was conducted to test how well this model
fits the pattern of responses found with relational reasoning
problems and the effects of belief on them. Valid,
determinately invalid, and indeterminately invalid problems
were tested, each with both believable and unbelievable
conclusions.
A novel prediction about a direct manipulation of working
memory was also tested. This model proposes that
conclusions are retrieved from working memory to evaluate
reasoning problems. What effect would a concurrent
working memory load have on this process? De Neys (2006)
has shown a reduction in the accuracy of reasoning in
syllogisms when belief and logic conflict, but did not break
down problems any further than conflict and no-conflict, for
example he does not distinguish between believable valid
and unbelievable invalid problems which both conflict. Nor
does De Neys test belief-logic conflict in determinately
invalid problems, only indeterminately invalid problems
were used. This model predicts different effects for each of
these problem types, and so extends these earlier findings.
Participants were presented with a random five digit
number before they attempted to evaluate each problem.
They were asked to retain it and recall the number after they
had evaluated the problem. This means that a representation
of the number must be maintained in working memory at
the same time as the conclusions to the reasoning problem.
Rehearsal of the number takes time and slows the
processing of the reasoning problem which in turn means
that the activation levels of the initial conclusions in
memory are not maintained as effectively. Therefore the
concurrent working memory load will tend to reduce the
activation levels of the initial conclusions.
As a result, initial conclusions are more likely to be
forgotten. But not all conclusions will be influenced equally.
Those with higher activation are less likely to be forgotten.
This suggests that those conclusions that have merged with
prior beliefs are less likely to be forgotten than the
conclusions which have not merged. There will be a greater
influence of merged conclusions when there is a concurrent
working memory than without.

3012

This will have a particularly noticeable effect in
indeterminate problems. Without the working memory load
it is more likely that both conclusions will be recalled
leading to the correct invalid response. When only the
merged conclusion is recalled the response will depend on
the believability of the conclusion. In the believable
condition the merged conclusion matches so a valid
response is given, in the unbelievable conclusion the merged
conclusion does not match and so an invalid response is
given. In other words, the interaction of belief and logic
when comparing valid and indeterminately invalid problems
will be accentuated with a concurrent working memory
load. The effect of working memory load on determinately
invalid problems will not be so great.

Method
Participants Thirty-two students from the University of
Surrey participated in return for course credit.

conclusion (given below the statements) may be logically
deduced from them. You should answer this question on the
assumption that the statements are, in fact, true. If, and only
if, you judge the conclusion necessarily follows from the
statements, you should press ‘d’ on the keyboard, otherwise
press ‘k’. Please answer all the questions as accurately and
quickly as you can. Please press the spacebar when you are
ready to move on to the next problem. Additionally, during
twelve of these problems you will be asked to remember
five random numbers between 1 and 9 whilst you are
solving the problem. When you have solved it, recall these
numbers out loud for the experimenter to note down. There
will be a different set of numbers for each problem’.
Participants were given a practice problem and their
solution was discussed to ensure they had understood the
task. Then they completed the experiment. The practice and
experimental materials were presented using a computer.

Results

Design A within subjects, three factor design was used.
Problems varied in the believability of their conclusion
(believable or unbelievable), their validity (valid,
determinately invalid or indeterminately invalid) and
whether there was a concurrent working memory load or not
(load or no load). The dependent variable was the number
of conclusions accepted in each condition. Problems were
presented in a different random order to each participant.
The order of the working memory load condition was
counterbalanced. Half of the participants completed the
working memory load condition before the no load
condition and the other half completed the no load condition
first.
Materials Participants completed twenty-four problems,
two of each type. The problems used were all two-model
problems of the form described above. The content of the
problems was based on those used by Roberts and Sykes
(2003) and all described temporal relations between a range
of historical events. An example has been presented above.
Two premises were believable and two were unbelievable in
each problem in order to control for premise believability. A
second set of problems was created by reversing the
relational term for each conclusion. Thus the believable
valid problem in the first set becomes an unbelievable
determinately invalid problem in the second set, and so on.
This technique counterbalances the strength of belief in the
believable and unbelievable conditions and avoids
discrepancies arising if the conclusions chosen for one
condition are stronger in belief overall than the other. Half
of the participants used the first set of problems and half
used the second set.
Procedure Participants completed the task individually.
They were given the following written instructions: ‘This is
an experiment to test peoples’ reasoning ability. You will be
given 24 problems in total. For each problem you will be
shown four statements and you are asked if a certain

Responses to the forward and reversed problems were
combined and the percentage of conclusions accepted
calculated for each condition. These responses are presented
in Figure 1. A 2x3x2 within subjects ANOVA showed a
main effect of validity F(2, 62) = 63.22, p<0.0001, no main
effect of belief F(1, 31) = 1.00, p>0.05 and an interaction of
validity and belief F(2, 62) = 5.64, p<0.01. Thus the
expected effects of validity and the interaction with belief
were found, but unexpectedly there was no main effect of
belief. Examining figure one it seems that the reason for this
was that unbelievable valid conclusions were accepted more
frequently than believable valid conclusions. This cannot be
attributed to content effects of the problems because of the
counterbalancing of the two sets of problems with forward
and reversed conclusions. The explanation of this effect is
not clear.
It was predicted that the effect of belief bias would be
greater with the working memory load than without.
Therefore the percentage of conclusions accepted for valid
and indeterminately invalid problems were examined
separately for the load and no load conditions. In the load
condition there was a main effect of validity F(1,31) =
19.36, p<0.0001, a marginally significant effect of belief
F(1,31) = 3.53, p=0.07 and a significant interaction of
validity and belief F(1,31) = 8.91, p<0.01. It was also
predicted that this interaction of valid and invalid problems
would be present only with indeterminately invalid
problems. Comparing valid and determinately invalid
problems, a main effect of validity was found F(1,31) =
38.02, p<0.0001, but no main effect of belief was found
F(1,31) = 0.09, p>0.05 and no interaction of validity and
belief F(1,31) = 0.90, p>0.05. Thus the predicted effects of
working memory load were found. Believable conclusions
were accepted more often, specifically in the
indeterminately invalid condition.
In the no load condition when comparing valid and
indeterminately invalid problems there was a main effect of
validity F(1,31) = 40.63 p<0.0001, but no main effect of

3013

belief F(1,31) = 0.03, p>0.05 nor an interaction of validity
and belief F(1,31) = 2.05, p>0.05. Comparing valid and
determinately invalid problems a main effect of validity was
found F(1,31) = 181.19, p<0.0001, no main effect of belief
F(1,31) = 1.34, p>0.05 and no interaction of validity and
belief F(1,31) = 0.24, p>0.05. Therefore the predictions of
this experiment were supported. The effect of belief bias
was greater when there is a working memory load than
without and was especially strong in the indeterminately
invalid problems.
Load
90
80
70

were only using this strategy in the no load condition. A
better fit was found in the load condition if it was assumed
that no participants used the more sophisticated strategy. It
is possible that the working memory load hindered this
strategic development as well as the reasoning itself.
The fit between the model and data was good, with an R2
of 0.96. Believable conclusions were accepted more than
unbelievable conclusions in all of the problem types, valid
problems were accepted more than invalid problems, and
the effect of belief was greater with the indeterminately
invalid problems. These effects were accentuated in the
working memory load condition; in particular the effect of
belief on indeterminately invalid conclusions was greater
than in the no load condition. The model does not replicate
the unexpected finding that unbelievable valid conclusions
were accepted more frequently than believable valid ones.

60
50

Data

40

Model

Discussion
Overall, the model provides good support for the activationbased account of belief bias in relational reasoning. The
major belief bias effects were replicated by the model: valid
conclusions were accepted more than invalid conclusions;
believable conclusions were accepted more than
unbelievable conclusions; and the effects of belief were
stronger in the indeterminately invalid problems than the
valid or determinately invalid problems.
A concurrent working memory load has the effect of
disrupting and delaying the reasoning process which leads
to lower activation levels of the conclusions stored in
working memory. This in turn leads to an increased
influence of belief on conclusion evaluation because
conclusions that have merged with the prior belief chunk are
more likely to remain above the retrieval threshold and be
retrieved as they begin with a higher activation level. Novel
conclusions that have not merged with prior belief are more
likely to be forgotten. A second finding is that the influence
of concurrent working memory was not solely through
influencing the reasoning process, as predicted, but also
altered the strategy adopted to complete the reasoning task
and therefore the responses made.

30
20
10
0
Believable
Valid

Unbelievable
Valid

Believable
Det. Invalid

Unbelievable
Believable Unbelievable
Det. Invalid Indet. Invalid Indet. Invalid

No load
100
90
80
70
60

Data

50

Model

40
30
20
10
0
Believable
Valid

Unbelievable
Valid

Believable
Det. Invalid

Unbelievable Believable Unbelievable
Det. Invalid Indet. Invalid Indet. Invalid

Figure 1: Percentages of conclusions accepted by condition
with and without a working memory load, and model
predictions

General Discussion

Model Fit
The concurrent working memory load was modeled by
placing a chunk containing the number in declarative
memory. Productions to retrieve this chunk and subvocalize
the number fired whenever ACT-R was not engaged in any
other memory retrieval or when it was already
subvocalizing the number.
Before assessing the model fit, one further comment on
the strategies used in reasoning must be made. Previous
research suggested that some participants learnt to draw an
invalid conclusion directly after the construction of the
ambiguous model of the indeterminate problems rather than
constructing the explicit mental models (Banks, 2008).
However in this experiment it appeared that participants

The purpose of this paper has been to explore the link
between working memory, relational reasoning, and prior
knowledge to explain belief bias. An activation-based
account of belief bias is proposed in which the main belief
bias effects are explained through the influence that belief
has on the retrieval of conclusions from working memory.
This account proposes that when evaluating relational
reasoning problems, mental models are constructed of the
premises from which initial conclusions are drawn. These
are then retrieved from memory in order to evaluate the
conclusion presented in the problem. The likelihood of a
conclusion being retrieved is determined by its activation
level, which is raised if the conclusion matches a previously
held belief. Therefore belief affects reasoning through its
influence on working memory. An ACT-R model of this

3014

theory predicts the major belief bias effects well and also
the influence of a concurrent working memory load on
responses.
The most common current explanations of belief bias
are presented as dual process theories, e.g. Evans (2006) and
Stanovich (2004). Essentially, these suggest that belief bias
results from the interaction of heuristic and analytic
processes. Belief influences the process either by a heuristic
which directly cues a belief based response or through
influencing the subsequent analysis. However analytic
processes can override these influences, on occasion.
Although the mechanisms proposed here differ from
specific dual process theories that have been suggested
elsewhere, the activation-based account of belief bias
described here is actually broadly consistent with a dual
process account. It is proposed here that beliefs can
influence reasoning in two ways, a prior belief can be
retrieved directly in the evaluation of the conclusion or it
can influence the retrieval of a conclusion through merging
with it. The former process is comparable to a heuristic
response in which the salient belief for a problem is
retrieved directly. The latter process is more analytical as
the initial conclusion has been inferred from the mental
model – although prior belief can influence this too, through
merging. There are some parallels therefore between this
account of belief bias and dual process theories. The
difference is that the ACT-R model presented here does not
describe two distinct types of processes or systems which
work relatively independently. The influence of prior
experience and analytic reasoning operate much more
closely together to affect the activation level of all chunks in
declarative memory.
This theory also differs from previous accounts of
working memory and belief bias. Working memory does
serve to temporarily retain conclusions used in the reasoning
process and is limited in capacity. But this capacity is a
function of the time taken for an activation level to decay
below a level such that a chunk cannot be recalled rather
than a limit on the number of items in working memory per
se. Working memory resources here are not described as
inhibiting heuristic responses, the choice of response at any
time is determined by an explicit set of production rules in
the ACT-R model. However the main aspect in which this
model differs from previous accounts is that belief in the
items themselves affects working memory performance.
Conclusions within it are not neutral and subject to invariant
working memory capacities but vary in activation level
according to a number of factors, including whether they
match prior belief or are novel. Therefore it is proposed here
that prior knowledge and working memory work together
more closely than has previously been suggested in
reasoning (e.g. Quayle & Ball, 2000).
Finally, the goal of this paper has been to develop a
more detailed account of belief bias by investigating the role
of working memory in reasoning. As a result, a large part of
the explanation has rested on retrieval and memory rather
than the more common explanations in relational reasoning

involving mental model construction. But the claim is not
that reasoning is solely about memory. Firstly, the
construction of mental models is modeled in some detail and
this process is important. Secondly, the aim was to make
some simplifying assumptions and to test how effective the
resulting model was. For example variation in the mental
models constructed is not modeled and the activation levels
of the mental models themselves in working memory are not
validated. Future work could certainly expand on these and
other areas. However, given these assumptions, the fit of the
model to the data was still very good. Introducing more
detail into the process would perhaps serve only to improve
the model further.

References
Anderson, J.R. (2007). How can the mind occur in the
physical universe? New York: Oxford University Press.
Anderson, J.R., Reder, L.M., & Lebiere, C. (1996). Working
memory: Activation limitations on retrieval. Cognitive
Psychology, 30, 221-256.
Banks, A.P. (2008). An activation level account of belief
bias: Modelling the effects of belief strength. Sixth
International Conference on Thinking, Venice.
De Neys, W. (2006). Dual processing in reasoning: Two
systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science, 17, 428433.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 378-395.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology, 59, 255-278.
Quayle, J.D., & Ball, L.J. (2000). Working memory,
metacognitive uncertainty, and belief bias in syllogistic
reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
53A, 1202-1223.
Roberts, M.J., & Sykes, E.D.A. (2003). Belief bias and
relational reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 56A, 131-154.
Schaeken, W., Johnson-Laird, P.N., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). Mental models and temporal reasoning. Cognition,
60, 205-234.
Schaeken, W., Van der Henst, J-B., & Schroyens W. (2006).
The mental models theory of relational reasoning:
Premises’ relevance, conclusions’ phrasing and cognitive
economy. In W. Schaeken, A. Vandierendonck, W.
Schroyens & G. d’Ydewalle (Eds.), The mental models
theory of reasoning: Refinements and extensions.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stanovich, K.E. (2004). The robot’s rebellion: Finding
meaning in the age of Darwin. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Vandierendonck, A., Dierckx, V., & Vooght, G.D. (2004).
Mental model construction in linear reasoning: Evidence
for the construction of initial annotated models. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 57A, 1369–1391.

3015

