UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Experimental Investigation of the Role of Collaboration in the Evolution of
Communication Systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2046139d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fay, Nicolas
Rogers, Shane
Swoboda, Nik
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Experimental Investigation of the Role of Collaboration in the Evolution of
Communication Systems
Bradley Walker (walkeb03@student.uwa.edu.au)
Nicolas Fay (nfay@psy.uwa.edu.au)
Shane Rogers (rogers03@student.uwa.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, CRAWLEY
WA 6009, Australia

Nik Swoboda (nswoboda@clip.dia.fi.upm.es)
Departamento de Inteligencia Artificial, Universidad Politecnia de Madrid, 28660-Boadilla del Monte,
Madrid, Spain
Abstract

able to try it out for themselves, most operating it
successfully. Another group of chimpanzees in a “ghost”
condition observed the mechanism being operated by
invisible strings. None in this condition proceeded to use
the mechanism successfully, indicating that observation of
the moving mechanism was not enough; to adopt the
techniques required to obtain the food, chimpanzees
imitated each other, performing the same actions to achieve
the same ends. Given this capability for imitation, why did
language not arise in chimpanzees?
One answer is that imitation alone cannot explain the
origin and evolution of language. The literature suggests
two additional ingredients that may help explain the
evolution of human communication systems: learning biases
and social collaboration.

Imitation alone cannot explain language evolution. Two
additional ingredients have been proposed that may help
explain the evolution of language systems: learning biases
and social collaboration. An experimental method was
developed that isolated the roles of collaboration and learning
biases in the development of novel communication systems.
Participants played a Pictionary-like task to develop ad hoc
graphical communication systems in one of two conditions:
one in which they interacted with a partner (Interaction
condition), and one in which they received the same images
from a “pseudo-partner” but did not interact (PseudoInteraction condition).
Comparison of the resultant
communication systems showed that the Interaction condition
yielded higher identification accuracy, greater refinement of
graphical signs and more alignment on a set of shared
graphical signs (in fact, graphical alignment did not occur at
all in the Pseudo-Interaction condition). Thus, collaboration
plays a crucial role in the evolution of human communication
systems.

Learning Biases

Keywords: Language; collaboration; learning biases; cultural
evolution; communication systems.

Background
It is widely believed that imitation alone can explain the
evolution of human communication systems. Dawkins
(1976) argued that memes, cultural units equivalent to
genes, replicate and spread via imitation. As in biology,
copying mistakes (mutations) promote variability and
competition among memes, where more successful variants
survive and drive memetic evolution. Blackmore (2000)
argues that imitating communication techniques over a
number of generations could have led, through the
accumulation of such copying mistakes, to the emergence
and development of language.
Until recently, imitation was considered a uniquely
human ability, and therefore offered a plausible explanation
as to why language is unique to humans. However, recent
research shows that imitation also occurs in chimpanzees.
Hopper et al. (2007) trained a high-ranking female
chimpanzee to use a food-releasing mechanism by lifting a
weight. The rest of her group was later allowed to observe
her using the mechanism to obtain the food, and then were

Human learning biases may play a key role in the evolution
of human communication systems. Like other cultural
phenomena, communication systems spread through
learning. Learning biases can therefore influence what is
spread and how communication systems evolve.
The Iterated Learning Model (ILM) is a framework that
has been used to investigate language evolution,
highlighting the importance of constraints on learning. In a
series of learner generations in the ILM, each learner
receives input from the previous learner, develops
hypotheses about the processes involved in its production,
and then transmits their own output to the next learner based
on these hypotheses. Learning plays a crucial role here, and
any biases that restrict the learning of one thing over another
will dictate what spreads through the population; learnable
languages proliferate.
Computational studies using the ILM to simulate the
evolution of language from earlier non-linguistic
communication systems have isolated three aspects of
human learning that are necessary for the development of
linguistic structure: the capacity for generalization, bias
against the acquisition of one-to-many meaning-signal
mappings, and bias against the acquisition of many-to-one
meaning-signal mappings (Brighton, Smith, & Kirby, 2005).

1388

According to these simulations, without such biases
language in its present state could not have evolved.
Behavioral studies employing the ILM framework support
the notion that learning biases impose constraints that steer
the course of cultural evolution. Kalish, Griffiths and
Lewandowsky (2007) created a computer task in which
participants learned one of four functions (positive linear,
negative linear, non-linear and random) from corrective
feedback presented after guessing the y-value associated
with a given x-value. A test phase, with no feedback,
followed this training phase. Participants' responses in the
test phase served as input in the training of the next
generation of learners in the chain. Each generation thus
learned the function purely from the output of the previous
generation, for a total of nine generations. Regardless of the
original function, most chains of learners eventually settled
on a positive linear function of response, suggesting that the
information presented at the beginning of a chain has less
impact than learning biases on the eventual form of this
information at the end of the chain.

Collaboration
An alternative view is that social processes contribute to
cultural and linguistic evolution. Tomasello et al. (2005)
argue that the capacity to understand others as having goals
and intentions is shared by humans and apes, but the
motivation to share emotions and experiences with others is
unique to humans. When individuals engage in activities
that involve shared goals and require coordination of their
actions to achieve those goals, they develop shared practices
and beliefs. Like other cultural phenomena, language exists
as shared knowledge and changes through interaction,
causing cultural evolution (Fay et al., under review; Garrod
& Doherty, 1994).
One mechanism for this change is alignment, where
interlocutors start to think about and express concepts
similarly during communication (i.e., they align). Studies of
dialogue have found that grounding, the process of ensuring
mutual understanding, leads to alignment (Clark & WilkesGibbs, 1986). Alignment expands the information shared
by interlocutors and thus lessens the effort required in
production and comprehension (Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
More shared information, or common ground, reduces the
effort needed to achieve mutual understanding.
To study the origin and evolution of communication
systems, several behavioral studies have used the Pictionary
task (e.g., Fay, Garrod, & Roberts, 2008; Fay et al., under
review; Garrod et al., 2007). Like the board game
Pictionary, participants communicate concepts to one
another by drawing, without using letters or numbers, and
without
speaking.
When
participants
repeatedly
communicate the same concepts, novel graphical
communication systems emerge and evolve.
Participants in the Pictionary task take on director and
matcher roles, where the director attempts to graphically
communicate concepts to the matcher, and the matcher
attempts to identify drawings produced by the director (from

a list of alternatives). Once each of the concepts on the
director's list have been drawn, partners swap roles and
repeat the game, using the same set of concepts (presented
in a different random order in each game). Typically six
games are played. By allowing the matcher to annotate the
director's drawings, participants can engage in a graphical
“discussion”.
In this task, participants engaged in a collaborative
activity with the shared goal of successfully communicating
each concept.
Through feedback and interaction,
participants are able to coordinate their actions to achieve
this goal. Garrod et al. (2007) found that over the course of
the task the interacting participants' ability to identify each
other's drawings improved, their drawings became less
complex and more schematic, and more similar. In other
words, communication became more effective, efficient, and
aligned.

Aim and Hypotheses
Learning biases and collaboration have the capacity to
explain language evolution. All humans have learning
biases and all humans engage in collaborative activity; the
question is whether one or the other, or both, is a
prerequisite for language evolution. The aim of the present
study is to determine the relative contribution of
collaboration to the evolution of communication systems.
To do so, two conditions were contrasted. In condition
one, the Interaction condition, pairs of participants were
able to interact freely while engaged in the Pictionary task.
In condition two individual participants were led to believe
that they were interacting with a partner while playing the
Pictionary task, but they were not. Instead, drawings
produced by a member of an interacting dyad were played
to them, and they attempted to identify the director's
intended referent.
These individual participants then
produced drawings they believed their “pseudo-partner”
would try to identify. This will be referred to as the PseudoInteraction condition, as participants thought they were
interacting with their partner but only received and
responded to drawings produced by their pseudo-partner.
Thus the Interaction condition permits feedback and
interaction within a given trial, whereas participants in the
Pseudo-Interaction condition are restricted to simple
production and reception, with no interaction.
If collaboration is not important to the evolution of
communication systems, its potential benefits (more
effective, efficient and aligned communication) may stem
from underlying learning biases.
In this case,
communication systems developed in the Interaction and
Pseudo-Interaction conditions will show similar levels of
identification accuracy, graphical refinement and graphical
alignment. Alternatively, if collaboration is important to the
evolution of communication systems, then communication
systems developed in the Interaction condition will be
superior to those emerging from the Pseudo-Interaction
condition.

1389

Method
Participants
Forty-five students from the University of Western
Australia participated in exchange for course credit. Ages
ranged from 17-61 years, with a median of 20. Ten
participants were male.
Participants were randomly
assigned to conditions, 15 pairs to the Interaction condition
and 15 individuals to the Pseudo-Interaction condition.

was made with a mouse; once done, both screens cleared
and the game progressed to the next trial. Participants did
not receive any feedback regarding their communicative
success.

Task and Procedure
Interaction Condition Sitting at separate computers, pairs
of participants completed a computerized version of the
Pictionary task. The task consisted of six games. In each
game the director tried to communicate 16 concepts to the
matcher, who selected a response from 20 items (16 targets
plus 4 distracters). The same concepts were used in every
game; for a complete list, see Table 1. Participants
alternated roles between each game, one directing in games
1, 3 and 5 (matching in 2, 4 and 6), and the other directing
in games 2, 4 and 6 (matching in 1, 3 and 5).
In this condition, matchers were able to freely annotate
the directors' drawings (e.g., request clarification by circling
part of the director’s drawing). Additional feedback was
given when a participant imitated or partly imitated their
partner's prior drawing, suggesting partner comprehension.
The trial ended when the matcher selected the concept they
believed the drawing represented. The game ended when
each of the 16 target items had been communicated.
A virtual whiteboard tool was used to manage the task
and record all drawing activity (Healey, Swoboda, & King,
2002). A screenshot of the director's screen is shown in
Figure 1. The list of concepts was displayed at the top of
both participants' screens, with the drawing area directly
below.
For directors, the concepts were organized
sequentially (though in a different, randomized order in each
game), with the current to-be-communicated concept written
in white. The concepts were displayed in a different random
order on the matcher's screen. As participants drew, by
pressing the left mouse button, their drawing activity was
displayed simultaneously on both screens.
To avoid
confusion, directors drew in black ink and matchers in green
ink. Both participants were able to erase parts of the
drawing after clicking the “erase” button. Item selection

Figure 1: Screenshot of the director's computer screen
from the Interaction condition of the Pictionary task. Gray
parts of the drawing, which depicts a microwave, were
drawn by the matcher and were green in the original.
Pseudo-Interaction Condition Here individual participants
played six games of the Pictionary task, alternating between
director and matcher roles from game to game. In games 1,
3 and 5, participants were matchers and attempted to
identify the images drawn by their pseudo-partner. In
games 2, 4 and 6 they directed, drawing images they
believed would be matched by their partner.
Each
participant who directed in games 1, 3 and 5 in the
Interaction condition served as the pseudo-partner of a
participant in the Pseudo-Interaction condition.
Participants in this condition were unable to annotate the
drawings they received, and, as no partner actually received
their images, no feedback was given in later games by reuse
of their drawing (unless fortuitously). As no partner
attempted to identify the participants' drawings in this
condition, the game progressed to the next concept when the
director decided they had finished drawing (and clicked a
“send” button), rather than when the matcher made their
selection. To simulate the pseudo-partner selecting an
answer, there was a random delay of 2 to 8 seconds before
progressing to the next trial.
To ensure that matchers in the Pseudo-Interaction
condition received the same information as those in the
Interaction condition, they were not able to select an answer

Table 1: List of concepts.
Places
Targets

People

Theater

Russell Crowe

Art Gallery
Museum

TV Shows
Drama

Objects

Abstract

Microwave

Loud

Arnold Schwarzenegger Soap Opera

Computer Monitor

Homesick

Brad Pitt

Cartoon

Television

Poverty

Hugh Grant

Sci Fi

Refrigerator

Sadness

Parliament
Distractors

1390

from the list of concepts until the image had been
completely played back. Thus, matchers in the PseudoInteraction condition received exactly the same information
as matchers in the Interaction condition. That PseudoInteraction matchers had no control over when the drawing
was finished added consistency to the task, in that directors
appeared to have full control over when they had finished
drawing, irrespective of whether the participant was
directing or matching.

Results
An example of the drawings produced in each condition is
shown in Figure 2, where arrows indicate the sequence of
images in the two conditions (solid arrows indicate
communication between interacting partners and dashed
arrows between pseudo-partners). Interaction images from
games 1, 3 and 5 are part of both sequences. Parts of the
game 3 and 4 drawings (Interaction condition) were
produced by the matcher; these were green in the original
but are shown here in gray.
As can be seen in Figure 2, the drawings produced in the
Interaction condition became increasingly similar and
simplified as the task progressed. Although the PseudoInteraction participant's drawings are similar to each other,
they are dissimilar to their pseudo-partner's drawings.
Drawings produced in the Pseudo-Interaction condition
were simplified across the task, although less than those
produced in the Interaction condition. Though not shown in
Figure 2, identification accuracy increased in both
conditions, but to a greater degree in the Interaction
condition. These observations were confirmed by ANOVA.

Identification accuracy is plotted in Figure 3, where gaps
in the Pseudo-Interaction condition at games 2, 4 and 6
correspond to games in which the participants were
directing. As can be seen, matcher accuracy improved
across games in both conditions, but improved more
dramatically for matchers in the Interaction condition
compared to those in the Pseudo-Interaction condition.
Accuracy scores were entered into a 2x3 mixed design
ANOVA that treated condition (Interaction, PseudoInteraction) as a between-subjects factor and game (1, 3, 5)
as within. This returned a main effect of game, F(2, 56) =
33.89, p < .01, partial η² = .55, and condition, F(1, 28) =
7.01, p < .05, partial η² = .20, but no game by condition
interaction, F(2, 56) = 3.01, p > .05. Communication
systems developed in both conditions became more
effective across games, but matcher accuracy was
consistently higher in the Interaction condition.

Communicative Effectiveness
The effectiveness of the communication systems developed
during the task was measured by the extent to which
matchers were able to correctly identify the directors'
intended referents (percentage of drawings correctly
identified by matchers). As Pseudo-Interaction partners
only matched in games 1, 3 and 5, the conditions were
compared across those games.

Figure 3: Accuracy of matcher responses over the task for
both conditions.

Graphical Efficiency
Communication system efficiency was measured by
calculating the complexity of each drawing. Drawing
complexity was quantified using Pelli et al.’s (2006)
perimetric complexity measure, calculated by dividing the

Figure 2: Arnold Schwarzenegger, as depicted by an Interaction pair and the corresponding Pseudo-Interaction individual.

1391

squared perimeter of an image by the inked area. This has
been shown to reliably correlate with subjective ratings of
drawing complexity (Garrod et al., 2007). As PseudoInteraction participants only directed in games 2, 4 and 6,
the analysis was restricted to those games.
Complexity data are plotted in Figure 4, gaps in the
Pseudo-Interaction condition corresponding to games in
which the participants were matching.
Graphical
complexity is consistently lower in the Interaction
condition, although the complexity of graphical signs is
reduced across games in both conditions.
Graphical complexity scores were entered into a 2x3
mixed design ANOVA treating condition (Interaction,
Pseudo-Interaction) as a between-subjects factor and game
(2, 4, 6) as within. This yielded a main effect of game, F(2,
56) = 26.09, p < .01, partial η² = .48, and condition, F(1, 28)
= 48.51, p < .01, partial η² = .63. The game by condition
interaction was not significant, F < 1. Drawings in both
conditions became simpler, and therefore more efficient, but
those produced in the Interaction condition were
significantly more efficient throughout the task.

Interaction condition became increasingly similar across
games, whereas drawings produced in the PseudoInteraction condition did not. A 2x5 mixed design ANOVA
was conducted, treating condition (Interaction, PseudoInteraction) as a between-subjects factor and game (1&2,
2&3, ..., 5&6) as within. This returned a main effect of
game, F(4, 112) = 27.20, p < .01, partial η² = .49, condition,
F(1, 28) = 39.75, p < .01, partial η² = .59, and a game by
condition interaction, F(4, 112) = 11.24, p < .01, partial η² =
.29. The interaction effect is explained by the increasing
similarity of drawings across games in the Interaction
condition and the lack of change in the Pseudo-Interaction
condition, where drawings remained equally dissimilar
across games.

Figure 5: Similarity ratings of drawings across adjacent
games in the Interaction and Pseudo-Interaction conditions.
Scores below 4 indicate drawing dissimilarity whereas
scores above 4 indicate drawing similarity.

Discussion
Figure 4: Perimetric complexity of images drawn in each
condition over the task.

Graphical Alignment
As participants interact they adopt each other’s expressions.
In graphical terms, they adopt aspects of each other's
drawings, which become increasingly similar. Alignment
was measured as the rated similarity between the drawings
produced by each participant and their partner. The
similarity of drawings produced in adjacent games (e.g.,
Brad Pitt at games 1&2, 2&3, 3&4, 4&5, and 5&6) was
rated by a judge (BW) on a scale of 0 (totally dissimilar) to
8 (practically identical). A second judge (NF) rated 20% of
these images to test reliability. Their scores were highly
correlated, r = .83, p < .01.
The similarity of drawings in adjacent games is shown in
Figure 5, where scores above the neutral line at 4 are similar
and scores below are dissimilar. Drawings produced in the

Communication systems evolve differently when partners
are able or unable to interact. While identification accuracy
in the Pseudo-Interaction condition did increase across
games, it plateaued at around 80%. This contrasts with the
Interaction condition, where identification accuracy rose to
above 95% (i.e., ceiling). Similarly, although graphical
refinement did occur in the Pseudo-Interaction condition,
the signs remained significantly more complex than those in
the Interaction condition, making them less efficient to
produce and interpret. The effect of interaction on graphical
alignment was striking; only in the Interaction condition did
participants’ drawings become increasingly similar across
games. Graphical alignment was absent in the PseudoInteraction condition. In light of the communication
benefits that arise from using the same signs (Pickering &
Garrod, 2004), this finding represents a problem for
accounts of language evolution that do not permit
interaction between agents.

1392

The benefits of collaboration to the evolution of
communication systems suggest that language evolution
cannot be explained by learning biases alone (see also Fay
et al., under review). Social collaboration promoted more
accurate communication systems that were less effortful to
use. Furthermore, collaboration underpinned agents’ ability
to negotiate a ‘shared’ sign system (i.e., a single system
used by both interlocutors). Presumably collaboration is
responsible for much of the efficiency and effectiveness
seen in today’s languages (e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs,
1986).
Learning biases may still play a role in the evolution of
communication systems, but this may be a smaller role than
first anticipated. This has implications for the ILM, which
relies heavily on the evolutionary influence of learning
biases but has no collaborative component. Thus, it may not
provide a complete picture of language evolution. A
collaborative account may offer a better explanation of
lexical evolution, whereas the ILM may better describe the
evolution of syntax and grammar, which may be more
strongly influenced by learnability.
We now return to the role of imitation. Drawing
alignment is only observed in the Interaction condition,
indicating that collaboration is crucial to the imitation of
graphical signs. As partners interacted they established
shared sign systems, such that over time it became
increasingly unclear who was imitating whom. That is, it is
unclear if participants were imitating the drawings produced
by their partner, or the drawings produced by themselves, or
a combination of the two.
The finding that collaboration plays a key role in the
evolution of communication systems lends experimental
support to theory concerning the role of collaboration in
cultural evolution (e.g., Tomasello et al., 2005).
Furthermore, there is no reason to believe that the effect of
collaboration seen here is limited to the evolution of
communication systems. Although communication may be
the most significant of collaborative human activities, it is
far from being the only one. It is quite likely that
collaboration plays a similarly important role in cultural
evolution more generally (e.g., the cultural evolution of
concrete artifacts; see Caldwell & Millen, 2008).

Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Fay, N., Garrod, S., & Roberts, L. (2008). The fitness and
functionality of culturally evolved communication
systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B, 363, 3553-3561.
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (under
review). The interactive evolution of human
communication systems.
Garrod, S., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation,
coordination and convention: An empirical investigation
of how groups establish linguistic conventions. Cognition,
53(3), 181-215.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T.
(2007). Foundations of representation: Where might
graphical symbol systems come from? Cognitive Science,
31, 961-987.
Healey, P. G. T., Swoboda, N., & King, J. (2002). A tool for
performing and analyzing experiments on graphical
communication. Proceedings of the HCI02 Conference on
People and Computers XVI (pp. 65-68). London, UK:
Springer.
Hopper, L. M., Spiteri, A., Lambeth, S. P., Schapiro, S. J.,
Horner, V., & Whiten, A. (2007). Experimental studies of
traditions and underlying transmission processes in
chimpanzees. Animal Behaviour, 73, 1021-1032.
Kalish, M. L., Griffiths, T. L., & Lewandowsky, S. (2007).
Iterated
learning:
Intergenerational
knowledge
transmission reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14, 288-294.
Pelli, D. G., Burns, C. W., Farell, B., & Moore-Page, D. C.
(2006). Feature detection and letter identification. Vision
Research, 46, 4646-4674.
Pickering, M., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27, 169-226.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll,
H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The
origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 28, 675-735.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an ARC Discovery Grant
(grant DP0556991) awarded to N.F.

References
Blackmore, S. (2000). The power of memes. Scientific
American, 283, 64-73.
Brighton. H., Smith, K., & Kirby, S. (2005). Language as an
evolutionary system. Physics of Life Reviews, 2, 177-226.
Caldwell, C. A., & Millen, A. E. (2008). Experimental
models for testing hypotheses about cumulative cultural
evolution. Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 165-171.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.

1393

