UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Empirical Evaluation of Fair-Division Algorithms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0v65q415

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dupuis-Roy, Nicolas
Gosselin, Frederic

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Empirical Evaluation of Fair-Division Algorithms
Nicolas Dupuis-Roy (nicolas@dupuis.ca)

Départment de Psychologie, C.P. 6128, succ. Centre-ville
H3C 3J7, Montréal, QC, Canada
Frédéric Gosselin (frederic.gosselin@umontreal.ca)

Départment de Psychologie, C.P. 6128, succ. Centre-ville
H3C 3J7, Montréal, QC, Canada
Abstract
Fair-division problems are ubiquitous. They range from the
day-to-day chore assignments to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and include the division of an inheritance to the heirs
(Brams & Taylor, 1999; Massoud, 2000). Many intuitive and
self-implementable algorithms guaranteeing “fairness” have
been devised in the past 50 years (Brams & Taylor, 1996). So
far, very few empirical studies have put them to the test
(Daniel & Parco, 2005; Schneider & Krämer, 2004). In fact, it
is not even known to what extent the solutions derived from
these algorithms are satisfactory to human players. Here, we
present an experiment that investigated the satisfaction of two
pairs of players who divided 10 indivisible goods between
themselves. A genetic algorithm was used to search for the
best division candidates. Results show that some of the best
divisions found by the genetic algorithm were rated as more
mutually satisfactory than the ones derived from six typical
fair-division algorithms. Analyses on temporal fluctuation and
non-additivity of preferences could partially explain this
result. Ideas for the future implementation of a more flexible
and unconstrained approach are discussed.
Keywords: Fair-division, cake-cutting algorithms, fairness,
justice, ethics, genetic algorithms.

Introduction
Inspired by the age-old I divide the cake and you choose
the piece procedure, Steinhaus, Banach, and Knaster
developed, in the 1940’s, the first mathematical algorithms
aiming at fairly dividing a cake between more than two
players. This started what has been recently phrased « the
quest for a “magic formula” to resolve conflicts »
(Schneider & Kramer, 2004, p.507). The goal is to design a
division procedure guaranteeing one or several fairness
criteria
such
as
proportionality1,
envy-freeness2,
equitability3, or efficiency4—even against the greediest
opponent. Additional desirable properties include
simplicity, self-implementation, and applicability to any
number of participants in real-life conflicts.
1
A solution is proportional when each of the n players receives
a share that is worth at least 1/n of their individual utility.
2
A solution is envy-free when each of the n players receives a
share that is worth more (or the same) for him than any other share,
in terms of his individual utility.
3
A solution is equitable when all of the n players receive a share
that is worth the same proportion of their individual utility.
4
A solution is efficient if no other division solution can increase
a player’s utility without decreasing the other player’s utility.

Since the seminal work of Steinhaus and colleagues,
dozens of fair-division algorithms have been designed (for a
review, see Barbanel, 2004; Brams, 2008; Brams & Taylor,
1996; Moulin, 2003; Robertson & Webb, 1998; Young,
1994). One famous example is the Adjusted Winner (see
Brams & Taylor, 1996 for complete details). Suppose m
inherited goods are to be split between two heirs. Briefly
stated, this procedure first requires that both heirs privately
express their true material preferences for the disputed
goods by distributing a total of 100 points over them (more
points means higher preference). Then, each object is given
to the player who allocated more points to it. If the players’
total points are unequal after this initial distribution, then the
procedure makes an additional adjustment: the most
disputed object (i.e. the one for which the ratio of both
players’ points is closest to one) is split in such a proportion
that both players end up with the same total amount of
points. If the heirs express their true preferences—and
Brams & Taylor (1996) demonstrated it is optimal for a
rational and self-regarded agent to do so—they will be
assured a proportional, envy-free, equitable, and efficient
solution.
So far, very few empirical studies have put these fairdivision algorithms to the test (Daniel & Parco, 2005; Pratt
& Zeckhauser, 1990; Schneider & Krämer, 2004). In fact, it
is not even known to what extent the solutions derived from
these algorithms are satisfactory to human players. In the
next paragraphs, we argue that it is not likely to be the case
because most fair-division algorithms dealing with
indivisible goods rest on invalid assumptions regarding
human preferences. More specifically, they assume stable
and additive material preferences.
Recall that in the Adjusted Winner, the players are instructed
to make a single and overt appraisal of their material
preferences. Likewise, most algorithms dealing with indivisible
objects require that a fixed or unlimited amount of points or
monies be distributed over the disputed goods. This is at odd
with behavioral evidence that shows systematic fluctuation of
individual utility over time (Rabin, 1998). A change occurring
between preferences’ appraisal and implementation of the
solution derived from the fair-division algorithm could hamper
its fairness and leave the group with a feeling of injustice. So,
are preferences stable in time? And, if not, what is the impact
on the fairness of the algorithms?
Most fair-division algorithms dealing with indivisible
goods assume the additivity of material preferences. For

2681

example, in the case of the Adjusted Winner, this means that
the points given to two disjoint bundles of goods is equal to
the sum of the points of its constituents. However, nonadditive preferences are likely to be observed when goods
have closely related functions: for example, a bayan and a
dayan (the two drums of an Indian tabla set) might be worth
more together than separated. Most fair-division algorithms
do not tolerate non-additivity, which can prevent them from
reaching the desired solution. Well aware of this potential
problem, Brams and Taylor (1996, 1999) have suggested
that goods be carefully organized, prior to the application of
the algorithm, in separable bundles (e.g., bayan and dayan
in the same bundle). This solution seems reasonable but
non-additivity might be difficult to predict considering
individual variability: for example, a non-musician might
consider a bayan and a dayan as two exotic pieces that
could be displayed either together or separately. Hence, can
we really control for the additivity of preferences?
Taking into account these two issues, we hypothesize that
the solutions derived from these algorithms are not likely to
be satisfactory for human players. We tested this hypothesis
and pinpoint two of its underlying causes by measuring the
satisfaction of two pairs of players who divided 10
indivisible goods between themselves. More precisely,
participants rated their satisfaction over a subset of all 1,024
possible divisions, and then estimated their material
preferences by distributing a total of 100 points over the 10
objects. The division space was explored using a genetic
algorithm (GA; Holland, 1975) that searched for best
division candidates. More precisely, it was designed to
converge toward divisions maximizing the satisfaction of
both players (details are provided in the Algorithm section).
The rational behind the use of this GA was manifold. First,
GAs can perform even when, as we hypothesized, nonadditive (non-linear) and dynamic preferences are involved.
Second, its natural tendency to duplicate solutions allows us
to evaluate the temporal fluctuation of preferences. Finally,
this GA is also a fair-division algorithm of its own that
could be tested against standard fair-division algorithms.

Methods
Participants
Four co-workers (including the authors of this paper) that
had known each other for at least three years were grouped
in pairs. Players 2 and 3 were naïve to the purpose of this
experiment. Each pair was informed that the goal of the
experiment was to divide ten items between them, and that
they would have to express their satisfaction individually
about at least 300 candidate divisions. Prior to the
experiment, subjects were given one minute to familiarize
themselves with the items. Informed consent was obtained
and no monetary compensation was provided.

Indivisible goods
Ten food items were designated as the indivisible disputed
goods: asparagus, a six-pack of beer, a jar of almond butter,

a bag of chips, fresh dills, a can of concentrated orange
juice, mushrooms, a pizza, a salmon filet, and half a pound
of shrimps. They were chosen as possible ingredients of
meals and we purposely selected potentially non-separable
items (e.g., a salmon filet and fresh dills). Color pictures of
these items were taken on the Internet and resized to span
about 4 to 5 cm on the screen at full resolution. Viewing
distance was about 60 cm.

Apparatus
Our Matlab (MathWorks) experimental programs used
functions from the Psychophysics toolbox (Brainard, 1997;
Pelli, 1997) and ran on two Macintosh G5 computers linked
via the intranet. All stimuli were presented on two Sony
Trinitron monitors.

Procedure
Paired participants were tested on two linked computers.
They were each submitted to a minimum of 15 runs. During
each run, they were shown a population of 20 candidate
divisions (not necessarily the same ones). On the computer
monitor, one row contained the goods given to one
participant and another row contained the goods given to the
other participant. Participants were told they had unlimited
time to express, on a scroll bar, her/his satisfaction about the
candidate division on a scale ranging from 0 (not satisfied at
all) to 1 (fully satisfied). Each run lasted approximately 2.5
minutes. After the testing session, participants were asked to
distribute 100 points over the ten items to reflect their
preferences for these objects (material preferences). Finally,
they were debriefed. The entire experiment lasted
approximately one hour.

Genetic algorithm
The genetic algorithm (GA) started with two populations
of 20 randomly generated candidate divisions. A vector of
ten binary elements represented a candidate division; each
binary element coded an object and its value specified the
owner of this object. Each paired participant rated the
candidate divisions from her/his population. The GA
maximized each subject’s rating independently. The fitness
of a candidate division was computed independently for
each population as follows: the satisfaction rating of a
participant divided by the sum of all of her/his satisfaction
ratings. This normalization per subject compensated for
discrepancies between paired participants. Two new
populations of candidate divisions were generated
independently for each participant following the so-called
roulette-wheel selection. Next, the two resulting populations
were mixed through a single-point crossover (50%) and
randomly split in two distinct populations. Finally, 1% of
the candidate divisions were randomly mutated (for an
overview of genetic algorithms, see Mitchell, 1996). This
GA implementation ensured that the ratings of each
participant equally contributed to the next populations of
candidate allocations thus avoiding the adoption of any
particular definition of fairness. The testing session was

2682

The average satisfaction rating increased rapidly from
0.49 (SD = 0.0003) at the first run to 0.85 (SD = 0.001) after
13 runs. The clone rate also jumped from 0 to 0.78 over the
first 13 runs, indicating a rapid convergence toward “fair”
candidate divisions.

1

0.8

Player 2’s material utility

As pointed out in the introduction, most fair-division
algorithms dealing with indivisible goods derive their
solutions from a single appraisal of material preferences. In
our case, participants were asked to express their material
preferences by distributing a total of 100 points over the 10
objects. By contrasting the satisfaction ratings with the total
number of points they would have obtained for each
solution candidate (henceforth called material utility), we
can test the extent to which solutions prescribed by fairdivision algorithms on the basis of material preferences are
satisfactory.
Figure 3 consists of two scatter plots, one for each pair of
participants. Each plot summarizes the relationship between
the participants’ satisfaction ratings and the material utility
of the solutions. More specifically, material utility is the
proportion of the 100 points a participant would have won
for a given solution candidate. This measure could be seen
as a variable that predicts the participant’s satisfaction
rating. And, for fair-division algorithms to work correctly,
satisfaction should closely map onto material utility.
The scatter plots depict four dimensions on a flat surface:
the x-y axes represent each participant’s material utility (e.g.
1 means all objects are assigned to that participant) and the
gray level of each joint squares (or rectangle formed of two
squares) indicates the satisfaction rating (black means “not
satisfied” and white “fully satisfied”). More precisely, each
joint squares represents one candidate division rated by the
two participants of a pair. The left ones show player’s 1 (or
3) satisfaction ratings and the right ones show player’s 2 (or
4) satisfaction ratings. This side-by-side arrangement was
chosen to visually enhance the contrast between the
participants’ satisfaction. Homogeneous gray rectangles
show satisfaction agreement whereas highly contrasted joint
squares mean satisfaction disagreement. All solution
candidates located in the upper right portion (delimited by
dotted lines) of the scatter plots are envy-free and
proportional because both participants won at least 0.5 of
their total material utility. The solutions located on the
dotted diagonal are equitable. Black crosses indicate the
divisions derived from six fair-division algorithms (based
on material preferences): the Sealed Bid Knaster (Knaster,
1946), the Adjusted Winner (Brams & Taylor, 1996), the
Adjusted Knaster (Raith, 2000), the Division by Lottery
(Pratt, 2007), the Descending Demand (Herreiner & Puppe,
2002) and the Balanced Alternation algorithm (Brams &

1

0.7
0.6

S.B.K. & A.K.
D.L.
A.W.
ine
yl
lit

bi

a
uit
Eq

0.9
0.8

B.A.
D.D.

Players’ satisfaction

Do fair-division algorithms maximize satisfaction?

0.9

Proportionality square

Results and Discussion

Taylor, 1999). All of these algorithms except the
Descending Demand and the Balanced Alternation proceed
in a similar fashion: first, the players evaluate their material
preferences by distributing a fixed (or unlimited) amount of
points (or monies) over the disputed goods; second, each object
is allocated to the highest “bidder”; and third, the procedure
adjusts this first distribution by either splitting one of the
objects, asking monetary compensation or randomly assigning
one of the objects. Details about the algorithms are available
in the cited papers.

Envy-free square

0.5
0.4

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Player 1’s material utility
1

1
e

0.9

Player 4’s material utility

0.8
0.7
0.6

in
yl

it

D.D. & B.A.

bil
ita

0.8

S.B.K. & A.K.
A.W.
D.L.
Envy-free square

0.5

0.9

u
Eq

Players’ satisfaction

Proportionality square

stopped after a minimum of 15 runs and after having
reached a minimum clone (duplicate candidate divisions)
rate of 0.75 or a mean satisfaction level above 0.9.

0.4

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Player 3’s material utility

Figure 1. Each rectangle (composed of two joint squares)
represents one candidate division rated by the two
participants of a pair. The x-y coordinates of each rectangle
represent the material utility of each paired participants for
the corresponding division. The right (players 2 and 4) and
left (players 1 and 3) gray levels of a disc indicate the
respective satisfaction of paired participants (black= “not
satisfied” and white=“fully satisfied”). Red circles represent
the divisions prescribed by the five fair-division algorithms.
In the upper scatter plot, material preferences explain
48% and 1% of the variance of satisfaction ratings of player
1 and 2 respectively. It can be appreciated at a glance: most
light and relatively homogeneous rectangles are clustered on
the left side of the scatter plot. This suggests that the most

2683

satisfactory solutions have very low material utility. Also,
this could mean that some players had difficulty estimating
their material preferences. All of this is bad news for most
fair-division algorithms, which mostly rely on these material
preferences.
In the bottom scatter plot, material preferences explain
28.79% and 47.06% of the variance of the satisfaction
ratings of player 3 and 4 respectively. Light and
homogeneous rectangles are concentrated in the envy-free
and proportionality region. There is also a clear overlap
between the divisions prescribed by the fair-division
algorithms (black crosses) and the candidate divisions
selected by the GA (joint squares). Some of the divisions
prescribed by the fair-division algorithms were highly
satisfying (especially those of the Descending Demand and
the Balanced Alternation algorithms) but other candidate
divisions sampled by our GA were even more satisfying. In
fact, some of the most satisfying candidate divisions were
outside the envy-free and proportionality region. These
results strongly advise against using only material
preferences to derive fair divisions. Next, we consider two
possible explanations for this result.

Satisfaction fluctuates
As mentioned in the introduction, one explanation for
the small correlation between satisfaction and material
utility is the fluctuation of the preference measure.
Accordingly, a single and overt appraisal of material
preferences might not be precise enough. To verify this
possibility, we first analyzed the overall fluctuation of
satisfaction ratings of the clones. All participants exhibited a
fairly high level of fluctuation (SD = 0.15, 0.24, 0.12 and
0.06 respectively), especially for mid-rated clones (between
0.25 and 0.75 satisfaction units). Two questions logically
follow this observation: Are these fluctuations caused by
some random factors? And what could be the effect of these
fluctuations on fair-division algorithms?
To address the first question, we looked at the slope of the
line fitted on satisfaction ratings and time (or trial). We
focused on variations occurring in the mid-range—between
25% and 75%—to stay at bay from floor and ceiling. Out of
14 sets of clones, five (57%) had a significant slope
(p<0.05, Bonferroni corrected). Linear variations of
satisfaction ranged from -0.036/trial to 0.0002/trial. This
suggests that at least part of the temporal fluctuations were
systematic and linear. Verbal reports of the players offer one
possible explanation: they all interpreted the selection
process of the genetic algorithm (GA) as an indication of
“who was winning” and, as a consequence, adapted their
strategies. Other possible explanations concern all timedependent behaviors (e.g. fatigue, habituation, etc) and
order effects such that a given trial influences the next one.
Unfortunately, pursuing these specific hypotheses goes
beyond the scope of this paper.
To address the second question, we first needed to find an
estimate of the group random fluctuation level that would be
free of systematic (or strategic) fluctuations. We opted for

the standard deviation of the residuals of the line fitted on
the clone ratings (see previous analysis). It turned out to be
0.15 in satisfaction units—this is the variation that cannot be
predicted by the linear model. We did not look for any nonlinear trend because we had no specific expectations about
what type of non-linearity it should be. Nevertheless, this
allowed us to control minimally for the possibility of a
linear interaction between the GA and the players.
Moreover, we think the standard deviation of the residuals is
a conservative estimate of the random fluctuations because
it takes into account all clones, including the highly- and
lowly-rated ones, which do not fluctuate much (because of
the floor and ceiling effects). To assess the possible impact
of such fluctuations on fair-division algorithms, we ran a
simulation on five of them: the Sealed Bid Knaster, the
Adjusted Winner, the Adjusted Knaster, the Division by
Lottery and the Descending Demand. We did not use the
Balanced Alternation because it does not guarantee any
criterion of justice. We compared the division obtained
following the application of each algorithm with
deterministic and stochastic (uniform noise with a SD =
0.15) agents. By repeating this process 100 times, we
estimated the probability that an algorithm will meet its
(promised) fairness criteria in a situation with a realistic
noise level (Table 1).
Table 1: Percentage of the 100 simulated solutions that
satisfied envy-free, equitability, maximin and efficiency.
Added uniform noise had either a SD = 0.15 (the estimated
noise level; bottom numbers) or a SD = 0.075 (a more
conservative noise level; top numbers).
Procedures
Efficiency
Equitability

S.B.K.
76%
41%
–

Envyfreeness
Maximin

100%
92%
–

A.W.
70%
39%
17%
8%
100%
95%
–

A.K.
76%
41%
14%
1%
100%
92%
–

D.L.
66%
36%
–

D.D.
47%
32%
–

100%
94%
–

–
57%
33%

Results indicate that the observed random fluctuations
have a decisive impact on the fairness of all procedures.
Equitability seems to be the least robust criterion whereas
envy-freeness (proportionality is equivalent to envy-freeness
with only two players) seems to be the most robust. This
was expected because equitability is a very restrictive
criterion: both subjects need to win the same total utility. In
comparison, envy-freeness is generally more inclusive: it
fills up to 25% of the solution space. The least robust
algorithm seems to be the Descending Demand (Herreiner
& Puppe, 2002). In sum, we observed fluctuations of
satisfaction that could not be predicted by the linear model,
and showed that even a very conservative estimate of these
random fluctuations was sufficient to affect the justice of
fair-division algorithms.

2684

Preferences are (non-predictably) non-additive
Another explanation for the small correlations observed
between satisfaction and material utility is the presence of
non-additivity in the material preferences. Additivity
implies the independence of object preferences; we thus
needed to search for dependencies in conjunctions of
objects. This was tested by performing a multiple linear
regression on the satisfaction ratings and the outer-products
of the candidate division vectors. We estimated the
statistical thresholds of regression coefficients using a
Monte-Carlo simulation (p<0.05; two-tailed). Significant
(black cells) positive (white ‘+’) and negative (white ‘-’)
regression coefficients are shown in figure 2. This figure
displays two conjunction matrixes that indicate which
combination of objects are strongly non-additive. Note that
the upper and lower triangles in each matrix correspond to
different paired participants.

Figure 2. Two conjunction matrices: Significant (black
cells) positive (white ‘+’) and negative (white ‘-’) regression
coefficients indicate strong non-additive preferences.
Results show a total of 26 significant preference
conjunctions. This is not all that surprising because, as we
explained in the Methods section, we did not choose the
objects with the intent of separability—on the contrary.

More interestingly, inter-rater reliability, measured by the
Fleiss’ kappa index (0.04), indicates little agreement
between raters. This means a consensus would be hard to
obtain in real-life when allotting goods in separable bundles
prior to the application of a fair-division algorithm–as
proposed by Brams and Taylor (1996, 1999). Overall, the
presence of non-additive preferences can partially explain
why satisfaction ratings do not map onto material utility.

General discussion
We explored the satisfaction over a large subset of the
1,024 possible divisions of 10 indivisible goods between
two pairs of participants using a genetic algorithm (GA).
The data from two pairs of participants suggests that fair
divisions derived from a single and overt appraisal of
material preferences are not necessarily the most
satisfactory solutions. Furthermore, we discovered that fairdivision algorithms fared rather poorly in comparison to the
most satisfactory division candidates selected by our GA.
Subsequent statistical analyses suggested two possible
explanations for this result: two assumptions of typical
point-allocation fair-division algorithms, i.e. stability and
additivity of preferences, were violated. More specifically,
we observed fairly large fluctuations of the satisfaction
ratings over time and further analysis showed that part of
this fluctuation was linearly systematic. This means part of
the fluctuations were predictable (probably due to order
effects, strategic or time-dependent behaviors) and part were
mere noise. Computer simulations of deterministic and
stochastic players allowed us to evaluate the impact of the
residual random fluctuations (the noise) on the fairness of
five fair-division algorithms. All algorithms were affected.
Unsurprisingly, the most inclusive criterion of justice, envyfreeness (and proportionality), was also the most noiseresistant. The conjunction analysis on pairs of objects
revealed that the combinations of objects that were treated
non-additively varied considerably from one participant to
another. This suggests that the solution consisting in
allotting these non-separable objects in bundles (see Brams
and Taylor, 1996) would be hard to implement in real-life.
There is at least another possible explanation for the
discrepancies between the solutions derived from fairdivision algorithms and the one found by our GA:
individual attitudes toward justice (e.g. inequity aversion,
self-interest, reciprocity, etc) and knowledge about the other
players’ attitude could have injected additional non-linearity
into the satisfaction ratings. For example, a participant
averse to inequity would have probably been unsatisfied
with a division assigning all objects to him and none to his
partner–i.e. a division with maximum material utility. Such
attitude could involve a non-linear and possibility nonmonotonic relationship between material utility and
satisfaction. Hence, non-additivity and temporal fluctuations
were not necessarily the only sources of non-linearity in the
data. This represents a possible confounding variable in both
analyses. From a broader perspective, the diversity of
attitudes toward justice (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999; Colman,

2685

2003) could be a real threat to fair-division algorithms
because they impose a limited set of justice criteria.
Therefore, the choice of a fair-division algorithm could
depend on which criteria are preferred. We thus wonder if a
consensus can be reached on a set of justice criteria,
considering possible discrepancies between individual
attitudes toward justice?
There are caveats about our experiment: We did not
control for possible non-linear interactions between the
selection process of the GA and the participants’ strategies.
To prevent this from happening, we could have sampled a
(much) larger subset of randomly selected candidate
divisions. Also, this would have allowed a better evaluation
of existing fair-division algorithms. Furthermore, additional
naïve subjects would need to be tested to gain a better
understanding of the interplay between satisfaction and
material utility.
We used a GA to search the division space for the most
satisfying divisions. Interestingly, our GA also constitutes a
fair-division algorithm in itself: it converges toward
maximum mutual satisfaction. Perhaps our GA-based fairdivision converged toward more satisfactory divisions than
typical fair-division algorithms because—unlike typical fairdivision algorithms—GA-based faire-division does not
assume a shared set of justice criteria and can promptly
adapt to fluctuating and non-additive preferences. In any
case, we believe that such a flexible and non-normative
approach to justice is worth exploring, especially in the
context of real-life fair-division problems. Many questions
remain unanswered at this point: Can GA-based fair
divisions elicit trust in players even though no guarantee of
justice is promised in the face of greed? And will the
inherent complexity of the GAs evoke suspicion in players?
Or, rather, will it diminish the likelihood of manipulation?

Conclusion
As promising as fair-division algorithms might be, their
implementation in realistic setting presents great challenges
(e.g. Pratt & Zeckhauser, 1990), some of which can be
addressed by experimental investigations. Future studies
should consider the possible impact of different attitudes
toward justice and focus on more detailed comparison
between standard fair-division algorithms and alternative
algorithms such as our GA.

Acknowledgments
Research supported by FQRNT scholarship and NSERC
grants.

References
Brams, S. J. (2008). Mathematics and Democracy:
Designing Better Voting and Fair-Division Procedures.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brams, S. J., & Taylor, A.D (1996). Fair Division: From
Cake-Cutting to Dispute Resolution.
New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Brams, S. J., & Taylor, A.D (1999). The Win-Win
Solution: Guaranteeing Fair Shares to Everybody. New
York: W.W. Norton.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433–436.
Camerer, C. F. (2003). Behavioral Game Theory. New
York. 255 pages.
Colman, A. M. (2003). Cooperation, psychological game
theory, and limitations of rationality in social interaction. .
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26, 139-153.
Daniel, T. E., & Parco, J. E. (2005). Fair, efficient and envyfree bargaining: An experimental test of the Brams-Taylor
adjusted winner mechanism. Group Decision and
Negotiation, 14(3), 241-264.
Denoon, D., & Steven J. Brams. . (1997). Fair division : A
new approach to the Spratly Islands controversy.
International Negotiation, 2(2), 303-329.
Fehr, E., & Schmidt, K. M. (1999). A theory of fairness,
competition, and cooperation. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114(3), 817-868.
Haake, C.-J., Raith, M. G. & Su, F. E. (2000). Bidding for
envy-freeness: A procedural approach to n-player fairdivision problems. Social Choice and Welfare, 19, 723749.
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in Natural and Artificial
Systems. University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, MI.
Kramer, U. S., & Schneider, G. (2003). Fair formulas:
Psychological and procedural determinants in the
resolution of redistributive conflicts. Kolner Zeitschrift
Fur Soziologie Und So
zialpsychologie, 55(1), 55.
Massoud, T. G. (2000). Fair division, Adjusted Winner
procedure (AW), and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(3), 333-358.
Mitchell, M. (1996). An introduction to genetic algorithms.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moulin, H. J. (2003). Fair Division and Collective Welfare.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision, 10(4), 437–442.
Pratt, J. W., & Zeckhauser, R. J. (1990). The fair and
efficient division of the windsor family silver.
Management Science, 36(11), 1293-1301.
Pratt, J. (2007). Fair (and not so fair) division. Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, 35(3), 203-236.
Raith, M. G. (2000). Fair-negotiation procedures.
Mathematical Social Sciences, 39(3), 303-322.
Robertson, J., & William Webb. (1998). Cake-Cutting
Algorithms: Be Fair If You Can. MA: A K Peters.
Schneider, G., & Kramer, U. S. (2004). The limitations of
fair division - An experimental evaluation of three
procedures. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 48(4), 506524.
Young, H. P. (1994). Equity in Theory and Practice. . NJ:
Princeton: Princeton.

2686

