UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Scaffolding in Collaborative Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5b74x3jv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gadgil, Soniya
Nokes, Timothy

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Scaffolding in Collaborative Learning
Soniya Gadgil (smg58@pitt.edu)
Timothy Nokes (nokes@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 US
Abstract
Past research has shown that collaboration can facilitate
learning and problem solving (e.g., Azmitia, 1988; Barron,
2000). In the current work, we compared the effects of
three collaborative learning conditions: prompts that
encourage analogical comparison between examples,
prompts that guide sequentially studying single examples,
and traditional instruction (practicing problem solving), as
students learned to solve physics problems in the domain
of rotational kinematics. Preliminary results showed a
significant problem type by condition interaction effect.
Keywords: analogy; collaborative learning; comparison;
problem solving; transfer

Introduction
Analogical comparison can be a powerful mechanism of
learning from examples (e.g., Gentner, Loewenstein, &
Thompson, 2003). However, students often have difficulty
making spontaneous analogical comparisons (Atkinson,
Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000). Recent research by
Nokes & VanLehn (2008) has shown that providing
prompts to encourage analogical comparison of worked
examples improves students’ performance especially on far
transfer tests. The current research extends this work by
exploring the effect of analogical prompts on collaborative
learning. We hypothesize that analogical comparison will
scaffold the cognitive processes of explanation and
knowledge construction that underlie successful
collaborative learning, thereby helping students learn more
effectively while collaborating.
Much research on collaborative learning has shown that
when students learn in dyads, they show better learning
gains (at the group level) than working alone (e.g., Azmitia,
1988; Barron, 2000). Much of this research has focused on
identifying the conditions that underlie successful
collaboration such as the presence of conflict (e.g.,
Schwartz, Neuman, and Biezuner, 2000), adequate
scaffolding of the collaborative interaction (e.g., Rummel
and Spada, 2005), and group composition characteristics,
such as aptitude, age, gender etc (e.g., Webb, 1982). For
example, we know that the presence of cognitive conflict is
an important variable underlying successful collaborative
learning in particular contexts. Schwartz, Neuman, and
Biezuner (2000) showed that when students with
misconceptions distinct from each others’ collaborated,
they were more likely to learn compared to those with the
same misconception, or without a misconception.

3115

We also know that scaffolding (or structuring)
collaborative interaction is often critical for achieving
effective learning gains (see Lin, 2001 for a review). For
example, Rummel and Spada (2005) conducted an
experiment in which students learned to collaborate by
studying an example of collaboration in the presence or
absence of a collaboration script. Dyads that received a
script showed an advantage in learning over those who
received no scaffolding. This is consistent with other results
that show that providing scripted problem solving activities
(e.g., one participant plays the role of the tutor vs. tutee and
then switch) facilitate collaborative learning compared to
those who learned individually or in unscripted conditions
(McLaren et al., 2007).
Hausmann, Chi, and Roy (2004) have identified three
mechanisms that are at play during collaborative learning.
The first is “other directed explaining” and occurs when
one partner explains to the other how to solve a problem.
The second is explanation through “co-construction” in
which both partners equally share the responsibility of
sense-making. Collaborators extend each others’ ideas and
jointly work towards a common goal. The third mechanism
is “self-explanation” in which one partner is engaged in a
knowledge-building activity for his or her own learning.
Data from physics problem solving by undergrads showed
that all three mechanisms are at play in learning to solve
problems collaboratively. However, the former two are
more beneficial to both partners while the third is only
beneficial to the partner doing the self-explaining.
In the current work, we explored whether scaffolding
collaborative interaction by the means of providing
analogical prompts can help students learn more
effectively. We hypothesized that analogical comparison
will provide specific scaffolding to encourage otherdirected explanation and knowledge co-construction
compared to studying individual examples sequentially,
thus ensuring that both partners benefit from the
collaborative interaction.
To test these hypotheses, we conducted an in-vivo
classroom experiment in which we had students collaborate
under one of three conditions: 1) with comparison prompts
(i.e., questions instructing participants to compare two
examples), 2) with sequential prompts (i.e., the same
questions targeted towards studying individual examples)
and 3) without prompts (problem solving and reading
expert solutions/ explanations). The results will help us
understand whether analogical comparison can be an

effective tool to scaffold collaborative interactions above
and beyond traditional instruction.
Analogical Comparison Helps Schema Acquisition
Why would analogical prompts be helpful to students while
learning collaboratively? Analogical comparison has been
shown to be an extremely effective learning mechanism for
individuals (e.g., Cummins, 1992). Analogies play an
important role in schema acquisition. A problem schema is
a knowledge organization of the information associated
with a particular problem category. Schemas have been
hypothesized to be the underlying knowledge organization
of expert knowledge (Chase & Simon, 1973). One way in
which schemas can be acquired is through analogical
comparison (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). Analogical
comparison operates through aligning and mapping two
example problem representations to one another and then
extracting their commonalities.
Research on analogy and schema learning has shown that
the acquisition of schematic knowledge promotes flexible
transfer to novel problems. Many researchers have found a
positive relationship between the quality of the abstracted
schema and transfer to a novel problem that is an instance
of that schema (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). For example, Gick
and Holyoak (1983) found that transfer of a solution
procedure was greater when participants’ schemas
contained more relevant structural features. Analogical
prompts will assist in identifying the relevant structural
features, thereby improving schema acquisition.
Analogical comparison has also been shown to improve
learning even when both examples are not initially well
understood (Gentner Lowenstein, & Thompson, 2003). By
comparing the commonalities between two examples,
students could focus on the causal structure and improve
their learning about the concept. Kurtz, Miao, and Gentner
(2001) showed that students who were learning about the
concept of heat transfer learned more when comparing
examples than when studying each example separately. In
summary, prior work has shown that analogical comparison
can facilitate schema abstraction and transfer of that
knowledge to new problems.
However, the role of analogies has not been extensively
examined in collaborative settings. We hypothesized that
successful collaboration will be supported and enhanced by
prompts that encourage dyads to engage in analogical
comparison when learning about new concepts and solving
novel problems. Analogical comparison will act as a script
to facilitate constructive learning processes such as
identifying the critical features of the problem, abstracting a
problem solving schema, relating the critical features to the
abstract concept or principle, facilitating error-correction,
and fostering self-explanations, other-directed explanations,
and co-construction. In the current work, we examine how
analogical comparison may help students learn better
through collaboration.

Method

3116

Participants
Seventy-two students from the United States Naval
Academy (USNA) participated in the experiment as a part
of their normal Introductory Physics I course. Three
sections with 24 students each participated in the
experiment. Thus, there were in all 36 pairs of students,
with 12 dyads in each section.
Design
The design was a between subjects design with dyads of
students randomly assigned to one of the three conditions:
compare (n =24), sequential (n = 24), and problem solving
(n = 24). Participants in the compare condition received
analogical comparison prompts, i.e., questions instructing
them to compare across two worked examples. Participants
in the sequential condition received the same worked
examples with informationally equivalent questions that
focused on studying of individual examples. Participants in
the problem solving condition received the same worked
examples, but were not given any prompts to aid studying
of the worked examples.
Learning Materials and Procedure
The learning materials were presented in paper booklets. In
the learning phase, students studied the worked examples
the learning booklet in collaborative dyads. The first
section was common to all conditions and consisted of
written descriptions of each of the principles students
would be learning about (e.g., angular velocity, tangential
acceleration, radial acceleration). This was followed by the
symbolic representations for the concepts and principles
along with a few graphs illustrating those concepts.
The booklet for the compare condition consisted of four
worked examples and two analogical comparison tasks. The
examples were divided into two pairs of problems that used
the same concepts and principles. Each worked example
was a word problem with the step-by-step problem solution
(see Table 1 for an illustration). Justifications for the steps
were not provided and students were expected to work
collaboratively to generate those explanations. The second
example in each pair applied the same concepts and
principles but in a different context (see Table 1, Example
2). The analogical comparison task that followed consisted
of prompts designed to guide comparison between the two
worked examples. Solutions to the analogical comparison
prompts were provided after students attempted to answer
the questions.
The booklet for the sequential condition consisted of the
same four worked examples, but each worked example was
followed by learning prompts that were designed to guide
studying of that individual worked example. Similar to the
compare condition, the worked examples were word
problems with the step-by-step problem solutions (see
Table 1 for an illustration). Justifications for the steps were
not provided and students were expected to work
collaboratively to generate those explanations. The prompts
for the two examples were informationally equivalent to the

Table 1: Examples of the Learning Materials
Worked Example 1
The flywheel of a steam engine runs with a constant angular
velocity of magnitude 150 rev/min. When the steam is shut off, the
friction of the bearings and of the air brings the wheel to rest in
2.2h. Assume that the wheel was spinning counterclockwise, and
that this is the positive direction.
a. What is the average angular acceleration of the wheel?
Givens: ω 0z = 150 rev min , ω z = 0 rev min , t = 2.2h
Conversions:
rev
πrad 1min
ω 0z = 150 min
× 21rev
× 60s = 15.71 rad
s
€

€

€

€

Sought: α
ω z = ω 0z + αt
(ω − ω 0z )
αz = z
€
t
(0 rad s − 15.71 rad s )
αz =
2.2h
−15.71 rad s
αz =
7920s
α z = −0.0020 rad s 2

€

Worked Example 2
The wheel of a unicycle is traveling at a constant angular velocity
of 10.8 rad/s. The rider suddenly backpedals, and the wheel is
brought to a stop in 0.800 s. Assume that the wheel was spinning
counterclockwise, and that this is the positive direction.
a. What is the average angular acceleration of the wheel?
Givens: ω 0z = 10.8 rad s ω z = 0 rad s , t = 0.800s
Sought: α z
ω z = ω 0z + α z t
€
(ω − ω 0z€)
αz = z
€
€
t
rad
rad
(0 s − 10.8 s )
αz =
0.800s
α z = −13.5 rad s 2
b. What angle will the wheel rotate through before coming to
rest?
Sought: θ z

€

θ z = ω 0z t + 12 α z t 2

(b) How many rotations will the wheel make before coming to
rest?
Sought: N (number of rotations)
θ z = ω 0z t + 12 α z t 2

θ z = (15.71 rad s )(7920s) + 12 (−0.0020 rad s2 )(7920s) 2
θ z = 124423.2rad − 62726.4rad
θ z = 61696.8rad

€

θ z = (10.8 rad s )(0.800s) − 12 (13.5 rad s2 )(0.800s) 2
θ z = 8.64rad − 4.32rad
θ z = 4.32rad

€

θ z = 61696.8rad × 21rev
= 9819.4rev
πrad

€
€

Sample Questions for Sequential Group
Worked Example 1:
1. How do you define angular acceleration?
2. Why is final velocity assumed to be zero?
3. How do we calculate angular displacement?

Sample Questions for Compare Group
1. For Part A, what is similar and different between the two
problems? Specifically, what is different between their angular
velocities and time periods? How do these affect angular
acceleration?
2. For part B, what is similar and different between the two
problems? How do the two results for number of rotations
compare? Explain why any differences might occur.

prompts in the compare condition (See Table 1 for example
questions). Solutions to the learning prompts were provided
after students attempted to answer the questions. The
worked example pair was followed by an isomorphic
problem.
The booklet for the problem solving condition contained
the same four worked examples, but had no prompts to
guide studying from those examples. Again, justifications
to steps were not provided and students worked
collaboratively to make sense of the examples. Students in
this condition received the two isomorphic problems (one
after each worked example pair) like the other two
conditions. In addition, to equate for time on task, they
received two additional isomorphic problem-solving tasks,
so that the total time spent by all conditions was exactly the
same.
Students in all three conditions were first given 10 minutes
to study the principles booklet individually. After this,
dyads were given learning booklets based on the condition
to which they were assigned. They were given 16 minutes

for studying the first worked example pair and answering
analogical comparison or sequential prompts depending on
which condition they were in. Students in the problem
solving condition did not have to answer any questions, and
were therefore given an extra problem to solve. This was
followed by an isomorphic problem common to all
conditions, for which students were given 6 minutes to
solve. After students attempted to solve the isomorphic
problem, they were given the solution to that problem with
2 minutes to study the solution.
A second pair of worked examples followed, for which the
dyads were given 18 minutes to study. Again, the problem
solving group got an extra problem in lieu of answering
compare or sequential prompts. This was followed by a
second isomorphic problem common to all three conditions
for which the dyads had10 minutes to solve. After students
attempted to solve this problem, they were given the
solution to that problem with 2 minutes to study each
solution.

3117

Test Materials and Procedure
The test phase of the experiment included an immediate
and delayed assessment which students completed
individually. The immediate test was administered directly
after the learning phase, and the delayed assessment
occurred when students complete their homework for
rotational kinematics problems. The immediate post-test
consisted of three tasks: multiple choice questions, problem
solving tasks, and qualitative reasoning tasks. The delayed
assessment looked at transfer measures such as
performance on homework problems on the same topic and
on a subsequent topic of rotational dynamics. Only results
from the immediate assessment are reported here.
Multiple-Choice Questions. This assessment consisted of
ten multiple-choice questions in which students were given
a target statement and were required to choose the best
answer. This task assessed students’ conceptual
understanding and qualitative reasoning (they were not
asked to calculate quantitative solutions).
Problem Solving. This test consisted of two word
problems. The first problem was an isomorphic problem to
one of the worked examples but had a different cover story
(i.e., scenario). This problem measured near transfer. The
second problem assessed the same concepts, however it
included extraneous values that were not needed to solve
the problem. The task was to decide which formula applies
and correctly map the values in the problem statement to
the variables in the formula. These problems assessed both
concept access (determining the correct equation) as well as
procedural application (generating the correct answer). The
problems were similar to those used in the class textbook
and ones that they completed in their homework.
Open-Ended Questions. This test consisted of two ‘what’s
wrong?’ questions and two open-ended qualitative
reasoning questions. In the “what’s wrong” questions
students had to determine if a problem was solved correctly
and generate an explanation that describes why the solution
was correct or incorrect. In the open-ended qualitative
reasoning questions, students had to provide a solution to
the problem along with an explanation.
All participants were given a test booklet containing the
three tasks. They were given 10 minutes to complete the
multiple-choice task, 13 minutes for the problem-solving
task, and 13 minutes for the open-ended questions task. The
total time for the experiment was 1 hour and 40 minutes (10
minutes for the principles booklet, 54 minutes for the
learning booklet, and 36 minutes for the test booklet).
Predictions
On questions tapping conceptual understanding, we
expected the compare condition to perform better than the
sequential condition, because the comparison process
should highlight critical features and help abstract
principles common across the problems. The sequential
condition in turn should outperform the problem-solving
condition.

3118

On the problem-solving task, we expect to see an
advantage for the problem-solving group on the isomorphic
problem because it focuses on step-by-step near transfer
learning, and the problem-solving condition received more
practice solving problems than the two other groups.
However, on the other problem in this task, which
contained extraneous values and required students to
determine the relevant values, we expected the compare
condition to outperform the sequential and problem-solving
conditions, because comparison promotes abstraction;
highlights critical features, and application conditions. We
did not expect to see a difference between sequential and
problem-solving conditions on this measure, because
neither of these engaged in these learning processes.
On the open-ended questions, we again expected to see the
compare and sequential conditions outperform the problemsolving condition.

Results
The results are divided into two sections, learning and test.
In the learning results, we examine the performance of
students on the two isomorphic problems that they solved
during learning, and the answers to the compare or
sequential questions. This will help us determine how much
students learned during the learning phase.
The test results look at performance of students on the three
test measures. These measures will show whether students
are able to apply what they learned to new problems.
Learning Results
During learning, students in all three conditions studied
worked examples and solved isomorphic problems. The
answers to compare questions and sequential questions
were scored for students in those conditions. Students were
given one point for every correct concept they mentioned
while answering the analogical comparison questions in the
compare condition or questions directed at studying
individual examples in the sequential condition.
If we look at the percentage of questions answered
correctly, the sequential group answered a significantly
higher percentage of questions (M = 70.28%, SE = 5%)
correctly over the compare group (M = 50.66%, SE = 6%);
F (1,22)= 5.60, p < 0.05.1 This suggests the possibility that
the sequential group correctly encoded a greater amount of
knowledge than the compare group. The reason that the
sequential group could answer more questions correctly
may be that the compare questions were inherently more
difficult than the sequential questions, and caused a greater
cognitive load. Indeed, past research has shown that
cognitive load is an important determinant of successful
analogical learning (Keane, Ledgeway, and Duff, 1994).
Next, we looked at the performance of the three groups on
the isomorphic problems that they solved during learning.
1

Only the compare and non-compare groups are included in
this comparison, because the problem-solving group were not
required to answer any questions during learning.

Test Results
As described earlier, the test phase was divided into three
sections: multiple-choice, problem solving, and open-ended
questions. Next, we will describe the performance of the
three conditions on each of these measures. Note that the
test phase was administered individually; therefore all
scores reported below are means of scores for individual
students.
Multiple-Choice Test. Overall, all three conditions
performed poorly on the multiple-choice questions. The
overall mean was 3.82 (SE = 0.23) out of a total of ten
points. There were no significant difference between
conditions, F (2,69) = 0.05, ns.
Therefore, we shall focus only on the performance of High
learners. Item analysis of the multiple choice questions
shows that the high learners in the compare condition
performed significantly better than the high learners in the
sequential and problem solving conditions on five
questions. An ANOVA showed a significant difference
between the three conditions, in a direction favoring the
compare condition, F (2,33) = 3.86, p < 0.05 (See Fig. 1
for means and standard errors). Consistent with our
predictions this result shows more conceptual learning for
the compare condition than the sequential and problem
solving conditions. Contrasts revealed that the compare
group was significantly different from the sequential group

3119

t (1,33) = 2.56, p < 0.05 and problem-solving group; t
(1,33) = 2.22, p < 0.05 but the sequential and problemsolving groups were not significantly different; t (1,33) = 0.34, ns.

Percent Correct

On the first isomorphic problem, the three conditions were
not significantly different; F (2,33) = 0.88, ns. On the
second isomorphic problem, the three conditions were
marginally different; F (2,33) = 2.60, p < 0.1 and the effect
was in a direction favoring the sequential group over the
compare and the problem solving groups.
The superior performance of the sequential group ran
counter to our predictions, but can be attributed to the fact
that students in this condition answered more questions
correctly during learning. This suggests that they encoded
more correct knowledge components during the learning
that enabled them to solve isomorphic problems more
accurately.
Next, we see whether this translated into better
performance by the sequential group on the test phase of
the experiment.
High variation was observed in performance on the
learning tasks, suggesting the possibility that individual
differences would interact with learning outcomes. We are
interested in testing the effectiveness of our intervention on
test performance for when testing was successful.
Therefore, we selected the best learners from each group by
conducting a median split based on the learning scores (i.e.,
average scores on isomorphic problems from the learning
phase). This was based on the assumption that there are
some qualitative differences between learners who show
high learning and those who show low learning during the
learning intervention. This left us with six pairs in each
group (high / low split for each condition).

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
Compare Sequential

Problem
Solving

Learning Condition
Figure 1: Performance of High learners on multiple-choice
questions.
Problem Solving Test. The problem-solving test consisted
of two questions, one of which was isomorphic to one of
the problems the students had encountered in the learning
intervention, but had different surface features. The other
problem had extraneous values, which required students to
determine which of the values were critical to solving the
problem before they plugged in the numbers.
We conducted a mixed model repeated measures ANOVA
with problem-type as the within subject factor, and
condition as the between-subject factor. Again, consistent
with our prediction, there was a significant interaction
problem-type X condition interaction (F (2,33)=3.37, p <
0.05). (See Fig. 2) Specifically, the students in the compare
condition and sequential conditions performed better on the
extraneous information problems than on the isomorphic
problems, whereas students in the problem solving
condition performed better on the isomorphic problem than
they did on the extraneous information problem. Students
in the compare and sequential conditions acquired a better
conceptual understanding with the help of the provided
prompts, whereas those in the problem solving condition
got no such scaffolding. However, they got more practice
solving the same type of problems, thus explaining their
better performance on the isomorphic problems.
Open-Ended Questions Test. The first question in this test
consisted of two problems for which students had to
determine whether the answer was correct or wrong and
provide an explanation for the same. The second question
consisted of two problems for which students had to
calculate an answer and provide an explanation. Chi square
tests revealed no difference between conditions on either
question. All χ2s (2, N = 36) <4.8, ns.

Discussion
We had hypothesized that analogical prompts will provide
better scaffolding for collaborative learning compared to
prompts focused on single examples or no prompts. The

Percent Correct

References

0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
Isomorphic

Extraneous
Information

Problem Type
Compare

Sequential

Problem Solving

Figure 2: Problem-type by Condition interaction
findings from this experiment provide preliminary evidence
that analogical comparison can support collaborative
learning, particularly where conceptual understanding is
required. We hypothesize that this is because the process of
analogical comparison promotes abstraction; highlights
schema and critical common features, and application
conditions which gives an advantage to students in the
compare condition.
We found significant differences in performance only for
high learners. One potential reason that only half the
students in the experiment showed good learning may be
motivation. Perhaps, highly motivated students took the
task seriously, and were able to learn from the intervention.
Even within highly motivated learners, there was a benefit
for doing analogical comparison over studying examples
individually or practicing problem solving. However, an
issue that future research should address is how we can get
even the low learners to learn and what kinds of additional
scaffolding we need to provide in order to help the low
learners.
In order to understand what kinds of cognitive processes
that led to learning, future work should undertake a finegrained analysis of students’ collaborative interactions.
Further analysis will also look at long-term learning
measures, such as performance on homework problems in
rotational kinematics and a subsequent topic of rotational
dynamics. This will help us understand whether our
learning intervention had any effect on students’ long- term
retention and whether the knowledge they gained during
learning could transfer to a related domain of rotational
dynamics.

Acknowledgments
Funding for this research was provided by the National Science
Foundation, Grant Number SBE-0354420 to the Pittsburgh
Science of Learning Center (http://www.learnlab.org). Thanks to
the Ted McClanahan at the Unites States Naval Academy for
allowing us to collect data in his classrooms. Also, thanks to
Robert Shelby for providing expert feedback on our experiment
materials and Max Lichtenstein for help coding the materials.

3120

Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of
Educational Research, 70(2), 181.
Azmitia, M. (1988). Peer interaction and problem solving:
When are two heads better than one? Child Development,
59(1), 87-96.
Barron, B. (2000). Achieving coordination in collaborative
problem solving groups. Journal of the Learning
Sciences 9(4), 403-436.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Cummins, D. D. (1992). Role of analogical reasoning in the
induction of problem categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18,
1103-1124.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393408.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Hausmann, R. G. M., Chi, M. T. H. & Roy, M. (2004).
Learning from collaborative problem solving: An
analysis of three dialogue patterns. In the Twenty-sixth
Cognitive Science Proceedings.
Keane, M. T., Ledgeway, T., & Duff, S. (1994). Constraints
on analogical mapping: A comparison of three models.
Cognitive Science, 18(3), 387-438.
Kurtz, K. J., Miao, C. H., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning
by analogical bootstrapping. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 10, 417-446.
Lin, X. (2001). Designing metacognitive activities.
Educational Technology Research & Development, 49,
1042-1629.
McLaren, B., Walker, E., Koedinger, K., Rummel, N., &
Spada, H. Kalchmann, M. (2005). Improving algebra
learning and collaboration through collaborative
extensions to the algebra tutor. Conference on computer
supported collaborative learning.
Nokes, T. J. & VanLehn, K. (2008). Bridging principles
and examples through analogy and explanation. In the
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference of the
Learning Sciences. Mahwah, Erlbaum.
Rummel, N., & Spada, H. (2005). Learning to collaborate:
An instructional approach to promoting collaborative
problem solving in computer-mediated settings. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 14(2), 201-241.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two
wrongs may make a right ... if they argue together!
Cognition & Instruction, 18, 461-494.
Webb, N. M. (1982). Peer interaction and learning in
cooperative small groups. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 74(5), 642-655.

