UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Appraisal of Children’s Facial Expressions while Performing Mathematics Problems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6cs1f9t5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Krahmer, Emiel
Van Amelsvoort, Marije

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Appraisal of Children’s Facial Expressions while Performing
Mathematics Problems
Marije van Amelsvoort (M.A.A.vanAmelsvoort@uvt.nl)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences, Warandelaan 2, P.O. Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Emiel Krahmer (E.J.Krahmer@uvt.nl)
Department of Communication and Information Sciences, Warandelaan 2, P.O. Box 90153
5000 LE Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
We show that children display facial expressions when
solving mathematical problems, and that adults can infer from
these facial expressions whether a child finds the problem
easy or difficult. More specifically, we show an age
difference in displaying facial expressions while solving math
problems. Eleven-year old children display more facial
expressions when solving a difficult problem than 8-year olds,
and are also rated to be faced with more difficult problems by
adult observers. The opposite is true for easy problems.
Results of our studies can be used for the development of
automatic detection of affective state in educational computer
environments. These environments can then adapt the
difficulty level of tasks to the individual child.
Keywords: facial expressions;
mathematics; primary education.

learning;

appraisal;

Introduction
When children are performing school tasks, their faces often
show how they feel. The face has been called the primary
source of information for someone’s internal state (Knapp &
Hall, 2006), and in interaction, facial expressions support
the information a speaker wants to convey (e.g., Ekman,
1979; Barkhuysen, Krahmer & Swerts, 2005).
The detection of children’s affective state when
performing school tasks is very important for several
reasons. First, learning occurs when children incorporate
new knowledge into their existing knowledge. Ideally, tasks
are in children’s ‘zone of proximal development’
(Vygotsky, 1978). If a task is too easy for children they will
not learn. However, if the task is too difficult they will also
not learn, because the new information does not relate to
existing knowledge. Children’s faces may show us whether
the task is too easy or too difficult for them, and enable us to
adapt the level of task-difficulty accordingly. Second,
children may not yet be able to express themselves verbally
very well, which makes their non-verbal reactions a
valuable source of information. It seems easier for children
to express themselves non-verbally, also in school tasks. For
example, Alibali (1999) found that when children generate
new problem-solving strategies, they often first show
gestures expressing these strategies before being able to
verbalize them. Third, children’s facial expressions may
reveal their level of meta-cognitive awareness. Metacognition is important for regulating one’s own learning.

Smith & Clark (1993) showed that people signal uncertainty
in factual question-answering situations by a variety of
verbal prosodic cues, and Swerts & Krahmer (2005)
extended this finding to the visual domain.
Expert teachers seem to be able to infer children’s
affective state from their verbal and non-verbal expressions,
and modify their pedagogical tactics accordingly (Meyer &
Turner, 2002). However, until now we do not know exactly
on what grounds teachers evaluate how children are doing
while performing school tasks. Previous research has shown
that affective states such as frustration, boredom, interest
and confusion can occur in learning (Craig et al, 2004), but
has not related these states to specific expressions.
In this paper, we report on two studies done to investigate
whether the perceived level of difficulty of mathematics
problems is shown in children’s facial expressions, and
whether adults can evaluate these expressions correctly.
1. Do children show facial expressions when solving
mathematics problems?
2. Can adults interpret these facial expressions to infer
whether the children are dealing with an easy or
difficult mathematics problem?
Besides these two general questions related to affective
states in facial expressions while performing math tasks, we
also include a specific question related to age. Generally,
children are more expressive than adults. Thompson (1994)
argues that younger children are more expressive than older
children are. As said before, children may be very
expressive in their faces because of their limited verbal
abilities. Thus, when children grow older they might not
need to express themselves non-verbally as much as before
because of their improved verbal skills. On the other hand,
they might also have adapted their facial expressions to
support the verbal information they want to convey. In
addition, children may learn how to control their facial
expressions for social reasons while growing up (Krahmer
& Swerts, 2005). Therefore, our third question is:
3. Are older children less expressive in their face while
solving math problems than younger children?
Not only novice teachers could greatly benefit from the
knowledge of how to detect children’s inner state, but
knowledge on facial expressions in learning could also be
used to improve educational software. Computers have
become an intrinsic part of education. Many software tools

1698

have been developed to assess children’s knowledge and
skills. One of the advantages of using a computer to provide
children with tasks is that they can be adaptable to the
individual child. Some programs have been developed that
adapt the difficulty level when children give many wrong
answers. However, whether the answer is right or wrong is
not the only thing important for learning. For example, a
learner can be engaged in a task and enjoy trying things
even when making mistakes, because the task is still in his
or her zone of proximal development. On the other hand, it
may be good to adjust the difficulty level when the learner
is showing signs of increased frustration when making
errors (Kapoor, Mota & Picard, 2001). Researchers are
slowly starting to investigate the detection of affective states
in learning in order to incorporate these aspects into
educational software (Craig et al., 2007; Kapoor, Mota,
Picard, 2001). Our study aims to contribute to this line of
research, paving the way for automatic detection of affective
states in learning by collecting suitable training materials.

Data Collection
In order to collect facial expression data during learning
tasks, we elicited responses from children to easy and
difficult math problems. Math problems were chosen
because they have straightforward answers and there are
clear guidelines on what level of math problem a child at a
certain age should be able to solve.

Design
We employed a mixed 2x2 design with grade (second grade,
fifth grade) as between-subjects variable, and level of
difficulty (easy, difficult) as within-subjects variable. The
order of the math problems was randomly varied to prevent
order-effects.

reactions to the math problems were recorded with a videocamera placed behind the laptop on which the math game
ran. The problems were taken from an official test children
take regularly in the Dutch school system, the Tempo Test
Rekenen (Tempo Test Mathematics, De Vos, 1994). The
difficulty level was based on norms of what the children’s
level should be. Thus, half of the problems for each grade
were taken from a level far below the children’s current
ability level, and half of the problems were taken from a
level high above their current ability level.

Procedure
The children were asked to play a math game to help us get
new input for Dr. Kawashima’s Brain Training. They
carried out this task one by one, in a separate room in the
school. The experimenter first talked to the children to make
them feel at ease, and told them that the task was a game
and did not involve getting a grade. The PowerPoint started
with explanation slides from Dr Kawashima and then 12
easy and 12 difficult math problems. Children were asked to
answer the problems facing the camera. At the end of the
slides, Dr Kawashima calculated the children’s intellectual
age, and systematically gave them a higher age than their
real age. This was done to encourage the children and
prevent frustration from the difficult problems. At the end of
the experiment, children were asked to indicate the general
level of difficulty and fun they experienced in playing the
game. This was done with a five-point scale consisting of
facial representations, with the items changing from a sad
face (mouth corners pulled down) to a smiling one (mouth
corners pulled up). These scales are often used with children
(e.g., Lockl & Schneider, 2002; Read, MacFarlane & Casey,
2002). All children received a small treat to thank them for
their participation.

Participants
Fifty-eight children from a primary school in the
Netherlands participated in this study; twenty-nine from
second grade (group 4 in the Dutch school system) and
twenty-nine from fifth grade (group 7). The 14 boys and 15
girls in second grade had a mean age of 7 years and six
months (SD = 0.51), and the 14 boys and 15 girls in fifth
grade had a mean age of 10 years and nine months (SD =
0.48). Parents were informed about the experiment
beforehand and returned a consent form for their child’s
participation and usage of recorded material for research
purposes.

Materials
A PowerPoint presentation (Figure 1) was developed with
mathematical problems at an easy and a difficult level. The
PowerPoint resembled Dr. Kawashima’s Brain Training, an
educational game developed for the Nintendo DS. Many
children in the Netherlands are familiar with this game and
play it regularly themselves. In this game, as in ours, people
have to solve math problems as fast as they can. Children’s

Figure 1. PowerPoint slides showing welcome,
explanation, a simple math problem and age calculation

1699

Figure 2. Facial expressions in answering math problems
(clockwise from top left: funny face, laughing, averted gaze, frowning)

Results

Design

Figure 2 shows representative stills of children’s reaction
after receiving an easy or a difficult math problem. Overall,
the game worked quite well. All children liked the task, M =
4.17 (SD = .60) on a five-point scale ranging from ‘I did not
like the game at all’ to ‘I liked the game very much’. The
majority of children (34 out of 58) rated the task ‘not easy/
not difficult’, M = 2.88, (SD = .68) on a scale ranging from
very difficult to very easy, which suggests that the math
problems taken from the Tempo Test Mathematics were
indeed both easy and difficult for their level. There was no
significant age difference in the amount of fun or level of
difficulty children experienced.
Furthermore, the data gathered seem rich in facial
expressions. Informal observations reveal differences in
facial expressions between the easy and difficult problems
and between age groups, which we attempt to validate in a
perception experiment.

The experiment was a 2x2 within subjects design, with
grade (group 4 and 7) and level of difficulty (easy, difficult)
as variables. All participants saw all variables on film. The
order of the fragments was randomly varied in two versions
of the film to compensate for potential learning effects.

Perception of Task Difficulty
In the perception experiment, adults rated the children’s
facial expressions while responding to a math problem to
investigate whether they could accurately detect perceived
level of task-difficulty.

Participants
31 adults participated in this experiment (15 male, 16
female). Their mean age was 37 and a half (SD = 14.3) and
their level of education varied.

Materials
A film consisting of 114 fragments of children from the data
collection was given to all participants. These fragments
included one randomly chosen easy (1 x 4 = 4) and one
randomly chosen difficult math problem (87 – 12 = 75 for
group 4; 193 + 159 = 352 for group 7) from every child.
One child was taken out of this experiment because he did
not give an answer to the difficult problem. The fragments
were cut from the moment the children had seen the
problem until they gave an answer, regardless of whether
the answer was right or wrong. The participants rated all
114 fragments by completing the sentence “I think the child
found the problem...” choosing from very easy to very
difficult on a seven point scale. Sound was excluded from
the film.

1700

Procedure
Participants individually saw the film with 114 fragments on
a laptop. They were told that the children on the film were
solving an easy or a difficult math problem, and that they, as
viewers, had to guess how much difficulty the children
experienced with the math problem. Participants first saw a
trial version of eight fragments, during which they could ask
for clarifications. Then they saw the actual film with 114
fragments. Before each fragment, a number was shown
together with a sound, to indicate a new fragment was
starting. Immediately after each fragment, participants were
asked to fill the question on the child’s experience of
difficulty-level on a seven-point scale. They had three
seconds to score the fragment. After 57 fragments,
participants were allowed a short break.

Results
The scores for the two versions of the film we made to
prevent order effects did not differ significantly, so we
combined the results of both versions.
We found a significant difference between easy and
difficult problems on the perceived difficulty level. This
means that participants rated children’s reactions to difficult
problems indeed as indicating a high difficulty (M = 3.31,
SD = 0.15), and their reactions to easy problems as
indicating low difficulty (M = 6.44, SD = 0.07), F(1, 30) =
671.12, p < .001, ŋ2 = .96.
Results show a significant difference between grades on
perception of difficulty level. According to the participants,
group 7 children showed higher levels of difficulty in their
expressions (M = 4.79, SD = 0.07) than group 4 children did
(M = 4.96, SD = 0.08), F(1, 30) = 17.89, p < .001, ŋ2 = .37.
There was also a significant interaction between grade
level and difficulty level, F(1, 30) = 319.80, p < .001,
ŋ2 = .91, indicating that the perceived differences between
easy and difficult problems in facial expressions is higher in
group 7 than in group 4 (see Figure 3).

Analysis of Facial Expressions
The results of the perception experiment suggest that adults
can perceive whether children find a given math problem
easy or difficult by watching their face. The results also
suggest that facial expressions vary with age. To further
investigate which facial expressions children show and
whether these are related to the results of the perception
experiment, we analyzed the facial expressions of the
children in all 114 fragments.
The 114 fragments of children’s reactions to math
problems were coded on five facial expressions: (1) smiling,
(2) gaze, (3) frowning, (4) ‘funny face’ (a marked facial
expression, which diverts from a neutral expression, Swerts
& Krahmer, 2005), and (5) visual delay in answering.
Verbal clues were not included in the analysis. The features
are loosely based on some of the Action Units (AUs)
described by Ekman & Friesen (1978) to distinguish facial
expressions and the facial muscles involved. Of the visual
features under consideration here, smiling is related to AUs
12 and 13 and gaze to AUs 61-64. Frowning is related to
AUs 1 and 2. Funny faces typically consist of a combination
of AUs such as lip corner depression (AU 15), lip stretching
(AU 20) or lip pressing (AU 24), combined with eye
widening (AU 5) and possibly brow movement as well.
Representative examples of these facial expressions are
displayed in Figure 2.
For every fragment, the five expressions are scored as
present (= 1) or not present (= 0). Each reaction to a math
problem could thus score a minimum of 0 facial expressions
and a maximum of 5 facial expressions.

Results
Table 1 shows the frequencies (114 fragments) of shown
facial expressions, split by difficulty level of the math
problem and group level.
On average, children show significantly fewer
expressions when they are faced with an easy problem
(M = .32; SD = .51) than when faced with a difficult
problem (M = 1.91, SD = 1.01), t(112) = -12.41, p < .001.
Smiling occurs both when facing easy and difficult
problems, t(112) = 1.25, p = .21, while all other facial
expressions occur significantly more often when a problem
is difficult than when it is easy (p < .001).
There is no significant difference in amount of
expressions shown between group 4 and group 7, t(112) = .51, p = .61.
A significant strong negative relation (r = -.81, p < .001)
was found between the perceived level of difficulty and the
facial expressions. This means that participants think that
children are solving simpler problems when they show
fewer facial expressions.

Figure 3. Perception of difficulty level for easy and
difficult math problems inferred from facial expressions in
two group levels. High scores indicate the problems were
easy, low scores indicate the problems were hard.

1701

Table 1. Frequencies of shown facial expressions and delay in easy and difficult math problems in two groups

Smiling
Gaze
Frowning
Funny
face
Visual
delay

yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no

Group 4
5
23
0
28
0
28
2
26
4
24

Easy
Group 7
7
22
0
29
0
29
0
29
0
29

There is a significant interaction between grade level and
difficulty level, F(1, 110) = 5.83, p < .05, ŋ2 = .05,
indicating that the differences in the amount of facial
expressions between easy and difficult math problems is
higher in group 7 then in group 4 (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Mean number of facial expressions while
answering math problems for two group levels.

General Discussion
In this paper we have shown that children display facial
expressions when solving mathematical problems, and that
adults can interpret these facial expressions. There was a
strong relation between adults’ ratings of perceived
difficulty inferred from the facial expressions and the actual
difficulty level of mathematical problems. In other words,
facial expressions showed that children indeed found easy
problems easy, and difficult problems difficult. Note that
adults were just told they had to judge problem difficulty,
and that the only cues they could rely on were the facial
expressions; adults were not told about an expected
correspondence between facial expressions and difficultylevel.
In easy problems, the facial expression most shown was
smiling. When children answered difficult problems, they
showed a variety of facial expressions, such as gaze,
frowning, a funny face, and visual delay. Although we did

Difficult
Group 4
Group 7
2
5
26
24
11
9
17
20
3
10
25
19
8
11
20
18
22
28
6
1

not ask participants on which (combination of) factors they
based their decision of difficulty level, we found a relation
between their ratings and our analysis of the facial
expressions. This suggests that children’s perceived
difficulty of the math problems could be inferred from the
facial expressions we analyzed. It also suggests that the
more facial cues were shown, the more difficult a
mathematical problem is perceived to be. Further research
could investigate what factors contributed most to the
accuracy of responses.
Overall, children in group 4 showed as many facial
expressions as children in group 7. However, the children in
group 7 were rated to show higher difficulty in difficult
problems. This is supported by the fact that children in
group 7 show more facial expressions on average when
facing difficult problems than children in group 4. One
possible explanation for this finding is that the difficult
problems group 7 had to solve were more difficult than the
problems group 4 had to solve. However, this is only true in
an absolute sense. Problems that are difficult for group 4 are
relatively easy for group 7. We chose difficult math
problems according to the norms applicable to the group
children are in. A more plausible explanation is that children
in group 7 are more expressive when facing a difficult
problem. This finding seems to be incompatible with
expectations based on the theory that younger children are
more expressive than older ones (Thompson, 1994), but
consistent with the findings of Shadid, Krahmer & Swerts
(2008) that 12 year old Pakistani and Dutch children were
more expressive playing a game than 8 year olds. However,
the interaction effect we found between grade level and
expressions is difficult to interpret in this light. Group 7
children are more expressive when facing difficult math
problems, but less expressive when facing easy math
problems compared to group 4 children. It is possible that
the easy problems were so easy for group 7 children that
they could hardly take them seriously and therefore it did
not really affect them. Another possibility is that there is a
difference in displaying positive and negative affect in
children. Further research could shed light on this issue.
Our results show that difficulty level of mathematics
problems can be inferred from facial expressions, which

1702

makes it possible to use facial expressions to adapt
educational software to individual ability levels. To extend
our findings to educational software, we will investigate
whether a computer can automatically detect perceived
difficulty based on the five facial expressions we analyzed.
Automatic detection of AUs as described by Ekman &
Friesen (1978) may be very helpful in this respect.
However, we conjecture that low-level features such as the
overall amount of facial movement in a given interval may
be indicative of difficulty as well. Of course, children’s
affective state is not only based on the difficulty level of the
problem they face, but can change depending on goals and
expectations for example (Conati, 2002). We will therefore
extend our research to include factors such as motivation
and boredom for future computer environments.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Lucinda Martens for her
help in collecting the data, and Lisette Mol and three
anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on a
previous version of this paper. The second author thanks
The Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO, Vici grant 277-70-007).

References
Alibali, M. W. (1999). How children change their minds:
Strategy change can be gradual or abrupt. Developmental
Psychology, 35, 127-145.
Barkhuysen, P., Krahmer, E., & Swerts, M. (2005). Problem
detection in human-machine interactions based on facial
expressions of users. Speech communication, 45, 343-359.
Conati, C. (2002). Probabilistic Assessment of User's
Emotions in Educational Games. Applied Artificial
Intelligence 16, 555-575.
Craig, S. D., Graesser, A. C, Sullens, J. & Gholson, B.
(2004). Affect and learning: an exploratory look into the
role of affect in learning with AutoTutor. Journal of
Educational Media, 29, 241-250.
Craig, S. D., D’Mello, S., Witherspoon, A., & Graesser, A.
(2007). Emote aloud during learning with AutoTutor:
Applying the facial action coding system to cognitiveaffective states during learning. Cognition & Emotion, 22,
777-788.
De Vos, T. (1994). Tempo Test Rekenen [Tempo Test
Mathematics]. Handleiding Tempo-Test-Rekenen (2nd
edition). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets Test Publishers.
Ekman, P. (1979). About brows: Emotional and
conversational signals. In M. von Cranach et al. (Eds.),
Human Ethology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1978). The facial action
coding scheme. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists’
Press.

Kapoor, A., Mota, S., Picard, R. W. (2001). Towards a
learning companion that recognizes affect. In: AAAI Fall
symposium, November 2001.
Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A. (2006). Nonverbal
communication in human interaction. Sixth edition,
Wadworth: Wadworth publishers.
Krahmer, E. J., & Swerts, M. (2005). How children and
adults produce and perceive uncertainty in audiovisual
speech. Language and speech, 48, 29-54.
Lockl, K., & Schneider, W. (2002). Developmental trends in
children’s feeling-of-knowing judgments. International
Journal of Behavioral Development, 26, 327-333.
Meyer, D. K., & Turner, J. C. (2002). Discovering emotion
in classroom motivation research. Educational
Psychologist, 37, 107-114.
Read, J., MacFarlane, S., & Casey, C. (2002). Endurability,
engagement and expectations. In M. Bekker et al. (Eds.),
Interaction Design and Children. Eindhoven, The
Netherlands: Shaker Publishing.
Shadid, S., Krahmer, E., & Swerts, M. (2008). Alone or
together: Exploring the effect of physical co-presence on
the emotional expressions of game playing children
across cultures. In P. Markopoulos et al. (Eds.), Fun and
Games. Lecture notes in Computer Science, 5294, pp. 94105. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Smith, V. L., & Clark, H. H. (1993). On the course of
answering questions. Journal of Memory and Language,
32, 25-38.
Swerts, M., & Krahmer, E. J. (2005). Audiovisual prosody
and feeling of knowing. Journal of Memory and
Language, 53, 81-94.
Thompson, R. (1994). Emotion regulation: A theme in
search of definition. In N. Fox (Ed.), The development of
emotion
regulation:
biological
and
behavioral
considerations. Monographs of the Society for Research
in Child Development, 59, 25-52.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development
of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

1703

