UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Arbitrary Imitation, Pattern Completion and the Origin and Evolution of Human
Communication

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kw0n70h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Tamariz, Monica

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Arbitrary imitation, Pattern Completion and the Origin and Evolution of
Human Communication
Monica Tamariz (monica@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Language Evolution and Computation, PPLS
The University of Edinburgh
3 Charles Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK

Abstract

he did not even attempt to. Mindlessly imitated
behavior, especially if it is not costly, may entrench the
use of non-functional patterns in a community; this
increases the degree of structure (reduces randomness)
in the cultural environment, which therefore becomes
easier to process and learn. This paper explores the role
of arbitrary imitation in the origin of communication in
our species.
Recent approaches to the evolution of human
communication propose that humans evolved a unique
biological adaptation, the socio-cognitive capacity for
theory of mind (Tomasello, 1999) or symbolic
reference (Deacon, 1997). This adaptation presupposes
and relies on non-communicative behavior being
already in place (Tomasello et al. 1997), for instance
the behavior sequences observed in chimpanzees
resulting from ontogenetic ritualisation (Tomasello &
Call, 1997). During the transition to communication,
non-communicative behavior would come to be
understood as a reflection of others’ meanings or
intentions. In this study I explore an alternative kind of
pre-communication behavior system caused by the
evolution of the general cognitive capacity to decouple
means from ends, instantiated as the abstraction of form
from function and the abstraction of behavior from the
producer of behavior.

Existing accounts of the origin of human
communication assume a pre-existing behavioral
system shared among members of a social group. This
paper is concerned with the origin of that system;
specifically, it explores its characteristics and
functionality as well as the circumstances under which
it could have appeared. A number of agent-based
computer simulations test whether the capacities for
arbitrary imitation and pattern completion can lead to a
behavioral system that could be co-opted for
communication. The results show that arbitrary
imitation and pattern completion may indeed generate a
population-wide shared behavioral system whose
structure reflects the structure of the environment, and
therefore could easily have been co-opted for
communication. This system may have paved the way
for other biological capacities widely believed to be
necessary for communication, such as shared
intentionality and symbolicity, to co-evolve.

Introduction
Much human socially transmitted culture arguably
depends on arbitrarily copying learnt patterns whose
function or origin is often unknown to the learner. This
is illustrated by Gergely and Csibra’s (2006) Sylvia’s
ham recipe story: Sylvia always cut the end of the ham
when she cooked it because that is the way her mother
did it; when the mother saw her do that, and asked why,
Sylvia told her: “Because that is the way you always
did it”. The mother explained that her pan was too small
to hold a whole ham, and that was why she had to cut
off the end. Children engage in mindless imitation of
elaborate actions even when these are irrelevant for the
desired goal (Horner & Whiten, 2005; Lyons, Young &
Keil, 2007; Whiten et al., 1996), or even for no
apparent goal, as illustrated by the personal observation
(which partly inspired this research) of a 24-month-old
who, after seeing his mother clap her hands to try and
catch moths on multiple occasions, interrupted his
playing to clap when he saw a moth in the room, even if
the moth was so far he could not possibly catch it – and

Arbitrary imitation for pattern completion
Imitation has been proposed as one capacity that
preceded and may have afforded the evolution of
communicative behavior (Donald, 1991; Zlatev, 2007).
Tomasello (1999) claimed that only human cultural
behavior involves true imitation, or replication of the
means that another individual employed to obtain an
end or function, as opposed to emulation, or achieving
the same function as the other individual, regardless of
the means employed. I focus on arbitrary imitation, or
replication of behavior irrespective of whether it can be
identifiable as a means to an end or not.
Possible motivations for arbitrary imitation include a
conformity bias (Asch 1955) and a pattern completion
(hereafter, PC) bias. I focus on the latter. PC is the
activation of a complete representation upon exposure

455

to a partial representation and is invoked as the
fundamental cognitive mechanism in approaches to
learning and cognition such as Sign Gestalt Expectancy
(Tolman, 1932) and connectionism (Bishop, 1995;
Ripley, 1996).
Consider the following pattern as experienced by one
individual: the recurrent correlation of a number of
stimuli, including objects and individuals in the
environment and behavior produced by oneself or by
others. If the behavior component is missing from an
(incomplete) instance of this pattern, the individual may
satisfy the PC bias by producing the missing behavior,
and thus complete the pattern. If the behavior produced
is a copy of a behavior observed in another individual,
and if the behavior itself has no other function than to
complete a current pattern, we have an instance of
arbitrary imitation for PC.
Arbitrary imitation for PC requires the two
abstractions mentioned above: first, it requires
decoupling behavior from its iconic or primary utility
function. Here, behavior’s functionality resides in being
the missing bit that completes the current context
pattern. Second, individuals must assume that behavior
produced by oneself is equivalent to behavior produced
by another individual, and that both are equally good
completions of a pattern.

If arbitrary imitation for pattern completion had a
foundational role in communication, and it is
anecdotically observed today in examples such as
Sylvia’s story, it would suggest there is scope to further
test the present-day role of this cognitive bias in the
maintenance and shaping of communication systems
such as language.

Methods
The hypothesis explained above is tested with a
computer simulation experiment where agents learn
about their environment and produce behavior. Unlike
other models of language evolution (e.g. Kirby, 2002;
Steels, 2002), the present simulations do not include
communicative function or intention. Arbitrary
imitation is implemented by letting the agents have
access to (“be able to observe”) the behavior
productions of others. Behavior production is either
guided by a heuristic that maximizes the systematicity
of the agents’ internal representation of the world
(which optimizes the possibility of correct PC), or is
produced randomly. Finally, the environment structure
is also manipulated.

Hypothesis
This paper is concerned with the idea that arbitrary
imitation for PC evolved in hominins prior to the
appearance of communication. Specifically, I test the
hypothesis that arbitrary imitation for PC in a
population can result in a behavioral system that both
(a) reflects the structure of the population’s
environment, and (b) is shared by all members of the
population, in the absence of any intention or
expectation of communication.
Behaviors are cumulatively perceived and processed
by individuals in the community. We assume that
individuals in a social group are exposed to similar
patterns; therefore imitation for PC should increase the
level of structure in the environment by increasing the
frequency of the imitated behaviors (through individual
behavior “downloading” information onto the common
environment, as in Clark, 1997). This more structured
environment can then be more easily exploited by other
individuals’ arbitrary imitation for further PC activity.
Moreover, this should result in an emergent social
coordination of the associations or mappings between
behaviors and other aspects of the environment among
the individuals in the population. The only missing
requirement for communication involves a dyadic
social dimension, most likely related to theory of mind,
that is absent from, but that could have evolved on top
of, arbitrary imitation.

Figure 1. An agent’s memory or cooccurrence matrix.
In the simulation run that generated this matrix there
were 3 objects and 3 behaviors; the complete matrix
and the object and behavior matrix subsets are
symmetrical; the two mapping matrix subset are not
(they are mirror images of each other).
Agents do associative learning based on cooccurrence: the level of association between two items
for an individual is proportional to the frequency with
which they have co-occurred in the same context in the
individual’s experience. Their memory is a symmetric
square matrix storing the cooccurrence counts between
every pair of stimuli (see Fig. 1).
Each simulation consists of a number of interactions
where the agents observe and interact with the
environment thus:

456

1. A proportion of the agents in the population are
randomly selected as participants (observers) in the
current context; a proportion of the observers are
randomly selected to be also producers of behavior.
2. A current environment is constructed by randomly
selecting objects (which may be repeated) from the
object set.
3. Each producer in turn observes the current
environment and selects a behavior from its
behavior repertoire applying either a PC heuristic or
randomly (see below). After all producers have
made their selections, the behaviors are added to the
current context.
4. Each observer agent increases the cooccurrence €
frequency count between each and every other
elements in the current context it has access to in its
memory matrix.

Independent variables
As already mentioned, three independent variables are
manipulated in the simulations: (1) whether there is
imitation or not (2) whether behavior selection is
guided by PC or is random and (3) the environment
structure.
1. In the imitation conditions, agents can observe
other agents’ behaviors, and consider those behaviors as
part of the current context. They therefore register the
cooccurrence between their own and others’ behaviors
and the objects in the environment, as well as
cooccurrences among objects. In the control (no
imitation) condition, agents only register cooccurrence
among objects and between their own behavioral
productions and the objects.
2. In the PC conditions, producers select the behavior
that is most likely to be activated in their memory
matrix given the objects in the current context and
given an expectation of regularity (expect the same
object-object and object-behavior combinations to
occur again and again). This is implemented by agents
selecting the behavior that maximizes the systematicity
of the memory matrix resulting from their own
individual experience over successive contexts. The
measure of systematicity (Syst) is based on RegMap
(Tamariz & Smith, 2008), a formalization of Hebbian
learning that quantifies the regularity of the mappings
between two domains (e.g. between signals and
meanings in a language). RegMap uses information
theory’s redundancy (Eqn. 1) and frequency.
i

(1) R = 1−

∑ p log( p )
i

i

1

log(i)
Redundancy is 1 minus the entropy (H), and
measures the structure of a system, its departure from
randomness or its predictability. Syst is measured as
€
follows: For an object-behavior (O, B) pair, first a

matrix is created by computing the cooccurrence
frequencies xij between each object i and each behavior
j. Syst is then calculated for B given O (Eqn. 2) and for
O given B (Eqn. 3), which are finally combined to
obtain Syst(O, B) (the measure that is maximized in the
PC heuristic) using Eqn. 4.


∑R(xij )∑(xij )

i 
j
(2)
Syst(B | O ) =
∑(xij )
ij



∑R(xij )∑(xij )

(3) Syst(O | B) = j 
i
∑(xij )
ij

(4) Syst(O ,B) =

RegMap(O | B)× RegMap(B | O )

€ In the control (no PC) heuristic condition, speakers
select a behavior at random from the behavior
€
repertory.
3. Three conditions of environment structure are
tested: In the random environment, the probability of an
object appearing in the current context of an interaction
is equal to that of, and independent of the appearance
of, other objects. In the frequency-based environment
condition, the object set has an exponential frequency
distribution:
. In the dependency
environment condition, the presence of an object in the
context is determined by the presence of another object.
Context construction in the simulations below (context
size = 8; four object types O = {1,2,3,4}) consists of
random selection of one object oi, and inclusion in the
context of four tokens of oi and four of oi+1. In this way,
each object oi only ever co-occurs with object oi+1.

Dependent variables
Two variables are measured at the end of each run of
the simulation, based on the agent’s memory matrices.
1. The first one is the level of coordination of the
mappings, measuring the degree to which individuals
in the population have reached similar mapping matrix
subset states. This is quantified as the average of the
coordination of the mapping matrix subset for each pair
of agents in the population. For a pair of agents (A, B),
the coordination of their mapping matrices is given in
Eqn. 5. It equals the square root of the correlation
(Pearson’s r) between their mapping matrices
multiplied by the average variance of the same mapping
matrices.
(5) Coord(A,B) = ( r(A,B)) ×  Var(A) +Var(B) 


2
2. The second dependent variable is related to the
potential of a behavioral system in the population to be
co-opted for communication. Mappings that could be
€
co-opted for communication need to be potentially apt

457

for one-to-one mappings for both production and
comprehension, therefore the systematicity for
production and comprehension values are measured
using Eqns. 2 and 3 applied to the mapping subset of
each agent’s memory matrix. Syst(B|O) relates to
production and measures how confident a speaker can
be, given its mapping matrix subset (its knowledge
about object-signal mappings), about which behavior to
select to express an object. Syst(O|B) relates to
comprehension and measures how confident an
observer can be of which object a behavior refers to.

(Eqn. 5). Additionally, when agents interact with a
structured environment, mappings are better
coordinated.

freq

random

depend

random

+ Imitation
+ Pattern completion

0.4
0.0

0.2

0.4

Coord. mappings

0.6

+ Imitation
- Pattern completion
0.6

Environment structure

0.0

Coord. mappings

freq

Environment structure

0.2

Results

0.4
0.0

depend

The simulations are run with 10 agents. At each
interaction, 6 observer agents are present, of which 3
are also producers; the context includes 8 object tokens
selected from a repertory of 4 object types. The agents
have a repertory of 4 behaviors to select from. Each
simulation is run for 600 interactions (when the systems
have reached stable values of the dependent variables),
at the end of which the average coordination and
systematicity of the agents’ mapping subset of their
memory matrices are recorded.
The experiment design exhaustively combines two
imitation conditions (imitation and no imitation), two
behavior selecting heuristics (PC and random) and three
environment structures (random, frequency-structured
and dependency-structured). 130 simulations were run
with each factor combination of the 2 x 2 x 3 design.

0.2

Coord. mappings

0.4
0.2
0.0

Coord. mappings

0.6

- Imitation
+ Pattern completion

0.6

- Imitation
- Pattern completion

depend

freq

random

Environment structure

depend

freq

random

Environment structure

Figure 2. The degree of mapping coordination in the
agent population in the 12 combinations of imitation x
PC levels x environment structure. Each box-plot shows
sample minimum, lower quartile, median, upper
quartile and sample maximum.
When PC is combined with imitation (bottom right
plot) coordination is much higher in the three
environments. This is driven not only by heuristic and
the initial environment structure, but also by the fact
that the behavior that each agent produces (in a nonrandom way, following a PC heuristic) becomes part of
the environment that is observed and learned by the
population, thus increasing the level of structure in the
environment.
The effect of environment structure is apparent in all
four plots, with frequency structure returning the
highest coordination values, followed by dependency
structure and finally by random structure. In the
frequency-structured environment, the proportions of
objects in the interactions will be skewed, importantly,
in the same direction for all agents. Dependency
structure results in contexts that are more similar
between agents than random structure, but because the
dependencies are between the objects, each agent will
experience a more unique frequency distribution of
objects in the contexts it is exposed to than in the
frequency-structured environment condition.

Coordination of the mappings in the population
The level of coordination of the mappings among the
agents in the population at the end of the simulation
runs was measured in all possible condition
combinations (Fig. 2). Coordination is significantly
positively affected both by imitation and PC, and there
is a strong interaction between the two: two-factor
ANOVA tests in every world structure returned
p<0.001 for each factors and for their interaction in all
three environment structure conditions. Mapping
coordination is also significantly affected by the
environment structure, with one-way ANOVA tests run
in all four imitation x pattern-completion combination
conditions also returning p<0.001.
No PC, i.e. random selection of behavior (top and
bottom left plots), generates random mappings, which,
naturally, tend to be different for each agent (low
coordination). In the dependency and, especially, the
frequency-structured environments, however, agents are
more likely to converge on similar mappings. When a
PC heuristic is in place alone (top right plot)
coordination is increased: a non-random heuristic
generates more non-random mapping matrices; because
of this, the Pearson’s r component of the coordination
measure becomes less obscured by the variance factor

458

Systematicity of the mappings

Syst. mappings (COMPREHENSION)

Fig. 3 shows that the PC heuristic strongly increases
the systematicity of the agents’ mappings for
production: it all but eliminates the uncertainty for
behavior selection for production. When arbitrary
imitation is also present, mappings are even more
highly systematic in all environments. In the random
environment, production is always very unambiguous
(each agent produces always the same unique
behavior); in the frequency-structured environment,
systematicity is more variable, but with high values; in
the dependency-structured environment there is more
ambiguity, and also a wider range of possible
systematicity outcomes, with a clear bimodal
distribution (not apparent in the figure): in half of the
cases, a single behavior is produced every time, as in
the random environment, but in the other half, distinct
behaviors are produced for distinct objects. This
indicates that PC strongly contributes to mapping
systematicity for production in all environment
structures.
The pattern is very different for systematicity in
comprehension (Fig. 4). Most obviously, even the
highest values (in the conditions including PC) are
clearly lower than those for systematicity for
production. This is due to the fact that agents in the PC
conditions are maximizing the systematicity of their
memory matrices by producing behavior; their
productions accrue to the environment, which becomes

depend

freq

random

0.8

- Imitation
+ Pattern completion

0.4

Figure 3. Systematicity of the mappings for the
purposes of production in all condition combinations.

- Imitation
- Pattern completion

0.0

Environment structure

depend

freq

random

Environment structure

Environment structure

+ Imitation
- Pattern completion

+ Imitation
+ Pattern completion

depend

freq

random

Environment structure

0.8

random

0.4

0.8
0.4

freq

0.8

Environment structure

depend

0.4

random

Syst. mappings (COMPREHENSION)

freq

0.0

0.4
depend

Syst. mappings (PRODUCTION)

+ Imitation
+ Pattern completion

0.8

+ Imitation
- Pattern completion

0.0

random

0.0

freq

Environment structure

Syst. mappings (COMPREHENSION)

0.8
0.4
0.0
depend

0.8

random

Environment structure

0.4

freq

- Imitation
+ Pattern completion

0.0

depend

Syst. mappings (PRODUCTION)

0.0

0.4

0.8

- Imitation
- Pattern completion

0.0

Syst. mappings (PRODUCTION)

Syst. mappings (PRODUCTION)

If the mappings are to be co-optable for
communication, they must be systematic both for
production and for comprehension.

Syst. mappings (COMPREHENSION)

cumulatively more systematic for production.
Unambiguous comprehension, on the other hand, is
only possible if the environment is structured, and the
agents cannot alter this in the present simulations. The
results for systematicity for comprehension in the
structured environments are nevertheless highly
significantly different from those in the baseline
random environment in all cases.
It is evident in Fig. 4 that the structure of the
environment alone (even in the absence of imitation
PC) confers a degree of unambiguous comprehension.
PC only affects systematicity for comprehension in the
dependency environment. In this environment,
comprehension systematicity is consistently higher than
for any other environment in the absence of imitation.
When imitation is present, however, comprehension
systematicity also has a bimodal distribution (not
apparent in the figure): in about half of the runs, the
heuristic makes no difference; in the other half,
systematicity is much higher than without imitation,
overlapping with that in the no imitation condition (top
right), if statistically different from it: 2-tailed t-test, t27
= 6.36; P<0.001.

depend

freq

random

Environment structure

Figure 4. Systematicity of the mappings for the
purposes of comprehension in all condition
combinations.

Potential suitability for communication
The ideal behavioral system to be potentially co-optable
for communication should have all of (1) high
coordination, (2) high systematicity for production and
(3) high systematicity for comprehension. These three
requirements are only met in 50% of the runs in the
+imitation, +PC, dependency-structured environment
condition.

459

Discussion

References

Imitation and PC together enhance the coordination of
the mappings between objects and behaviors in the
population to a much higher degree than either
separately. PC enhances systematicity for production
because the agents simply seek to have a memory
matrix that allows unambiguous selection of behavior
for production, and are under no pressure to produce
behaviors that will be understood by others.
The frequency-structured environment enhances
systematicity for comprehension. Here, some objects
are so frequent that the mapping matrix ends up
reflecting the object frequency and a strategy of
interpreting a behavior as referring to the most frequent
object is better than chance. The dependency-structured
environment also has an impact, in the cases where
agents converge on the same systems (high
coordination) and the association between each object
and a unique signal is further enhanced over time by the
agents’ coordinated productions.
Arbitrary imitation improves systematicity for
production, but seems to have negative effects for
systematicity for comprehension in the dependency
environment. However, in this condition we have,
again, a bimodal distribution, including very low
comprehension systematicity values, but also some very
high ones, when two or three behaviors are produced,
which can be unambiguously associated to specific
objects, a crucial advantage if communication is to coopt the system. These results indicates that the structure
of the environment, especially if it includes
dependencies between objects, can result, in half of the
cases, in significantly-higher-than-chance systematicity
of the mappings both for production and
comprehension.
Therefore, this study suggests that the most
propitious conditions for the emergence of a behavioral
system that could be co-opted for communication
include arbitrary imitation for PC and a dependencystructured environment. Moreover, this result supports
the idea that a cognitive bias for imitation may have
been instrumental for the origin of communication
(Donald, 1971; Zlatev, 2007). Additionally, it proposes
a mechanism whereby arbitrary or blind imitation
(Gergely & Csibra, 2006) for pattern completion results
in the coordination of cultural conventions in a
population and thus can play a role not only in the
origin but also in the ongoing spread and maintenance
of symbolic cultural conventional systems including
language.

Asch, S. E. (1955). Opinions and social pressure.
Scientific American, 193: 31-35.
Bishop, C.M. (1995). Neural networks for pattern
recognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species. London:
Allen Lane (The Penguin Press).
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Gergely, G. & Csibra, G. (2006). Sylvia's recipe: The
role of imitation and pedagogy in the transmission of
human culture. In: N. J. Enfield & S. C. Levinson
(Eds.), Roots of Human Sociality. Oxford: Berg.
Horner, V. & Whiten, A. (2005). Causal knowledge and
imitation/emulation switching in chimpanzees (Pan
troglodytes) and children (Homo sapiens). Animal
Cognition, 8, 164-181.
Kirby, S. (2002). Learning, bottlenecks and the
evolution of recursive syntax. In Briscoe, T. (Ed.),
Linguistic evolution through language acquisition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lyons, D.E., Young, A.G., & Keil, F.C. (2007). The
hidden structure of overimitation. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104: 19751-19756.
Ripley, B.D. (1996). Pattern recognition and neural
networks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shannon
Steels, L. (2002) The Evolution of Communication
Systems by Adaptive Agents. Adaptive Agents and
Multi-Agents Systems 2002: 125-140
Tamariz, M. & Smith, A.D.M. (2008). Quantifying the
regularity of the mappings between signals and
meanings. In A. D. M. Smith, K. Smith and R. Ferrer
i Cancho (Eds.), The Evolution of Language:
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
the Evolution of Language, 315-322.
Tolman, E.C. (1932). Purposive behavior in animals
and men. New York: Century.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Tomasello, M. & Call, J. (1997). Primate cognition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M., Call, J., & Gluckman, A. (1997). The
comprehension of novel communicative signs by
apes and human children. Child Development, 68,
1067-1081.
Whiten, A., Custance, D.M., Gomez, J.C., Teixidor, P.
& Bard, K.A. (1996). Imitative learning of artificial
fruit processing in children and chimpanzees. Journal
of Comparative Psychology, 110(1): 3-14.
Zlatev, J. (2007). Embodiment, language, and mimesis.
In T. Ziemke, J. Zlatev and R. Frank, (Eds.) Body,
language and mind: Vol 1: Embodiment. Berlin:
Mouton.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by a Leverhulme Early
Career Fellowship. The author also acknowledges
helpful comments on this work from Dan Dediu.

460

