UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are representativeness judgments automatic and rapid? The effect of time pressure on the
conjunction fallacy.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2677g2j0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Villejoubert, Gaelle

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are representativeness judgments automatic and rapid?
The effect of time pressure on the conjunction fallacy
Gaëlle Villejoubert (gaelle.villejoubert@univ-tlse2.fr)
Laboratoire CLLE-LTC (UTM, CNRS, EPHE)
Université de Toulouse Le Mirail
5 allées A. Machado
31058 Toulouse Cedex 9, France
Abstract

(1)

Linda is a bank teller.

This study aimed to better understand the cognitive underpinnings of people’s intuitions concerning the conjunction rule of
probabilities. Using a novel methodology to study the conflict between representativeness and logic considerations in the
conjunction fallacy, results revealed that, contrary to what is
commonly assumed, assessments of representativeness are not
automatic and rapid but are in fact most influential when participants are not pressured by time to provide a judgment. Implications for the different dual-system accounts of probability
judgments will be discussed.
Keywords: Conjunction fallacy, Probability judgments, Intuition, Dual processes, Representativeness, Time pressure.

(2)

Linda is a bank teller and is active in the feminist
movement.

Overall, 85% of respondents chose (2) over (1), thus revealing that their intuitive answer was at odds with the conjunction rule.

Why Does our Intuition Fail us?

Introduction
The question of whether we can intuitively appreciate mathematical concepts has puzzled many psychologists and linguists (e.g., see Lakoff & Núñez, 2000). There is some strong
evidence that this achievement is not beyond our capabilities.
For example, Young Brazilian candy sellers with little formal education can outperform their non-sellers counterparts
on complex ratio-comparison problems presented in familiar
formats (i.e., using candies and bills) without using pen or
paper (Saxe, 1988). Yet, the automatisation of mathematical
operations can have its shortcomings. For example, erroneous
intuitions about probabilities have been demonstrated numerous times. One striking example concerns intuitions about the
conjunction rule, a basic probability law which does not seem
to be intuitively grasped by individuals (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). According to this rule, the probability of a conjunction of two events A and B, or Pr(A ∧ B), cannot exceed
the probability of any of its constitutive events, namely Pr(A)
or Pr(B). In certain situations, however, most individuals will
erroneously judge that Pr(A ∧ B) is more probable than one
of its constitutive probabilities, an error known as the “conjunction fallacy” (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). Tversky and
Kahneman (1983) provided a paradigmatic illustration of this
error with the “Linda problem”. In this problem, individuals
are asked to read the following thumbnail description:
Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright.
She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply
concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice, and also participated in anti-nuclear demonstrations. (p. 297)
In the most transparent test of individuals’ intuition for the
conjunction rule, the authors asked participants to decide
which of the two following alternatives was more probable:

There are two main types of accounts to explain the discrepancy between participants’ intuitions and the objective mathematical rule in conjunction tasks. The first type of account
focuses on linguistic ambiguities inherent in the task (e.g., see
Hertwig, Benz, & Krauss, 2008; Politzer & Noveck, 1991).
Researchers who emphasised the role of linguistic ambiguity proposed, notably, that people inferred that (1) implicitly
negated the possibility that Linda was a feminist when asked
to compare (1) and (2) (see e.g., Politzer & Noveck, 1991). In
other words, when asked to compare Pr(A) and Pr(A ∧ B), individuals would instead compare Pr(A∧ not-B) and Pr(A∧B).
In this case, considering that Pr(A∧ not-B) is greater than
Pr(A ∧ B) can no longer be deemed to be a ‘fallacy’. There is,
however, evidence to show that removing the ambiguity is not
sufficient to perfectly realign people’s intuitions with mathematical rules. Thus, Tentori, Bonini, and Osherson (2004)
asked individuals to evaluate Pr(A), Pr(A ∧ B), as well as
Pr(A∧ not-B)1 . Results showed that the majority of participants erroneously believed that Pr(A ∧ B) was more probable
than Pr(A).
The second type of account, so-called the attributesubstitution account (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002; Kahneman, 2003), is presented as a more specific, process-oriented
extension of the representativeness heuristic account (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). According to Kahneman and Frederick (2002; but see also, Kahneman, 2003), people’s intuitions deviate from normative expectations because individuals assess an explicit target attribute of a judgment by substituting a related heuristic attribute that comes more readily
to mind. So, according to this account, people use representativeness or similarity as a heuristic attribute to gauge the
probability that Linda is a bank teller and a feminist and the
probability that she is a bank teller. Accordingly, since Linda
appears more representative of a feminist bank teller than a
1 where the explicit mention of Pr(A∧ not-B) prevents participants to interpret A as referring to A-but-not-B.

2980

bank teller, people believe that she is more likely to be both a
feminist and a bank teller than a bank teller.

tion of the present study is to propose a new methodology for
studying the conjunction fallacy which will make it possible
to test for the separate effects of logic and representativeness
assessments on judgments.

Does our Intuition Always Mislead us?
There is a confound in Linda problems that has yet to be addressed. People’s intuitions have been assessed with one of
two methodologies. One procedure consists in asking individuals to rank order different events according to their probability of being true. These events encompass—solely, or
among others—the conjunction of two events and each of
these two events in isolation. The other procedure consists in
asking participants to give a numerical estimate of the probability that the conjunction is true, as well as the probabilities
that each of its constitutive events are true2 .
In both cases, there are two ways in which participants’
intuitions can be fallacious. They can believe that the conjunction is more probable than any of its constitutive events
or they can believe that the conjunction is more probable than
one of its constitutive events but not the other. Tversky and
Kahneman (1983) reported that 85% participants believed
Linda resembled more a typical feminist bank teller than a
bank teller (A∧B  B) but also that she resembled more a typical feminist than a feminist bank teller (A  A ∧ B). Therefore, if individuals assess the explicit probability attribute by
substituting a related representativeness attribute, they should
only commit the conjunction fallacy when comparing the
least representative event and the conjunction of the least representative and the most representative one. In other words,
they should erroneously believe that Pr(A ∧ B) > Pr(B) but
they should also correctly infer that Pr(A) > Pr(A ∧ B). Unfortunately, the authors did not report probability judgments
for most probable event Pr(A). But in a recent study, Hertwig
et al. (2008, Experiment 2) data suggesting that nearly 70%
of participants who committed the conjunction fallacy considered that the conjunction was more probable than one of
its constituting events, but nevertheless correctly inferred that
the conjunction was less probable than the second constitutive
event.
This result suggests that our intuition can sometimes be
aligned with rules of mathematics, that it does not always
mislead us. The issue, therefore, lies in identifying whether
these correct intuitions are solely determined by heuristic processing (i.e., considerations of representativeness) or whether
they reflect a sensititivity to the logic of sets which underpins
the conjunction rule. The current procedures and available
empirical results, however, do not allow a more precise determination of whether participants actually detect the conflict between what considerations of representativeness dictate and what the logic of sets entails. This is because the role
of intuitions about the logic of sets and intuitions based on
representativeness considerations are not experimentally manipulated in the tasks commonly used. One main contribu2A

variant of this procedure consists in asking frequency estimates. This can greatly reduce the proportions of erroneous judgments (see e.g., Hertwig et al., 2008) but does not address, in itself,
the issue of the origin of the erroneous probabilistic intuitions.

Two Modes of Cognitive Functioning
A key element of the attribute-substitution account is the fact
that the result of the evaluation of the heuristic attribute is
presented as effortless and immediate (Kahneman, 2003). In
other words, individuals are assumed to be able to judge how
representative Linda is of a feminist or a bank teller almost
synchronously upon reading the problem. As such, Kahneman (2003) argues, judgments based on representativeness
originate from an intuitive mode of cognitive function, within
which judgments are made rapidly and automatically. The
author then contrasts this intuitive mode of functioning with
a controlled mode, described as deliberate and slower. This
dual-system view of cognition has gained considerable influence in the past decade in research examining judgment,
decision-making or reasoning (e.g., see Evans, 2008; Kahneman, 2003; Sloman, 1996). According to this view, the
second, more deliberate, system will either be at the origin of the judgment provided or simply monitor its quality.
From this theoretical perspective, the conjunction fallacy results from the generation of a representativeness-based impression by the first, more intuitive system, while the second,
slower and more deliberative, system fails to detect and correct the inference based on similarity. Kahneman and Frederick (2002) argued the controlled mode of cognitive functioning only loosely monitors the output of the intuitive system.
Kahneman (2003) added that individuals will often be satisfied with the first plausible judgment that comes to mind
and only will only rarely think hard to produce their judgment. There are concrete, empirically testable, predictions
that can be derived from this position. Namely, Kahneman
and Frederick’s lax-monitoring view suggests that judgments
observed in conjunction problems should always be rapid and
automatic and solely influenced by considerations of representativeness.
The lax-monitoring view is at odds with other conceptions
of dual-system cognition. There is evidence pointing to the
possibility that individuals are, to some extent, sensitive to
the conflict existing between heuristic and more analytical
considerations. In reasoning, this is best illustrated by the
belief bias phenomenon (Evans, Barton, & Pollard, 1983).
Belief bias is illustrated by asking participants to evaluate
syllogisms which vary both according to their logical validity (i.e., whether their conclusion logically follows from the
premises) and their believability (i.e., whether the conclusions is congruent with prior beliefs). Evans et al. (1983)
showed believable conclusions were more often endorsed
than unbelievable ones but also that valid conclusions were
more often endorsed than invalid ones. Moreover, Evans and
Curtis-Holmes (2005) showed that the main effect of logic
disappeared under time pressure, which is consistent with the
proposition that heuristic responses would be automatic and

2981

Method

immediate but that, when the slower controlled mode of functioning can intervene, such responses are modified.
This conflict-monitoring view has recently also gained support in research on probability judgments. Thus, individuals
who do not judge that the conjunction is more probable than
any of its constitutive events will spend more time on producing a judgment (De Neys, 2006). Additionally, De Neys and
Glumicic (2008, Experiment 2) showed that individuals took
longer to make a judgment based on conflicting analytical and
heuristic pieces of information. They gave participants information about the composition of a sample (e.g., 996 women
and 4 men) and a short personality description supposedly
drawn at random from that sample. The description was either congruent with stereotypes of the larger group or with
stereotypes of the smaller group and hence, incongruent with
the stereotypes of the larger group. For example, an incongruent description for the above sample described Jo as a student in engineering, who likes to go cruising, listen to loud
music and drink beer. Participants took longer to correctly
infer that the individual most probably belonged to the larger
group when the description was incongruent with stereotypes
on that group. Here again, concrete predictions can be derived
from the conflict-monitoring view for conjunction probability judgments. First, statements presenting the most representative outcome as the most probable should be more often endorsed than statements presenting an unrepresentative
outcome as most probable. Second, statements presenting a
single event (independently of its representativeness) as more
probable than a conjunction should be more often endorsed
than statements presenting the conjunction of events as more
probable. Third, the latter effect should disappear under time
pressure because the controlled mode of cognitive functioning will no longer be able to exert its slower-paced monitoring.

Experiment
The following experiment was designed to test the competing
predictions of the lax-monitoring view (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002; Kahneman, 2003) and the conflict-monitoring
view (De Neys & Glumicic, 2008) of cognitive functioning
in order to better understand the cognitive underpinnings of
people’s intuitions concerning the conjunction rule of probabilities. It first aimed to establish whether those intuitions
were solely driven by heuristic processing (lax-monitoring
view) or whether they were resulting from a combination
of heuristic and controlled processing (conflict-monitoring
view). The methodology used was adapted from the procedure used in belief-bias studies of reasoning (Evans & CurtisHolmes, 2005). A second objective of this study was to assess the effect of time pressure on those probabilistic intuitions. Based on the theoretical predictions of the two-system
view of cognition, it was expected that participants required
to respond rapidly would show an increased level of heuristic
processing and a reduced level of logical responding.

Participants Participants were recruited by second-year
psychology students at the University of Toulouse, France,
as a course requirement. Each student emailed or contacted
several men and women who were older than 18 to invite
them to take part in an on-line study. Of the 127 participants in the final sample, 24 already knew the Linda problem. Three participants took over two hours to complete the
test, and another ten participants allocated to the limited time
condition spent more than 12 seconds on average to provide
an answer. All these participants were removed from subsequent analyses. Of the remaining 90 participants (43 men
and 47 women; mean age = 29.85, SD = 12.52), 31% had
post-graduate education, 36% had undergraduate education,
24% had graduated from high school, and the remaining 9%
had left education before graduating from high school. Their
background knowledge was diverse, ranging from maths and
science (26%), social sciences (19%), services (21%), Technology and design (17%). The experiment was conducted in
French and all participants were native French speakers.
Materials Two scenarios used were based upon the original
Linda and Bill descriptions (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983),
respectively. In addition, ten new descriptions were modelled
after these original texts. A crucial difference between these
twelve tasks and the original Linda problem, however, was
the judgment task.
The materials used in this study presented participants
with a unique statement which they could either accept as
correct or reject as incorrect. The statements presented
fell into four categories: Correct-Congruent (CC), CorrectIncongruent (CI), Incorrect-Congruent (IC), and IncorrectIncongruent (II). Table 1 provides an illustration of the four
types of conclusions for the Linda problem. Note, however,
that different scenarios were used for each of the twelve tasks
created in the experiment so that all statements referred to
different contents.
Table 1: Illustration of the four types of statements used to
study the conjunction fallacy
Possible statements
CC The fact that Linda is a feminist is more likely than
the fact that she is a feminist and a bank teller.
CI
The fact that Linda is a bank teller is more likely
than the fact that she is a feminist and a bank teller.
IC
The fact that Linda is a feminist and a bank teller
is more likely than the fact that she is a bank teller.
II
The fact that Linda is a feminist and a bank teller
is more likely than the fact that she is a feminist.
Note. CC: Correct-Congruent, CI: Correct-Incongruent, IC:
Incorrect-Congruent, II: Incorrect-Incongruent.

Correct statements proposed that an event was more likely
than a conjunction of this event and another as in (3) or, al-

2982

followed by the message: “Respond now!” (see Figure 1 for
a screenshot). The next screen informed participants that they
would now enter the test. The experimental tasks were presented in a random order, following the same procedure as
that of the example task. Each time, the program recorded
the participant’s choice (accept or reject the conclusion) and
the time taken to respond from the moment the conclusion appeared on the screen until the participant clicked a box. After
they had provided all their answers, participants were asked
to fill in demographic information and were thanked for their
participation. The experiment used a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed design. The within-subject factors were the logical validity of
the statement (correct vs. incorrect) and the congruency between the event or conjunction presented as most likely and
its level of representativeness (congruent vs. incongruent).
The between-subject factor was the time condition (free time
vs. limited time).

Figure 1: Screen shot of the training task

ternatively, that the conjunction was less likely than one of its
constitutive events.
(3)

Results

The fact that Linda is a feminist is more likely than
the fact that she is a feminist and a bank teller.

Manipulation checks Participants in the free time condition spent more time completing the questionnaire and took
more time to evaluate conclusions than those in the limited time condition (see Table 2). Independent samples ttests confirmed observed differences were statistically significant both for the total time spent on the questionnaire and
the response time; t(88) = 3.18, p = .001, one-tailed, and
t(88) = 5.74, p < .001, one-tailed, respectively.

Conversely, an incorrect statement proposed that the conjunction was more likely than its constitutive events or, alternatively, that one of its constitutive event was less likely than
the conjunction, as in (4).
(4)

The fact that Simon is a businessman is less likely than
the fact that he is a businessman and an opera singer.

Congruency was determined by the description presented.
Each description was designed so that the individual presented appeared as a highly representative member of a given
category without explicitly mentioning that this individual actually belonged to that category. Congruency was manipulated by presenting either the representative event or the unrepresentative event as most likely.

Table 2: Mean total time spent on the on-line questionnaire
and mean time taken to evaluate conclusions as a function of
time condition.

Design and procedure Participants were randomly allocated to one of two experimental conditions: the free time
or the limited time condition. A screen explained that they
would be presented with thumbnail descriptions of a person
followed by a statement. They were asked to read the description carefully and to indicate if they thought the statement
was correct (free time condition) or indicate if they thought
the statement was correct as fast as possible (italics added,
limited time condition).
The next screen presented an example of a thumbnail description. Participants were asked to read the description attentively and to click on a “Continue” button when they were
ready. Upon clicking, a probability statement appeared and
they were instructed to click on a “yes” or “no” box to indicate whether or not they thought the statement was correct.
In the free time group, participants could take as long as they
wished to provide an answer. In the limited time group, a
clock and a countdown appeared 5 seconds after the presentation of the statement and went down for another 7 seconds,

Total time (min)
Response time (sec)

Free time
M(SD)
00:11 (00:05)
19.52 (11.58)

Limited time
M(SD)
00:08 (00:04)
09.04 (01.68)

Acceptance rates As the top panel of Figure 2 illustrates,
acceptance rates were higher for statements that were congruent with the stereotype activated by the description than
for those that were incongruent; M = 69.25 (SD = 24.31)
vs. M = 28.60 (SD = 23.18), respectively. Individuals, however, were also sensitive to the logical validity of the conclusion presented as they accepted correct statements more often
than incorrect ones; M = 59.26 (SD = 26.27) vs. M = 38.59
(SD = 21.34), respectively. A 2 (validity) × 2 (congruence) × 2 (time condition) mixed analysis of variance was
conducted on these data. The main effect of congruence
was significant, F(1, 88) = 136.04, p < .001, η2p = .61, as
was the main effect of logical validity, F(1, 88) = 34.12, p <
.001, η2p = .28, but the main effect of time condition was not,
F(1, 88) = 1.93, p > .05. None of the interactions were significant, largest non-reliable F(1, 88) = 2.83 for the interac-

2983

tion between validity and congruence.3 .
Mean a
acceptanc
ce rate

Free time

Table 3: Mean values of the logic and representativeness index as a function of the response time condition.
Limited time
M(SD)
1.44 (2.03)
2.12 (1.97)

Correct
Incorrect

77.6

75

Finally, following Evans and Curtis-Holmes (2005), two
indices were computed for each participant. A logic index
(CC + CI - IC - II) measured the difference between acceptance of correct and incorrect conclusions and ranged from
+6 (perfectly logical) to -6 (absolutely illogical). A representativeness index (CC + IC - CI - II) measured the difference
between acceptance of conclusions that were congruent or incongruent with the stereotype activated. This index ranged
from +6 (always heuristic) to -6 (absolutely not heuristic).
Table 2 summarises the descriptive results for these indices.
Contrary to dual-systems predictions, participants’ responses
were not less logical under time pressure; t(88) = −0.94,
p = .35. Moreover, and also contrary to theoretical predictions, under time pressure, responses were not more influenced by representativeness assessments; t(88) = 1.51,
p = .14. Finally, whereas acceptance rates were more influenced by representativeness than by logic under free time
(t(48) = −3.59, p < .005), this was no longer true under time
pressure; t(40) = −1.40, p = .17.
Response times Average response times for accepting each
type of conclusion presented (CC, CI, IC, II) were screened
for multivariate outliers using the Mahalanobis distance measure (D2 ). No outliers were identified (Smallest D2 = .54, p =
.03) and all participants’ response times were retained for
the analyses. The acceptance time data were analysed with
a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed ANOVA. The main effect of congruence
was significant, F(1, 88) = 6.00, p < .02, η2p = .06 as well as
the main effect of time condition, F(1, 88) = 11.91, p < .002,
η2p = .12, while the main effect of validity was not, F < 1. Of
greater interest was the significant interaction between validity and congruence, F(1, 88) = 72.64, p < .001, η2p = .45,
accounting for most of the variance. No other interactions
were significant, largest non-reliable F(1, 88) = 3.33 for the
interaction between congruence and time condition. As the
bottom panel of Figure 2 illustrates, individuals were quicker
to accept conclusions that were congruent and correct compared to congruent but incorrect ones; M = 6.73s (SD = 5.15)
vs. M = 15.57s (SD = 14.21), respectively. By contrast,
they took longer to accept conclusions that were incongru3 The careful reader may notice that participants with limited
time seemed more likely to accept correct but incongruent statements than those with free time; M = 49.59, SD = 35.84 vs. M =
33.33, SD = 35.83. Although potentially meaningful, this difference
is not statistically significant if we correct for familywise error;
t(85) = −2.11, p = .04 > .0125(.05 ÷ 4).

100
77.2

75

61.2

61.0
49.6

50

50

32.7
14 3
14.3

25
0

17.9

25
0

Congruent
Mean accep
ptance tim
me (s)

logic index
representativeness index

Free time
M(SD)
1.04 (1.99)
2.76 (1.98)

100

Limited time

Incongruent

30

Congruent

Incongruent

30
20.0

20

20

13.3

11.2

10

8.8
5.6

4.6

0

11.4

10
3.0

0
Congruent
Incongruent
Type of conclusion

Congruent
Incongruent
Type of conclusion

Figure 2: Mean acceptance rate and acceptance time as a
function of conclusion validity, congruency with the stereotype activated, and response time condition
ent but correct compared to incongruent and incorrect ones;
M = 12.35s(SD = 12.78) vs. M = 4.31s (SD = 8.58), respectively. This pattern of results remain unchanged by time pressure. Individuals responded more quickly when pressured by
time; M = 11.94s (SD = 8.17) vs. M = 7.54s (SD = 8.93),
respectively.

Discussion
According to the lax-monitoring view of cognitive functioning, conjunction fallacies occur because people solely rely on
representativeness attributes to make their judgments. Moreover, those judgments are assumed to be hasty and individuals are assumed to be reluctant to ‘think hard’ (Kahneman
& Frederick, 2002; Kahneman, 2003). The present experiment provided the first empirical test of this claim. Results
confirmed that judgments were heavily influenced by considerations of representativeness as statements presenting the
most representative outcome as the most probable were more
often endorsed than statements presenting an unrepresentative outcome as most probable. However, those results also
pointed to the fact that individuals are sensitive to the logic
of sets which underpins the conjunction rule since statements
presenting a single event (independently of its representativeness) as more probable than a conjunction were more often
endorsed than statements presenting the conjunction of events
as more probable. This result is at odds with predictions of
the lax-monitoring view and, instead, lends support to the
conflict-monitoring view of cognitive functioning (De Neys
& Glumicic, 2008). They reveal that, even when thinking
about probabilities—as opposed to easier formats such as frequencies (Hertwig et al., 2008)—individuals’ cognitive processing is not solely based on heuristic considerations. They

2984

do appear to think hard when heuristic and logic responses
are in conflict. In fact, they spent twice as long thinking about
their answer in such instances.
The present study also allowed testing an assumption
shared by both of the above-mentioned views: namely, that
attribute substitution is a rapid and automatic response originating from the intuitive mode of cognitive functioning. Reliance on heuristic processing was therefore expected to increase under time pressure while logical responding was expected to decrease. Results did not confirm these predictions.
In fact, when people did not have the leisure to think as long
as they wished, they tended to be less influenced by representativeness considerations although time pressure did not
affect their sensitivity to the logic of sets. If anything, it
lessened the influence of representativeness considerations on
judgments compared to that of logical considerations. Even
when pressured by time, individuals spent longer responding to items which where logically correct but incongruent
with representativeness considerations or incorrect but congruent with such considerations. If replicated, such preliminary results would bear important consequences for our understanding of the type of processing underpinning attributesubstitution. Future research could seek to triangulate those
results by burdening executive resources with an attentiondemanding secondary task (e.g., see De Neys, 2006).
One possible explanation for these finding is that sensitivity to logical considerations arises from rapid rule-based processing (Sloman, 1996). Accordingly, the logical response
would come first and depend solely on the formal structure of
the statement, and not on its the meaning. The data collected
in this experiment, however, offered no support for this explanation: under time pressure, the more valid responses individuals gave, the longer they thought about each answer they
gave; r = .83, p < .001, suggesting they detected the conflict
between representativeness and logic and therefore processed
content. This relationship was still positive under free time,
although it was only marginally significant; r = .27, p = .06.

Conclusions
This study presented a novel methodology for studying the
cognitive underpinnings of the conjunction fallacy, which allowed a more precise determination of whether participants
actually detect the conflict between what considerations of
representativeness dictate and what the logic of sets entails.
This in turn allowed demonstrating that intuitions regarding the conjunction rule of probabilities are not solely influenced by heuristic processing and that people think longest
when there is a conflict between the heuristic-based response
and the logic-based response. Moreover, contrary to what
is commonly assumed, representativeness assessments were
not rapid and automatic. In fact, it is when people had time
to think that they were most influenced by representativeness.
These results apply to intuitions arising from subjective probability considerations. Future research could extend on these
results to see if they hold when judgments are frequency-

based since frequency formats foster higher rates of logical
responding (Hertwig et al., 2008).

Acknowledgments
I thank students for their contribution to scenario design and
recruitment, Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau for his helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper and Jean-François
Bonnefon for helpful discussions of this work. This research was supported by grant ANR-07-JCJC-0065-01 from
the Agence Nationale de la Recherche.

References
De Neys, W. (2006). Automatic-heuristic and executiveanalytic processing during reasoning: Chronometric and
dual-task considerations. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 59, 1070-1100.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring
in dual process theories of thinking. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
Evans, J. S. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 255-78.
Evans, J. S. B. T., Barton, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On the
conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic reasoning.
Memory & Cognition, 11, 295-306.
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Curtis-Holmes, J. (2005). Rapid
responding increases belief-bias: Evidence for the dualprocess theory of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 11,
382-389.
Hertwig, R., Benz, B., & Krauss, S. (2008). The conjunction
fallacy and the many meaning of and. Cognition, 108, 740753.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and
choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American Psychologist, 58, 697-720.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness
revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment. In
T. Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics
and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (p. 4981). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics
comes from: How the embodied mind brings mathematics
into being. New York: Basic Books.
Politzer, G., & Noveck, I. A. (1991). Are conjunction rule
violations the result of conversational rule violations? Journal of psycholinguistic research, 20, 83-103.
Saxe, G. (1988). The mathematics of child street vendors.
Child Development, 59, 1415-1425.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3-22.
Tentori, K., Bonini, N., & Osherson, D. (2004). The conjunction fallacy: a misunderstanding about conjunction? Cognitive Science, 28, 467-477.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review., 90, 293-315.

2985

