UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Argument quality: An interdisciplinary perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wc9t3zd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fox, John
Hahn, Ulrike
Oaksford, Mike
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Argument quality: An interdisciplinary perspective
Participants
Ulrike Hahn (hahnu@cf.ac.uk)

John Woods (jhwoods@interchange.ubc.ca)

School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Park Place,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

Dept. of Philosophy, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, B.C., V6T 1Z4, Canada
Dept. of Computer Science, King’s College London,
The Strand, London, WC2R 2LS, UK

Frans van Eemeren (F.H.vanEemeren@uva.nl)
Dept. of Speech Communication, Argumentation Theory
and Rhetoric, University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, 1012 VB, Netherlands

John Fox (john.fox@eng.ox.ac.uk)
Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK

Discussant
Mike Oaksford (m.oaksford@bbk.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Birkbeck College, University of London
Malet Str., London, WC1E 7HX, UK
Keywords: argumentation, argument quality, fallacies of
argumentation.

success, that is, about what –descriptively- ‘works’ in
convincing others of a position. At the same time, however,
researchers in all of the above areas are necessarily engaged
in the question of what should convince us, and which are
the appropriate normative standards against which argument
quality should be judged.
So-called fallacies of argumentation have had a central
role in the question of argument quality. Fallacies are
arguments that might seem correct but aren’t, that is,
arguments that might persuade but really should not. Wellknown examples include circular arguments (“God exists
because the Bible says so and the Bible is the word of
God”), arguments from ignorance (“Ghosts exist, because
no-one has proven that they don’t”), ad hominem arguments
or simple appeals to authority. These informal arguments
are pervasive in everyday discourse. On a theoretical level,
fallacies have been a longstanding focus of debate.
Catalogues of reasoning and argumentation fallacies
originate with Aristotle and continue to concern
philosophers, logicians, and argumentation theorists to this
day. The longstanding goal of fallacies research has been to
provide a comprehensive treatment of these fallacies that
can explain exactly why they are ‘bad’ arguments. In other
words, the fallacies are a litmus test for our theories of
argument quality.
Though seemingly a simple question, it has proven
extremely difficult to provide a comprehensive answer to
the question of ‘what makes a good argument’. The
normative question has attracted the formal tools of logic
and, more recently, probability theory, and a pragmadialectical emphasis on norms underlying argumentative
discourse, such as rights to reply, and burdens of proof.
Even though the issue of argument quality is prominent
within its associated disciplines, the topic has had little
presence at meetings of the Cognitive Science Society. The
aim of the symposium is to bring the breadth of current
interdisciplinary research on this topic to the attention of a
cognitive science audience. All speakers are key exponents

Introduction
Argumentation is central to our complex world, in particular
to our social world. It pervades law, politics, academia, and
everyday negotiation of what to do and how. Given its
centrality, it is not surprising that it is the concern of a wide
range of disciplines: philosophy, psychology, education,
logic and computer science all have large research programs
dealing with argumentation, though they differ in the
aspects they emphasize. Philosophers have traditionally
focussed on normative theories, that is, theories of how we
should behave. The traditional standard here has been
formal logic, but more recently, pragma-dialectical theories
have focussed on the norms and conventions governing
argumentative process as a means of overcoming some of
the limitations of logical analysis. Within psychology,
‘persuasion’ has been an important topic of social
psychological research. This has led to a vast literature that
has identified many of the moderating variables (e.g.,
speaker likeability, engagement, mode of presentation, fit
with prior beliefs) that affect the degree to which a
persuasive communication will be effective. Developmental
and education research have focused on the way children’s
argumentation skills develop, and examined ways in which
critical thinking and argument skills might be fostered.
Logicians and computer scientists have sought to devise
novel frameworks for dealing with dialectical information,
seeking to capture the structural relationships between
theses, rebuttals, and supporting arguments with the degree
of explicitness necessary for the design of computational
argumentation system.
A shared, focal concern for all of these areas is the issue
of argument quality: what makes a good argument, and how
can good arguments be distinguished from bad ones? This
question has two aspects- one descriptive and one
normative. On a descriptive level, this question is about

33

of the particular approaches to argumentation that they
represent, and have led in their development.

rational foundations for evidence-based decisions. Work in
AI and knowledge engineering is offering new alternatives
to traditional frameworks, including a growing body of
work on argumentation. Two strands can be distinguished
here. The "dialectical" mode of argumentation focuses on
conditions under which an argument for some claim is
acceptable. The central idea here is that an argument is
acceptable so long as it has not been "defeated" by another
argument (e.g. by proving that the assumptions of the
argument are false, or the rules used in its construction are
inappropriate, irrelevant or unreliable). If an argument is
defeated but the attacking argument can itself be defeated,
the original argument is reinstated. The "evidential" mode
of argumentation is inspired by human decision-making
rather than reasoning. In order to make decisions between
hypotheses or actions we must assess all lines of argument
for each option. Each distinct supporting argument increases
our confidence in a hypothesis while each distinct opposing
argument increases doubt, reducing overall confidence.
Even if we do not know the quantitative strength of each
argument we can still compare overall persuasiveness of
competing claims by applying an "aggregation function"
which collapses the set of arguments into a summary
statement of confidence. Confidence can be represented
quantitatively, qualitatively or linguistically.
The talk
argues that both modes have an intuitive rationale and
increasingly understood mathematical foundations, and that
they can be combined. For example, we may construct
individual arguments about a claim using the dialectical
mode and then aggregate all the acceptable arguments in an
evidential mode. Even if we cannot give numerical strengths
to our arguments we still have a versatile and robust
formalism within which to represent and compare
competing claims and assess the strength of the supporting
evidence.

The symposium
Ulrike Hahn. The talk will outline the recent Bayesian
treatment of the classic catalogue of argumentation fallacies
and the perspective on everyday rationality that the
experimental investigations of argument strength conducted
within this framework presently afford.
John Woods. This presentation will establish why the classic
fallacy of ‘Hasty Generalization’ should not be viewed as a
fallacy in light of the cognitive utility and economy of
generic inferences. Generic inferences are default-inferences
from and to generic statements. A generic statement is a
statement with as much universality as is compatible with
anomalous exceptions. Thus “Ocelots are four-legged” is
true of every ocelot except those which, owing to congenital
defect or injury, are not four-legged. Generic statements are
semantically interesting, because unlike universally
quantified conditional generalizations, the existence of a
true negative instance need not falsify the corresponding
generic claim. The talk will examine the role of generic
statements in the generalizing practices of human agents,
both in what they generalize from and generalize to.
Specifically, it will argue that, owing to the semantic fact
just noted, there are economic benefits that attach to our
preference for the generic over the universal, and that in
quite wide ranges of cases the economic advantage is not
offset by cognitive loss. This gives insight into the structure
of default reasoning, as well as rehabilitating ‘hasty
generalization’.
Frans van Eemeren will report on the results of a recently
completed long-term project (with Bart Garssen and Bert
Meuffels) on fundamental questions that have not usually
been considered in the literature on fallacies: What do
laymen (“ordinary arguers”) think about discussion moves
that are deemed fallacious in argumentation theory; how do
they judge the reasonableness of such moves? From the
viewpoint of the pragma-dialectical theory of argumentation
this question can be made more specific: To what extent do
laymen agree with the rules for critical discussion that
distinguish between reasonable moves and fallacious
moves? Do ordinary arguers make a clear distinction
between reasonable and fallacious discussion moves? Are
they consistent in their evaluations of argumentative moves?
How articulate are their pre-theoretical notions about
reasonableness and fallaciousness? These questions were
addressed in a comprehensive experimental project titled
Conceptions of Reasonableness, now just completed after
some 12 years of testing. The talk will introduce the
problem of determining the conventional validity of the
pragma-dialectical rules for critical discussion and then
provide a general overview of the setup and the
experimental results concerning violations of the rules for
critical discussion in the various stages of such a discussion.
John Fox. Recognition of shortcomings in human
judgement has led to a growing interest in formalising

References
Eemeren, F. H. van, & Grootendorst, R. (1992).
Argumentation, communication, and fallacies. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Eeemeren, F.H. van & Grootendorst, R. (2004). A
systematic theory of argumentation. The pragmadialectical approach. Cambridge: CUP.
Fox, J., Glasspool, D. & Bury, J. (2001) Quantitative and
Qualitative Approaches to Reasoning Under Uncertainty
in Medical Decision Making. Heidelberg: Springer.
Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2006). A Bayesian approach to
informal argument fallacies. Synthese, 152, 207-236.
Hahn, U. & Oaksford, M. (2007) The Rationality of
Informal Argumentation: A Bayesian Approach to
Reasoning Fallacies. Psychological Review,114, 704-732.
Woods, J. (2004). The Death of Argument: Fallacies in
Agent-Based Reasoning, Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer
Woods, J., Irvine, A., & Walton, D. N. (2004). Argument:
Critical thinking, logic and the fallacies, Revised Edition.
Toronto: Prentice Hall.

34

