UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
As time goes by: The role of variability in category belief revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1j72v7v2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hayes, Brett
Kearney, Lauren

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

As time goes by: The role of variability in category belief revision
Lauren Kearney (lkearney@psy.unsw.edu.au)
Brett K. Hayes (B.Hayes@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

Abstract
Two studies examined the effect of category variability on
revision of stereotypical and non-stereotypical beliefs. In
Experiment 1, participants learned the characteristics of
various groups via exposure to numerical distributions of
category attributes. These distributions had the same mean
values, but either high or low levels of variability around the
mean. The categories were either stereotyped categories or
non-stereotyped categories. After learning category attributes,
participants were exposed to disconfirming exemplars (drawn
from a sample with higher or lower means). Participants were
then asked to re-estimate the central tendency of the category
and to rate the likelihood that the category had changed.
Beliefs about categories with low variability were more
influenced by disconfirming information than beliefs about
highly variable categories. This relationship was the same
across category domains. This same general pattern was
found in Experiment 2 where participants had to request
information about test instances before deciding whether
category values had changed. The results are consistent with
Bayesian models of belief revision.
Keywords:
statistics

Categorization,

Belief

revision,

Bayesian

Introduction
Imagine that you were a climate change researcher and you
discovered that the average number of cyclones in a
particular location had increased by 30 per cent over the
past three years. You then have to decide whether this
represents good evidence for change in the underlying
weather patterns. To answer this question one needs to
consider not only the mean number of cyclones in the past,
but also the past variability of cyclone activity. If the mean
number of cyclones in the area had shown little variability
prior to the recent increase, then you may be more
convinced that some underlying change had occurred than if
you knew that the past pattern of cyclone activity was
highly variable.
This sort of problem can be construed as one of category
belief revision. After encountering instances with
unexpected properties can we conclude that the typical
properties (e.g., annual frequency) of a category (e.g.,
cyclones) have changed? It seems evident that in order to
remain useful, knowledge and beliefs about category
properties need to reflect changes in underlying category
structure (Garcia-Marques & Mackie, 1999). The challenge
then for perceivers is to determine when meaningful change
has actually occurred. As highlighted in the earlier example,
one factor that seems important in determining when it is

appropriate to revise category beliefs is the variability of the
category exemplars that form the basis for the belief.
Although some work has examined the influence of
category variability in related areas such as category
learning (Stewart & Chater, 2002), category discrimination
(Hahn, Bailey & Elvin, 2005), and induction (Nisbett,
Jepson, Kunda and Krantz, 1993), relatively few studies
have directly examined the impact of category variability on
belief revision. In one of the few studies to examine this
issue, Rehder and Hastie (1996) presented participants with
category attributes. Each attribute was represented by a
numerical value (e.g., a politeness score). Half the
participants saw categories with highly variable attribute
distributions while the other half saw distributions with low
variability. Critically, the high and low variable
distributions had the same mean; hence participants were
expected to acquire similar beliefs about the central
tendency of category attributes, but have different
expectations about the level of variability around this value.
When participants were subsequently exposed to novel
exemplars with highly discrepant attribute values (higher or
lower), participants who had initially seen the low variable
distribution changed their central tendency beliefs more than
did those who had initially seen the high variable
distribution.
In addition to the experimental evidence, Rehder (1996)
proposed a normative model outlining how people might
use variability information. If the task is cast as one of
Bayesian inference, whereby observation of a set of
category exemplars allows one to calculate a central
tendency estimate, then the variability of the original
information should be of paramount importance. When one
is presented with novel information, the calculation of the
most likely posterior mean should be made on the basis of
the prior mean, the variability of the initial distribution of
exemplars, and the new single observation. As the standard
deviation of the initial distribution increases, the weight of
each piece of disconfirming information decreases and vice
versa.
Although the Rehder and Hastie (1996) results support a
Bayesian model of belief revision, some evidence suggests
that people do not always respond to disconfirming
information in a normative manner. One obvious domain
where disconfirming information often fails to change
existing beliefs is in social stereotyping (see Hilton & von
Hippel, 1996 for a review). Moreover, there is evidence to
suggest that, in the social domain, category variability may
play a very different role in mediating belief change than the

1078

one outlined by Rehder and Hastie (1996). Much of this
work is concerned on a phenomenon known as the outgroup
homogeneity effect (OHE). This refers to the tendency of
members to perceive their own group (ingroup) as more
heterogeneous and diverse as compared to members of other
groups (outgroups) (e.g., Linville, Salovey & Fischer,
1989). Contrary to the normative approach, much existing
evidence suggests that seeing outgroups as homogeneous
(i.e. low in variability) leads to greater resistance to change
following disconfirming evidence, (e.g., Hewstone,
Johnston & Aird, 1992, Hewstone & Hamberger, 2000).
Hewstone et al. (1992), for example, found that after
viewing counter-stereotypical exemplars, there was more
change in trait ratings for social groups who were perceived
as having highly variable attributes (teachers) than for
groups with low perceived variability (accountants). Such
results imply that there may be some fundamental difference
in the way that variability moderates belief revision in social
and non-social domains.
The main aim of the current work was to examine this
discrepancy in the role played by category variability in
belief revision in non-social and social domains. Previously,
a direct comparison of the role of variability in non-social
and social categories has been difficult because each has
been studied using very different methods. Studies in each
domain have operationalized category variability in
different ways, used different kinds disconfirming data and
measures of belief change (cf. Hewstone et al. 1992; Rehder
& Hastie, 1996). It is possible that these differences in
stimulus structure and presentation, rather than domain per
se, may have led to the discrepant findings with regard to
role of variability in belief revision.
In the current studies, therefore, we used a common
learning paradigm to manipulate variability in nonstereotypic (object) and stereotypic (social group)
categories, and to test for revision of category beliefs
following disconfirming data. Following Rehder and Hastie
(1996) we created a set of object categories where the
central tendency of category attributes was held constant but
attribute variability differed. A corresponding set of
stereotyped categories was created with the same central
tendency but where there were pre-existing differences in
participants’ beliefs about the variability of the groups
around that central value. These categories were designed to
mimic the outgroup homogeneity effect such that there was
greater attribute variability (but not central tendency) for
participant ingroups (“City Dwellers”, “Youths”) than for
corresponding participant outgroups (“Country Dwellers”,
“Seniors”). After learning these categories all participants
were presented with three disconfirming instances (with
attribute values above or below the training mean). Revision
of category beliefs following disconfirmation was examined
by asking people to re-estimate the category mean and rate
the likelihood that this mean had changed.
If people use information about category variability in
fundamentally different ways in the stereotyped and nonstereotyped domains then this should be reflected in the test

data (with category heterogeneity at training leading to less
belief revision in the non-stereotyped domain and more in
the stereotyped domain). If, however, people use variability
information in a normative way in both domains then we
should see parallel patterns of belief revision in the
stereotyped and non-stereotyped domains.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Forty five male and female Caucasian University of New
South Wales undergraduate students (Mage = 19.3 years)
participated in return for course credit.
Design and Materials
During the training phase, people learned the attributes of
three non-stereotyped and three stereotyped categories. Each
training category consisted of 32 instances with a single
numerical attribute. The variability of these attribute values
was manipulated between subjects by varying the standard
deviation of category attributes around a common mean (see
Table 1).
Table 1: Training and test distributions
Case
M
165
64
19.8
5.7
345
9.1

A
B
C
D
E
F

Training
Low
SD
8
6
4
1
11
2

High
SD
24
18
12
3
33
6

Low
M
141
46
7.8
2.7
345
9

Test
High
M
189
82
31.8
8.7
345
9

SD
8
6
4
1
11
2

Table 2: Categories and attributes
Case

Category

Attribute

A

New Zealanders

Light Sensitivity

B

Fiction Novels

Length

C

Seniors/Youths

Attitudes towards drugs

D

Asians/Caucasians

Politeness

E

College Students

Oxydilic Mineral Levels

F

Medicine/Psychology
Students

Study hours per week

High variability categories had a standard deviation that
was three times that of the low variability categories. For
stereotyped categories low variability cases always involved
participant outgroups (i.e. Asians and Seniors) and high
variability cases always involved participant ingroups (i.e.
Caucasians and Youths). Furthermore, the stereotyped
categories were pilot tested to check that participants’

1079

beliefs about the variability of in-groups and out-groups
groups were in line with the outgroup homogeneity effect.
Participants were asked to indicate the possible range of
attribute scores for their ingroup and a corresponding
outgroup. For the stereotyped categories utilized in this
study, participants gave reliably wider range estimates (but
not central tendency estimates) for their ingroups as
compared to the corresponding outgroups, as predicted by
the OHE (e.g., Linville, et al. 1989).
The non-stereotyped categories were drawn from Rehder
and Hastie (1996). For the full list of the categories and
attributes used see Table 2.
At test participants in each condition were shown three
new instances (disconfirmers) from each of the training
categories. For four of the categories (A-D), the test phase
values were substantially different from the mean training
values (see Table 1). These were designated “change” cases.
For half the participants the values of test instances were
above the training mean. For the remainder they were below
the training mean. The other two categories (E-F) were “no
change” cases in that test instances were drawn from the
same distribution as the corresponding training instances.
Procedure
Participants were randomly allocated to a low or high
category variability condition. They were told that they
were to learn about the characteristics of a number of
objects/groups that were measured on a critical attribute in
the year 1995. Following a warm-up example, each
participant was trained and tested on six categories (four
change and two no change). The order of presentation of the
six categories was randomly determined subject to the
constraint that a change case was always presented first. In
the training phase for each category 32 instances containing
a single numerical value were presented on screen one at a
time for 2s each, with a blank screen inter-stimulus interval
of .3s. After viewing these values, participants were
prompted to estimate the mean of the attribute scores and
the maximum and minimum values observed. Immediately
after completing these judgments, the test phase began.
Participants were told that a more recent study of the same
target category had been carried out (circa 2005) and that
they would be presented with some of the results of this
more recent study. Prior to the presentation of the test
instances, participants were prompted to estimate the mean
attribute value of the 2005 category. They were also asked
to rate the likelihood that the mean value of the category for
the test items had changed on an eleven-point scale (1=
change since 1995 was very unlikely; 10 = change since
1995 was very likely). These judgments were referred to as
the 0 disconfirmer phase, as participants had seen no new
information. The three test instances/disconfirmers (from
the 2005 data set) were then presented one at a time in the
same manner as the training instances. After each
disconfirming instance participants gave mean estimates and
ratings of change likelihood. After completing the test
phase, the training phase for the next category commenced.
The procedure took approximately 45 minutes to complete.

Results and Discussion
To make the results of the different categories comparable,
estimates of the category means and upper and lower bound
estimates were converted into z scores using the training
mean for the scenario and the standard deviation from the
high variability version of the original distributions.
Judgments of the range of training and test distributions
were calculated by subtracting the z score of the lower
bound estimates from the z score of the upper bound
estimates. For the “change” categories the mean and range
estimates for two stereotyped categories were collapsed to
give a singe set of results for the stereotyped condition. The
same was done for the two non-stereotyped categories.
Change-likelihood scores for all four change cases were also
collapsed into two sets of scores, one stereotyped and one
non- stereotyped case.
Training Phase
Estimates of category means after training were generally
accurate (A perfect estimate would have a z score of zero).
In the high variability condition the mean estimates in z
score units were .12 and .00 for the social and non social
cases respectively. In the low variability condition the
corresponding mean estimates were -.02 and -.02.
Estimates of the range of attribute values were also
sensitive to the manipulation of the variability of the
distribution. In the low variability condition, range estimates
were 1.58 and 1.29 (in z score units) for the stereotyped and
non-stereotyped cases respectively. The corresponding
range estimates in the high variability condition (3.54 and
4.27 for social and non social), were significantly higher, F
(1, 43) = 1326.75, p < .001. These results show that
participants in both variability conditions accurately
encoded the distributional characteristics of category
attributes
Test Phase
Separate test analyses were carried out for change and no
change categories. For “change” cases the mean value of the
disconfirming instances was always either higher than the
training mean (high disconfirmer) or lower than the training
mean (low disconfirmer). To make these cases comparable,
the z scores for participants in the low disconfirmer
condition were multiplied by negative one. The high and
low disconfirmer results were collapsed for each of the
variability and domain conditions.
Test phase mean estimates (see Figure 1) were entered
into 2 (variability condition) x (2) (stereotyped vs. non
stereotyped) x (4) (number of disconfirmers: 0, 1, 2 or 3)
ANOVA with repeated measures on the second and third
factors. Estimates of the new mean were clearly influenced
by the amount of disconfirming information, with a
significant linear effect of number of disconfirmers on mean
estimates F (1, 41) = 51.01, p<.001. Critically, there was
also a significant interaction between the variability of the
training category and linear trend for disconfirming
instances, F (1, 41) = 6.16, p < .05. In line with the findings
of Rehder and Hastie (1996), this linear relationship was
stronger in the low variability condition than in the high

1080

variability condition. As the number of disconfirmers
increased, mean estimates in the low variability condition
showed increasingly large deviations from the training
mean. Critically, the effect of variability on belief revision
was the same across both domains (stereotyped vs. non
stereotyped), F (1, 41) = .490, p = .488. Contrary to
previous work on the OHE (e.g., Hewstone et al., 1992),
mean estimates for outgroups (low variable categories) were
revised more in the face of disconfirming information than
mean estimates for ingroups (highly variable categories).

Figure 1. Test phase estimates of category means as a
function of disconfirmers, variability and domain.
Similar results were obtained for change-likelihood scores
(see Figure 2). There was a significant linear effect of
number of disconfirmers on change-likelihood, F (1, 41) =
13.65, p < .001, with the likelihood of change increasing
with the presentation of successive disconfirmers. Again,
this effect was moderated by a significant interaction
between linear trend and variability, F (1, 41) = 13.23, p <
.001, Figure 2 shows that with successive disconfirmers,
people in the low variability condition became increasingly
likely to judge that the typical values of the category had
changed. Those in the high variability condition however
showed little change in their likelihood ratings across
disconfirmers.

Analysis of the “no change” categories confirmed that
neither variability, number of disconfirmers nor domain
affected mean estimates or change likelihood ratings for
these cases (all F’s < 2)
Overall, the results suggest that variability in category
attributes plays a similar role in belief revision for
stereotyped and non-stereotyped domains. In both domains
exposure to disconfirming information was more likely to
lead to a perception of category change when categories
were homogenous than when they were heterogeneous.
These results suggest that in an environment where
exposure to category members is externally controlled and
people are not given the option of selectively sampling or
discounting certain exemplars, variability information is
used in a normative way when considering disconfirming
information. This seems to be the case regardless of the
category domain.
For this finding to be generalisable however, it is
important to consider that exposing people to discrepant
information may involve different processes than allowing
people to actively seek it. For example Johnston (1996)
compared the impact of forced exposure to counterstereotypic information with free (participant controlled)
exposure. Results indicated that only those in the forced
condition showed moderation of their stereotyped
judgments. This suggests that giving people the option of
sampling new data to test whether or not a category has
changed may result in the use of additional information
processing strategies. These could include re-interpretation
or discounting of the information (Johnston, 1996), which
seems more likely to occur when there is a motivation to
maintain the existing belief (e.g., in the case of stereotypes).
Given that there is some evidence that higher levels of
variability are associated with weaker stereotype effects and
less confidence in group stereotypes (Judd, Ryan & Park,
1991) then one might expect that discounting or reinterpretation of discrepant information might be more
likely to occur for homogeneous group stereotypes (i.e.
those relating to outgroups). In this way, people may require
more evidence to be convinced to change their outgroup
stereotypes as compared to stereotypes about their ingroups.
Experiment 2 addressed this issue by allowing
participants to actively control the amount of disconfirming
information to which they were exposed.

Experiment 2
Method

Figure 2. Change-likelihood scores as a function of
disconfirmers, variability and domain

Participants
40 University of New South Wales undergraduates (Mage =
19.3 years) participated in return for course credit.
Design and Procedure
The training phase stimuli and procedure were identical to
Experiment 1. In the test phase, however, participants were
asked to imagine themselves as field researchers and told
that it was their task to sample from the new (circa 2005)
values for each training category until they had determined

1081

whether or not the attributes of the test categories differed
from those encountered at training. On each test trial
participants were asked whether they would like to see
another observation from the test category. If they answered
“yes” then a new value was presented on the screen for 4s.
They were instructed to continue this process until they
were “more than 75% certain that the 2005 category was
either the same or different from the 1995 category” or until
a total of 32 observations for a given category had been
obtained. The general instructions emphasised that they
should not draw more observations than was necessary to
make their judgment about change as this would increase
the costs of their research. The 32 test items for each
category were generated from the test distributions given in
Table 1. When a new observation was required the
computer program sampled randomly without replacement
from this set of instances. As in Experiment 1, four of the
test categories were change cases where the mean of the test
distribution was three standard deviations above or below
the training mean. Two were no-change cases where the
means were the same as the training distributions. After the
participant had finished sampling they were asked to
estimate the mean of test category and rate the likelihood
that this mean was different from the training mean.

Results and Discussion
Training Phase
Once again z score estimates of the mean values of the six
training categories were close to zero (M’s = 0.009, -0.023,
0.011, 0.126 for non-stereotype low variability, nonstereotype high variability, stereotype low variability, and
stereotype high variability respectively). Again, the
observed variability of category values was reflected in
higher range z-score estimates being given to high
variability (M= 3.76), than low variability categories (M =
1.37), F (1, 38) = 550.69, p < .001. In this experiment the
no-change cases were treated as fillers and were not
analyzed.
Test Phase
The key prediction involved the number of test instances
sampled before a decision about category change was made.
For change categories a 2 (variability) x 2(domain) analysis
of variance found a significant effect of variability. Those
trained with high variability categories requested more
observations at test to make a decision about category
change (M = 7.61) than those trained with low variability
categories (M = 5.94), F (1, 38) = 4.38, p < .05. There were
no significant differences between the number of instances
searched for non-stereotypical (M = 6.65) and stereotypical
categories (M = 6.9), and no interactions between domain
and variability (all F’s < 1.0).

General Discussion
These studies were concerned with whether people respond
to change in the characteristics of categories and what role
the variability of the original category exemplars might play
in this process. Previous work on this issue has yielded

inconsistent results. Some (e.g., Rehder & Hastie, 1996)
have demonstrated that when faced with novel and
contradictory category information, low attribute variability
can be conducive to changes in beliefs about category
characteristics, whilst others have shown the opposite effect
in the realm of stereotype change (Hewstone et al. 1992;
Hewstone & Hamberger, 2000).
Consistent with the results of Rehder and Hastie (1996),
both our studies showed that people are sensitive to changes
in the central tendency of both stereotyped and nonstereotyped categories. Furthermore, variability appears to
moderate responses to these changes, with beliefs based on
less variable category information being more susceptible to
revision than beliefs based on highly variable categories. In
Experiment 1, two indexes of belief change were moderated
by variability. As the amount of discrepant information
increased, mean estimates in the low variability condition
showed increasingly large deviations from the training
mean. This pattern was mirrored by increasing ratings of the
likelihood that the category central tendency had changed.
Critically, the effect of category variability was observed
regardless of whether the categories in question were
stereotyped (ingroups and outgroups) or socially neutral.
This was despite the fact that participants had pre-existing
stereotypical beliefs about the relative variability of the
ingroups and outgroups described in the experiment. This
pattern of updating and sensitivity to variability information
is consistent with a Bayesian model of belief revision
(Rehder & Hastie, 1996). Experiment 2 showed that the
observed relationship between variability and belief change
holds even when people control the amount of
disconfirming information they are exposed to.
Our findings provide converging evidence that
experienced variability has a similar effect on belief revision
in stereotyped and non-stereotyped categories. Stereotypical
beliefs about groups with a homogeneous distribution of
attributes seem to be more prone to revision in the face of
disconfirming evidence than stereotypical beliefs about
groups with a heterogeneous distribution of attributes.
Category domain does not seem to materially affect the
process of mean estimate revision.
These data support the notion that stereotype formation
and maintenance may be a more specific instance of the
general process of categorization (cf. Rothbart, 1981). The
question still remains however why some previous studies
on stereotyping have found more change for heterogeneous
groups as compared to homogeneous groups (e.g. Hewstone
et al. 1992, Hewstone and Hamberger, 2000). There are
several possible explanations for this discrepancy. On a
methodological note, in both the Hewstone et al. (1992) and
Hewstone and Hamberger (2000) studies, the manipulation
of variability was indirect and the disconfirming
information was in a verbal format (descriptions of antistereotypic behaviours). The differences in the way the two
studies operationalised variability and disconfirming
information may be quite important for a number of reasons.
Firstly, it has been demonstrated that people are able to

1082

derive and utilize variability information in a relatively
normative fashion when the information is presented in
numerical distributions (Kareev, Amon & Horwitz-Zeliger,
2002) whereas it is less clear that people can derive
statistically meaningful group variability information from
implicit group stereotypes.
With regards to the disconfirming information, numerical
disconfirming instances may be processed differently to
disconfirming instances in the form of behavioral
descriptions. Evidence from Nisbett, et al. (1983) suggests
people find it difficult to reason statistically about social
variables, especially when they do not have clear units of
measurement. These difficulties may have been exacerbated
by the trait statements utilised by Hewstone et al. (1992).
Future work should aim to explore the role that mode of
data presentation may have on the relationship between
variability and belief change.
On a theoretical note, perceptions of variability in social
domains may be laden with additional factors like causal
theories about how group membership is related to group
characteristics like the central tendency and variability of
social behaviours (Yzerbyt, Rocher & Schadron, 1997)). For
example, one might believe that Japanese people are
uniformly polite because their culture is more collectivist
and values conformity. When equipped with these causal
theories, people may be less likely to relinquish their beliefs
in the face of disconfirming information (Anderson, Lepper
& Ross, 1980; Fugelsang, Stein, Green & Dunbar, 2004).
Examining the influence of causal beliefs on the relationship
between variability and belief change would be a productive
avenue for future research.

Acknowledgments
This work was carried out as part of a doctoral dissertation
by the first author and supported by Australian Research
Council Discovery Grant (DP0770292) to the second
author.

References
Anderson, C.A., Lepper, M.R., & Ross, L. (1980).
Perseverance of social theories: The role of explanation in
the persistence of discredited information. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1037-1049.
Fugelsang, J.A., Stein, C.B., Green, A.E., & Dunbar, K.N.
(2004). Theory and data interactions of the scientific
mind: Evidence from the molecular and cognitive
laboratory. Canadian Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58, 86-95.
Garcia-Marques, L., & Mackie, D.M. (1999). The impact of
stereotype-incongruent information on perceived group
variability and stereotype change. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 77, 979-990.
Hahn, U., Bailey, T. M. & Elvin, L. B. (2005). Effects of
category diversity on learning, memory, and
generalization. Memory and Cognition, 33, 289302.

Hewstone, M., & Hamberger, J. (2000). Perceived
variability and stereotype change. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 103-124.
Hewstone, M., Johnston, L., & Aird, P. (1992). Cognitive
models of stereotype change: (2) Perceptions of
homogeneous and heterogeneous groups. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 22, 235-249.
Hilton, J. L., & von Hippel, W. (1996). Stereotypes. Annual
Review of Psychology, 47, 237-271.
Johnston, L. (1996). Resisting change: Information seeking
and stereotype change. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 26, 799-825.
Judd, C. M., Ryan, C. S., & Park, B. (1991). Accuracy in
the judgment of in-group and out-group variability.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 366379.
Kareev, Y, Arnon, S., & Horwitz-Zeliger, R. (2002). On the
misperception of variability. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 2, 287-297.
Linville, P. W., Salovey, P., & Fischer, G. W. (1989).
Perceived distributions of the characteristics of in-group
and out-group members: Empirical evidence and a
computer simulation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 57, 165-188.
Nisbett, R. E., Krantz, D. H., Jepson, C., & Kunda, Z.
(1983). The use of statistical heuristics in everyday
inductive reasoning. Psychological Review, 90, 339-363.
Rehder, B. (1996). A Bayesian analysis of the relationship
between category variability and belief revision.
Unpublished manuscript.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (1996). The moderating influence
of variability on belief revision. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 3, 499-503.
Rothbart, M. (1981). Memory processes and social beliefs.
In D. L. Hamilton (Ed.), Cognitive processes in
stereotyping and ingroup behaviour. Hillsdale, New
Jersey: Erlbaum.
Stewart, N. & Chater, N. (2002). The effect of category
variability in perceptual categorization. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 28, 893-907.
Yzerbyt, V. Y., Rocher, S. J., Schadron, G. (1997).
Stereotypes as explanations: A subjective essentialistic
view of group perception. In R. Spears, P. Oakes, N.
Ellemers A. Haslam (Eds.), The social psychology of
stereotyping and group life. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

1083

