UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automatic and voluntary shifts of attention in a Dynamic Neural Field model of the
Dimensional Change Card Sort task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2sk6d441

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Buss, Aaron
Spencer, John

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automatic and Voluntary Shifts of Attention in a Dynamic Neural Field Model of
the Dimensional Change Card Sort Task
Aaron Buss (aaron-buss@uiowa.edu) and John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, 11 Seashore Hall East
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
Abstract
Recently, Buss & Spencer (2008) proposed a Dynamic Neural
Field (DNF) model of the Dimensional Change Card Sort task
(DCCS). This model is able to not only capture the details of
3- and 4-year-olds’ performance in the standard version, but
also generalizes to account for performance in two other
canonical variations. The distribution of features in space
plays a central role in capturing these effects. To show that
the model can generalize beyond space-based effects, we
present preliminary simulations of DCCS variations reported
by Fisher (2008) that examine the role of automatic and
voluntary shifts of attention and randomize the spatial
location of the target cards. Results show that the DNF model
captures performance in these conditions as well.
Keywords: neural network models; dynamic systems theory;
DCCS; attention; executive function; perseveration

The DNF Model of the DCCS
The Dimensional Change Card Sort task (DCCS) and other
rule-based card sorting tasks provide an index of executive
functioning both in early development and disordered
populations (Zelazo et al., 2003). In the DCCS task,
children sort cards by one dimension, for instance, the
dimension of shape and are then instructed to switch and
sort by another dimension such as color. Target cards are
displayed on the trays where cards are sorted to show which
features go where. Importantly, the test cards that children
sort typically match each target card along one dimension
(see Figure 1). Three-year-olds have little trouble using
shape or color rules during the initial sorting phase;
however, once these children are instructed to switch and
sort by the other dimension, they typically perseverate and
continue to use the first set of rules they were given. This
task, then, measures aspects of cognitive flexibility, and
children’s behavior has been described in terms of rulerepresentation, inhibitory or dis-inhibitory control (Zelazo et
al., 2003), and attentional control (Kirkham, Cruess, &
Diamond, 2003).

in children with autism (Zelazo et al., 2002) and ADHD
(Mulas et al., 2006). Although this move toward neural
functioning adds new critical information about the nature
of performance in this task, current theories are not well
grounded in neural dynamics and neurally plausible
concepts. A Dynamic Neural Field (DNF) model proposed
by Buss & Spencer (2008) provides a critical bridge
between the brain and behavior in this task. Using a
neurally-grounded view of the processes that underlie the
representations of shapes, colors, and space, the model
provides a detailed account of children’s behavior and
development. This is not explicitly a rule-use model; rather,
it is couched in a general framework originally proposed to
capture the integration of ‘what’ (i.e., ventral stream) and
‘where’ (i.e., dorsal stream) visual pathways in object
representation. The DNF model is able to not only capture
the details of 3- and 4-year-olds’ performance in the
standard task, but also generalizes to capture performance in
other canonical versions of the DCCS.
The effects modeled by Buss & Spencer (2008) revealed
an important role for spatial information in rule-use in the
DCCS. Specifically, difficulty switching in the model stems
from an inability to resolve spatial conflict between LTM
traces accumulated from past decision and the current task
inputs present when sorting a card. To provide a more
comprehensive account of performance in this task and to
show that the model captures phenomena that are not
grounded in feature-space conflict, we present simulations
of new versions of the DCCS reported by Fisher (2008).
These versions distinguish automatic from voluntary shifts
of attention by manipulating feature saliency and attentional
weights for sets of features. To isolate these types of
attentional switching, the spatial locations of the target cards
were randomly assigned on each trial. With space thus
randomized, children’s errors cannot be a result of specific
spatial habits or memories, eliminating space as a source of
children’s perseverative errors. These, then, seem like ideal
conditions to provide a thorough test of the model. Before
describing the implementation of these versions in the DNF
model, we first start with a brief summary of the dynamics
of rule-use.

Model Architecture
Figure 1: Example of cards used in the DCCS
More recently there has been a growing interest in using
such tasks as an index of neural functioning. Specifically,
these tasks have been linked to developmental changes in
the prefrontal cortex as well as other brain regions (Crone et
al., 2006) and have been used to explore cognitive deficits

DNF models use fields of neurons that are tuned to
continuous feature dimensions (e.g., shape, space, or color).
The fundamental unit of cognition within this framework is
a peak of activation for a particular feature or set of features
within these fields. Thus, peaks of activation capture
representations that underlie decisions or working-memory
for different spatial locations or object features. We utilize

1663

a generic two-layered architecture initially explored by
Amari (1977) to capture the dynamics of neural activity in
visual cortex. To highlight the dynamics that lead to peak
formation, Figure 2 shows a 1-dimensional spatial system
(the same architecture and dynamics are present for the 2dimensional fields to be described below, except the
interactions are along both dimensions). For these 1dimensional fields, neurons tuned to a particular continuous
feature dimension a lined up along the x-axis (in Figure 2,
this is a spatial dimension), while each neuron’s activation
is displayed along the y-axis.

only the WM fields are shown; however, each WM field is
coupled to its own inhibitory and LTM layer. Research has
revealed a dorsal/ventral dissociation in visual processing
(Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982). Dorsal stream processes
are primarily devoted to encoding spatial information and
are captured in a 1-dimensional spatial working memory
(SWM) field (see top layer in Figure 3A and 3B). Ventral
stream processes are primarily devoted to encoding object
properties with different feature dimensions encoded by
different populations of neurons. Importantly, many of
these ventral stream areas are precise in their representation
of features, but also have broad spatial receptive fields
(Desimone & Gross, 1979; see inputs to feature WM fields
in Figure 3A). These processes are captured by 2dimensional feature-space working memory (FWM) fields
which contain a continuous feature dimension (e.g., color or
shape, depicted along the y-axis) and a spatial dimension
(depicted along the x-axis; see middle and bottom fields in
Figures 3A and 3B). Relative levels of activation within
these 2-dimensional fields are depicted by the color on the
inset scale (red is high activation, blue is low activation).

Figure 2: Excitatory and inhibitory architecture in a 1dimensional system, along with an associated LTM layer.
The architecture in Figure 2 consists of a layer of selfexcitatory working memory neurons (WM) arranged by
functional topography (e.g., neurons that code for nearby
spatial locations are neighbors in the network). These
neurons project activation (see green arrows in panel B) to a
layer of inhibitory interneurons (Inhib) which project
inhibition broadly back into WM (see red arrow).
Activation within these fields is passed through a sigmoid
function so that only neurons that are sufficiently close to or
above a 0 activation threshold contribute to interaction. This
gives the WM field a critical type of non-linearity: a local
population of neurons can go from a stable resting state to a
stable active or ‘on’ state, creating a ‘peak’ of activation
(see blue Gaussian profile in panel B). An important
parameter to mention here is ‘h’, or the resting-level of the
field (h<0). The closer a WM field is to 0 the quicker inputs
will build to threshold, engage neural interactions, and build
a peak.
In addition to the WM and Inhib layers, we add a longterm memory (LTM) layer (bottom layer in Figure 2) that is
reciprocally coupled to the WM layer. The WM and LTM
layers implement a form of Hebbian learning: peaks in WM
leave traces of activity at associated sites in LTM which, in
turn, influence the strength of activation in WM. As can be
seen in panel B of Figure 2, the peak in WM is building a
LTM trace in the bottom LTM layer which is projecting
activation back into WM.

Object Representation
The DNF model of the DCCS is an extension of an object
representation model put forth by Johnson, Spencer, &
Schöner (2008). The basic architecture and the mapping to
cortical pathways are displayed in Figure 3. For simplicity,

Figure 3: Space, shape, and color WM fields representing a
blue triangle and the mapping to different visual pathways.
Given the broad spatial tuning of ventral stream neurons
(see Figure 3A), how does our model solve the “binding”
problem of vision (Treisman & Gelade, 1980)? That is,
how would the model know that a “blue” peak in the colorspace field should be matched with a “triangle” peak in a
shape-space field in representing a blue triangle? The
answer is through spatial coupling; that is, the SWM and
FWM fields contain a common spatial dimension and thus
share spatial activation. This achieves distributed but
coupled peaks of activation across multiple cortical fields—
our implementation of an “integrated” object (for related
ideas, see Treisman & Gelade, 1980). Figure 3B shows the
WM fields of the model representing a blue triangle at a
location left of center in the task-space. The inputs have
built to threshold and excitatory/inhibitory interactions for
each WM field have formed a peak of activation. The
shared spatial activation is now visible in the feature WM
fields as ridges of sub-threshold activation running
vertically at the location of the object (there is also spatial
coupling going into the spatial WM field; however, it is not
readily visible). Thus, coupled spatial activation serves to
anchor features together.
The final aspect of the model architecture highlighted in
Figure 3 is the contribution from frontal lobe areas. As we

1664

discuss below, we hypothesize that neural processes in the
frontal lobe can selectively modulate the resting level of
populations of neurons in SWM and FWM (e.g., boosting
the excitability of color neurons). This serves as a
mechanism to bias representations of objects based on
different visual dimensions and is a neurally plausible
mechanism underlying ‘rule’-like behavior (Egner &
Hirsch, 2005). This modulation of activity is putatively
grounded in word-learning. As the labels ‘shape’ and
‘color’ are learned, stronger levels of resting-level boost can
be applied to the populations of neurons coding for the
respective type of information. Thus, developmental
changes in rule-flexibility in the DCCS is hypothesized to
be a product of a simple associative mechanism between the
labels ‘shape’ and ‘color’ and the feature fields encoding
these dimensions.

opposite spatial location of the target input for that feature
in the shape WM field (see white circle in Figure 4C); that
is, the model is seeing a star at the left location in the taskspace but has a memory for placing a star to the right.

Rule-use and the Role of Space

Figure 4: The sequence of events as the model sorts the
two target cards.

Because space is a central component of the object
representation model we are using to capture behavior in the
DCCS, space is also an important component of rule-use.
We highlight this in Figure 4 which shows how the model
captures the sequence of events as the model sorts both test
cards by color in the standard version of the DCCS task.
Figure 4A shows the target inputs into the spatial and
feature WM fields that capture the information on the target
cards. Note that the hot spots in Figure 4A are not peaks,
but are sub-threshold boosts of activity. This is apparent in
the spatial WM field (top panel) which shows two subthreshold bumps of activity at the location of the trays.
Within the feature WM fields, these are hotspots of activity
for particular features at the left and right locations. Here,
the target cards are a red star on the left and a blue circle on
the right.
Test inputs are presented without spatial
information as a ridge for a particular feature value across
all spatial locations (see horizontal ridges in Figures 4B and
4D). The model, like children, must localize the features on
the test cards to a spatial location.
In order to get rule-like representations out of the model
and to resolve the spatial conflict in the test cards (e.g., for a
blue-star, blue feature input will overlap with a target input
at the right location while the star feature input will overlap
with a target input at the left location), we boost the restinglevel for the relevant population of neurons. When ‘told’ to
play the color game, for example, the resting level of the
color field is given a slight boost. Figure 4B shows the
model sorting a blue-star. With the color field boosted,
spatial activation at the location of the blue target input is
shared with the spatial WM and shape WM field. This
ultimately tips the balance of activation within the shape
WM field and drives the binding of the star feature to the
right sorting bin by building a peak at the rightward
location. The model, then, binds the features together to
represent the object at the location where it is to be placed.
Figure 4C shows the accumulation of LTM as a result of
making this decision. LTM is overlapping with the target
input in the color WM field. However, LTM is at the

The same sequence of events plays out as the model sorts
a red-circle by color in Figure 4D. Figure 4E shows the
accumulation of LTM after the pre-switch phase. Since the
model consistently sorted by color, LTM is overlapping
with the target inputs in the color field, while LTM is at
conflicting locations with the inputs in the shape field. Thus,
going into the post-switch phase, there is spatial conflict in
the shape field.
What happens when we switch the ‘rule’ in the postswitch trials? To implement the rule switch in the model, we
reset the resting level of the color field and boost the resting
level of the shape field. However, with weak levels of
resting-level boost, the model perseverates and uses the
incorrect feature dimension to sort the test cards. This
occurs because activation in the color field builds quickly
due to the strong activation from the overlap between the
target inputs and the LTM traces accumulated during the
pre-switch phase. By contrast, activation builds slowly in
the shape field due to spatial conflict. If, however, we
increase the resting-level boost for neurons within the postswitch field, the model sorts correctly and overcomes the
spatial conflict created from the pre-switch phase. Thus,
models with weak levels of resting level boost (i.e., weak
representations of color and shape dimensions) will be
successful in the pre-switch, but only models with strong
levels of resting level boost will be able to switch rules. A
model’s ability to switch rules, then, is a function of the
inputs to the model, the LTM that accumulates in the preswitch phase, and the strength of resting-level boost that is
supplied to the relevant feature WM field.
This model not only captures the performance of 3- and 4year-olds in the standard task, but also generalizes to two
other canonical versions (a Negative Priming and an
Absolute Negative Priming version; see Buss & Spencer,
2008). The spatial conflict shown in Figure 4 plays a
central role in capturing these effects. To show that this
account is not only about space, it is necessary to
demonstrate that the model can capture effects that

1665

eliminate a role for spatial information. We now turn to
new variations of the DCCS which provide such a test.

Automatic and Voluntary Shifts of Attention
The nature of attentional shifting in the DCCS was explored
by Fisher (2008) because of the implications the results
would have for early word-learning. Theories of early word
learning either posit that developmental changes occur
through automatic attention driven by bottom-up processing
(Sloutsky & Fisher, 2005) or voluntary attention that is
applied in a conscious and deliberate manner (Gelman &
Medin, 1993). Proponents of the former perspective argue
that developmental changes in word-learning occur prior to
the development of voluntary control of attention.
Assuming that common attentional systems and processes
are used for both rule-switching and word-learning, it
should be possible to measure automatic and voluntary
attention in other tasks. If voluntary attention is not yet
developed in 3-year-olds, then these children should only
have trouble switching rules in the DCCS when a voluntary
shift of attention is required.

high-attentional weights condition to a low-attentional
weights condition (see Figure 5). Features are considered to
have high attentional weights when there are fewer overall
features (thus, each feature has a greater allotment of
attention; Nosofsky, 1986). Again, randomizing the spatial
location of the target cards trial-by-trial and using half noconflict cards during each phase, 3-year-olds had
significantly more difficulty switching rules when 2 features
per dimension were used compared to 4 features per
dimension. With lower attentional weights, attention for
each feature essentially weighs less and is moved more
easily to new features during the post-switch phase. Lower
weights thus facilitate an automatic switch of attention,
while higher weights are more attentionally demanding and
require a voluntary switch.
Across these two variations in the DCCS, voluntary shifts
of attention prove to be more difficult for 3-year-olds than
automatic shifts of attention. This account leaves
unanswered, however, what exactly makes a switch of
attention automatic or voluntary and what makes voluntary
shifts of attention difficult.
As we will show, the
preliminary simulation results suggest that the DNF model
can provide a way to ground these concepts.

Simulation of Feature Saliency Conditions
Figure 5: Example of cards used in Fisher (2008) with low
saliency along the color dimension but high saliency along
the shape dimension (Panel A) and cards with 4 features per
dimension (Panel B).
In one comparison, Fisher (2008) examined the role of
feature saliency. Salient features have been shown to
automatically capture attention (Treisman & Gelade, 1980);
thus, when combined with a less salient set of features,
high-saliency should facilitate automatic switching of
attention while low-saliency should require a voluntary
switch. Fisher (2008) constructed the color features in the
DCCS with low-saliency and the shape features with highsaliency (see Figure 5). Using a more complex task design
in order to isolate automatic and voluntary attentional
processes, any influence of spatial information was
eliminated by randomizing the location (left/right) of the
target cards trial by trial. Thus, children’s difficulty could
not stem from spatial habits or memories associated with the
images on the test cards. Further, half of the 8 trials during
the pre- and post-switch phases were no-conflict (i.e.,
matched a target card along both dimensions).
Under these conditions, 3-year-olds had significantly
more difficulty switching to a less-salient set of features
than to a more-salient set of features (i.e., more difficulty
switching to color than switching to shape). Thus, highsaliency facilitates an automatic switch of attention, while
low-saliency is more attentionally demanding and requires a
voluntary switch.
In another set of conditions, Fisher (2008) compared a

To implement different degrees of feature saliency in the
model, the relative separation between the inputs along the
feature dimension was manipulated. As can be seen in
Figure 6, the inputs to the color field are now closer along
the feature dimension. Instead of a 31 neuron separation as
in the shape field, the color inputs are now only 11 neurons
apart. Inputs to the model were implemented exactly as in
Fisher (2008). The spatial location of the target cards was
randomized for each trial. Eight cards were presented
during each the pre- and post-switch phase, half of which
were no-conflict.
Figure 6 shows the post-switch results from 10 runs of the
model with a weak resting-level boost for each post-switch
dimension compared to the results from 3-year-olds in
Fisher (2008). The model, like children, performed well
when sorting by both shape and color during the pre-switch
phase, sorting 100% and 92.5% correct, respectively. As
can be seen, the model shows the same trends in
performance as that of 3-year-olds. Specifically, the model
exhibited high rates of correct sorting for no-conflict cards
for both shape and color rules. Further, the model was able
to successfully switch to the shape rules but had a poor level
of performance switching to the color rules.
To explore the source of difficulty with similar feature
metrics, we examined the latency in peak-build time on
correct trials within the shape and color fields when they
were boosted and relevant for the pre-switch. Since the
model performed with a high level of success during the
pre-switch, the boosted field is reliably driving the decision
making process. Thus, this gives a measure of how long it
takes to build a representation of a relevant feature in order
to make a decision based on either color or shape. Average

1666

peak latency within the color field with less-salient inputs
was 547 time-steps, while this average latency was 425
time-steps in the shape field with more-salient inputs. Thus,
activation builds more slowly with close feature metrics in
the color field. This is due to the partially overlapping
representation of the color features. The color field is more
active overall when presented with a test card which
requires more inhibition during peak formation. Although
this delay in peak build-time does not impact performance
during the pre-switch trials, once LTM has been established
and the model is switching to color rules, there is activation
at each spatial location for each feature. This induces
additional conflict, requiring even more inhibition to resolve
the conflict and select a choice along the color dimension.
Thus, it is difficult to sort by color and shape wins the
competition during peak formation.

set of features and the 3-year-olds from Fisher (2008) is
displayed in Figure 7 (the model showed a high level of
performance during pre-switch for both the low- and highattentional weight versions, sorting 100% and 95% correct,
respectively). Again, both the model and children displayed
a high rate of correct sorting with the no-conflict cards.
Further, the model had a high rate of correct switching in
the low-attentional weights condition but a low rate of
switching in the high-attentional weights condition.

Figure 7: Inputs to the model for the low-attentional
weights version with 4 features per dimension and
preliminary fits of the model’s performance.

Figure 6: Inputs to model for the feature saliency condition
and preliminary fits of the model’s performance.
The difference between automatic and voluntary shifting
in this situation is the amount of resting-level boost required
to sort by a given dimension’s inputs. Switching to more
salient features is ‘automatic’ in that distinct features winout by default given the overall slowing down of activation
in the color field. Thus, switching to distinct features is
supported in a bottom-up manner by the inputs to the model.
Conversely, switching to less-salient features is voluntary in
that it requires extra resting-level boost (i.e., a stronger
representation of shape and color dimensions within frontal
areas) to correctly switch to these features. This condition,
then, highlights how these two types of attention can be
conceptualized within the dynamic field framework and
provides neural grounding for these concepts.

Simulation of Attentional Weights Conditions
In the second condition from Fisher (2008), the highattentional weights inputs have 2 different feature values for
each dimension and 2 sorting locations, while the lowattentional weights inputs have 4 different feature values
and 4 sorting locations (see Figure 7). Once again, we
simulated this condition with no special modifications to the
model; rather, we simply implemented Fisher’s procedure.
The location of the target cards was randomized so that each
target card occupied each location an equal number of
times. Eight trials were administered for each of the preand post-switch phases with half of the cards being noconflict. The comparison of 10 runs of the model with each

What underlies this ‘attention’ related performance? In
the model, LTM for visual features is specific to spatial
locations within the 2-dimensional feature WM fields. With
randomized space and 4 sorting locations, the LTM for the
features involved in the task becomes distributed across the
4 spatial locations. Further, with 4 features per dimension,
the individual features are presented less often. With 2
features, by contrast, LTM accumulates at more consistent
feature and spatial locations. As a result, LTM with 2
features becomes stronger and leads to more interference
during the post-switch phase. This, in turn, requires a
stronger resting-level boost to sort correctly. With 4
features, however, LTM is weaker and, thus, does not create
strong interference in the post-switch field. Indeed, the
average strength of LTM with 2 features was 0.0242 units,
while this average was only 0.0155 units with 4 features.
Thus, switching with 4 features is more ‘automatic’ because
a more distributed LTM facilitates switching even with
weak levels of resting-level boost. While different levels of
resting-level boost (i.e., different strengths of dimensional
attention) are required in order to switch with 2 versus 4
features, this version seems less about attention and more
about the distribution of features in space and the dynamics
of LTM accumulation.

Discussion
Our object representation system coupled with a simple
mechanism of resting-level modulation has proven to be a
versatile framework for capturing children’s rule-use and
the development of flexible rule-use. This shows the power
and utility of formalizing and grounding abstract concepts
such as rule-use and rule-representation in a neural
framework. Within the same model, concepts such as

1667

negative-priming, inhibition, and various attentional
processes can all be united and understood.
The previous simulations presented by Buss & Spencer
(2008) highlighted the role of spatial information and
showed that boosting the resting level of relevant feature
fields is enough to capture developmental changes in
flexible rule-use. Here we showed that more subtle effects
can emerge from the interactions of LTM, inputs, and
resting-level modulation such that correct switching can be
supported in a bottom-up and top-down fashion based on
the nature of activation within the feature fields.
Fisher (2008) found evidence that voluntary attention is
not developed at 3-years of age, and children were only able
to switch rules when automatic shifts of attention were
supported by the task. In the model, different inputs (i.e.,
salient features and low-attentional weights) support
automatic switching earlier in development with weak
levels of resting-level modulation; however, voluntary shifts
of attention (i.e., with non-salient features and highattentional weights) only emerge later in development with
stronger ‘shape’ and ‘color’ representations.
However, the model also provides further clarity on the
nature of attention: voluntary and automatic in this context
operate simultaneously in the model. That is, the model
requires some resting-level boost, some level of voluntary
attention, in order to sort correctly in the pre-switch. As
features are represented and LTM accumulates during the
initial sorting phase, different amounts of competition are
established. At this point, the inputs can either facilitate
switching or stronger resting-level boost will be needed in
order to switch rules. Thus, automatic and voluntary are
relative terms along a continuum in the balance between all
these factors--space, feature-metrics, LTM, and the boost
supplied to different feature field--when they are assembled
in the task rather than a discrete developmental switch from
one form of attention to another. This provides a picture of
emergence and self-organization where both types of
attention can exist at once as they are defined in the task and
the nature of the inputs.

Acknowledgements
Research funded by NSF HSD0527698 and NIH RO1
MH62480, awarded to JPS.

References
Amari, S. (1977). Dynamics of pattern formation in lateralinhibition type neural fields. Biological Cybernetics, 27,
77-87.
Buss, A. T. & Spencer, J. P. (2008). The emergence of ruleuse: a dynamic neural field model of the DCCS. In A. T.
Buss (Chair), Cognitive Development. Paper symposium
presented at the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Washington, DC.
Crone, E. A., Donohue, S. E., Honomichl, R., Wendelken,
C., and Bunge, S. A. (2006). Brain regions mediating
flexible rule use during development. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 26(43), 11239-11247.

Desimone, R & Gross, C. G. (1979). Visual areas in the
temporal cortex of the macaque. Brain Research, 178(23), 363-380.
Egner, T., & Hirsch, J. (2005).
Cognitive control
mechanisms
resolve
conflict
through
cortical
amplification of task-relevant information.
Nature
Neuroscience, 8(12), 1784-1790.
Fisher, A. V. (2008). Automatic and voluntary shifts of
attention of the Dimensional Change Card Sorting task.
In A. T. Buss (Chair), Cognitive Development. Paper
symposium presented at the 30th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society. Washington, DC.
Gelman, S. A., & Medin, D. L. (1993). What’s so essential
about essentialism? A different perspective on the
interaction of perception, language, and concrete
knowledge. Cognitive Development, 8, p.157-167.
Johnson, J.S., Spencer, J.P., & Schöner, G. (2008). Moving
to higher ground: The dynamic field theory and the
dynamics of visual cognition. In F. Garzón, A. Laakso, &
T. Gomila (Eds.) Dynamics and Psychology [special
issue]. New Ideas in Psychology, 26, 227-251.
Kirkham, N. Z., Cruess, L., & Diamond, A. (2003).
Helping children apply their knowledge to their behavior
on a dimension-switching task. Developmental Science,
6(5), 449-476.
Mulas, F., Capilla, A., Fernández, S., Etchepareborda, M.
C., Campo, P., Maestú, F., Fernández, A., Castellanos, F.
X., & Ortiz, T. (2006). Shifting-related brain magnetic
activity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Biological Psychiatry, 59, 373-379.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Sloutsky, V. M. & Fisher, A. V. (2005). Similarity,
Induction, Naming, and Categorization (SINC):
Generalization or Inductive Reasoning? Response to Heit
and Hayes. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 134, 606-611.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A featureintegration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12,
97-136.
Ungerleider, L. G. & Mishkin, M (1982). Two cortical
visual systems. In D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale, and R. J.
W. Mansfield (Eds.), Analysis of Visual Behavior.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zelazo, P. D., Jacques, S., Burack, J. A., & Frye, D. (2002).
The relation between theory of mind and rule use:
evidence from persons with autism-spectrum disorders.
Infant and Child Development, 11, 171-195.
Zelazo, P. D., Müller, U., Frye, D., & Marcovitch, S.
(2003).
The development of executive function.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, 68(3).

1668

