UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Actions Represent Relations?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0p68m6pb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Mutafchieva, Milena

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can Actions Represent Relations?
Milena Mutafchieva (mmutafchieva@nbu.bg)
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
This paper is exploring alternative ways of representation of
relations to be used effectively in a transitive mapping task. In
the experiment described in the paper children had to map the
3 animals on their side to the 3 animals on the experimenter’s
side in terms of relative size. In all conditions physical objects
“draw-bars” were used to connect the animals on each side.
The draw-bars represent the relation “stronger than” in a
physical way. However, in two conditions the draw-bars were
lacking directions and thus there was no physical
representation of the direction (who is stronger than whom).
In the third condition the draw-bars ended with pointer on one
side and thus physically represented the direction of the
relation. In the second condition the direction of the relation
was represented by a physical action (pulling) preformed both
by the experimenter and the child on the animal. The results
showed that both the motor action and the pointed draw-bars
improved children’s performance, thus actions can
successfully replace physical objects in representing relations.

Introduction
Gentner (1989) and Smith (1989) suggest that children
initially represent objects by overall attributes and only later
on start to pay attention to relations. This might be the
reason why children initially have problems with analogical
mapping, since analogy is a mapping between relations
according to most definitions (Gentner, 1983).
There are various studies trying to find out factors that
facilitate children in attracting their attention to relations.
One such factor is language. Gentner and her colleagues
have demonstrated that the use of relational words (labels)
during the analogical task facilitates children’s success in
relational mapping (Gentner, & Rattermann, 1991;
Rattermann, & Gentner, 1998; Gentner, & Loewenstein,
2002; Loewenstein & Gentner, 2005). The authors do not
claim that the mapping cannot be performed without
language. Taking into account that all children are at least 3
years olds and they are all capable of using language in
general, their experiments concentrate on whether the use of
the specific relational words for explicit representation of
the relations in the task can help children making the
analogy and the results are really positive, i.e. the use of
explicit relational terms such as “Daddy”, “Mommy”, and
“Baby” facilitates significantly the mapping process.
We take a different approach. We raise the question why is
it so difficult for children to encode relations and how can
we possibly facilitate them. One possible answer is that
relations are more difficult to be perceived: in contrast to

objects and attributes they are not salient in the world and
they require more cognitive (and possibly even more
physical) efforts to be noticed and recognized in the
environment. The argument is that noticing a relation like
left-of, above, etc. requires our gaze to be moved from one
specific location to another and to represent the movement
(eye movement or head movement) that we have made. In
contrast, attributes like red, green, bright, round, etc. do not
need comparison with other objects at different positions. In
order to mentally represent the object, we can use its mental
image, while in order to represent a relation we typically
cannot use a mental image, and that is why we need a word
(which will replace the mental image).
The question we have posed is whether we can aid
children in building representations of the relations in a way
that is not language-based. One way to facilitate encoding is
to use a physical object for representing the relation in a
task. In our previous studies we used “draw-bars” as
physical representation of the relation “stronger than”.
The results have extended the findings of Gentner et al. by
demonstrating that 4 years old children can equally well
make transitive relational mapping under various conditions
– with language labels such as “Big/Medium/Small”; and
with physical representation of the relations – draw-bars
(Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007b). We demonstrated also
that analogy (both “the family” analogy and “the train”
analogy) improves children’s performance in a transitive
mapping task with both linear and triangle configuration of
the stimuli (Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007a, 2007b).
Based on these previous results we have decided to find
out whether there is a third alternative to language and
physical object – another way of representing the relations.
One possibility could be to use an action.
The idea that action and perceptual content are coded in a
common representation comes from the embodied cognition
theories and from the Theory of Event Coding of Hommel
(Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001;
Hommel, 2002). Embodied cognition emerges from bodily
interactions with the environment. According to this idea,
cognition depends on the fact that we have body with
particular motor and perceptual capabilities that are linked
together with language, reasoning, memory, emotions and
other aspects of mental life into one representation.
Basically, Hommel and his colleagues suggest that cognitive
representations of events (i.e. of any to-be-perceived or tobe-generated incident in a distant environment) subserve not
only representational functions (e.g. for perception,
imagery, memory, reasoning) but also action-related

744

functions (e.g. for action-planning and initiation). The
perceptual content and action are coded in this actionrelated object representation by feature codes with distal
references. If Hommel’s intuition is right, action can serve
as well as physical object in building a mental image of the
relation.

Previous Experimental Studies
The experiment described in this paper is a continuation of
the work of Gentner and her colleagues (Rattermann &
Gentner, 1991, Gentner & Rattermann, 1998, Loewenstein
& Gentner, 2005) and Mutafchieva and Kokinov
(Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007a, 2007b, 2008), because
both lanes of research intend to study the role of different
factors in facilitating children’s performance in transitive
relational mapping task. In another direction the experiment
is closely related to the study of Smith (Smith, 2005). She
claims that action alters shape categories formed by
children. That is why a brief review of these experiments is
necessary.
The design of our experiment is based on the study of
Gentner and Rattermann (1991, 1998). They presented
young children (3, 4, and 5 years old) with an implicit
analogical mapping task. The child and the experimenter
had each three different sized objects (big, medium, small).
The experimenter hid her sticker under one of her objects
(say the middle one) and said “I'm going to hide my sticker
underneath one of my toys while you watch me. If you
watch me carefully, and think about where I hid my sticker,
you'll be able to find your sticker underneath one of your
toys. If I put my sticker under this toy, where do you think
yours is?” The child had to find out that this means under
the object of the same relative size and search under her/his
middle sized object. At the same time within the child’s set
of objects there was an object which was of the exact same
absolute size as the object pointed by the experimenter, but
different relative size (e.g. was the smallest in the child’s
set). Pitting against each other the absolute and relative size
the researchers intended to study whether children will
prefer to base their answer on the surface or on the structural
similarity (e.g. on the similarity between attributes and
objects or on the similarity between relations). The results
were that 3 years old children picked up in about 50-54 % of
the trials the “correct” relative size object, and 4 years old
children picked up the relational response in about 62% of
the trial.
In another condition Gentner et al. provided family
language labels calling the set family and the particular
objects Dady, Mommy and Baby. When language labels
were involved the 3 years old children were correct in 8789% of the trials. This rather significant improvement was
attributed to the use of language relational labels which
focused the child’s attention towards the relations and they
encoded and used them.
Later on, Gentner and Loewenstein performed various
experiments (2002, 2005) to test the effect of other
relational labels such as “top, middle, bottom”. These labels
also produced a significant improvement but it was not that
strong as in the “Daddy, Mommy, Baby” condition.

Our previous experiments aim to further explore the
reason why relational terms are helpful for children and
whether there is an alternative way to facilitate children in
transitive relational mapping.
In our previous studies we have used the same task as
the one in Gentner’s study. In one particular experiment
(Mutafchieva & Kokinov, 2007b) we are trying to explore
whether language has a very specific role in analogymaking as claimed by many researchers, or it is just one
very effective way of building mental representations of
the relational structure of the task. If the latter is true there
must be also alternative ways of aiding mental
representations of relations by young children. In the
experiments we used physical objects (draw-bars) as
representing the relation “stronger than” within the task
and it turns out that this is an effective way of helping
children to build relational representations and use them
successfully in an analogical mapping task.
The idea of using action, which we are trying to explore in
the current paper, can be traced in a study of Smith (2005).
She suggests that action has a specific role in the
development process of object recognition between 1 and 3
years of age. In the experiment children were given a 3dimensional object which is called “a wug”. Children had
done different actions with the object (holding it, moving up
and down). At the second step the child was given two
different objects and was asked which of them is also “a
wug”. The researchers hypothesised that the children will
choose the vertically-extended object when they had moved
the object along a vertical path and in another condition the
child will choose the horizontally-extended object when
they had moved the object along a horizontal path. She
studied 30 months-old children and there were two
procedures and five different conditions. In the forcedchoice procedure in the training trials of two Action
conditions the child and the experimenter moved the object
three times either in horizontal or vertical way. In the test
trials the experimenter presented two objects to the child
and asked “Where is the wug?” There were two more
conditions which differed from the Action conditions by the
fact that only the experimenter moved the object while the
child only observed this movement without moving the
object himself or herself. In one condition the object was
moved in a horizontal pathway again, and in another
condition was moved in a vertical pathway.
In the fifth condition the experimenter only named the
object several times without moving it. The child did not
move the object either.
The “yes/no” procedure was exactly the same as “forcedchoice” procedure except the fact that the test question
required yes/no answer – “Is this a wug?” The results in
both procedures in Action conditions showed that children
chose the horizontally extended test object when they
moved the exemplar along a horizontal path, but chose the
vertically extended object when they had moved the
exemplar along the vertical path. Children’s choices in noaction conditions were at the chance level. In the two
conditions in which the children only observed the
experimenter to move the exemplar horizontally or

745

vertically there were no systematic directional effects, e.g.
the observation of the experimenter’s moving the object in a
vertical path was not sufficient to choose the vertically
extended object. In the second experiment Smith studied the
generality of the phenomenon by examining the case of
symmetry. The results are consistent with the previous ones.
The results of these two experiments show that action has
a strong influence on the range of shapes 2 year-olds take as
being similar and appear to do so by defining axes of
elongation and symmetry.
Smith proposes several explanations of the results. First of
them is that children probably make an association between
action and shape. Children’s hand movements may be
systematically related to the shape and there is a general
knowledge that objects are moving on paths parallel to their
long axes. If this association is specifically for motor action
and shape, this could explain why watching the
experimenter’s action is not sufficient to influence the shape
judgment in the same manner. Another explanation could be
found in iconicity between action and perceived shape.
Smith suggests that body movement may increase the
similarity between objects because of the cross-modal
correspondence between hand movement paths and aspects
of visual shape and the increasing of similarity influences
the selection of one object as “a wug”. Yet another
explanation could be ascribed to the role of visual motion –
the effect of action on shape judgments is mediated by
effects of visual motion of shape, for example moving edges
of a form. Smith points out that this interpretation could not
explain why when watching the experimenter’s action the
effect is dissimilar in comparison to doing the action. One
possible explanation, provided by Smith, is that children’s
visual attention to the object is more focused when they are
acting rather than watching another’s action. Finally, Smith
claims that it is also possible that there is some form of
lower level recruitment by the motor system of the visual
processes central to shape perception.
Alternative explanation could be found in the assumptions
of Hommel (Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz,
2001; Hommel, 2002). He has proposed and found evidence
that spontaneous integration of features of external objects
also includes action-related spatial information. The
represented spatial codes are very important for action
planning. He claims that object representation includes
spatial and nonspatial information of object’s attributes
which are bound into a single object file. This “object file”
or object representation might subserve object perception
and guidance of action. This is called by Hommel actionrelated object representation. He found out that the
construction of action-related object representation takes
time and the time lies between a quarter to half a second.
The encoding of spatial information (object’s location)
facilitates the recognition of the object, but Hommel
enriched this claim by saying that spatial information is also
functional in planning an action associated with this object
or includes information about what action it affords.
The main idea of this paper is to use action as
representation tool for the relations and to find out whether
movement could replace the use of physical objects. In
addition since the object is always present, its mental image

is refreshed all the time and thus hold active in memory
during the mapping process; in contrast, the action is
performed once and at the time of the mapping will not be
present. This could lead to better results in the condition
with physical object in comparison to the condition with
action. Basically, the task contains two sets of animals –
three for the experimenter and three for the child. There is
small, medium and big animal in every set and the child has
to choose the same relative size animal as the one chosen by
the experimenter. In one condition we have used the drawbars in order to represent the relation “stronger than”, and in
other condition we have used the action of “pulling” for the
same representational purpose.

Experiment
The goal of this experiment was to find out whether
physical action will be able to replace the physical object as
a representation of relation – in other words whether
children will be as good in making transitive relational
mapping when using action “pulling” as they are when
using physical object “draw-bar”. These two conditions will
be compared to a condition, where only visible connections
between objects or undirected draw-bars are used.

Hypothesis
Our hypothesis was that the physical action of “pulling” will
be as useful as the physical object in representing the
relation “stronger than” and both ways will facilitate
children in making transitive relational mapping.
The idea of using the draw-bars as physical representations
of the relations was first introduced in (Mutafchieva &
Kokinov, 2007b) and turned out to be very effective in
facilitating children in transitive relational mapping task.
Now we want to compare this tool with physical action and
to extend the idea of using different kinds of representations
of the relations.

Design
The experiment had between group design:
• Control condition: both sets of objects were
connected via undirected draw-bars; no physical
action of “pulling” was used.
• Embodiment condition: the objects in both sets
were connected via undirected draw-bars and
physical action of “pulling” was used in order to
represent the relation.
• Directed Draw-bar condition: both sets of
objects were connected via directed draw-bars and
no physical action of “pulling” was used.
The dependent variable was the number of relational
responses.

Stimuli
In each trial 6 animals of the same type were used: 6 mice, 6
swans, 6 bears, etc. Each animal among group of 6 was of
different size except two animals with the same absolute
size. Three of the animals formed the experimenter’s set and
three of them formed the child’s set. There was big, middle

746

and small animal in every set and there was a difference in
the absolute size of the corresponding objects from two sets
– for example the biggest mouse from the experimenter’s set
and the biggest mouse from the child’s set were different in
size. One element from the child’s set was exactly the same
as one element in the experimenter’s set.
In this experiment the stimuli were presented in a triangle
configuration. In every trial different sets of stimuli with
different spatial positions and absolute sizes as well as
different animals were used.
In addition, four directed and four undirected draw-bars
were used – two for the experimenter’s set and two for the
child’s set for both conditions.

Figure 1. Example of the stimuli used in the Control
condition where the animals were connected via
undirected draw-bars.

Figure 2. Example of the stimuli used in the Draw-bar
condition where the animals were connected via directed
draw-bars.

Procedure
In each trial the child saw two triads of objects, both
arranged in a triangle way. The child watched the
experimenter hid a sticker under one of the objects in the
experimenter’s set. The child was told that he/she could find
his/her own sticker “in the same place” in the child’s triad.
The correct response was arranged always to be at the
relational similarity place: thus, in order to pick it up, the
child had to choose the object with the same relative size,
but not the same absolute size (object similarity). The
children were always given a feedback by showing the
correct response (by receiving the sticker).
Each child participated in a single experimental session.

The experiment included two training trials and five test
trials. In the training trials the experimenter gave the child
an explanation about the instruction and the question that
she or he had to answer.
The instruction for the Control Group in the test trials was
(in Bulgarian language):
“We are going to play a game of hiding and finding
stickers. I have three mice and you have three mice. From
these two of my mice (pointing e.g. to the biggest and the
medium mouse in the experimenter’s set) this one is
stronger than this one and I will put this draw-bar in such a
way that the stronger mouse could pull the weaker one.
From these two of your animals which one is the stronger
one? Please, put this draw-bar in such a way that the
stronger mouse could pull the weaker mouse. Now, from
these two of my mice (pointing e.g. to the medium and the
smallest mouse from the experimenter’s set) this one is
stronger than this one and I will put the draw-bar in such a
way that the stronger mouse could pull the weaker one.
From these two of your animals which one is the stronger
one? Please, put this draw-bar in such a way that the
stronger mouse could pull the weaker one. I am going to
hide my sticker under this mouse. Where do you think your
sticker is hidden?”
The corresponding instruction for the Directed Draw-bar
Group in the test trials was the same as in the Control
condition. The difference was that in the Directed Draw-bar
condition were used directed draw-bars in contrast to the
undirected draw-bars in the Control condition (Fig.1 and 2).
The instruction for the Embodiment group was following:
“We are going to play a game of hiding and finding
stickers. I have three mice and you have three mice. From
these two of my mice (pointing e.g. to the biggest and the
medium mouse in the experimenter’s set) this one is
stronger than this one and I will connect them with this and
will pull in a way that that the stronger mouse could pull the
weaker one. From these two of your animals which one is
the stronger one? Please, connect them and pull in a way
that the stronger mouse could pull the weaker one. Now,
from these two of my mice (pointing e.g. to the medium and
the smallest mouse from the experimenter’s set) this one is
stronger than this, I will connect them and will pull in such
a way that the stronger mouse could pull the weaker one.
From these two of your animals which one is the stronger
one? Please, connect them and pull in such a way that the
stronger mouse could pull the weaker one. I am going to
hide my sticker under this mouse. Where do you think your
sticker is hidden?” (Fig.3).

Figure 3. Example of the stimuli used in the Embodiment
condition. On the picture only two animals are seen and the
action “pulling”. The instruction was “This mouse is stronger
than this mouse; please pull in such a way that the stronger
mouse pulls the weaker one.” This instruction is then repeated
for the second relation.

747

Participants
75 children were studied in this experiment. 25 of them
formed the Control group, 25 formed the Draw-bar group,
and 25 formed the Embodiment group.
The average age of the children was 4 years and 4 months
ranged from 4 years and 0 month to 4 years and 8 months.

Results
The descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1.
Group

Mean

Control=undirected
1,76
draw-bars
Embodiment=undirected 2,56
draw-bar + pulling
Directed draw-bars
2,80
Table 1: Group Statistics

Std.
Deviation
1,332

N
25

1,387

25

1,607

25

The mean for the Control Group is 1.76 (out of 5), which is
at the chance level, while the mean for the Directed Drawbar group is 2.80, and the mean for the Embodiment group
is 2.56, which are significantly above the chance level.
5
4,5
4
3,5
3
Mean 2,5
2
Chance
level 1,5
1
0,5
0

Control
2,56
1,76

2,8

Embodi
ment
Drawbar

Figure 4. Score means for the three groups,
F(2,72)=3,541, p=0.034
Pair-wise comparison shows that both the Draw-bars group
and the Embodiment group perform significantly better than
the Control group (T(48)=-2,491, p=0.016, and
(T(48)=2,080, p=0.043, respectively), but no difference is
found between the Embodiment group and the Draw-bars
group (T(48)=-0,565, p=0.575).

the draw-bar objects as device for capturing children’s
attention and directing it to the relation between the objects
rather than to the objects themselves. We the current
experiment we have demonstrated that not only objects, but
also motor actions can be effective in drawing the attention
of children to the relations.
As far as the second role is concerned the objects (the
draw-bars) were present at the test phase and therefore, if
they do represent the relation, they are available for usage
during the mapping process. Thus it is not necessary for the
child to remember the direction of the relation when it is
represented by a directed draw-bar, because the object is
present at mapping and he/she only has to look at it.
However, this is not the case with the action. It is not
present at the time of mapping and thus children have to
remember that the stronger animal pulls the weaker one and
recall the action of pulling. That is why the results of this
experiment are even more intriguing because regardless of
the heavier memory load, the action seems very effective in
representing relations. This might be a result of internal
mental simulation of the action that is easy to reconstruct.
An obvious next step would be to improve the procedure
by repeating the action several times (it is now performed
just once) thus forming a better memory for the action.
Another question will be whether the children really need to
perform the action, or it would be enough for them to
observe it performed by the experimenter. There are
arguments in both ways: embodiment theory would predict
that performing the action will have a stronger effect than
observing it; on the other hand, mirror neuron theory would
argue that observing someone performing an action will
activate our motor system and the corresponding action
representations and therefore no significant difference is
expected. This would be a nice parallel to the study by
Smith (2005).
The main conclusion for the moment is that the motor
action, in its current form, can successfully replace the
physical object as it facilitates children’s performance in the
mapping task.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the ANALOGY
project (NEST program, contract 29088) funded by the EC.
Special thanks to Ivan Vankov for his ideas about the
embodiment condition and to Vanya Lambeva, Tsvetelina
Atanasova, Desislava Koleva, Kristina Goceva, and Ana
Doncheva for their intensive data collection work.

General Discussion
The obtained results support our main hypothesis that motor
actions can successfully represent the relations and are as
effective as the physical objects as representation means.
That is why both the action (of pulling) and the physical
object (directed draw-bars) facilitate children’s transitive
relational mapping performance.
Mutafchieva and Kokinov (2007b) have speculated that
one possible reason why young children have difficulties
with the transitive mapping task is that relations are difficult
to be detected (perceived) in the environment and then they
are difficult to be remembered. That is why they designed

References
DeLoache, J. S. (1989). Young children's understanding of
the correspondence between a scale model and a larger
space. Cognitive Development, 4, 121-139.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure–mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.

748

Control Mechanisms for Spatial Knowledge Processing in
Cognitive / Intelligent Systems. AAAI Press.
Inhelder, B. and J. Piaget (1958). The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York:
Basic Books.
Inhelder, B. and Piaget, J. (1964). The Early Growth of
Logic in the Child: Classification and Seriation. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D., (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, vol. 50, pp. 315-353.
Mutafchieva, M. & Kokinov, B. (2007a). Does the Family
Analogy Help Young Children To Do Relational
Mapping? In: Proceedings of the European Cognitive
Science Conference. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Mutafchieva, M. & Kokinov, B. (2007b). Can Language be
Replaced? Physical Representations of Relations Instead
of Language Labels in Relational Mapping: Do They
Help Young Children? In: Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Piaget, J. (1971). Biology and knowledge. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press
Rattermann, M.J., & Gentner, D. (1998). The effect of
language in similarity: The use of relational labels
improves young children’s performance in a mapping
task. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B. Kokinov. Advances
in Analogy Research: Integration of Theory and Data
from the Cognitive, Computational, and Neural Sciences.
New Bulgarian University, Sofia.
Smith, L.B. (1989). From global similarities to kinds of
similarities: the construction of dimensions in
development. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Smith, L. B. (2005) Action Alters Shape Categories.
Cognitive Science, Vol. 29, 665-679

Gentner, D. (1989). Mechanisms of analogical learning. In
S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony, (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning, 199-241. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman &. J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M.J., Markman, A., & Kotovsky,
L. (1995). Two forces in the development of relational
similarity. In G. Halford & T.Simon, Developing
Cognitive Competence: New Approaches to Process
Modeling (Eds.). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2002). Relational language
and relational thought. In Amsel, E. (Ed); Byrnes, J.P.
(Ed). Language, literacy, and cognitive development. The
development
and
consequences
of
symbolic
communication, pp. 87-120.
Goswami, U. (1995). Transitive relational mappings in 3and 4-year-olds: The analogy of Goldilocks and the Three
Bears. Child Development, 66, 877-892.
Goswami, U. (1996). Analogical reasoning and cognitive
development. In H.Reese (Ed.). Advances in Child
Development and Behavior, 92-135. San Diego. CA:
Academic Press.
Goswami, U., Pauen, S. (2005). The effects of family
analogy on class inclusion reasoning in young children.
Swiss Journal of Psychology, vol. 64, n 2, pp. 115-124
Halford, G.S. (1984). Can young children integrate
premises in transitivity and serial order tasks? Cognitive
Psychology, 16, 65-93
Halford, G. (1993). Children’s understanding: The
development of mental models. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Publishers, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
Halford, G. (1998). Relational processing in higher
cognition: Implications for analogy, capacity and
cognitive development. In K. Holyoak, D. Gentner, B.
Kokinov (Eds.) Advances in Analogy Research:
Integration of Theory and Data form the Cognitive,
Computational, and Neural Sciences. New Bulgarian
University, Sofia.
Halford, G. (1998). Processing capacity defined by
relational complexity: Implications for comparative,
developmental, and cognitive psychology. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 21, 803-864.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849-878.
Hommel, B. (2002). Responding to object files: Automatic
integration of spatial information reveale d by stimulusresponse compatibility effects. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 55A, 567-580.
Hommel, B., & Klippel, A. (2007). Embodying spatial
maps. Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium on

749

