UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Causal Exclusion and Consciousness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2md4b9s9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Seli, George

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Causal Exclusion and Consciousness
George Seli (gseli@gc.cuny.edu)
Department of Philosophy, 365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016-4309 USA
Abstract
I examine the question whether state consciousness is
efficacious in the context of a more fundamental problem for
mental causation known as “causal exclusion.” Essentially,
the generally accepted notion that physical events are part of a
causally closed system entails that every neural event has a
sufficient physical cause. So, barring overdetermination,
mental events are unable to cause neural events. This result is
a step in Jaegwon Kim’s Causal Exclusion Argument (CEA).
I argue that CEA poses a problem for conscious causation,
and furthermore that proposed solutions to it do not
necessarily secure the efficacy of state consciousness.
Keywords: Consciousness;
exclusion; supervenience.

mental

causation;

causal

Introduction
State consciousness is that property in virtue of which a
mental state, as opposed to a creature, is conscious. It is
likely that an agent’s conscious mental states are relatively
few compared to the many beliefs, desires, volitions, and
perceptions that are not. If being conscious1 is causally
relevant, it would seem that instantiating the property must
make a difference to a state’s ability to cause mental or
bodily events. More formally, let F be the set of causal
powers a mental state m possesses, let G be the set of causal
powers of that same mental state when it is conscious, mc,
and assume F ≠ G. Since differences in causal powers
supervene on differences in properties, F ≠ G entails that
mc’s distinct causal potentiality is due to its c-property. A
theory that holds consciousness to be causally relevant
claims, at minimum, that at least once during an agent’s
lifetime, she is in a mental state that is like mc, i.e., one
whose causal potentiality depends (in part) on its being
conscious. 2 A more theoretically robust and appealing claim
is that an agent is regularly in such states, and that the causal
powers afforded (or negated) by consciousness significantly
affect behavior. There are, of course, further questions as to
1
Instead of this locution, I will sometimes use “c-property” to
designate that property in virtue of which a mental state is
conscious. The c-property may be intrinsic or relational, as will be
discussed in sect. 4.
2
According to Kriegel (2004), consciousness would contribute to
or modify the state’s “fund of causal powers.” A theory that
specifies this contribution meets what Kriegel calls the “singularity
requirement,” which is to “distinguish between the causal powers
that a conscious state has and the causal powers it has precisely in
virtue of being conscious” (p. 175). Rosenthal (2008) makes the
same point with regard to the state’s function: “[F]or states that are
conscious, we must distinguish the function that is specifically due
to its being conscious from the function that results from others of
its psychological properties” (p. 830).

the kind of causal difference the property makes, the means
by which it makes that difference, the cases in which it
facilitates mental or physical performance, and so on. Yet a
theory of “conscious causation” may well be a nonstarter if
mental states themselves are causally inert: How can
consciousness make mental processing more (or less)
efficacious if it is not mental processing, but neural
processing, that does the causal work?
In this paper I examine the issue of conscious efficacy in
the context of a more fundamental problem for mental
causation known as “causal exclusion.” Essentially, the
generally accepted notion that physical events are part of a
causally closed system entails that every neural event has a
sufficient physical cause. So, barring overdetermination,
mental events are unable to cause neural events. This result
is a step in the Causal Exclusion Argument (CEA) advanced
in Kim (1998). I argue that CEA poses a problem for
conscious causation, and furthermore that proposed
solutions to it do not necessarily secure the efficacy of state
consciousness. For even if conscious mental events can be
plausibly “included” in the etiology of neural events and
behavior, their efficacy qua being conscious is not entailed.
My procedure is as follows: First, I explain how the qua
issue arises on an ontology that countenances events as
causal relata. Second, I discuss CEA and various ways of
preserving mental causation in spite of it, showing how
these responses need not establish that state consciousness is
efficacious. Third, I argue that the qua problem obtains only
on a certain kind of theory of consciousness, namely, where
the property is construed as intrinsic to the conscious state.
Relational theories entail a distribution of causal powers
between higher- and lower-order mental events, and I
conclude by noting a theoretical advantage of that feature.
The overall concern, then, is not whether and how
consciousness is efficacious, but rather to clarify the causal
metaphysics underlying the inquiry.

The Qua Problem and Mental Event
Individuation

In accord with one convention, I assume that mental and
neural events are metaphysically suitable as causal relata,3
although not all properties or constituents of an event may
be causally relevant to a given effect. Thus, if event c = my
bowling ball strikes the last pin and event e = the last pin
tips over, the ball’s being spherical (a constituent of c) is
causally relevant to e but not its having the name of the
bowling alley engraved on it.4 Similarly, if c = my
3

See Davidson (1967).
According to Horgan (1989), the causal relevancy factor makes
causation into a four-place relation he calls “quausation”: c qua F
4

1341

deliberating what to eat for lunch and e = my deciding on a
steak sandwich, c’s including an inviting mental image of
such a sandwich is likely causally relevant to e, but perhaps
not the brief thought about a bowl of pasta that in part
constituted c, and perhaps not c’s being conscious. Other
examples can be drawn from Hume’s associative
psychological laws: Bringing to mind the image of a tree
may cause one to think of shade (ideas of causes bring to
mind ideas of their effects) or perhaps a certain formal proof
method (ideas of similar things bring each other to mind).
But neither of these events, it would seem, are brought
about in virtue of the tree image’s property of representing
green, which bears no causal association with shade and no
similarity-based association with a branching form.
Clearly, if a property is causally relevant to an effect, it
must be a property of a cause of that effect. Assume event c
is F. If F is causally relevant to event e, then c is necessarily
a cause of e.5 The converse entailment, however, does not
hold: if c is a cause of e, then F is not necessarily causally
relevant to e. Thus, suppose an event with both mental and
neural properties – e.g., one that is both a conscious volition
and an action potential in the motor cortex – causes a finger
movement. Despite the fact that a mental event causes the
finger to move, its efficacy is not necessarily in virtue of
being mental; for example, if CEA is sound, the potential is
sufficient for the movement, and thus the event’s being a
volition, conscious or not, is causally irrelevant. Now
suppose CEA is refuted and the conscious volition is shown
to be a legitimate cause of the finger movement. It would
not follow from such a demonstration that the volition
causes the movement in virtue of being conscious. Thus, per
an ontological view that parses mental events and their
neural substrates as single events with both mental and
physical properties, a double “qua” problem must be
resolved to secure the relevance of consciousness to
producing the finger movement: The event must be a cause
qua mental event and the mental property must be causally
relevant qua conscious mental property.6 Alternatively, if
causes e qua G. Thus, the engraving might be causally relevant to
the effect qua a falling at a very precise speed: since the engraving
alters the ball’s weight fractionally, it will alter the speed of the
ball fractionally, and in turn the precise speed at which the pin
falls. Nevertheless, it is plausible that there are constituents of the
cause that fail to be causally relevant to any property of the effect,
such as the particular shape of the engraving (within a range of
shapes that make no difference to weight) or the color of the ball.
5
This principle, I should add, only holds for intrinsic properties of
events, a notion I will discuss in sect. 4. Suppose the event of my
eating a hotdog in the stands has the relational property of
occurring along with Jon’s swinging the bat. That property is
surely causally relevant to the homerun that follows, insofar as it is
constituted in part by the bat-swinging, yet my snacking is not
thereby a cause of the homerun.
6
Davidson’s (1991) monist metaphysics (putatively) allows a
causal role for the mental to be preserved in spite of this problem.
On that view, mental events are both mental and physical in virtue
of conforming to both mental and physical descriptions. Thus, any
event that can be mentally described can also be (in theory)

we individuate two events, a mental one accompanying (and
perhaps supervening on) a neural one, we still face a qua
issue: Assuming mental event c causes event e, does c cause
e qua c’s being conscious?
The problem, then, is that arguments for mental causation,
i.e., arguments against the exclusion thesis, do not establish
that conscious causation obtains: Every conscious mental
event could be efficacious, in spite of supervening on the
neural, without any conscious mental event being
efficacious qua its c-property. And this would mean that the
phenomenon of state consciousness lacks causal relevance.
Before examining whether this difficulty, which I will call
the “qua problem” for conscious causation, arises on several
major theories of state consciousness, a review of CEA and
its various counterarguments is in order.

Causal Exclusion and Nonreductive
Physicalism
CEA presents a serious challenge to a theory of mental
causation. If sound, it proves that all mental phenomena,
including consciousness, are causally inert. In this section I
will review certain counterarguments to CEA and show that
they can secure the efficacy of mental events without
establishing the causal relevance of the c-property that some
of those events instantiate. First, I will briefly explicate
Nonreductive Physicalism, a theory that according to Kim
entails the causal exclusion of the mental by the neural.
Nonreductive Physicalism claims that mental events
supervene on neural events but remain ontologically distinct
from them; that is to say, they are separate entities.
Although the notion of supervenience has been variously
construed by theorists, one plausible definition of the
relation is as follows: Mental event-type m supervenes on
neural event-type n if and only if, for any time t, the
occurrence of an instance of n at t is sufficient (but not
necessary) for the occurrence of an instance of m at t. So if
pain supervenes on C-fiber firing, a particular case of Cfiber firing entails that a particular experience of pain
concurrently obtains. Thus the mental is “fixed” by the
physical, and physical duplicates will be mental duplicates.
neurologically described. And it is the referent of those
descriptions that enters into causal relations. So if such an event is
a cause, then a mental event is a cause. This proposition holds
despite the fact that only the event’s neurological description will
be of use in formulating a strict causal law, since, Davidson argues,
events as mentally described are anomalous. Presumably, state
consciousness can be efficacious via the same reasoning: If an
event that enters into a causal relation can be correctly described as
a conscious event, then a conscious event enters into a causal
relation. The typical counterargument to Davidson is that the
extensions of mental and neural descriptions of an event are
actually distinct properties of that event. So if that event can be
shown to participate in a strict regularity only as neurologically
described, that’s because only its neural properties are entering into
strict regularities and doing the causal work. In turn, the event’s
mental properties become causally irrelevant, i.e., the event is not
efficacious qua its mental properties, including any c-property.

1342

Yet the fact that n is not necessary for m means that m can
obtain with some other (presumably neural) substrate: pain
in an octopus, for example, may well be subvened by a
different kind of neural activity entirely. Hence a mental
event cannot be identical, or reducible, to a neural one.
Apart from preserving the reality of the mental and other
theoretical advantages that result from this feature,7 the
supervenience of m on n, unlike the causation of m by n,
secures m’s causal efficacy – at least prima facie. The
reason is found in the metaphysical relation between m and
n, which, although weaker than identity, is stronger than
causation.8 Depending on the version of the theory, n is held
to realize m, where m is a functional role; constitute m,
where m is a macrostructural event; or determine m, where
m is a determinable. When n bears relations such as these to
m, it can be argued that m causes neural events and behavior
along with n. For example, Jackson (1996) argues that the
constitution relation enables m to inherits n’s causal powers.
“If mental state tokens are constituted by brain state tokens
rather than being identical with them, it remains true that
mental state tokens are in the brain and that their causal
powers are those of the relevant brain state or states” (p.
389).
Yet according to CEA, m is preempted from causing any
of n’s neural or behavioral effects – its supervenience on n
notwithstanding. The reason is that any such effect – call it e
– is physical and therefore its sufficient cause must be
physical. The more general premise here is the causal
closure of the physical domain (CCP): For any physical
event x, if y is part of the sufficient cause of x, then y is a
physical event. So if m is to be part of the sufficient cause of
e along with n, m must be physical – but according to
Nonreductive Physicalism m is irreducibly mental.9 Now it
7
E.g., it justifies calling the theory physicalism, as the mental is
determined by, not merely correlated to, the physical.
8
Indeed, Yablo (1992) has characterized supervenience as “a kind
of ‘supercausation’ which improves on the original in that
supercauses act immediately and metaphysically guarantee their
supereffects” (p. 257).
9
One objection to this argument may go as follows: Granted, m
cannot be reduced to n; yet in virtue of its supervenience on n, it is,
at a more fundamental ontological level, a nonmental phenomenon.
And assuming the thesis that all fundamentally nonmental
phenomena are physical, m counts as physical, which means that
CCP is not breached should m be part of e’s sufficient cause along
with n. In response, we can deploy the following stronger version
of CCP, which does entail m’s exclusion. CCP*: For any physical
event x, if y is part of the sufficient cause of x, then y is a
thoroughly nonmental event. To say y is “thoroughly nonmental” is
to say that any phenomenon that y supervenes on is nonmental and
y itself is nonmental. CCP* is plausible in that, presumably, every
neural event and every behavioral event can be given a complete
causal explanation in terms of phenomena that are thoroughly
nonmental, such as neural events, sensory stimuli, etc. So on
CCP*, the sufficient cause of e can include n, since n is nonmental
and supervenes on molecular events that are also nonmental. But it
cannot include m, which is only fundamentally nonmental, in
virtue of supervening on n. Though m is arguably physical
according to Nonreductive Physicalism, it is clearly not nonmental

might be that m can cause another mental event – m΄ – a
scenario that would not breach CCP. However, this claim is
problematic, for according to a sub-argument of CEA, the
supervenience feature results in m and n competing for the
causation of m΄. Per Nonreductive Physicalism, m΄ must
have a supervenience base, say n΄, that is metaphysically
sufficient for its occurrence. And per CCP, n (or n plus other
thoroughly nonmental events) is causally sufficient for n΄.
So by the transitivity of the sufficiency relation, n is
sufficient for m΄, which seems to exclude m as a cause of
m΄.10 Kim (1991) himself has suggested that mental events
can satisfy a notion of supervenient or epiphenomenal
causation: “When mental event M causes a physical event P,
this is so because M is supervenient upon a physical event
P* and P* causes P. … Similarly, when mental event M
causes another mental event M*, this is so because M
supervenes on a physical state P, and similarly M* on P*,
and P causes P*.”11 Kim concedes, however, that insofar as
supervenient causation depends upon subvenient causation,
it is a lesser grade of causation: “It would be foolish to
pretend that the proposed account accords to the mental the
full causal potency we accord to fundamental physical
processes,” he adds (p. 264).
If we do accept supervenient causation as a means to
secure the efficacy of mental events, presumably the
efficacy of conscious mental events is also secured. Yet it
would not follow that said events are efficacious qua their
being conscious. Let us assume that n is the sufficient cause
of both n΄ and m΄ (insofar as it causes n΄, and n΄ is the
supervenience base of m΄). The fact that m, a conscious
mental event, supervenes on n entails that m superveniently
causes n΄ and m΄. For m’s c-property to be (superveniently)
causally relevant to these subsequent events, it must
supervene on one of n’s properties. More than that, it must
supervene on one of n’s causally relevant properties. As
discussed in sect. 2, not all properties of a cause need be
causally relevant to a given effect. Thus, n can have
properties that are causally irrelevant to n΄, and hence to m΄.
The c-property of m may supervene on one of those
properties.12 Thus, if the notion of supervenient causation
on that theory, if the view is to remain distinct from Reductive
Physicalism. Thus, CCP* seems to entail that m is preempted from
causing e by the set of thoroughly nonmental phenomena that are
causally sufficient for e.
10
Observe that even if m can be a legitimate cause of m΄ in spite of
CEA, if the causal chain of mental events that includes m!m΄
never includes neural events (i.e., there is no “downward
causation,” as Kim puts it), then we have another problem: how
can mental events ultimately make a difference to behavior?
Behavior is physical and its most proximate sufficient cause is
physiological, so in order to affect behavior a mental event must be
part of the etiology of neural events, which transgresses CCP.
11
We can expand on this account to claim that a mental event’s
causing a neural event consists in the fact that the former has a
realizer, constitutor, or determiner that causes that the latter.
12
Heil and Mele (1991) suggest this possibility: Assuming that
“the causal clout of a supervenient characteristic resides in
whatever realizes that characteristic,” they note that even if a

1343

provides a valid solution to the exclusion problem, the
solution would be the same for a mental event and its cproperty: both would need to supervene on causally
efficacious neural phenomena if they are to be efficacious.
But a mental event’s satisfaction of this criterion would not
entail that its c-property does, due to the qua issue outlined
in sect. 2. Essentially, where C is m’s c-property and m
supervenes on n, m superveniently causes n΄ qua C iff there
is some property F of n such that (i) n causes n΄ qua F and
(ii) C supervenes on F.
The notion of supervenient causation is, however, a
questionable one: why exactly should a mental event cause
(even with less “potency,” as Kim contends) the effects of
its supervenience base? To be sure, a realizer, constitutor, or
determiner necessarily entails that which it realizes,
constitutes, or determines, and we might think that the
supervening phenomenon is entitled to a causal claim on the
effects of its base in virtue of being a necessary condition
for that base to obtain. Yet from the fact that an event c is
causally sufficient for an event e and N is a necessary
condition for c, it does not follow that N is a plausible cause
of e.13 So instead of positing a distinct species of causation
for mental events based on the supervenience feature, let us
return to Jackson’s claim that the phenomenon’s causal
powers simply are those of its base. Suppose e is a physical
effect of n; n then has the power to cause e (under certain
circumstances). For m, which supervenes on n, to “inherit”
n’s power to cause e means either that m’s power to cause e
is numerically the same as n’s power to cause e, or that it
duplicates n’s power to cause e. The first construal, I argue,
results in m being causally irrelevant: Presumably m is
distinct from n (as it must be if m can exist with a different
supervenience base), and for m to be causally efficacious as
such is for it to have numerically distinct causal powers.
Without its own power to cause e, m is causally irrelevant to
the n!e causal process. The second construal is thus to be
preferred if we are arguing that m has a causal role in this
process: m’s power to cause e is numerically distinct from
n’s.14 And since (following CCP) n is sufficient for e, any
mental state M supervenes on a biological condition C that
produces behavior B, C will have “a range of features that have no
bearing on its behavioral effects,” and M’s phenomenal features
may supervene on those features of C. They write: “M may have
characteristics – phenomenal characteristics, for instance –
unrelated to its causal role. These might depend on characteristics
of C that are themselves causally irrelevant to the production of B”
(n. 18).
13
To give a common example, a fire is causally sufficient to melt
wax, and the fire could not occur without smoke, but the smoke is
(quite arguably) not causally relevant to the wax’s melting.
14
Perhaps it need not even duplicate n’s power. Wilson (2005)
explains that causal powers are distinguished not only by the
events or properties they bring into nomological relations, but also
based on the kind of “fundamental forces” they are grounded in.
On this line of thinking, we may say that while n causes e relative
to electrochemical forces, m causes it relative to psychological
forces, which presumably would supervene on the brain’s
electrochemical forces.

further causes of e entail that e is overdetermined. As an
additional cause, m clearly could not be necessary for e to
occur, or n wouldn’t be sufficient. It would instead be an
additional sufficient cause.
Accepting overdetermination is thus another way of
preventing m’s exclusion from causing e,15 but there is
another theoretical option that seeks to avoid the causal
competition between mental and neural events altogether.
The basic idea is that these events are causally active at
distinct ontological “levels,” just as macrophysical and
microphysical events are. For example, if we don’t want to
be saddled with the view that a macrophysical event like
sipping very hot tea is inefficacious (i.e., that its causal
powers “drain” to those of the atomic properties of the tea),
we hold, first, that the macro-event is a real entity; and
second, that it causes a macro-effect: a scalding of the
mouth, as opposed to certain atomic-level chemical
alterations in the tissue. Similarly, a mental event like
fearing a rabid dog would be a cause of one’s running away,
while the electrochemical activity in one’s amygdala would
be a cause of the “raw” behavior, or the corresponding
events at the neuromuscular level.
Yablo’s (1992) theory of mental causation, according to
which a mental event supervenes on a neural one as
determinable to determinate, allows for this kind of solution.
Regarding the present examples, his point would be that just
as the tea’s atomic properties are a particular determination
of the property being very hot, the amygdala activity is a
particular determination of the fear: In both cases, the
determinate is sufficient but not necessary for the
determinable to obtain. Should the amygdala activity occur
slightly differently, the fear would still obtain – and so
would the running, ceteris paribus. Thus, neither is that
specific neural event necessary for the running, meaning
that it is not a cause of the running, Yablo argues. However,
it is necessary for – and thus a cause of – the neuromuscular
event that subvenes the running, for that event depends upon
an equally specific neural cause. The fear, on the other hand,
is only commensurate with the running: it lacks the right
structure to be a cause of the neuromuscular event. So the
fear and the amygdala activity are both efficacious; they just
have different effects.
Whether we accept overdetermination or adopt the “levels
of causation” view as a solution to the problem of mental
15
Yet the view may be no more plausible than supervenient
causation, for reasons such as the following: (i) If e has a sufficient
cause in both m and n, the standard counterfactual analysis of n!e
would become problematic: if n did not occur, e presumably still
would, in virtue of m. (ii) Overdetermination within the mind/brain
would not only be widespread and systematic, but also arguably a
result of evolutionary design. The latter, notably, is not a feature of
other cases where overdetermination seems to occur (e.g., a firing
squad’s multiple shots simultaneously killing a person), and makes
overdetermination in the mind/brain seem especially
counterintuitive: Why would the mind/brain have been
“engineered” with such causal redundancy? A case can be made
for overdetermination in spite of such objections. See, for example,
Sider (2003).

1344

causation, it seems the qua issue remains for conscious
causation. Suppose m and n are both (legitimately) sufficient
causes of e: Does m cause e (or any aspect of e) qua being
conscious? Suppose n causes e while m causes e΄, which is
the determinable supervening on e: Does m cause e΄ in
virtue of being conscious? Now, assuming CEA is no longer
an obstacle, conscious mental events will have their salient
effects per introspection and folk psychology: a conscious
volition to perform a particular movement at time t results in
that movement at t; a conscious desire to buy milk together
with beliefs that the store is open and has milk causes a
desire to enter the store; a conscious perception of a stop
sign ahead produces a belief that there is a stop sign ahead;
a conscious perception of a rabid dog causes a feeling of
dread; and so forth. But there need not be some aspect of
these ensuing mental events and behaviors that the
conscious causes produce qua being conscious. In virtue of
the c-property, a conscious mental event may have
processing effects that are neither available to introspection
nor recognized by folk psychology. For example, the
event’s representational content – roughly, the information
it carries about conditions in the world – may become
poised for use by brain modules that subserve functions
such as executive control of action, creative thinking, and
explicit learning and memorization.16 If a mental event
transfers its content to these modules qua being conscious,
while it causes behaviors and subsequent introspectible
states qua its other psychological properties, the causal
demands may seem overly taxing on a single mental event.
But as we shall see, conscious causation does not
necessarily entail the qua problem.

The Qua Problem and the Nature of State
Consciousness

The qua issue for conscious causation only arises on one
kind of view of the nature of the c-property, namely, where
it is intrinsic17 to the mental event that instantiates it. There
are two types of theory that so characterize the property:
first-order representational (FOR) views and what are
sometimes called “self-representational” views.18 Neither of
these kinds of theory makes recourse to a mental event or
16

For elaboration on the notion of “global access,” see Baars
(1997). Block (1997), of course, distinguishes these access
relations a state may have from its phenomenality. I am here
suggesting that the property of being phenomenally conscious may
afford a state the power to enter into these access relations. Block
puts it more colorfully: “Perhaps there is something about Pconsciousness that greases the wheels of accessibility” (p. 402).
17
The notion of intrinsicality is admittedly contentious, and a full
discussion of what it means and what kinds of properties are
intrinsic is beyond the present scope. But roughly, a property of an
event is intrinsic to it if that property ontologically depends only
on how things are within the spatiotemporal extent of the event; in
other words, the property is “internal” to the event, in the literal,
spatiotemporal sense. So a complete description of that property
would involve no reference to anything apart from the event.
18
The latter is a more recent proposal. See Kriegel and Williford
(2006).

state apart from the conscious state in order to explain its
being conscious. The first holds that a conscious state (at
least a perceptual one) is distinguished, inter alia, by its
fine-grained – and thus nonconceptual – representational
content.19 In other words, such states carry information
about the world that is not structured by our concepts, and
this is supposed to explain their qualitative “feel.” The latter
theory holds that such a state contains an intentional content
that represents that very state; e.g., a conscious perception
of a house is “about” the house as well as itself, which is
supposed to explain the putative fact that conscious states
are those we are aware of being in.
Since these properties – nonconceptual content and selfrepresentation – do not consist in distinct mental events or
states accompanying the conscious state, they are
nonrelational.
The
consciousness-conferring
representational content is borne by the conscious event; it is
thus “internal” to the event (to the extent that said
representational content is internal). In contrast, some
higher-order representation (HOR) theorists hold that a
mental state is conscious when it instantiates a relational
property: being represented by a separate mental state. That
state can be a belief or thought, according to higher-order
thought (HOT) theorists, or a quasi-perception, according to
higher-order perception (HOP) theorists.20 On the first type
of view, a perception of a house is conscious in virtue of
being accompanied by the thought that one perceives a
house. On the second, the perception is represented by some
state of a hypothesized “internal attention” system.
First let us observe that the qua question can be posed
about both intrinsic and relational properties. Returning to
the case where event c = my bowling ball strikes the last
pin, and event e = the last pin tips over, we can ask whether
c caused e qua the bowling ball’s sphericality. If c = Taft
prosecutes a monopoly, and e = the monopoly dissolves, we
can ask whether c caused e in virtue of Taft’s slow
metabolism. Each of these qua questions applies to an
(arguably) intrinsic property of a cause. But consider the
ball trajectory’s spatial location and Taft’s being president.
Whether these properties are instantiated depends on
conditions outside the object and the man, respectively, so
they are relational properties. Yet it seems we can still say
the ball knocked over the pin in virtue of its trajectory, and
that Taft dissolved the monopoly qua his being president.
The reason is that the causal powers in question depend on
19

For example, on Tye’s PANIC theory, such a state has Poised,
Abstract, Nonconceptual, Intentional Content. While the
abstractness and nonconceptuality of the state’s intentional content
are arguably intrinsic to the state, the property of being poised is
that of standing “ready to make a direct impact on beliefs and/or
desires,” as Tye explains (2000, p. 62). Depending on one’s
analysis of dispositional properties, poisedness may not be intrinsic
to the state. But in any case, no introspective awareness of the state
– mediated by a higher-order mental state – is needed for it to be
conscious.
20
Theorists who hold this type of view include, respectively,
Rosenthal and Carruthers; and Armstrong and Lycan.

1345

certain conditions external to the event that has those
powers, and those conditions constitute relational properties
of the event: the event is such that those conditions obtain.
So Taft’s power of dissolving the monopoly depends on
others recognizing him as president, which is to say his
being president. Similarly, a certain causal power of a
mental state m may depend on a condition external to m
obtaining, namely, a distinct mental state m* that represents
m. And then m could be said to exert that causal power qua
being represented by m*. At least, it would make sense to
ask whether a mental state is efficacious qua its relational,
consciousness-conferring property, just as we can ask if an
action of Taft’s is efficacious qua the relational property of
his being president.
Nonetheless, there is no qua problem for conscious
causation if the c-property is relational, i.e., if being
conscious consists in a distinct mental event with suitable
representational properties obtaining. For on that view, a
successful argument for mental causation would establish
that conscious causation obtains. If every mental event were
efficacious, in spite of supervening on the neural, the
efficacy of any mental event qua its being represented by a
distinct mental event (a HOT or HOP) would not follow.
What would follow, however, is that those higher-order
representational events themselves are efficacious despite
supervening on the neural. And this means that the
phenomenon of state consciousness is efficacious, since
those higher-order states constitute the phenomenon.21
Essentially, if mental events are not causally excluded by
neural ones, then neither are higher-order representational
mental events excluded. But if the c-property is intrinsic to
conscious states, then even if the exclusion problem is
solved for those states, there is still an outstanding qua
problem on which the efficacy of consciousness turns.
I conclude by sketching how relational theories of state
consciousness may afford a better division of causal labor.
State consciousness is clearly associated with executive
control, explicit memorization, and other characteristics of
globally accessed content. If the reason for that association
is that it causes that access, the dissemination of first-order
content to the relevant modules would be handled by a
distinct, higher-order state – one that may be located in
those very brain areas. On this scenario, a conscious volition
to make a certain bodily movement, for example, would not
cause the global access of its own content through some
intrinsic c-property it possesses. Rather, its causal powers
would be devoted strictly to producing the movement, while
the higher-order representation of that volition would
facilitate the dissemination. Here is an example of how the
facilitation might run in the case of perception: Suppose that
a conscious perception of an apple on the table occurs in the
visual cortex, while the higher-order representation of that
perception that renders it conscious obtains in an area
21
So, contra the definition proposed in sect. 1, the causal power of
state consciousness need not consist in altering the causal
potentiality of conscious states (i.e., first-order states), but simply
in higher-order states’ own causal powers.

subserving executive control, such as the prefrontal cortex.
Now, the higher-order state carries the information that the
visual cortex is in a certain representational state, not the
information that there is an apple on the table. So the fact
that the higher-order state occurs in the prefrontal cortex
does not entail that the executive module accesses the latter
content. But if the executive does access that first-order
perceptual content, one cause is plausibly a signal that the
visual cortex is in a certain representational state. And the
executive receives that signal precisely when a suitable
higher-order state arises in its neural region.

References
Baars, B.J. (1997). In the theatre of consciousness: global
workspace theory, a rigorous scientific theory of
consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4, 292309.
Block, N. (1997). On a confusion about a function of
consciousness. In N. Block et al, The nature of
consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Davidson, D. (1967). Causal relations. Journal of
Philosophy, 64, 691-703.
Davidson, D. (1991). Mental events. In D. Rosenthal (Ed.),
The nature of mind. New York: Oxford.
Dretske, F. (1997). Conscious experience. In N. Block et al,
The nature of consciousness. Cambridge: MIT.
Heil, J. & Mele, A. (1991). Mental causes. American
Philosophical Quarterly, 28, 61-71.
Horgan, T. (1989). Mental quausation. Philosophical
Perspectives, 3, 47-76.
Jackson, F. (1996). Mental causation. Mind, 105, 377-413.
Kriegel, U. (2004). The functional role of consciousness: a
phenomenological approach. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 3, 171-193.
Kriegel, U., & Williford, K., (Eds.) (2006). Selfrepresentational
approaches
to
consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a physical world: an essay on the
mind-body problem and mental causation. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Kim, J. (1991). Epiphenomenal causation. In D. Rosenthal
(Ed.), The nature of mind. New York: Oxford.
Rosenthal, D. (2008). Consciousness and its function.
Neuropsychologia, 46, 829-840.
Sider, T. (2003). What’s so bad about overdetermination?
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 67, 719726.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, color, and content.
Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Wilson, J. (2005). Supervenience-based formulations of
physicalism. Noûs, 39, 426-459.
Yablo, S. (1992). Mental causation. Philosophical Review,
101, 245-280.

1346

