UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Effects of Synesthetic Metaphors Evoked by the Semantic Interaction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cz7w6vc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Sakmoto, Maki
Utsumi, Akira

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Effects of Synesthetic Metaphors Evoked by the Semantic Interaction
Maki Sakamoto (sakamoto@hc.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Human Communication, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Akira Utsumi (utsumi@se.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Systems Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan
(1) The old woman had an open heart
(2) The rich man had a cold heart
(3) The stone statue had a cold smell

Abstract
A synesthetic metaphor (e.g., sweet touch) is a metaphor that
results from a combination of a modifier and a head, where
both express different perceptual qualities. Most of the
existing studies examine how the acceptability of synesthetic
metaphors can be explained by the pairing of adjective
modifier’s and head noun’s modalities. However, little
attention has been given to cognitive effects evoked by
synesthetic metaphors. This paper explores cognitive effects
evoked by synesthetic metaphors for the Japanese language.
Based on Abstract Performance Grammar (APG) proposed by
Osgood (1980) we analyzed how semantic interactions
between vehicle and topic of synesthetic metaphors function
to shift the meanings of words to the positive pole or negative
pole. In the experiment 3267 subjects were asked to evaluate
meanings of 158 linguistic expressions by 7-point semantic
differential scales. Results show that synesthetic metaphors,
especially synesthetic metaphors modified by color adjectives,
tend to evoke negative effects, which is against the rules
predicted by APG model.
Keywords: synesthetic metaphors; Japanese language;
Abstract Performance Grammar; semantic change patterns;
negative effect.

Introduction
The phenomenon of synesthesia has gained increasing
attention over the last ten years (Baron-Cohen & Harrison,
1997; Harrison, 2002; Cytowic, 2002). It has a neurological
as well as a linguistic aspect. This paper focuses on the
linguistic aspect. In contrast to synesthesia as a neurological
phenomenon, synesthesia as a phenomenon in natural
languages is not restricted to a small proportion of the
population. According to prominent theories of metaphors
(Black, 1962; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980), any metaphor
results from a mapping of some concept from a source
domain onto a concept of some target domain. In the case of
synesthetic metaphors, the source domain is restricted to
concepts of perception, which make up the perceptual
domain. The classification of the perceptual domain can be
made with the five senses: color, sound, touch, smell, and
taste. Werning, Fleischhauer, & Beşeoğlu (2006) call the
linguistic expressions as shown in (2) and (3) synesthetic
metaphors, while example (1) is not a synesthetic metaphor
because the modifier does not come from a perceptional
domain. Furthermore, they classify example (2) into a
weakly synesthetic metaphor and example (3) into a
strongly synesthetic metaphor:

In (3) the target domain and the source domain both are
from the perceptual domain, whereas in (2) only the source
domain is. In this paper we do not differentiate between the
linguistic expressions as shown in (2) and (3) and refer to
them roughly as synesthetic metaphors.
As shown in examples (1)-(3), synesthetic metaphors are
a kind of adjective metaphors, in which an adjective
denoting the perception of some sense modality modifies a
noun’s modality. Metaphor studies in the domain of
cognitive science, however, have paid little or no attention
to adjective metaphors. Many existing studies have paid
much attention to nominal metaphors such as “My job is a
jail” (e.g., Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Glucksberg, 2001;
Jones & Estes, 2006; Utsumi, 2007) and predicative
metaphors such as “He shot down all of my arguments” (e.g.,
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Martin, 1992).
Many studies focusing on synesthetic metaphors,
including Werning, Fleischhauer, & Beşeoğlu (2006), have
examined how the acceptability of synesthetic metaphors
can be explained by the pairing of adjective modifier’s and
head noun’s modalities. Ullmann (1967), in a very early
study on synesthetic metaphors, proposes a certain hierarchy
of lower and higher perceptual modalities. He claims that
qualities of lower senses should preferentially occur in the
source domain, while qualities of higher senses should be
preferred in the target domain. His thesis of directionality
thus asserts that a metaphor with a source domain lower in
the hierarchy of sense modalities than the target domain
should tend to be cognitively more accessible than a
metaphor with the reverse direction of domains. After
Ullman, Williams (1976) makes a more differentiated claim
of directionality, in which a similar order of sense
modalities is proposed. Recently, Yu (2003) highlights
cross-linguistic differences, when he makes different
directionality claims for different languages (English as
compared to Chinese). Werning, Fleischhauer, & Beşeoğlu
(2006) explore the factors that enhance the cognitive
accessibility of synesthetic metaphors for the German
language. Very few studies, however, have attempted to
explore cognitive effects evoked by synesthetic metaphors.
This paper explores cognitive effects evoked by synesthetic
metaphors for the Japanese language.

1593

Osgood (1980) is one of few studies exploring cognitive
effects of nominal metaphors. Metaphor comprehension has
been recognized as the process of finding relevant features
that constitute the metaphorical meaning from the
interaction between a source concept and a target concept,
especially by interaction theorists (e.g., Black, 1962;
Indurkhya, 1991; Tourangeau & Sternberg, 1982). Abstract
Performance Grammar (APG) proposed by Osgood (1980)
states the crucial rules to evoke semantic changes through
fine semantic interactions in the processing of linguistic
expressions. In this paper we will call such semantic
changes ‘cognitive effects’. According to Osgood, these
effects on meaning are not deliberate conscious acts by the
comprehender, but rather automatic feature interactions of
which one is usually quite unaware.
The APG model enables us to see how such interactions
function to shift the meanings of words within constituents
and of phrases between constituents. In the analysis, the
semantic features will be bipolar and reciprocally
antagonistic in nature and be nonarbitrarily positive vs.
negative in the signing (+/-) of their antagonistic poles. Thus
in this paper we will see how semantic interactions between
vehicle and topic of synesthetic metaphors function to shift
the meanings of words to the positive pole or negative pole.
The APG rules for semantic feature interaction generate
explicit predictions for potential metaphors and similes.
Rule 1: when a feature has the same sign (non-zero) in
vehicle and topic, (a) equal intensity of coding yields no
change in topic meaning, (b) greater intensity in vehicle
increases polarization in topic, and (c) lesser intensity in
vehicle reduces polarization in topic. Rule 2: when a feature
is signed (either + or -) in the vehicle but unsigned in the
topic, the topic assumes the same intensity and polarity on
the feature as the vehicle. Rule 3: when topic and vehicle
have opposed signs (polarities) on a feature, (a) unequal
codings yield reductions in intensity toward zero coding in
the topic, (b) non-polar equal codings (e.g., +2 vs. -2) yield
cancellation of that feature (i.e., zero coding) in the topic,
and (c) polar equal codings (+3 vs. -3) yield the sense of
anomaly.
While Osgood (1980) analyzes cognitive effects of
nominal metaphors, we analyze cognitive effects of
synesthetic metaphors and argue that semantic interactions
between vehicle and topic of synesthetic metaphors tend to
evoke negative cognitive effects, which contradicts the
predictions of the APG model.
In this paper we analyze whether the semantic interaction
between the vehicle and the topic caused changes to the
negative semantic poles or the positive semantic poles. To
observe detailed semantic change patterns of synesthetic
metaphors evoked by the semantic interactions between the
vehicle and the topic, we adopted modified rules of
semantic interactions between vehicle and topic rather than
the rules proposed by Osgood (1980). While the APG model
proposed by Osgood (1980) considers absolute value as
semantic intensity, we considered not absolute value but real

value. Semantic changes predicted by the APG model are
shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Predictions of semantic change
semantic
intensity

predicted
semantic change

T=V

no change (0)

T<V
T>V

change to +
change to -

The first column in Table 1 shows the classification of
potential metaphors based on the value of topics (T) and
vehicles (V) in the antagonistic (negative or positive) poles.
The second column shows semantic changes predicted by
the APG model. If the values of topic and vehicle are the
same, their semantic interactions of synesthetic metaphors
evoke no semantic change. If the value of topic is smaller
than that of vehicle, their semantic interactions of
synesthetic metaphors evoke semantic change to the
positive pole. If the value of topic is larger than that of
vehicle, their semantic interactions of synesthetic metaphors
evoke semantic change to the negative pole. Figure 1(a)
shows an example of no semantic change (0), Figure 1(b)
shows an example of a semantic change to the positive pole,
and Figure 1(c) shows an example of a semantic change to
the negative pole.
△: vehicle □: topic ○: metaphor
-3

0

+3

Figure 1(a): an example of no change (0)
-3

0

+3

Figure 1(b): an example of change to +
-3

0

+3

Figure 1(c): an example of change to -

Method
Participants
Participants were recruited through Macromill, Inc., an
organization that maintains a panel of more than 533,579
people who have agreed to participate in web-based online
survey research. 3267 Japanese males and females, aged 2075, agreed to participate in our experiment.

1594

Materials
We conducted a pre-experiment to choose materials used for
the experiment. 30 Japanese males and females, aged 21-25,
participated in the pre-experiment. Materials used for the
pre-experiment were 250 Japanese synesthetic metaphors.
They were made by combining 25 Japanese adjectives
denoting perceptions of the five sense modalities with 11
Japanese nouns; color (‘iro’ in Japanese), tezawari (‘touch’),
voice (‘koe’), taste (‘aji’), smell (‘nioi’), feeling (‘kimochi’),
dream (‘yume’), uneasiness (‘fuan’), greed (‘yokubou’),
affection (‘aijou’), and manner (‘taido’). 25 Japanese
adjectives denoting the perceptions of the five sense
modalities are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: List of adjectives used for the experiment
color
yellow

touch
light

sound
noisy(1)

taste
tasty

‘kiiroi’

‘karui’

‘urusai’

‘oishii’

blue

hard

noisy(2)

sweet

‘aoi’

‘katai’

‘yakamashii’

‘amai’

‘kinakusai’

red

soft

noisy(3)

bitter

stinking(2)

assigned 19 or 20 metaphorical expressions per participant.
They were asked to rate the assigned expressions against the
following 15 SD scales; dislike – like, uncomfortable –
comfortable, not interesting – interesting, not appropriate –
appropriate, dull – sharp, weak – powerful, heavy – light,
coarse – delicate, ugly – beautiful, dark – light, unclear –
clear, scary – safe, sad – glad, old – new, and not salient –
salient. The ratings were made on a 7-point scale ranging
from -3 through 0 to +3. We regarded the value -3 as the
negative semantic pole and the value +3 as the positive
semantic pole.

Result
Figure 2 shows an example of the mean values of vehicle,
topic and metaphor of red voice ‘akai koe’.

smell
sweetsmelling
‘kaguwashii’

stinking(1)

‘akai’

‘yawarakai’

‘sawagashii’

‘shibui’

‘kusai’

black

hot

quiet

hot

smelly

‘kuroi’

‘atsui’

‘shizukana’

‘karai’

‘namagusai’

white

cold
‘tsumetai’

loud

sour

fragrant

‘kandakai’

‘suppai’

‘koubashii’

‘shiroi’

Participants were asked to evaluate how easily they
understand each metaphor. The ratings were made on 7point scale ranging from -3 (very difficult) through 0 (not
sure whether difficult or easy) to +3 (very easy). They were
also asked to evaluate how conventional they felt each
metaphor to be. The ratings were made on a 7-point scale
from -3(not at all conventional) through 0 (not sure whether
convention) to +3 (highly conventional). We selected
metaphors with mean value from -2.0 to +2.0 in both scales.
This procedure reduced the possibility that differences of
cognitive effects evoked by synesthetic metaphors could
result from differences of accessibility or conventionality
among materials used for the experiment. As a result 158
Japanese synesthetic metaphors were chosen as materials
used for the experiment.

Procedure
3267 participants were classified into 10 groups. 18-20
linguistic expressions were assigned to each group. The
linguistic expressions assigned to one group were randomly
assigned to each participant in that group (e.g., linguistic
expressions assigned to group 1 were randomly assigned to
each participant belonging to group 1).
Participants of group 1 and 2 were each assigned 18
adjectives and nouns and the remaining 8 groups were

△: vehicle □: topic ○: metaphor
Figure 2: an example red voice ‘akai koe’
We classified all the mean values of vehicles and topics
rated on the 15 SD scales into T=V, T<V, and T>V,
considering the APG predictions given in Table 1. Using ttest (two-tailed, the alpha level .05), we regarded the cases
which have no significant difference between the mean
value of T and V as T=V. The other codes such as T<V and
T>V fall to the cases which have significant differences
between the mean values of T and V. The total number
falling under each classification is given as ‘sum’ in the far
right column of Table 3.
In order to compare the actual semantic changes resulting
from our experiment with the semantic changes predicted by
APG model, we classified the actual semantic changes
resulting from our experiment as shown in Table 3. We
conducted t-test (two-tailed, the alpha level .05). We
regarded the cases which have no significant difference
between the mean values of T and metaphor as ‘no change’
(0) and the cases which have significant differences between
them as changes either to the negative pole (-) or to the
positive pole (+).

1595

Table 3 shows the comparison between the predicted
semantic changes and the actual semantic changes observed
through our experiment.
Table 3: Comparison between predicted semantic changes
and actual semantic changes
semantic
intensity
T=V
T<V
T>V

predicted
change
0
+
-

sum
numbers = cases of SD scales

actual change
0
+
－
331
17
261
366 230
76
119
9
961
816 256 1298

interactions between vehicle and topic of synesthetic
metaphors tend to evoke a negative effect.
In addition, we analyzed the tendency of negative effect
among the types of synesthetic metaphors. Table 4 shows
the number of cases classified either into positive effect or
negative effect.
Table 4: Comparison among the 5 types of
synesthetic metaphors

sum
609
672
1089
2370

As for the cases which were predicted as no change (0),
the proportion of the cases showing the same change as the
APG prediction was significantly higher than that showing
change different from the APG prediction, χ2 (1, N=609) =
4.612, p < .05. Among the cases which showed change
different from the APG prediction, the proportion of the
cases showing the change to - was significantly higher than
those which showing the change to +, χ2 (1, N=278) =
214.158, p < .001.
As for the cases which were predicted to change to +, the
proportion of the cases showing the same change as the
APG prediction was lower than that showing the different
change, χ2 (1, N=672) = 66.881, p < .001. This finding
suggests that actual semantic changes do not obey the
prediction of changing to +.
As for the cases which were predicted to change to -, the
proportion of the cases showing the same change as the
APG prediction was significantly higher than that showing
the different change, χ2 (1, N=1089) = 637.180, p < .001.
This result suggests that actual semantic changes obey the
prediction of changing to -.
In order to see the tendency for synesthetic metaphors to
evoke positive or negative effects, we classified all the cases
showing different changes from the APG prediction either
into positive effect or negative effect. The cases showing no
change as against the prediction of changing to - were
regarded as evoking a weakly positive effect, and were
classified into the positive effect category in the same way
as those which changed to + against the prediction of
changing to -. The cases showing no change against the
prediction of changing to + were regarded as evoking
weakly negative effect, and were classified into the negative
effect category in the same way as those which changed to –
against the prediction of changing to +. As a result, 848
cases which showed changes different from the APG
prediction were classified into 145 positive effect cases and
705 negative effect cases. A Chi-square test showed that the
cases showing negative effect were significantly more
frequent than those showing positive effect, χ2 (1, N=848) =
367.175, p < .001. This result suggests that semantic

positive effect
negative effect
color
4
312
touch
47
84
sound
41
64
taste
19
145
smell
34
98
sum
145
703
numbers = cases of SD scales

sum
316
131
105
164
132
848

A Chi-square test with Bonferroni correction (the alpha
level .005) were conducted among the five types of
synesthetic metaphors.
The result showed that synesthetic metaphors created
from adjectives denoting ‘color’ evoked the most negative
effect. They evoked significantly more negative effect than
the other four types of synesthetic metaphors, χ2 (1, N=447)
= 109.763, p < .001 for color vs. touch; χ2 (1, N=421) =
117.848, p < .001 for color vs. sound; χ2 (1, N=480) =
25.203, p < .001 for color vs. taste; χ2 (1, N=448) = 71.947,
p < .001 for color vs. smell. Differences among color
adjectives, yellow ‘kiiroi’, blue ‘aoi’, red ‘akai’, black
‘kuroi’, and white ‘shiroi’, were not observed.
The second most negative effect was observed for
synesthetic metaphors created from adjectives denoting
‘taste’. They evoked significantly more negative effect than
‘touch’, ‘smell’ or ‘sound’; χ2 (1, N=295) = 24.746, p
< .001 for taste vs. touch; χ2 (1, N=296) = 9.993, p < .005
for taste vs. smell; χ2 (1, N=269) = 27.859, p < .001 for
taste vs. sound. The negative effects were especially
observed among synesthetic metaphors created from sour
‘suppai’, bitter ‘shibui’, and hot ’karai’.
Significant defferences among synesthetic metaphors
created from adjectives denoting ‘touch’, ‘sound’, and
‘smell’ were not observed; χ2 (1, N=236) = .250, p = .617
for touch vs. sound; χ2 (1, N=263) = 3.160, p = .075 for
touch vs. smell; χ2 (1, N=237) = 4.775, p = .029 for sound
vs. smell. As for ‘touch’, synesthetic metaphors showing
negative effect were observed more frequently among those
created from hard ‘katai’ and cold ‘tsumetai’ than those
created from light ‘karui’, soft ‘yawarakai’, and hot ‘atsui’.
As for ‘smell’, the negative effects were observed among
those created from stinking (1) ‘kinakusai’, stinking (2)
‘kusai’, and smelly ‘namagusai’.

1596

Discussion
The possibility of cognitive universality
Our research showed that synesthetic metaphors tend to
evoke a negative effect. The most negative effect was
evoked by synesthetic metaphors created from ‘color’. This
result is interesting because according to Sakamoto (2005)
and Wierzbicka (1996) color adjectives such as yellow
‘kiiroi’, blue ‘aoi’, red ‘akai’, and white ‘shiroi’ themselves
do not have explicit negative meaning. Wierzbicka (1996)
states, for example, that the meaning of yellow is based on
our experience of something yellow like the sun, and the
meaning of blue is based on our experience of something
blue like sky.
The result of our research is not accidental and is
consistent with Sakamoto (2005).
Sakamoto (2005)
analyzes meanings of composite expressions of nouns
modified by color terms (red, blue, yellow, black, and
white) collected from a Japanese corpus containing literary
texts. She found a number of Japanese color metaphors
whose meanings are not predictable from those typically
associated with color terms pointed out by Wierzbicka
(1996). The result suggests that color terms tend to modify
nouns with negative images and color metaphors emphasize
negative images. To verify the result of corpus-based
analysis, she conducted psychological experiments using
Japanese color metaphors composed of nouns with neutral
images. Japanese respondents were asked to name images
associated with those color metaphors and their answers
were compared with images evoked by color terms. Results
showed that color metaphors were associated with negative
and different images from those of color terms.
Previous studies indicate that this tendency of synesthetic
metaphors created from ‘color’ adjectives is not peculiar to
Japanese. Sakamoto (2003 and 2005) analyzes German
‘color’ metaphors collected from German poetry by Georg
Trakl (Trakl, 1964). Trakl uses colors in a very striking way
throughout the poem. The followings are examples of color
metaphors created from blue ‘blau’ in German; the blue cry
‘die blaue Klage’, in the blue evening the figure of the dead
‘im blauen Abend der Toten Gestalt’, the blue bell ring of
the evening ‘die blaue Glocken des Abends’, and A blue
animal is scared of death ‘Ein blaues Tier will sich vorm
Tod verneigen’. These expressions emphasize negative
images working in negative contexts (e.g. about death). The
last example evokes metaphorically negative image by
describing an animal as blue. The following examples are of
color metaphors created from white ‘weiß’; white sorrow
‘weiße Traurigkeit’, The white voice talked to me: Kill
yourself! ‘Die weiße Stimme sprach zu mir: Töte dich!’, and
The white offsprings dark future… ‘Die weißen Enkel
dunkle Zukunft…’. These expressions also emphasize
negative images working in negative contexts (e.g. about
death). The followings are examples of color metaphors
created from deep red ‘purpurn’; deep red plague ‘purpurne
Seuche’, The deep red curses ‘Die purpurnen Flüche’, in
deep red dreams pain and agony ‘in purpurne Träume

Schmerz und Plage’, gloom and deep red laugh ‘Schwermut
und purpurnes Lachen’, and the deep red sufferings ‘die
purpurnen Marten’. These expressions also emphasize
negative images.
These German examples suggest that the negative
cognitive effect evoked by synesthetic metaphors created
from ‘color’ adjectives could be universal. The result of our
research suggests that cognitive effects of synesthetic
metaphors are worth exploring for various languages.

In what processes are the cognitive effects evoked?
In this paper we have shown that semantic interactions
between vehicles denoting different perceptual domains and
topics of synesthetic metaphors tend to evoke negative
cognitive effect and that there were differences among the
types of synesthetic metaphors. This raises the question as
to why and in what processes such cognitive effects are
evoked.
One possible explanation for differences among the types
of synesthetic metaphors would be accessibility different
among the types of synesthetic metaphors studied by many
previous studies. According to Ullmann(1967)’s thesis of
directionality, a metaphor with a source domain lower in the
hierarchy of sense modalities than the target domain should
tend to be cognitively more accessible than a metaphor with
the reverse direction of domains. Figure 3 shows the
directionality proposed by Williams (1976).
color
touch

taste

smell

dimension
sound

Figure 3: Directionality of synesthetic metaphors
Our finding that the ‘color’ synesthetic metaphors evoke the
most negative effect may be related to the fact that color is
located in the highest position of the hierarchy. However,
the second most negative effect was evoked by synesthetic
metaphors created from ‘taste’, which is located in a low
position in the hierarchy. Furthermore, in our preexperiment we asked participants to evaluate how easily
they understand the metaphors proposed for the experiment
materials. The ratings were made on 7-point scale ranging
from -3 (very difficult) through 0 (not sure whether difficult
or easy) to +3 (very easy). We also asked them to evaluate
how conventional they felt the proposed metaphors. The
ratings were made on 7-point scale from -3(not at all
conventional) through 0 (not sure whether convention) to +3
(highly conventional). We selected metaphors with mean
value from -2.0 to +2.0 in both scales. Through this
procedure we reduced the possibility that differences of
cognitive effects evoked by synesthetic metaphors could
result from differences of accessibility or conventionality
among materials used for the experiment. Therefore,
different effects evoked by the five types of synesthetic

1597

metaphors cannot be explained by differences in
acceptability among the types of synesthetic metaphors.
Various theories such as categorization theory
(Glucksberg, 2001; Glucksberg & Keyser, 1990) and
comparison theory (Gentner, 1983; Gentner et al., 2001) are
proposed to explain the mechanism of metaphor
comprehension. We believe that one probable theory that
can explain the processes in which the cognitive effects of
synesthetic metaphors are evoked would be a two-stage
categorization theory proposed by Utsumi & Sakamoto
(2007a) and (2007b). The intuitive idea behind two-stage
categorization is that correspondence between the properties
literally expressed by the adjective and the properties to be
mapped onto the target concept would be indirect, mediated
by an intermediate category, rather than direct as predicted
by the categorization theory. The argument is tested by
means of computer simulation in which three algorithms for
adjective metaphor comprehension, i.e., two-stage
categorization, categorization and comparison, were
compared in terms of how well they mimic human
interpretation of adjective metaphors. The simulation result
was that the two-stage categorization theory is a more
plausible theory of adjective metaphors than other theories.
Since the synesthetic metaphor is a kind of adjective
metaphor, cognitive effects of synesthetic metaphor could
be evoked in some processes of two-stage categorization.

Conclusion
In this paper we analyzed how semantic interactions
between vehicle and topic of synesthetic metaphors function
to shift the meanings of words to the positive pole or
negative pole. We have shown that synesthetic metaphors,
especially synesthetic metaphors modified by color
adjectives, tend to evoke negative images, which contradicts
the rules predicted by APG model. We hope that this
research sheds new light on cognitive studies of synesthetic
metaphors and studies of metaphor comprehension.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (C) (No. 20520350) from Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., & Harrison, J. E. (Eds.) (1997).
Synaesthesia: Classic and contemporary readings.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Black, M. (1962). Models and metaphor. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Bowdle, B., & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of metaphor.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 193-216.
Cytowic, R. E. (2002). Synaesthesia: A union of the senses.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language:
From metaphors to idioms. Oxford University Press.

Glucksberg, S., & Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparisons:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychological Review, 97, 3-18.
Harrison, J. (2002). Synaesthesia: The strangest thing.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Indurkhya, B. (1991). Metaphor and cognition: An
Interactionist approach. Kluwer.
Jones, L., & Estes, Z. (2006). Roosters, robins, and alarm
clocks: Aptness and conventionality in metaphor
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
18-32.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
The University of Chicago Press.
Martin, J. (1992). Computer understanding of conventional
metaphoric language. Cognitive Science, 16, 233-270.
Osgood, C. E. (1980). The cognitive dynamics of
synesthesia and metaphor. In R. P. Honeck & R. R.
Hoffman (Eds.), Cognition and figurative language (pp.
203-238). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sakamoto, M. (2005). An empirical approach to the
semantics of color metaphors in Japanese and German. In
Proceedings of the 9th International Cognitive Linguistics
Conference (pp. 409).
Sakamoto, M. (2003). A cognitive linguistics study on
metaphors in German poetry by Geork Trakl. German
Literature, 115, 95-109. (in Japanese).
Tourangeau, R., & Sternberg, R. (1982). Understanding and
appreciating metaphors. Cognition, 11, 203-244.
Trakl, G. (1964). Gedichte. Frankfurt am Main: Fischer
Bücherei.
Ullmann, S. (1967). The principles of semantics. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Utsumi, A. (2007). Interpretive diversity explains metaphorsimile distinction. Metaphor and Symbol, 22, 291-312.
Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto, M. (2007a). Computational
evidence for two-stage categorization as a process of
adjective metaphor comprehension. In Proceedings of the
2nd European Cognitive Science Conference (pp. 77-82).
Utsumi, A., & Sakamoto, M. (2007b). Predicative
metaphors are understood as two-stage categorization:
Computational evidence by latent semantic analysis. In
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1587-1592).
Werning, M., Fleischhauer, J., & Beşeoğlu, H. (2006). The
cognitive accessibility of synaesthetic metaphors. In
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2365-2370).
Wierzbicka, Anna. 1996. Semantics: Primes and universals.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williams, J. M. (1976). Synesthetic adjectives: A possible
law of semantic change. Language, 52 (2), 461-478.
Yu, N. (2003). Synesthetic metaphor: A cognitive
prespective. Journal of literary semantics, 32(1), 19-34.

1598

