UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive and Neural Foundations of Concepts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dq8f2zh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Barsalo, Lawrence
Gerlach, Christian
Kiefer, Markus
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive and Neural Foundations of Concepts
Markus Kiefer (Markus.Kiefer@Uni-Ulm.De)
Department of Psychiatry, Leimgrubenweg 12
Ulm, 89075 Germany

Lawrence W. Barsalou (Barsalou@Emory.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 532 Kilgo Circle
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
Keywords: concepts; semantic memory; embodied cognition;
perception; language.

neurodegenerative conditions known collectively as FrontoTemporal Dementia, called Semantic Dementia (SD), arises
from relatively focal degeneration of the anterior temporal
lobes bilaterally. The hallmark of SD is a degradation of
conceptual knowledge that applies across all modalities of
input and output and across all types of concepts and all
types of conceptual features. The main principles governing
the progressive deterioration of knowledge are the
familiarity of an object or concept and its typicality within
its domain: less familiar and less typical things are both
more vulnerable.
The combination of (a) the amodal, across-the-board
semantic disruption characteristic of SD, (b) the sensitivity
of the impairment to the typicality structure of conceptual
knowledge and (c) the consistently focal and predictable
lesion site leads to the following hypothesis: all of the
specific sensory, motor and linguistic aspects of concept
knowledge, which are in far-flung regions across the brain,
communicate with a conceptual hub in anterior temporal
cortex that represents semantic structure and that is essential
to semantically-guided human behavior.

Introduction
Concepts in long-term memory are important building
blocks of human cognition and form the basis for language,
thought and action. Traditionally, concepts are specified as
abstract mental entities different from perceptual or motor
systems. From this perspective, sensory or motor features of
objects and events are transformed into a common amodal
representational format, in which original modality-specific
information is lost (Fodor, 2001). Researchers often assume
that a single abstract representation underlies conceptual
processing, such as feature lists, semantic networks or
statistical vectors.
Challenging this classical view, recent modality-specific
approaches propose that concepts are essentially grounded
in perception and action (Barsalou, Santos, Simmons, &
Wilson, 2008). Conceptual features (e.g., visual, acoustic,
action-related) are represented by cortical cell assemblies in
sensory and motor areas established during concept
acquisition. Hence, access to concepts involves a partial
reinstatement of brain activity during perception and action
(Kiefer, Sim, Herrnberger, Grothe, & Hoenig, 2008).
The nature of conceptual representations is at the heart of
a fierce debate in the cognitive sciences. In this symposium,
we give an overview of the latest theoretical and empirical
developments in research on the functional and neural
architecture of conceptual memory. Speakers from a variety
of disciplines including cognitive science, cognitive
psychology, neuropsychology and cognitive neuroscience
critically discuss the sensory and motor foundations of
concepts in mind and brain on the basis of different
theoretical and methodological approaches.

Perceptual or conceptual processing?
Examination of category-specific impairments in braindamaged patients as well as neuroimaging studies in healthy
subjects demonstrating category-specific brain activation
have been an important source of evidence in favor of a
modality-specific representation of concepts. However,
explanations of these findings remain controversial because
the pattern of results has been rather inconsistent with
regard to the precise anatomical locations associated with
different types of knowledge.
The contribution of Christian Gerlach (University of
Århus, Denmark) presents the results of a recent metaanalysis of functional imaging studies of picture processing
(Gerlach, 2007), and highlights potential causes of the
observed inconsistency. The meta-analysis suggests that
many of the category-specific activations observed during
visual object processing may reflect differences between
categories in terms of structural similarity, with natural
objects being more structurally similar than artifacts. Hence,
at least in some cases, category-specific disorders may be
caused by visual rather than conceptual impairments.
Evidence in favor of this proposition also comes from
neuroimaging studies of visual object processing in normal

Is there an amodal conceptual structure?
The existence of an amodal conceptual structure is one of
the key questions in the present debate. Based upon
neuropsychological studies in brain-damaged patients, the
contribution of Karalyn Patterson (MRC Cognition and
Brain Sciences Unit, U.K.) provides arguments for an
amodal component of the distributed conceptual brain
network that goes beyond the modality-specific sensory and
motor aspects of conceptual knowledge (Patterson, Nestor,
& Rogers, 2007). One variant of the set of

47

subjects where category effects have been demonstrated to
depend on several factors likely to affect pre-semantic
perceptual processing. To account for such observations a
Pre-semantic Account of Category Effects (PACE) in visual
object recognition has been proposed. On this account,
category effects can arise at two stages in visual object
recognition: during shape configuration, where visual
elements are bound into elaborate shape descriptions in
which the relationships between the objects' constituent
parts are specified, and during selection, where the
configured shapes are matched with representations stored
in visual long-term memory. It is proposed that categoryspecific effects in conceptual tasks may reflect perceptual
stages and not necessarily processing of conceptual features.

neurophysiological recording techniques that demonstrate
the foundations of concepts in the sensory and motor brain
systems. It is shown that conceptual word processing
engages brain areas typically involved in representing
sensory and motor information (Kiefer et al., 2008). Activity
was strongest and started as early as 100 ms after stimulus
onset when the conceptual features relevant for a given
category were also task-relevant.
In generalizing and substantiating the view of concepts
embodied in perception, acoustic conceptual features could
be unequivocally linked to the auditory perceptual system:
Conceptual processing of words referring to objects for
which sound information is highly relevant activated
auditory brain areas, which were also activated by listening
to real sounds. Importantly, activity within this area
increased selectively as a function of acoustic, but not of
visual and action-related feature relevance. This shows that
access to concepts involves a partial reinstatement of brain
activity during the perception of objects.
Furthermore, both training studies with novel objects, in
which new concepts had to be acquired under different
sensory-motor interactions, and studies with real objects in
experts revealed experience-dependent brain activity: A
conceptual task activated a given sensory and motor area
only when participants had rich opportunities to interact
with the object through the corresponding sensory and
motor channel during concept acquisition.
The specificity of activity in sensory and motor areas
during conceptual processing, its early onset and anatomical
overlap with perceptual processing as well as its experiencedependent plasticity strongly suggest that conceptual
features are represented in a modality-specific fashion.
These findings support the view that concepts are grounded
in perception and action as a function of the sensory-motor
experience during concept acquisition.

Simulation or lexical processing?
The contribution of Lawrence Barsalou (Emory University,
U.S.A.) examines the nature of processes typically involved
in a conceptual task. It is argued that conceptual processing
is often a mixture of word association and situated
simulation based upon modality-specific representations
(Barsalou et al. 2008). Methodologically, this issue is of
importance because alleged conceptual tasks may actually
be tapping more into word association in the lexical system
than into knowledge in the conceptual system.
Processing in a conceptual task is typically a mixture of
representations, where one is grounded in words, and the
other is grounded in modality-specific representations.
Depending on task constraints, a given paradigm may tap
more into one process or the other. In behavioral studies of
property generation and property verification, the presence
of relatively fast word association processes is observed that
precede the production of conceptual representations, which
appear to have a perceptual character. When conditions
allow, subjects rely almost totally on word association to
perform the task. When the word association process is
blocked, however, subjects use conceptual representations.
Results from recent neuroimaging studies also converge on
these conclusions. Only when task conditions prevent or
discourage subjects from using word association in property
verification do visual brain areas become active.
Together these findings suggest that two different systems
are active during conceptual processing: word association
and situated simulation. Task conditions modulate the
particular mixture of these two processes that subjects use
on a given occasion. Word association appears central to
much conceptual processing as claimed in previous theories.
Unlike these theories, though, there is more to conceptual
processing than word association. When the word
association process is blocked, other forms of conceptual
representation, such as situated simulation, take over.

References
Barsalou, L.W., Santos, A., Simmons, W.K., & Wilson,
C.D. (2008). Language and simulation in conceptual
processing. In M. De Vega, A.M. Glenberg, & A.C.
Graesser, A. (Eds.). Symbols, embodiment, and meaning
(pp. 245-283). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (2001). The mind doesn’t work that way.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gerlach, C. (2007). A review of functional imaging studies
on category specificity. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19, 296-314.
Kiefer, M., Sim, E.-J., Herrnberger, B., Grothe, J., &
Hoenig, K. (2008). The sound of concepts: Four markers
for a link between auditory and conceptual brain systems.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 12224–12230.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P.J., & Rogers, T.T. (2007). Where do
you know what you know? The representation of
semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 8, 976-987.

Do concepts reflect sensory experience?
Modality-specific theories of conceptual representations
propose that concepts are essentially grounded in perception
and action. Markus Kiefer (University of Ulm, Germany)
presents cognitive studies in combination with

48

