UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparison, Categorization, and Metaphor Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55x0c706

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Gokcesu, Bahriye Selin

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparison, Categorization, and Metaphor Comprehension
Bahriye Selin Gokcesu (bgokcesu@hsc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1 College Rd.
Hampden Sydney, VA, 23948
Abstract

repeated use and thus has acquired a secondary, figurative
meaning.
For instance, as a consequence of being
repeatedly compared with different targets to convey similar
meanings (e.g., This garage sale is a goldmine, A college
education is a goldmine), the term goldmine has come to be
associated with the category anything that is a source of
something
valuable.
Once
this
process
of
conventionalization has taken place, any further metaphors
with goldmine in the base position can be understood as
categorization statements.
Instead of interpreting the
metaphor by seeking an overlap of properties between the
target and base, we can interpret it as a statement that the
target term belongs to the category represented by the base
term.
Bowdle and Gentner (2005) found that novel metaphors
are preferred more strongly in the simile form (A is like B),
whereas conventional metaphors are equally acceptable in
either the metaphor form (A is B) or the simile form. The
simile form has the same grammatical structure as literal
comparison (e.g., A dog is like a cat), so a preference for the
simile form might indicate processing through comparison.
In contrast, the metaphor form has the same grammatical
structure as literal categorization (e.g., A dog is a carnivore),
so a preference for the metaphor form might indicate
processing through categorization. According to Bowdle
and Gentner (2005), the simile form and the metaphor form
are both acceptable for conventional figurative statements
because such statements can be processed either through
comparison, by mapping the target onto the primary, literal
meaning of the base, or through categorization, by mapping
the target onto the secondary, figurative meaning of the
base. The finding that novel statements are preferred in
simile form, whereas conventional statements are equally
acceptable in either simile or metaphor form, was also
replicated by Gokcesu and Bowdle (2003).
Bowdle and Gentner (2005) further showed that novel
figurative statements were processed more rapidly in the
simile form than in the metaphor form. Their studies also
showed that conventionalizing a set of novel base terms in
the lab resulted in a shift towards categorization in the
processing of further statements containing these base
terms.
Glucksberg and Haught (2006a, 2006b), put forth the dual
reference theory, which is a variation of the categorization
approach to metaphor comprehension that focuses on
grammatical form. Bowdle and Gentner (2005) pointed out
that for conventional figurative statements that can be
processed either through categorization or comparison, the
grammatical form of the statement can determine which

One of the prevailing questions in current metaphor research
has been whether and to what extent conventionality of a
metaphor influences its processing. The career of metaphor
hypothesis (Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Gentner & Bowdle,
2001) suggests that conventional metaphors are processed
through categorization whereas novel ones are processed
through comparison. The dual reference theory (Glucksberg
& Haught, 2006a, 2006b), on the other hand, proposes that it
is the grammatical form of a figurative statement that
determines how it will be processed. More specifically,
metaphors which share the grammatical form of literal
categorizations are processed through categorization and
similes which share the grammatical form of literal
comparisons are processed through comparison. The present
study investigated the claims of these theories and found
support for the career of metaphor hypothesis by showing that
conventional figurative statements appeared to be processed
through categorization whereas novel statements appeared to
be processed through comparison.
Key Words: Metaphor; conventionality; categorization;
comparison.

Introduction
Traditionally, theories regarding the processing of
metaphors have been divided into those that view it as a
form of comparison (e.g., Miller, 1979; Ortony, 1979;
Johnson & Malgady, 1979) and those that view it as a form
of categorization (e.g., Glucksberg & Keysar, 1990; Shen,
1989). Comparison- based theories suggest that when
processing a nominal metaphor (e.g., Jealousy is a tumor),
we align the properties of the target term (jealousy) with
those of the base term (tumor) and look for an overlap (e.g.,
both grow uncontrollably). In contrast, categorization-based
theories suggest that we create an ad hoc category (e.g.,
anything that grows uncontrollably) that encompasses both
the target term and the base term, with the base term as a
more representative member. According to this view, the
metaphor Jealousy is a tumor is interpreted as a statement
that jealousy belongs in the category anything that grows
uncontrollably, which is denoted by tumor.
The career of metaphor hypothesis (Bowdle & Gentner,
2005; Gentner & Bowdle, 2001) unifies the comparison and
categorization theories of metaphor processing. According
to this hypothesis, novel metaphors (e.g., A child is a
snowflake) are understood through comparison.
The
properties of the target are mapped onto those of the base,
and an overlap is sought. In contrast, conventional
metaphors can be understood through categorization. A
conventional metaphor has a base term that has become
strongly associated with a certain ad hoc category through

567

conducted on the aptness and grammatical form preference
ratings of the Gokcesu and Bowdle (2003) data made it
seem improbable that the effect of conventionality they
found was due to a difference in the degree of aptness
between novel and conventional statements. The present
study set out to test the claims of the career of metaphor
hypothesis and dual reference theory on a set of
conventional and novel statements that were matched in
terms of aptness ratings.
Experiment I collected
interpretations of novel and conventional metaphors
presented in either the metaphor form or the simile form.
The interpretations were coded for grammatical cues that
indicate processing through comparison or categorization.
Experiment II manipulated the order of the target and the
base terms in each figurative statement and prompted
subjects to indicate their preference between the two orders.
Experiment III was a reaction time task which involved
deciding whether each figurative statement was sensible as
quickly as possible.

route is selected. In contrast, the dual reference theory
suggests that for all figurative statements, regardless of
conventionality, grammatical form might determine
processing.
Specifically, metaphors should invite
categorization as they share the grammatical form of literal
categorizations. According to dual reference theory, in
processing the metaphor My job is a jail, an ad hoc
metaphoric category is created (e.g., anything that is
confining). This category is selected such that the base term
is a more representative member of it than the target term.
The metaphor is processed as a statement that my job
belongs in the category of things that are confining
represented by jail. Similes, on the other hand, share the
grammatical form of literal comparison statements. When
processing the simile My job is like a jail, the properties of
my job and jail are retrieved and an overlap is sought
According to dual reference theory, conventionality does
not play a crucial role in metaphor processing. In support of
this claim, Glucksberg and Haught (2006a) showed that
when the base term of a metaphor is paired with a modifier
which indicates that it can only refer to a metaphoric
category (e.g., My lawyer is a well-paid shark), participants
always prefer the metaphor form over the simile form, even
for statements with novel base terms. Glucksberg and
Haught (2006a) suggested that the findings of Bowdle and
Gentner (2005), which show a significant effect of
conventionality on grammatical form preference, might
have been due to the fact that the conventional statements
Bowdle and Gentner used in their stimuli (e.g., A gene is a
blueprint) were more apt than the novel statements they
used (e.g., A fisherman is a spider). Glucksberg and Haught
argued that aptness, rather than conventionality, might have
been responsible for the differences Bowdle and Gentner
found between conventional and novel figurative
statements. Specifically, novel figurative statements might
have been preferred in the simile form because participants
found it difficult to produce an appropriate metaphoric
category for a figurative statement that was not apt.
In support of the idea that aptness rather than
conventionality determines how a nominal metaphor is
processed, Chiappe, Kennedy, and Smykowski (2003)
showed that the degree of aptness in figurative statements
correlates strongly with a preference for the metaphor form,
whereas degree of conventionality does not. Similarly,
Jones and Estes (2006) found that aptness, rather than
conventionality, determines whether a given figurative
statement is preferred in the metaphor form or the simile
form (but see Bowdle (2008) for an alternative account).
While these studies appear to suggest that aptness, rather
than conventionality, might have caused the differences
Bowdle and Gentner report between novel and conventional
statements, they cannot account for the finding that the
grammatical form preference for novel bases that were
conventionalized in the laboratory shifted from simile to
metaphor. Furthermore, a series of post hoc analyses

Experiment I
Bowdle and Gentner (2005) suggested that grammatical
cues used by people in their interpretations of figurative
statements can be indicative of whether they processed the
statement through comparison or categorization.
Specifically, Bowdle and Genter noted that when a given
statement is processed through comparison, participants are
more likely to use double predication. For instance, for A
child is a snowflake, double predication involves the
interpretation that both are unique. This is similar to how
people interpret literal comparisons (e.g., A tiger is like a
lion can be interpreted using both eat meat). However, it is
not compatible with how people interpret literal
categorizations (e.g., the interpretation of A tiger is a
carnivore is not likely to involve both eat meat). Participants
may be more likely to use single predication when they
interpret a given statement through categorization. For A
child is a snowflake, an interpretation with a single
predication would only mention the target (e.g., a child is
unique). Single predication is more compatible with the
interpretation of literal categorizations (e.g., the
interpretation of A tiger is a carnivore might involve a tiger
eats meat). Bowdle and Gentner (2005) found that people
provide more interpretations involving double predication
for novel figurative statements and more interpretations
involving single predication for conventional figurative
statements.
Experiment I collected interpretations and coded double
vs. single predications as a means of investigating the
experimental conditions where a figurative statement is
processed through categorization or comparison. The career
of metaphor hypothesis expects that double predications will
be more prevalent for novel figurative statements, as these
can only be understood through comparison. Single
predications, on the other hand, should be more prevalent in

568

Each participant saw a given experimental base term in a
metaphor (A library is a goldmine), a simile (A library is
like a goldmine), or a literal comparison (A silver mine is
like a goldmine). The number of metaphors, similes, literal
comparisons, and literal categorization fillers observed were
controlled across participants.
Like the pretests, the experiment was administered on a
computer with E-prime. Participants were instructed to type
an interpretation of all the statements they were presented
with in a text box.

the interpretations of conventional figurative statements, as
these allow categorization as well as comparison. Dual
reference theory predicts that participants should use more
double predications for interpreting similes (whose
grammatical form invites comparison) and more single
predications for interpreting metaphors (whose grammatical
form invites categorization), regardless of conventionality.

Participants
A total of 74 Indiana University students participated in the
pretests and the experiment. Subjects received credit for an
introductory psychology course in return for participation.

Results
Repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted on the subject
means for double predications and single predications. The
experiment had a 2(conventionality: conventional, novel) x
3 (statement type: metaphor, simile, literal comparison)
design.
Analyses on the means for double predication revealed a
main effect of conventionality (F(1,39)=17.401, p<.05) and
a main effect of statement type (F(2,37)=12.601, p<.05).
Interpretations of novel statements (M=0.259) were more
likely to include double predications than interpretations of
conventional statements (M=0.159). Interpretations of
literal comparisons (M=0.346) included a higher number of
double predication than those of metaphors (M=0.119) and
similes (M=0.161).
The differences between literal
comparisons and metaphors (t(38)=6.108, p<.05) and
between literal comparisons and similes (t(38)=4.099,
p<.05) were significant. However, the difference between
metaphors and similes was not significant.
Analyses on single predications showed that conventional
statements (M=0.725) were more likely to involve single
predication
than
novel
statements
(M=0.576)
(F(1,38)=19.699, p<.05). There was also a main effect of
statement type, such that metaphors (M=0.710) and similes
(M=0.720) were more likely than literal comparisons
(M=0.514) to involve single predication (F(2,37)=9.647,
p<.05). Post hoc analyses showed that the difference
between metaphors and literal comparisons (t(38)=-3.986,
p<.05) and the difference between similes and literal
comparisons (t(38)=-3.858, p<.05) were significant, but the
difference between metaphors and similes was not.
These findings support the career of metaphor prediction
that conventional figurative statements are more likely to be
processed through categorization than novel ones.
Interpretations of novel statements involved a greater
number of double predications (which are typical of
comparison) than conventional ones. Interpretations of
conventional statements, on the other hand, involved a
greater number of single predications (which are more
typical of categorization) than novel ones. Dual reference
theory’s predictions that similes are more likely to evoke
comparison (and thus result in more dual predications) and
that metaphors are more likely to evoke categorization (and
thus result in more single predications) were not supported.

Materials
The stimuli for the experiment were selected from a pool of
metaphors gathered from earlier studies of metaphor
comprehension. In Pretest 1, participants rated the aptness
of statements on a scale ranging from 1 to 9 where 1
indicated “not at all apt” and 9 indicated “very apt.”
Aptness was defined as how appropriate, informative, and
meaningful a given statement is.
Pretest 2 was designed to establish the conventionality of
each statement. It was a variation of the conventionality
procedure introduced by Gentner and Wollf (1997). Two
trained coders established a metaphoric ad hoc category
containing both the target and the base of each statement.
Participants were presented with only the base terms and the
corresponding ad hoc categories and were asked to rate how
familiar they were with the ad hoc category as a secondary
meaning for the base (e.g., How familiar are you with the
use of the word goldmine to refer to anything that is a
source of something valuable?). Ratings were collected on
a nine-point scale where 1 indicated “not at all familiar” and
9 indicated “very familiar.”
All pretests were administered on a computer using Eprime. The experimental statements were presented on a
black background in green letters and subjects’ responses
were collected by keyboard presses.
Based on the ratings from Pretest 2, 11 novel (M=3.655)
and 11 conventional (M=5.923) statements were selected.
The stimuli in both conditions were selected from those
items that had received an aptness rating of 5 or higher
(M=6.151) and did not differ significantly in terms of
aptness.
For each experimental base term, a comparison statement
was created that uses the base in a literal sense (e.g., A
silver mine is like a goldmine). This was done to provide a
basis of comparison for the metaphoric use of the base tern.
As almost all the bases were basic level concepts, an
equivalent literal categorization statement was not possible.
However, literal categorization statements (e.g., A gorilla is
a primate) were included in the materials as fillers so that
the participants were exposed to an equal number of
figurative and literal statements of either grammatical form.

569

Experiment II

Thus, ratings that fall in the center of the scale indicate that
the statement is reversible.
Analyses on the subject means also revealed a main effect
of conventionality (F(1, 33)=61.683, p<.05) and a main
effect of statement type (F(2, 32)=12.421, p<.05).
Conventional statements (M=2.670) received significantly
lower ratings than novel statements (M=4.012), indicating
that the preference for the forward order was stronger for
conventional items.
Asymmetry ratings of literal
comparison statements (M=4.260) were higher than both
metaphors (M=2.966) and similes (M=2.796)
The
differences between literal comparisons and metaphors
(t(33)=4.686, p<.05) and between literal comparisons and
similes (t(33)=4.589, p<.05) were significant. However, the
difference between metaphors and similes was not
significant.
The findings from Experiment II also support the career
of metaphor hypothesis by indicating that, like literal
categorization
statements,
conventional
figurative
statements appear to become less acceptable when the target
and the base switch positions. Novel figurative statements,
on the other hand, appear to be less sensitive to the positions
of the target and the base, similar to literal comparison
statements. The findings of this experiment do not support
dual reference theory’s assumption that similes should
behave similarly to literal comparison statements and that
metaphors should behave similarly to literal categorization
statements. The grammatical form of a figurative statement
did not affect its reversibility ratings.

Experiment II collected reversibility ratings on the
experimental stimuli from Experiment I.
Literal
comparisons (e.g., A tiger is like a lion) are highly
reversible, in the sense that they remain meaningful when
the two terms of comparison change positions (e.g., A lion
is like a tiger). Literal categorizations (e.g., A tiger is a
carnivore), on the other hand, tend to be highly irreversible.
They lose their meaning once the target and the base switch
positions (A carnivore is a tiger). Experiment II presented
participants with the two possible orders of the target and
the base for each experimental statement and asked them to
providing a rating of which order they preferred. According
to the career of metaphor hypothesis, because conventional
figurative statements can be understood through
categorization, conventional base terms should always be
preferred in the base position, making conventional
figurative statements less reversible than novel ones. Novel
statements should continue to be acceptable when the target
and the base switch positions, as these statements are only
understood through comparison.
According to dual
reference theory, metaphors should be less reversible than
similes as the metaphor form invites categorization and the
simile form invites comparison.

Participants
Thirty-four Indiana University students participated in the
pretests and the experiment. Subjects received credit for an
introductory psychology course in return for their
participation.

Experiment III
Experiment III sought to further test the claims of the career
of metaphor hypothesis and dual reference theory with a
reaction time paradigm used by Gernsbacher, Keysar,
Robertson, and Werner (2001).
In Experiment III,
participants were presented with an experimental statement
(e.g., A ballerina is (like) a swan) followed by a property
statement that was appropriate either to the literal meaning
of the base term (e.g., A swan has feathers) or the
metaphoric meaning of the base term (e.g., A swan is
graceful). The participants’ task was simply to decide
whether each statement made sense. Based on earlier
studies that employed this method (e.g Glucksberg,
Newsome, & Goldvarg, 2001) we hypothesized that if a
given figurative statement was processed through
comparison, this should activate the literal meaning of the
base term, which should facilitate the processing of the
literal property statement. On the other hand, if a given
figurative statement was processed through categorization,
only the metaphoric meaning associated with the base
should be activated, and this should inhibit the processing of
the literal property statements following this figurative
statement. The career of metaphor hypothesis predicts that
the processing of literal properties is inhibited after
conventional figurative statements but not after novel

Materials
The experimental statements were the same ones described
in Experiment I. Every participant was presented with each
statement on a computer screen with both orders of the
target and the base (e.g., Genes are blueprints, and
Blueprints are genes) with a scale of 1 to 9 displayed
between the two statements. A rating of 1 indicates a
preference for the statement to the right of the screen, and a
rating of 9 indicates a preference for the statement to the left
of the screen. Subjects indicated their preference by
pressing the appropriate number key on the keyboard.

Results
The experiment had a 2(conventionality: conventional,
novel) x 3 (statement type: metaphor, simile, literal
comparison) design. Repeated measures ANOVAs were
conducted on the subject means for reversibility ratings.
Participants’ responses were coded such that 1 always
indicates a preference for the form that was rated as the
more appropriate order (the forward order) by two judges,
and 9 always indicates a preference for the opposite order.

570

metaphor hypothesis prediction that conventional figurative
statements can be processed through either categorization or
comparison. Thus, they are judged as sensible both as
metaphors and as similes. Novel figurative statements, on
the other hand, can only be processed through comparison.
Thus, they are only sensible when presented as similes.

figurative statements. Dual reference theory, on the other
hand, expects that the processing of literal property
statements is inhibited following metaphors but not
following similes, as similes activate the literal meaning of
the base.

Participants

Conclusions

Fifty-four Indiana University students participated in the
pretests and the experiment. Subjects received credit for an
introductory psychology course or $5 in return for their
participation.

The present experiments tested the claims of the career of
metaphor hypothesis (Bowdle & Gentner, 2005; Gentner &
Bowdle, 2001) and dual reference theory (Glucksberg and
Haught (2006a, 2006b) regarding metaphor comprehension.
Overall, the findings supported the career of metaphor
hypothesis. The results indicated that novel figurative
statements are processed through comparison, whereas
conventional figurative statements can be processed through
either categorization or comparison, as their bases have dual
meanings. Conventional base terms are associated with
both literal meanings and stable, domain general categories
evoked by repeated use of the base term in figurative
contexts, which allow categorization. While dual reference
theory’s predictions that similes should be processed
through comparison and metaphors should be processed
through categorization were not confirmed, Experiment III
showed that grammatical form might indeed affect
processing.
To address Glucksberg and Haught’s (2006a) concern that
earlier studies supporting the career of metaphor hypothesis
employed stimulus sets in which the conventional figurative
statements were more apt than the novel ones, the present
set of experiments used novel and conventional statements
that were comparably apt. The present findings therefore
strongly suggest that the effect of conventionality on
processing is separate from that of aptness. Similarly,
Bowdle (2008) found that while aptness has an effect on the
perceived strength of figurative statements, it does not
influence the mapping involved in metaphoric statements.
The present findings point to a discrepancy in metaphor
processing research regarding the influence of
conventionality. While some studies fail to find an effect of
conventionality on metaphor comprehension (e.g. Jones and
Estes, 2006; Chiappe et al. 2003), others (e.g. Bowdle and
Gentner, 2005, Gokcesu, 2007) report that conventionality
is indeed a driving factor in this process. Bowdle’s (2008)
studies provide an explanation for this contradiction.
Bowdle went through Jones and Estes’s experimental
stimuli and selected the items whose base terms were
conventional both according to the ratings Jones and Estes
collected and the Oxford Dictionary of American English,
removing those on which the two sources did not agree.
Grammatical form ratings on only these stimuli revealed an
effect of conventionality alongside the effect of aptness.
This suggests that some of the discrepancy in the literature
might arise from the criteria employed for establishing
conventionality. Bowdle further showed that including

Materials
Materials were the experimental statements from
Experiments I and II as well as literal and metaphoric
property statements constructed for each experimental
statement. As the participants’ task was to decide whether
each statement made sense, the experiment also included
metaphors and similes that didn’t make sense (e.g., Cords
are (like) leaves) and property statements that didn’t make
sense (e.g., Leaves are intelligent) as filler items.
The statements were presented on a computer screen by
E-prime. The participants’ task was to respond “yes” if the
statement made sense and “no” if it didn’t by pressing a key
on the keyboard. Each participant’s dominant hand was
assigned to the “yes” response. Reaction times and
participants’ accuracies in rating a statement as sensible or
not were recorded.

Results
Analyses on reaction times for the property statements did
not produce significant results (see Gokcesu (2007) for a
full discussion). However, analyses on the participants’
sensibility judgments for the experimental statements did
produce significant results that are of theoretical interest.
A 2(conventionality: conventional, novel) x 3(statement
type: metaphor, simile, literal comparison) repeated
measures ANOVA was conducted on subject means for the
sensibility judgments. The results revealed a main effect of
form (F(2,52)=20.376, p<.05). Post hoc analyses showed
that subjects’ sensibility judgments for metaphors
(M=0.780) was lower than their sensibility judgments for
similes (M=0.902) (t(53)=5.250, p<.05) and comparisons
(M=0.904) (t(53)=6.358, p<.05). Similes and comparisons
did not differ significantly from each other in terms of
sensibility judgments.
More interestingly, there was an interaction between
conventionality and form (F(1,52)=3.638, p<.05).
Conventional metaphors (M=0.863) were rated as more
sensible than novel metaphors (M=0.697) (t(53)=3.077,
p<.05), but there were no significant differences between
conventional (M=0.889) and novel similes (M=0.914) or
literal comparisons for the conventional (M=0.914) and
novel (M=0.894) base terms. This confirms the career of

571

Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p.2289).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bowdle, B., and Gentner, D. (2005). The career of
metaphor. Psychological Review, 112, 193-216.
Chiappe, D. L., Kennedy, J. M., & Smykowski, T. (2003).
Reversibility, aptness, and the conventionality of
metaphors and similes. Metaphor and Symbol, 18, 85105.
Gentner, D., & Bowdle, B. (2001). Convention, form, and
figurative language processing. Metaphor and Symbol,
16, 223-247.
Gentner, D., & Wollf, P. (1997). Alignment in the
processing of metaphor. Journal of Memory and
Language, 37, 331 – 355.
Gernsbacher, M. A., Keysar, B., Robertson, R. R. W., &
Werner, N. K. (2001). The role of suppression and
enhancement in understanding metaphors. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 433-450.
Glucksberg, S. & Haught, C. (2006). On the relation
between metaphor and simile: When comparison fails.
Mind & Language, 21(3), 360-378.
Glucksberg, S., & Haught, C. (2006b). Can Florida become
like the next Florida? When metaphoric comparisons fail.
Psychological Science, 17, 935-938.
Glucksberg, S., Keysar, B. (1990). Understanding
metaphorical
comparisons:
Beyond
similarity.
Psychological Review, 97, 3 – 18.
Glucksberg, S., Newsome, M. R., Goldvarg, Y. (2001).
Inhibition of the literal : Filtering metaphor irrelevant
information during metaphor comprehension. Metaphor
and Symbol, 16, 277-293.
Gokcesu, B. S., (2007). Metaphor Processing and Polysemy.
Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Psychological and
Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington.
Gokcesu, B. S. & Bowdle, B. (2003). Conventionality,
similarity and the metaphor simile distinction.
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (p.1350). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johnson, M. G., & Malgady, R. G. (1979). Some cognitive
aspects of figurative language: Association and metaphor.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 8, 249 – 265.
Jones, L. L., & Estes, Z. (2006). Roosters, robins, and
alarm clocks: Aptness and conventionality in metaphor
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
18-32.
Miller, G. A. (1979). Images and models, similes and
metaphors. In A. Ortony (Ed.), Metaphor and thought.
Cambridge: Cambridge University.
Ortony, A., (1979). Beyond literal similarity. Psychological
Review, 86(3), 161 – 180.
Shen, Y., (1989). Symmetric and asymmetric comparison.
Poetics, 18, 517 – 536.

literal categorization and comparison statements as controls
eliminated the effect of aptness, possibly because literal
controls that create a strong preference for one grammatical
form over the other influence the participants’ criteria for
grammatical form selection for figurative statements. The
fact that none of the experiments that show an effect of
aptness included literal controls might also contribute to the
discrepancy in the literature regarding the role
conventionality on metaphor comprehension.
An interesting aspect of the present study is that the effect
of grammatical form only surfaced under a task that
required rapid processing. All the figurative statements in
these experiments were rated as apt metaphors in Pretest 1.
Furthermore, all of them appeared to be interpreted readily
in Experiment I, regardless of the grammatical form of the
statement. In Experiment II, grammatical form did not
interact with conventionality in rendering a given statement
more or less reversible. This suggests that when given
sufficient time and necessary instructions to evaluate an apt
figurative statement, subjects simply go by the semantics of
the statement and the meanings of the target and the base
that are appropriate to the context. As conventional bases
refer to stable metaphoric categories, they are more likely to
show signs of processing through categorization. However,
under time constraints, when there is no time for full
evaluation and the decision regarding whether a given
statement makes sense needs to be made based on an
immediate understanding of the statements, grammatical
form appears to play a more important role that is
compatible with the career of metaphor hypothesis. The
metaphor form (which shares the grammatical form of
categorization statements) posed no problem for
conventional figurative statements, and conventional
metaphors were judged to be as sensible as conventional
similes (which share the grammatical form of comparison
statements). This is predicted by the career of metaphor
hypothesis, as the conventional bases have secondary
metaphoric meanings that allow categorization. For novel
figurative statements, on the other hand, metaphor made the
statement seem nonsensical at first glance. This is predicted
by the career of metaphor hypothesis, which expects that the
metaphor form, which suggests categorization, is not
appropriate in a statement in which the base term does not
refer to a stable figurative category.
In addition to providing support for the career of
metaphor hypothesis, the present studies suggest that full
comprehension of metaphoric statements might involve a
different type of processing than immediate comprehension.
Future studies might consider separating these two types of
processing in assessments of metaphor comprehension.

References
Bowdle, B. (2008). Aptness is a bear: evaluating the
relationship between metaphor quality and metaphor
comprehension. Proceedings of the 30th Annual

572

