UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational Modelling of Deficits in Attentional Networks in mild Traumatic Brain Injury:
An Application in Neuropsychology

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1313q32b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hussain, Fehmida
Wood, Sharon

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational Modelling of Deficits in Attentional Networks in mild Traumatic
Brain Injury: An Application in Neuropsychology
Fehmida Hussain (f.hussain@sussex.ac.uk)
Representation and Cognition Group, Department of Informatics,
University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK

Sharon Wood (s.wood@sussex.ac.uk)
Representation and Cognition Group, Department of Informatics,
University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
as an exogenous cue, or voluntarily directed to a cue, the
endogenous form of orienting. Orienting deficits most
commonly found in patients are the difficulty in disengaging
from an invalidly cued location and then refocusing to a
new location. The disengagement deficit has been found, for
example, in patients suffering from stroke and Alzheimer’s
disease (Baddeley, Baddeley, Bucks & Wilcock, 2001) and
schizophrenia (Firth, 1992).
Executive Control refers to effortful control or
coordination in which, the response is not fully determined
by the stimulus. It is required in tasks like task switching
(Hayes, Davidson, Keele, & Rafal, 1998), conflict
resolution, error detection, and so forth (Posner & Rohbart,
2007; Cater, Botvinick, & Cohen, 1990). Deficits in
associated regions of the brain have been found in many
pathologies including traumatic brain injury (Strum,
Willmes, Orgass & Hartje, 1997), Alzheimer’s disease
(Baddeley et al., 2001), Parkinson’s disease (Hayes, et al.,
1998), and attention deficit disorder (Barkley, 1998).
Deficits in specific networks may be attributed to certain
disorders and increasing our understanding of the role of
each network in relation to various attentional phenomena is
therefore extremely valuable.

Abstract
This work builds upon a model of performance for the
Attentional Network Test (ANT) implemented in ACT-R 6.0
(Hussain & Wood, 2008; 2009) to simulate neglect conditions
related to mild Traumatic Brain Injury (mTBI) and their effect
on the attentional networks of alerting, orienting and
executive control (cf. Posner & Fan, 2007). The model is
evaluated against data sets for a human study of recovery in
mTBI patients (Halterman, Langan, Drew, Rodriguez,
Osternig, Chou & Donkelaar, 2006) and the model’s fit to
data is assessed statistically. A description of the mTBI model
is provided, outlining how the simulation of impairment is
achieved using ACT-R’s1 symbolic and subsymbolic
components. The process of data fitting within the constraints
of model design supports the finding that alerting remains
unimpaired in mTBI and indicates that orienting network
impairment is mainly due to the affect of mTBI on the ability
to disengage attention. The model data further indicates that
modulation effects previously observed between attentional
networks (Hussain & Wood, 2008; 2009) are preserved in the
mTBI model, and do not reflect the impairment observed in
orienting and executive control efficiency.
Keywords: Attentional Networks; Attentional Network Test
(ANT);
Alerting;
Orienting;
Executive
Control;
Computational Modeling; ACT-R; mild Traumatic Brain
Injury (mTBI).

Attentional Network Test

Introduction: Attentional Networks
Functional neuroimaging has enabled researchers to view
many cognitive processes in the window of which brain
areas are activated when various attention components are
working (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002; Posner & Fan, 2007;
Hopfinger, Buonocore & Mangun, 2000; Fan, McCandliss,
Fossella, Flombaum & Posner, 2005). There is evidence
that these networks can be distinguished both at cognitive
and neuroanatomical levels (Raz & Buhle, 2006). This has
led to a theory of attention (Posner & Boies, 1971; Posner &
Peterson, 1990) comprising three distinct anatomical areas
of the brain responsible for separate aspects of attention,
namely alerting, orienting and executive control.
Alerting refers to the ability to attain and sustain a
vigilant state. Clinical data indicates that deficits in the
associated brain network impair patients’ ability to maintain
alertness (Wilkins, Shallice, & McCarthy, 1987).
Orienting refers to selection of sensory information.
Attention can be drawn automatically by what is referred to

A paradigm for studying the separate functionality of these
distinct aspects of attention is the Attentional Network Test
(ANT) (Fan, McCandliss, Sommer, Raz & Posner, 2002;
URL 02). ANT is a computer based reaction time test that is
a combination of cueing experiments (Posner, 1980) and a
flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974). Each trial begins
with a cue (or a blank interval in the no-cue condition) that
informs the participant either that a target will be occurring
soon, or where it will occur, or both. The target always
occurs either above or below the centre screen fixation point
and consists of a central arrow surrounded either by dashes
(neutrals) or flanking arrows that can either point in the
same direction (congruent) or in the opposite direction
(incongruent). Participants respond to the direction of the
target arrow, either left or right, by pressing a key on the
corresponding side of the keyboard.
_____________________________________________________
For details on ACT-R refer to URL 01, Anderson, Bothell, Byrne,
Douglass, Lebiere & Qin (2004) and Anderson, Matessa &
Douglass (1995).

1

2675

The time from the stimulus presentation to the key press
is the reaction time. Figure 1 below shows the design of the
original ANT experiment extended to explicitly incorporate
an additional test condition in which an invalid cue appears
in the location opposite to where the target will appear. It
may appear that moving or shifting attention from one place
to another is a very simple task but according to Posner and
Peterson (1990) it is actually a three step process namely
disengagement, movement and engagement. Hence the
operation of shifting attention requires good coordination
between the separate areas of the brain responsible and
impairment in any of these regions may cause difficulty in
shifting attention. The invalid cueing condition allows us to
investigate the validity effect (given by equation 2) and is
therefore useful in this context. This variation of ANT has
been used for our model of mTBI described below.

was recorded at intervals of 2, 7, 14 and 30 days after injury.
The next section describes the design of a model to capture
the independent time course for recovery of each network.

Design and Functionality
The model presented here simulates the recovery of mTBI
patients and their performance on the ANT based on the
findings of Halterman and colleagues’ 2006 study. The
design can be divided into two main parts: (1) the Lisp
source code which sets up the experiment and (2) the ACTR productions and parameter settings; together they enable
the model to interact with the environment and make
decisions based on what is presented to it
The major functionality of the model consists of four
blocks of code for performing one ANT trial: (1) fixation
and cue expectation, (2) cue processing, (3) stimulus
processing and (4) responding to stimulus. Associated with
each functional step, are a number of production (if-then)
rules and associated parameter settings that combine to
produce latency and accuracy data. Using equations 1-3, the
efficiencies of the three networks are then calculated. The
implementation of the networks in the model is explained
below.
Latency Refers to the time elapsed between the appearance
of a stimulus and the pressing of the key, measured in ms.
Accuracy The percentage of human-like errors made in
pressing the correct key. Error is induced in the system in
two ways: (1) through the ACT-R parameter :egs which
induces noise in the system, making it non-deterministic;
and (2) using production rules which mimic response errors.

Figure 1: A sketch of the design of the original ANT
extended for the invalid cueing condition.
The value of the ANT is that differences in reaction time
(RT) between experimental conditions measure the
efficiency of each network (see equations 1-3) in
performing the one discrimination task.
Alerting efficiency = RT(no-cue) - RT(double)
Orienting/validity efficiency =RT (uncued) - RT(cued)
Executive control efficiency =RT(incong) - RT(cong)

Alerting The efficiency of alerting is a difference in latency
when there is no cue preceding the stimulus and when there
is a double cue which only prepares the subject but does not
give any spatial orienting. The element of surprise leads to
the firing of an extra production not-cue-so-switch-stateand-shift-attention [P1] to simulate the effect of alerting or
preparing for the stimulus.

(1)
(2)
(3)

Simulation of Recovery from mild Traumatic
Brain Injury (mTBI)
Concussion or mTBI has been defined as any transient
neurological dysfunction that results from a biomechanical
force to the head (Giza & Hovada, 2001). Following a mild
head injury, it is seen that over a course of weeks, symptoms
start to improve and attentional difficulties seem to resolve,
although cases of moderate to severe injuries may take
longer.
In the TBI literature, efficiencies of attentional networks
have been assessed separately for each network (CremonaMeteyard & Geffen, 1994; Ponsford & Kinsella, 1991;
Gronwall, 1977). In a study to assess the efficiencies of the
three networks in a single task, the ANT has been
administered to post mTBI patients (Halterman et al., 2006).
In this study, the rate and degree of recovery of the patient

Orienting The effect of orienting is achieved in two ways:
(1) in the case of cueing the model is made to focus on the
target location using the buffer stuffing mechanism; hence it
simulates the effects of various cue conditions. For example,
if the cue is spatial, then this acts as a top-down mechanism
to focus at the cued location. In other cases the focus is
bottom up, that is, the system automatically puts an object in
the visual location buffer whenever the buffer is empty; and
(2) when a spatial cue is encountered, the focus of attention
is moved to that location in advance of the target appearing,
so when the target stimulus is encountered, the buffer is
already pointing to the target.
Disengaging sub-component of Orienting To simulate the
effect of invalid cueing there is a need to disengage
attention from the wrongly cued location and then refocus at

2676

the stimulus location. In the model code the three step
process is shown distinctly by three productions, for
example, notice-stimulus-at-uncued-bottom-location [P2],
[P3]
and
shift-attention-at-uncued-bottom-location
goahead-responding-if-it-is-the-target [P4].
Executive Control When the target stimulus contains
arrows pointing in the same direction (congruency
condition) then the location is simply retrieved (harvested)
and a response given based on the direction of the arrow.
However, in the case of a distracting, incongruent stimulus
there are two choices: either harvest the target directly
(which is less costly) or refocus attention which will result
in the firing of an extra production before moving attention
to the target location. These are implemented using
conflicting productions; which is selected depends upon
their probabilities calculated on the basis of the ACT-R
conflict resolution equation (equation 4) (Anderson, 2007,
p160). The conflicting productions are harvest-targetdirectly-if-incongruent
[P5]
and
refocus-again-ifincongruent [P6]. In this way, if there are a number of
productions competing with expected utility value Uj then
the probability of choosing production i is described below:
eUi√2s
(4)
∑j eUj√2s
Here the summation is over all productions that are
currently able to fire, ‘s’ is the expected gain noise and ‘e’ is
the exponential function.
Probability (i) =

Model Fitting and Justification
Researchers have shown that model behavior can be altered
by making changes either to the knowledge retrieval
capability of the model, the procedural rule based system or
by making plausible changes to subsymbolic components
(Jones & Ritter, 1998; Jongman & Taatgen, 1999). For
example, the parameter :dat, the default activation time,
indicates the rule firing time for each production, having a
default value of 50ms. This corresponds to the time that
humans may take to execute a single processing step in the
mind; changing this can simulate the slowing down or
speeding up of processing steps or tasks.
The model of ANT for normal adults (Hussain & Wood,
in press) was the starting point for the simulation of mTBI
patients. To simulate performance changes in mTBI patients
over the 4 time intervals (Halterman et al, 2006) the model
was incrementally modified to simulate behavior exhibited
in the human study, keeping to a minimum the number of
modifications to parameters and production utilities given
the degrees of freedom for change. Theoretical
interpretation of the human study findings suggested the
basis for impairments in the networks and the base model
also helped explain and establish the basis for some of the
observed effects. The approach used was to find a fit for the
first model in the series to simulate the severest impairment
at the earliest time interval. The models for subsequent test
intervals are obtained through further minor adjustment of

the modified parameters to find an appropriate fit. The
human study showed the following variations in the mTBI
patients compared to controls: (1) overall reaction times
were higher reducing with time, (2) accuracy was
unaffected, (3) alerting was unaffected, (4) patients regained
the ability to orient effectively within one week and (5)
there was no corresponding significant improvement in
executive control which remained impoverished compared
to controls. By modifying the model of ANT four new
models were created and run for 24 subjects each to
simulate the recovery process of mTBI patients over
intervals of 2, 7, 14 and 30 days. Modifications to the model
(summarized in table 1) and their rationale are given below.
Latency Adjusting rule firing time is a natural choice to
obtain the mean RTs for each test interval. Rule firing time
is considered the basic information-processing step in ACTR in which declarative knowledge may be retrieved and
used. The range of values tried for ‘:dat’ started with 80ms
settling on 45ms for the first interval, then varied for each
interval. The best results achieved were with the values
given in table 1. It was observed that only increasing :dat
for the first interval model and keeping the default value
(40ms)1 for the other three models produced a good fit to
data. This indicates that for mTBI patients, the processing
time for each step returns to normal within a week and only
the raised incongruency effect results in comparatively
higher RTs for the next three intervals.
Accuracy The human study did not report a significant
group or testing day effect implying that both controls and
patients were equally accurate across the trials and the
within subject variability was similar. To simulate this effect
nothing was changed within the model with respect to
producing errors.
Alerting Network Efficiency A consequence of increasing
the overall rule firing time in the model was an increased
alerting effect, but this was not observed in the human
study. We believe the reason for this owed to the blanket
increase in rule-firing rate, so that the extra production (P1)
responsible for giving the effect of surprise (in the no-cue
condition) is also fired at the slower rate as if alerting gain is
increased (refer equation 1). To keep the alerting effect
unchanged we kept the firing time for P1 at 40ms. The
production rules are responsible for governing the model
behavior in performing the task, but only P1 is involved in
calculating alerting efficiency and by implication reflective
of associated brain regions. The different treatment of this
part of the model is consistent with the view that the alerting
network (and therefore alerting efficiency) is not impaired
in mTBI.
_________________________________________________________________________
1

Wang & Fan (2004) have reasoned and established that the
original model of ANT is best simulated with a :dat of 40ms and
that is carried over in all our models of ANT.

2677

Orienting Network Efficiency As suggested by the human
study, the reason for impaired orienting efficiency in the
first week could be due to two reasons: (1) impaired ability
to disengage, shift and re-engage attention back to the cued
location indicating injury affects the brain regions
associated with spatial orienting of attention; or (2) being
oriented to a location other than the stimulus and then being
made to refocus again. In the model, we considered
modifying each behavior in turn. In (1) to simulate the
initial slow down in disengaging from an incorrect cue
location and refocusing at the correct location, a slower
activation time (disengage time) for productions shiftattention-at-uncued-top-location [P8] and shift-attention-atuncued-bottom-location [P9] is used in test interval 1
reverting to the default for each subsequent test interval (see
table 1). In (2) the set-visloc-default command controlling
the buffer stuffing mechanism is narrowed for each test
interval. For example, if we state set-visloc-default (x-value
within (50, 140)), then anything in the model’s visual field
(scene) between the x coordinates 50 and 140 can be
selected for attention as a result of being placed in the visual
buffer, increasing the likelihood of selecting a non-target for
attention and thus inducing refocusing; anything outside that
range will not be attended. By narrowing the x-values,
focusing more closely on the target, the probability of
choosing the target arrow increases. It was observed from
the model results that changing the disengaging time gave a
better fit to the data (thus adopted in the model) than
altering the buffer stuffing mechanism. This leads us to
believe that the disengaging effect may have a major role to
play in affecting patients’ orienting network efficiency in
the case of mTBI.
Executive Control Network Efficiency Again there were
two possible ways of handling this behavior: (1) using the
healthy adult model as a benchmark, change the relative
utility values of the two conflicting productions P5 and P6
that handle incongruency; each have the same goal state and
the probability of either one firing depends upon their utility
values. The probability of selecting the first production was
set relatively high for interval 1. Alternatively, (2)
increasing the value of the noise parameter :egs also results
in a higher incongruency effect. In utility equation 4,‘s’ is
set by the value for the parameter :egs which induces noise
in the system and hence more non-deterministic behavior.
Based on the model results we are unable to say one is
better than the other, both induce a non-deterministic
behavior in conflict resolving ability. So both approaches
are used in the model. The original model was implemented
with 7 and 15 for P5 and P6 respectively giving
probabilities of 5-10% and 90-95% for P5 and P6. We
explored varying the value of noise between 3-5, utility
values for P5 from 3-7 and P6 from 10-20. The final values
used in this model giving the best fit are shown in table 1.
A consequence of increasing the congruency effect was
that all the intervals had increased utility and noise values
which also results in an overall increase in RTs.

Table 1: Model parameter setting variations for simulating
the efficiencies of attentional networks in mTBI patients.
Time
(days)
1 (2)
2 (7)
3 (14)
4 (30)
Control

Rule
fire1
45
40
40
40
40

Alert
effect2
40
40
40
40
40

Disengage
Time3
50
40
40
40
40

Noise
(egs)4
4.2
4
4
3.5
3

Util.
values5
5,18
5,15
6,15
6,15
7,15

Results and Evaluation
The model was run to simulate 24 participants, similar to
the original study (Halterman et al, 2006). The experimental
design comprised a block of 4 cues (nocue, cued, uncued
and double) X 3 flanker (neutral, congruent, incongruent) X
2 directions (left, right) X 2 locations (top, bottom). Each
block was run twice, totaling 96 trials for every run. The
model was run 4 times, each time with a different setting
(see table 1). The latency data, efficiencies and the
interactions of the networks are discussed in detail below.
Latency Data The model was run for each interval to
simulate the incremental change in performance over a
period of one month and reaction time data was recorded on
each run. The median reaction time was calculated for each
run for each time interval for the simulated mTBI subject.
Figure 2 plots and records the median reaction times over
the 4 intervals for the controls (both human and model),
human mTBI patients and simulated subjects6. These show
overall improvement in latency over time. The correlations
and root mean square deviations (RMSD)7 are 0.88 and 41
for controls and 0.98 and 15 for mTBI, showing a good fit
to the experimental data. Note that in both controls and
mTBI the RTs go as low as 440 and 475 ms whereas those
for the models are comparatively higher; even in the original
ANT experiment (Fan et al, 2002) with normal subjects, the
mean RT is 511ms with a standard deviation of 44. The
model was not purposely made to fit this low RT outlier
data, getting a good correlation was taken to be sufficient.
Efficiencies of Attentional Networks The efficiencies of
each modeled network were calculated using equations 1-3.
Figure 3 illustrates the efficiencies of the alerting, orienting
and control networks. The efficiency of the orienting
network improves markedly for each test interval. Executive
control, though reducing for each modeled interval, like the
mTBI patient is still not close to the control data, whereas
the simulated alerting network remained unchanged.
_______________________________________________
1
Value of :dat, overall rule firing time in ms.
2
Value of :at for the production P1 alerting effect.
3
Value of :at for the productions P2 and P3 disengaging effect.
4
Value for noise (:egs) parameter for inducing more randomness.
5
For congruency, the utility values are for P5 and P6.
6
Data for human study obtained from graphs (Halterman et al,
2006). (Attempts to obtain original data have been unsuccessful).
7
It is standard practice in ACT-R modeling to use correlations and
root mean square deviations (RMSD) to show goodness-of-fit.

2678

networks, there is no impairment to, or variation in, the
interactions between networks.
effect of alert on cong = (alerted-incong - alerted-cong) (6)
effect of un-alert on cong = (nocue-incong - nocue-cong)(7)
effect of cue on cong = (cued-incong - cued- cong)
(8)
effect of uncue on cong = (uncued-incong - uncued-cong)(9)

Figure 2: Median reactions times for human control, model
control, mTBI patients and the model simulation of mTBI.
In addition to the results reported above, the modulation
effects between networks for the model of mTBI
impairment were also analyzed. A study by Callejas,
Lupianez and Tudela (2004) exploring interaction effects
between networks and modeled in Hussain & Wood, (2008;
2009) showed the alerting network has an inhibitory effect
on the congruency network, orienting has a facilitating
effect on congruency, and alerting has a speeding up effect
on orienting efficiency. The same approach has been applied
here to study the interactions of the network using data from
the mTBI model. The correlations and root mean square
deviations for mTBI subject and mTBI model are 0.74 and 9
for alerting, 0.87 and 4 for orienting and 0.97 and 9 for
executive control.

Figure 3: The efficiencies of the three networks for mTBI
patients and mTBI models.
Based on the modulation data plotted in figure 4, as
calculated using formulae 6-9, it can be inferred that, as for
the previous study, the alerting network has an inhibitory
effect on congruency whereas the orienting network has a
facilitating effect or no effect on congruency. The
interesting part is that these interactions remain stable over
each test interval under study and no changes in the
interactions have been observed, particularly the alerting
network. This suggests that, although mTBI affects the
efficiency of both the orienting and executive control

Figure 4: Graph plotting the interactions of alerting and
cueing on congruency.

Conclusions and Future Work
The work reported in this paper is based on a
reimplementation of Wang & Fan’s (2004) model of
attentional networks (Hussain & Wood, 2009) incorporating
an invalid priming condition to explore the subcomponents
of orienting. The model has been used to simulate a study
by Halterman et al, (2006) which tracks the recovery of
mTBI patients over a 30 day period, achieving a good
correlation in replicating the human study data. The model
was run four times to simulate the intervals at which the
mTBI patients were reassessed for recovery, in the original
experiment. The changes in network efficiency were shown
to be effectively simulated by (1) altering the overall rule
firing time to achieve an overall slow down in performance,
(2) impairing the orienting network by further altering the
rule firing time for productions involved in modeling the
disengaging effect of invalid priming to achieve a poorer
orienting efficiency, (3) retaining the firing time of the
alerting production to maintain no affect on alerting and (4)
simulating deficit in the control network by changing utility
values of the productions for responding to incongruent
targets and varying the noise parameter (:egs) that handles
distraction.
Further analysis of the modeled data suggested by an
earlier study of network modulation (Hussain & Wood,
2009) indicates that throughout the recovery period, alerting
has an inhibitory effect on the control network whereas
orienting has a facilitating effect or no effect on the control
network. In addition, the results suggest that, despite
variation in network efficiency, interactions between
networks do not show any variation over time.

2679

It would be interesting to confirm this finding through
further study of mTBI patient data using the invalid cueing
version of ANT. Confirmation of this observation, perhaps
in conjunction with fMRI studies, may assist in informing
the design of attention network-specific attention training
programmes for mTBI patients (cf. Strum et al, 1997).

References
Anderson, J.R. (2007) How Can the Human Mind Occur in
the Physical Universe? New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C. & Qin, Y. (2004). An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review 111, (4), 1036-1060.
Anderson, J.R., Matessa, M. & Douglass, S. (1995). The
ACT-R theory and visual attention. In Proceedings of the
17th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 61-65). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baddeley, A.D., Baddeley, H.A., Bucks, R.S. & Wilcock,
G.K. (2001). Attentional control in Alzheimer’s disease.
Brain, 124, 1492-1508.
Barkley, R.A. (1998). Attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder. Scientific American, 279, 66-71.
Callejas, A., & Lupianez, J. & Tudela, P, (2004). The three
attentional networks: on their independence and
interactions. Brain Cognition. 54, 225– 227.
Cater, C.S., Botvinick, M.M. & Cohen, J.D. (1990). The
contribution of the anterior cingulated cortex to executive
processes in cognition. Review in the Neuroscience, 10,
49-57.
Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G.L. (2002). Control of goaloriented and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
Reviews, 3(3).,201-215.
Cremona-Meteyard, S.L. & Geffen, G. (1994). Eventrelated potential indices of visual attention following
moderate to severe closed head injury. Brain Injury, 8,
541-558.
Eriksen B.A. & Eriksen C.W. (1974). Effects of noise letters
upon the identification of a target letter in a non search
task. Perception and Psychophysics, 16, 143-149
Fan, J., McCandliss, B.D., Sommer, T., Raz, M. & Posner,
M.I. (2002). Testing the efficiency and independence of
attentional networks. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
3(14), 340–47
Fan. J., McCandliss, B.D., Fossella, J., Flombaum, J.I. &
Posner, M.I. (2005). The activation of attentional
networks. Neuroimaging, 26, 471–79
Firth, C.. (1992). The Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia.
Hillsdale NJ: Lawerence Erlbaum.
Giza, C.C. & Hovada, D.A. (2001). The nuerometabolic
cascade of concussion. Journal of Athletic Training, 36,
228-35
Gronwall, D. (1977). Paced auditory serial addition test: A
measure of recovery from concussion. Perceptual and
motor skills, 44, 367-373.
Halterman C.I., Langan J., Drew, A., Rodriguez, E.,
Osternig, L.R., Chou, L.S. & van Donkelaar, P. (2006).

Tracking the recovery of visuospatial attention deficits in
mild traumatic brain injury. Brain, 129, 747-53.
Hayes, A.E., Davidson, M.C., Keele, S.W. & Rafal, R.D.
(1998). Toward a functional analysis of the basal ganglia.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 178-198.
Hopfinger, J.B., Buonocore, M.H. & Mangun, G.R. (2000).
The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control.
Nature Neuroscience 3, 284-291.
Hussain, F. and Wood, S. (2008). A Cognitive Model of
Attentional Networks. Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Cognitive Science, Moscow, Russia.
Hussain, F. & Wood, S. (2009). Modeling the Efficiencies
and Interactions of Attentional Networks, In Paletta, L., &
Tsotsos, J.K. Eds., Attention in Cognitive Systems. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science-LNAI 5395, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Germany, 139-152.
Jones, G. & Ritter, F.E. (1998). Simulating development by
modifying architectures. In Proc. of the Cog. Science
Society. Madison, WI: Lawrence Erlbaum, 543-548.
Jongman, L. & Taatgen, N.A. (1999). An ACT-R model of
individual differences in changes in adaptivity due to
mental fatigue In Proceedings of the twenty-first annual
conference of the cognitive science society. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum, 246-251.
Posner M.I. (1980). Orienting of Attention. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology. 32, 3-25.
Posner, M.I. & Boies, S.J. (1971). Components of attention.
Psychology Review; 78, 391–408.
Posner, M.I. & Fan, J. (2007). Attention as an organ system.
In J. Pomerantz, Ed. Neurobiology of Perception and
Communication: From Synapse to Society. De Lange
Conference IV, London: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Posner, M.I. & Petersen, S.E. (1990). The attention system
of the human brain. Ann. Rev. Neuroscience, 13, 25-42.
Posner M.I. & Rohbart M.K. (2007). Research on attention
networks as a model for the integration of psychological
science. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 1-23
Ponsford, J.L. & Kinsella, G. (1991). The use of a rating
scale of attentional behavior. Neuropsychological
Rehabilitation, 1, 241-257.
Raz, A. & Buhle, B. (2006). Typologies of attentional
networks. Nature Review Neuroscience, 7, 367-379.
Serna, A., Pigot, H. & Rialle, V. (2007). Modeling the
progression of Alzheimer's disease for cognitive assistance
in smart homes. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 17, 415-438.
Strum, W., Willmes, K., Orgass, B. & Hartje, W. (1997).
Do specific attention effects need specific training?
Neurological Rehabilitation, 12, 81-103.
URL 01: http:// act-r.psy.cmu.edu/
URL 02: http://www.sacklerinstitute.org/users/jin.fan/
Wang, H., Fan, J. & Johnson, T.R. (2004). A symbolic
model of human attentional networks. Cognitive Systems
Research, 5, 119–34
Wilkins, A.J., Shallice, T. & McCarthy, R. (1987). Frontal
lesions and sustained attention. Neuropsychologia, 25,
359-366.

2680

