UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Compatibility of Motion Facilitates Visuomotor Synchronization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9hb2r154

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hove, Michael
Krumhansl, Carol
Spivey, Michael

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Compatibility of Motion Facilitates Visuomotor Synchronization
Michael J. Hove (mjh88@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, 211 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95344

Carol L. Krumhansl (clk4@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, 211 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
200 ms for auditory sequences (e.g., Fraisse, 1982);1
contrasted with IOIs around 460 ms IOIs for flashing visual
sequences (Repp, 2003).
The apparent difficulty in synchronizing with visual
stimuli has yet to be explained adequately. It may simply
stem from the less frequent occurrence of visual than
auditory rhythms in our environment. Another possibility is
that it is based on differences in neural connectivity. Fraisse
(1948) suggested that the action system is more closely
linked to the auditory system than to the visual system.
More recently, Thaut and colleagues (1999) proposed a
comparatively direct connection between auditory cortex
and spinothalamic neurons used to control movement,
which results in increased sensorimotor coupling. Yet
another possibility for the observed performance differences
stems not from differential connectivity between motor
neurons and auditory versus visual pathways, but from the
inherent processing styles of those two sensory systems
themselves. The auditory system is generally better at
resolving temporal variation (e.g., Conway & Christiansen,
2005), whereas the visual system is better at resolving
spatial variation (e.g., Posner, Nissen, & Klein, 1976).
Under this account, visual information naturally dominates
when one is attempting to identify the spatial location of a
sound (as in the ventriloquism effect; Bertelson & Radeau,
1981), and auditory information naturally dominates when
one is attempting to identify or behave contingent upon the
temporal incidence of a sound (as in synchronized tapping
tasks; Repp & Penel, 2002, 2004).
The observed difficulties in visuomotor synchronization
may appear simply because the vast majority of studies
employ purely temporal flashing stimuli devoid of spatial
information. This focus on flashing stimuli dates back
nearly a century (Dunlap, 1910) and more recently extends
into examinations of the neural substrates of visuomotor
synchronization in fMRI (e.g., Jäncke, Loose, Lutz, Specht,
& Shah, 2000), PET (Penhune, Zatorre, & Evans, 1998) and

Abstract
Prior research indicates that synchronized tapping performance
is far worse with flashing visual stimuli than with auditory
stimuli. This observed difference may reflect a general auditory
advantage for processing temporal information, while visual
processing may have an advantage with spatial information.
Three finger-tapping experiments compared flashing visual
metronomes with visual metronomes containing a spatial
component, either compatible, incompatible, or orthogonal to
the tapping action. In Experiment 1, synchronization success
rates increased dramatically for spatiotemporal sequences of
both geometric and biological forms over flashing sequences. In
Experiment 2, synchronization performance was best when
target sequences and movements were directionally compatible
(i.e. simultaneously down), followed by orthogonal, actionneutral stimuli, and was poorest for incompatible moving stimuli
(upward target/downward movement) and flashing target
sequences. In Experiment 3, synchronization performance was
best with auditory sequences, followed by compatible moving
stimuli and was worst for flashing and fading sequences. Results
indicate that visuomotor synchronization improves dramatically
with compatible spatial information (translation over time);
however, an auditory advantage in sensorimotor synchronization
persists.
Keywords: sensorimotor synchronization, modality effects,
rhythm, timing.

Introduction
Sensorimotor synchronization is generally found to be
more difficult and more variable with visual rhythms than
auditory or tactile rhythms. People rarely synchronize
spontaneously with purely visual rhythms, whereas young
children and adults spontaneously move to rhythms in music
(e.g., Eerola, Luck, & Toiviainen, 2006). Rhythmic finger
tapping has been found to be most variable with flashing
visual stimuli and least variable with auditory stimuli (Chen,
Repp, & Patel, 2002; Repp & Penel, 2002, 2004), with
tactile stimuli intermediate (Kolers & Brewster, 1985).
Moreover, reliable synchronization in 1:1 tapping is
possible at rates up to an inter-onset interval (IOI) of about

1

The rate limit in 1:1 tapping seems to reflect the maximum
finger frequency. When tapping with every 4th onset, the auditory
IOI limit decreases to 100-120 ms (Repp, 2003).

797

MEG (Chen, Ding, & Kelso, 2003). Repp, Patel and
colleagues (Patel, Iverson, Chen, & Repp, 2005; Repp &
Penel, 2004) have speculated that different types of visual
stimuli, namely those employing a spatial component, might
facilitate synchronization.
A great deal of literature explores stimulus-response
compatibility effects but such compatibility has not yet been
demonstrated in the synchronized tapping paradigm. Studies
of the synchronization of hand movements with an
oscillating visual target found that in-phase movements
were more stable than anti-phase movements (Roerdink,
Peper, & Beek, 2005). However, it remains unclear how
such results would compare with purely temporal flashes or
action-neutral moving stimuli. Additionally, facilitative
effects of compatibility between dynamic visual displays
and finger movements have been observed in reaction time
tasks (Brass, Bekkering, & Prinz, 2001), and may extend to
synchronization performance. Finally, the extrastriate body
area (EBA) in human occipital cortex responds selectively
to images of the human body (Downing, Jiang, Shuman, &
Kanwisher, 2001) and also is active during limb movements
(Astafiev, Stanley, Shulman, & Corbetta, 2004). This
suggests a link between perceptual and action-based body
representations, and might potentially translate into different
synchronization performance with human body images
versus geometric images. In the following experiments, we
investigate whether certain types of spatially varying and
compatible visual information enable better synchronization
than simple flashing lights.

of 40 frames per second (fps), and in the Fast tempo (400
ms IOI), the same videos were played at 50 fps.2 The four
visual metronomes are shown as still pictures in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Stills from the four metronomes in Experiment 1;
arrows added to depict motion.
a) The Flash was a 2 cm x 2 cm stationary white square that
remained on screen for 2 video frames. b) The Up-down Bar
was a 5 cm x 1 cm white bar that moved down frame-byframe from its initial position 2.5 cm above the bottom of
the viewing window to the bottom of the viewing window
and back again. c) The Rotating Bar utilized the same bar
and initial position as the Up-down Bar, but the bar pivoted
from its right edge until the left edge touched the bottom of
the viewing window, then returned to its initial horizontal
position. d) The Finger used spliced images of a right index
finger (5 cm x 1 cm) tapping in the same configuration as
the participant's finger; the Finger’s vertical trajectory
matched the Rotating and Up-down bars frame-by-frame,
thereby isolating the effect of the image of bodily form,
without confounding the acceleration and deceleration of
biological motion. The target position (for signaling the
time to tap) in all the spatial metronomes was contact with
the bottom of the screen; this was displayed for 2 frames to
match the Flash target duration.
Procedure Participants sat approximately 75 cm in front of
a computer monitor that displayed the visual sequences at
eye level. They positioned their right hand in front of
themselves at approximately waist level perpendicular to the
screen (pointing to the left) and tapped with their right index
finger on a Roland Handsonic HPD-15 drum pad.
Sequences were presented and taps were recorded using a
MAX/Jitter program running on a Macintosh G4.
Participants were instructed to start tapping with the 5th
cycle in the 26-cycle sequence; thus each trial consisted of
22 taps. Each of the eight trial types (2 tempi x 4 metronome
types) was presented in random order in a block. The
experiment consisted of twenty blocks, including one
training block, thus leaving 152 analyzed trials per
participant. The entire experiment lasted approximately 45
minutes.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigated sensorimotor synchronization
with visual metronomes that were either purely temporal or
contained additional spatial information. Those containing
spatial information showed motion of either geometric or
biological forms, which might afford different performance.
Sequences were presented at 2 tempi: 500 ms inter-onsetinterval (IOI) and 400 ms IOI; one above and one below the
previously ascertained 460 ms rate limit for flashing visual
stimuli (Repp, 2003). The primary measures of performance
were the success rate of synchronizing with the stimuli (i.e.
had consistent tap-to-target asynchronies) and the average
magnitude of those asynchronies.

Method
Participants Eleven right-handed Cornell students (6
women) aged 19 to 23 years participated in the study. They
were previously unfamiliar with the tapping task. Musical
training ranged from 0-12 years (M = 4.1), though most
were no longer active musicians; musical training yielded
no significant effects. Participants received course credit or
were paid $6.
Materials The four stimulus sequences were QuickTime
movies produced using the animation software, After
Effects. They were presented on a computer screen in a 10
cm x 8 cm viewing window. Videos lasted 26 cycles and
each cycle consisted of 20 frames. In the Slow tempo
condition (500 ms IOI), videos were played at a frame rate

2

The monitor refresh rate of 85 Hz (11.7 ms) led to slight
deviations of frame timing. However, no systematic error or drift
occurred. Timing perturbations on this order were recently shown
to have no effect on variability of inter-tap-interval (ITI) or tap-totarget asynchrony (Madison & Merker, 2004).

798

Figure 2: Percentage of trials failed for Experiments 1-3.
competing explanations). The main effect of metronome
type was also

Results and Discussion
Asynchronies between taps and targets and inter-tapintervals (ITIs) within trials were calculated prior to
analyses. Synchronization typically requires a few taps to
stabilize, so taps corresponding to the first 10 video cycles
(the first 6 taps) were omitted.
An indicative measure of synchronization performance is
the percentage of trials in which tap-to-target asynchronies
never stabilize (Repp, 2003). Unsuccessful trials (those with
irregular tapping or phase drift) were defined as those with
standard deviations of tap-to-target asynchrony greater than
67 ms for 400 ms IOI trials (16.7% of IOI, following Repp,
2003); the same 67-ms criterion was used for the 500 ms
IOI trials. The average percentage of unsuccessful trials is
shown in Fig. 2. A 2 (tempo) x 4 (metronome type) repeated
measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed a main
effect of metronome type, where unsuccessful trials were
more frequent for the Flash metronome than the spatial
metronomes, F(3,30) = 28.3, p < .001, ηp2 = .74. No
significant differences among the spatial metronomes were
found in pair-wise comparisons (Bonferroni corrected, as
are similar subsequent comparisons). Additionally, there
was a main effect of tempo; unsuccessful trials were more
frequent at the Fast tempo than at the Slow tempo, F(1, 10)
= 13.7, p < .01, ηp2 = .58. The Metronome x Tempo
interaction was not significant. Consistent with Repp
(2003), the Flash metronome in the Fast tempo condition
had a failure rate higher than the 50% “synchronization
threshold.” However, failure rates for the three spatial
metronomes were well below the 50% synchronization
threshold even in the Fast tempo condition. This indicates
that visuomotor synchronization rate limits for spatially
varying metronomes are lower than the previously measured
rate limits for flashing metronomes.
Taps tended to precede targets, as is commonly found
(e.g., Aschersleben, 2002), although means of asynchrony
are generally not considered an index of synchronization
success. An ANOVA revealed a main effect of tempo on
mean asynchrony; participants anticipated the target to a
greater extent at the Slow tempo, F(1,10) = 76.4, p < .001,
ηp2 = .88. This decrease in anticipation tendency is common
at faster tempi (e.g., Repp, 2003), but the reason for this
remains unclear (see Repp, 2005, for a recent review of

significant, F(3, 30) = 18.1, p < .001, ηp2 = .64. Planned
pair-wise comparisons revealed later tapping with the Flash
than with the spatial metronomes (ps < .05). This is
consistent with motion prediction in the flash-lag effect
(Nijhawan, 1994). The Metronome x Tempo interaction was
not significant.
In summary, the addition of a spatial component
facilitated visuomotor synchronization success and
participants easily synchronized with these metronomes
even at the fast tempo. No advantage for tapping with
biological forms over geometric forms was observed. The
anticipation tendency was greater at the slow tempo and for
moving metronomes.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 investigated whether the spatial visual
metronome’s degree of compatibility with the to-beperformed
movement
influenced
synchronization
performance. Participants synchronized finger tapping with
4 types of visual metronome. Sequences were presented at
three tempi: the two from Experiment 1, plus a faster tempo
in order to examine whether synchronization might be
possible at even higher rates.

Method
Participants Thirteen right-handed Cornell undergraduates
(8 women) aged 19 to 21 years participated in the study.
They were previously unfamiliar with the tapping task.
Musical training ranged from 0-10 years (M = 4.6), though
most were no longer active musicians; musical training
yielded no significant effects. Participants received course
credit or $6.
Materials The QuickTime videos were played at 3 IOIs:
500 ms (Slow); 400 ms (Fast); and 300 ms (Very Fast). The
four metronome types are shown in Fig. 3. The Flash and
Finger videos from Experiment 1 were used. The left-andright moving bar (Side Bar) was the Up-down Bar from
Experiment 1 rotated 90 degrees counter-clockwise, so the
target for tapping occurred when the bar struck the viewer
window’s right edge. The Inverted Finger was the Finger
video flipped upside down; the target occurred when the
finger contacted the top of the window. The three spatial

799

videos had identical trajectories and tested the degree of
compatibility between stimuli and movement.

synchronization performance over flashing metronomes, as
indicated by the equally poor synchronization for the
incompatibly moving Inverted Finger and non-spatial Flash.
Synchronization was greatly improved with spatial stimuli
moving orthogonally to the to-be-produced movement; and
compatible motion further facilitated synchronization
performance.

Experiment 3
In light of the facilitation observed in the first two
experiments, Experiment 3 probed whether visuomotor
synchronization with compatibly moving targets could
approach auditory-motor synchronization. Participants
synchronized finger tapping with four types of metronomes:
1) auditory beeps; 2) an up-down moving bar compatible
with finger movements; 3) a Flash; and 4) a Flash target
interspersed with predictably intensifying “snowflakes,”
dubbed Fade. The Fade metronome controlled for the
possibility that the facilitation with moving metronomes
stemmed from their continuous and predictable nature,
rather than their spatial translation (moving metronomes and
the Snowflake metronome have a trackable cycle and, in a
sense, more predictable target than the Flash). Sequences
were presented at even faster tempi: Target IOIs were 400
ms, 300 ms, and 240 ms.

Figure 3: Stills from the four metronomes in Experiment
2; arrows added to depict motion.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1,
except that there were 15 blocks containing each of the 12
trial types (3 tempi x 4 metronome types) in random order.
The first block was considered training, thus leaving 168
analyzed trials. The experiment lasted approximately 50
minutes.

Results and Discussion
The data were preprocessed as before. The percentage of
unsuccessful trials by condition is shown in Fig. 2. A 3
(tempo) x 4 (metronome type) ANOVA found a main effect
of metronome type, F(3, 36) = 19.5, p < .001, ηp2 = .62. The
pair-wise comparisons showed best synchronization
performance for the compatibly moving Finger than all
other metronomes (ps < .05). The neutral Side Bar yielded
better performance than the incompatible Inverted Finger
and non-spatial Flash (ps < .01). There was no difference
between the Flash and the Inverted Finger (p > .9). The
main effect of tempo was also significant, F(2, 24) = 45.0, p
< .001, ηp2 = .79. Pair-wise comparisons showed the most
failed trials at the Very Fast (300 ms IOI) tempo (ps < .001);
and more failed trials at Fast (400 ms IOI) than Slow (500
ms IOI) (p < .01). The Metronome x Tempo interaction was
not significant. Failure rates for the compatible Finger
metronome are under Repp’s (2003) 50% “synchronization
threshold” even at the fastest 300 ms IOI.
Taps tended to precede targets. An ANOVA revealed a
main effect of tempo, F(2, 24) = 29.7, p < .001, ηp2 = .71;
participants tapped significantly earlier at the slow tempo
than at the other two tempi, ps < .001. There was also a
main effect of metronome on mean asynchrony, F(3, 36) =
3.5, p < .05, ηp2 = .22. Planned pair-wise comparisons again
revealed earlier tapping for the compatible Finger than the
Flash (p < .05), consistent with the aforementioned motionprediction (flash-lag) interpretation. However, asynchronies
for the Inverted Finger did not differ from the Flash, and
were later than the compatible Finger and orthogonal
Sidebar (ps < .05). The Tempo x Metronome interaction
was significant, p < .001. This interaction arose largely from
the highly variable and erratic performance at the Very Fast
tempo.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that the mere addition of
spatial information on its own does not improve

Method
Participants Ten Cornell students (3 women) aged 19-32
participated (including author MJH). Musical training
ranged from 0-20 years (M = 6.5) and produced no
significant results. Participants received $4.
Materials Stimulus sequences were presented with
Matlab’s PsychToolbox running on a 2.4 GHz MacBook
Pro (NVIDIA GeForce 9600 video card) with its lid closed
and driving an external CRT monitor at a refresh rate of 100
Hz (10 ms). PsychToolbox syncs to the refresh rate allowing
millisecond accurate timing for visual presentation, as well
as auditory presentation. All sequences lasted 26 cycles.
Visual metronomes at the 400 ms and 300 ms target IOIs
consisted of 10 images per cycle, with each image lasting 40
ms and 30 ms, respectively; the 240 ms IOI sequences
consisted of 6 images/cycle, with each image presented for
40 ms. Sequences are depicted in Fig. 4.

Figure 4: The four metronomes from Experiment 3.
a) Auditory sequences consisted of 40 ms long sine wave
beeps at 440 Hz. b) The up-down moving bar was a 5 x 1

800

cm bar, with a 2.5 cm max displacement above the bottom
of the screen for the 400 and 300 ms IOI trials and a 1.5 cm
max displacement for the 240 ms IOI trials. c) The Flash
was a 2 cm x 2 cm white square. d) The Fade metronome
consisted of the Flash target interspersed with dots; it started
with a blank screen, then added dots each successive image
until the Flash onset, then subtracted dots until the blank
(i.e. blank, 5 dots, 10 dots, 15 dots, 20 dots, FLASH, 20
dots, 15 dots,… etc. for 400 and 300 ms IOI trials, and
blank, 10 dots, 20 dots, FLASH, 20 dots, 10 dots… for 240
ms IOI trials).
Procedure Participants sat in front of a computer monitor
wearing Beyer Dynamic circumaural headphones and
tapped on a light cardboard box fitted with a microphone.
On a separate Mac G4 computer running Audacity at an
8000 Hz sample rate, taps were recorded on one channel,
and trial onset markers from the stimulus computer were
recorded on the other channel.
Each of the twelve trial types (3 tempi x 4 metronome
types) was presented in random order in a block. The
experiment consisted of 1 practice block and 10
experimental blocks (120 analyzed trials). The experiment
lasted approximately 25 minutes.

General Discussion
These results demonstrate that compatible spatial
information greatly facilitates visuomotor synchronization.
In Experiment 1, participants’ synchronization performance
was dramatically better with the three moving metronomes
(similar in amplitude, size, and trajectory) than the flashing
metronome. No advantage was observed for synchronization
with biological forms, despite the representational overlap
for seeing bodily forms and for producing movements in the
extrastriate body area. Our stimuli did not contain biological
motion, but future work should explore synchronization
with metronomes containing biological trajectories of
acceleration/deceleration. Experiment 2 demonstrated the
importance of directional compatibility between the
metronome and body movement. Synchronization
performance was equally poor for the action-incompatible
Inverted Finger and the Flash. The directional mismatch
between target stimulus (upward) and tap response
(downward) presumably caused interference, thereby
negating the spatial facilitation. Performance improved
when tapping with an orthogonal (i.e. non-interfering and
non-compatible) sideways moving bar, and best
performance occurred with the highly compatible (in
direction, amplitude, size, and form) Finger video.
In Experiment 3 (and much pilot work employing
continuous Fading stimuli with color bursts) no advantage
was observed for a predictable Fade metronome. Thus, the
spatial component appears to be the crucial facilitative
factor, probably due to the visual system’s proficiency at
processing spatial information.
Rough estimates of a “synchronization threshold” (a 50%
success rate, Repp, 2003) for compatibly moving
metronomes in Experiments 2 and 3 converge around 300
ms IOI for the untrained, novice-tapper participants. Two
participants in Exp. 3 easily synchronized at the fastest
tempo: 240 ms IOIs; and future work could examine effects
of training on this uncommon task or examine performance
of “hand-eye experts” such as athletes or video-gamers.
While this rough threshold is much faster than previously
established, the advantage for synchronization in the
auditory modality remains.
The compatibility effects support the notion that temporal
information for action is not coded in an independent,
action-neutral domain (i.e., in a specialized, isolated timing
center that extracts temporal information from perceptual
systems and sends this on to an action planning system).
Rather, temporal information here appears to be computed
in a task-dependent, action-oriented manner (Ivry &
Spencer, 2004). Additionally, the compatibility effects
between perceived and produced events can be explained in
terms of the common-coding theory of perception and
action (Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001).
In this theory, sensory and motor codes share a common
representational medium; sensory information of a
downward moving target converges on a shared abstract
feature code, which spreads activation to the motor system,

Results and Discussion
Tapping data was analyzed using circular statistical
methods and the taps occurring during the first four targets
of each trial were omitted from analyses. Unsuccessful trials
were defined as trials with a SD of tap-to-target asynchrony
greater than 16.7% of the IOI for all trials (Repp, 2003, used
a stricter criterion for auditory trials, but we will held it
constant to compare across modalities). The percentage of
unsuccessful trials by condition is shown in Fig. 2. A 3
(tempo) x 4 (metronome type) ANOVA found a main effect
of metronome type, F(3, 27) = 46.5, p < .001, ηp2 = .84. The
pair-wise comparisons showed that the synchronization
performance with the Auditory metronomes was better than
each visual metronome (ps ≤ .001). Among the visual
metronomes, the moving bar yielded higher synchronization
success than the Flash or the Fade (ps < .05), and no
difference was observed between the Flash and the Fade (p
>.1). Tempo also affected performance, F(2, 18) = 22.7, p <
.001, ηp2 = .71, with pairwise comparisons showing that
synchronization performance was worse at faster tempi (ps
< .05). The tempo x metronome interaction (p = .04)
indicates that the fast tempos impede synchronization more
for visual than auditory metronomes.
Taps again tended to precede the targets, especially in the
slowest tempo. A circular ANOVA revealed a main effect
of tempo on mean asynchrony, F(2,117) = 4.34, p = .015. A
main effect of metromone type did not attain significance,
F(3,116) = 2.39, p = .072.
Experiment 3 demonstrates that synchronization
performance is more stable in the auditory domain, even
compared to compatibly moving visual stimuli. The Fade
metronome did not improve synchronization over the Flash,
thus we can confidently conclude that the facilitation with
the moving bar is due to its compatible spatial component,
rather than its continuity and predictability.

801

pre-specifying or biasing it toward downward action.
Conversely, an upward moving sensory target will bias
action toward upward movement and interfere with the
downward goal.
To sum, our results demonstrate that visuomotor
synchronization performance is greatly facilitated by
compatible motion, possibly due to the visual system’s
proficiency at processing spatial information and the tight
linkages between perceptual and action systems; however an
auditory advantage in sensorimotor synchronization persists.

Fraisse, P. (1982). Rhythm and tempo. In D. Deutsch (Ed.),
The psychology of music (pp. 149-180). Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.
Jäncke, L., Loose, R., Lutz, K., Specht, K., & Shah, N. J.
(2000). Cortical activations during paced finger-tapping
applying visual and auditory pacing stimuli. Cognitive
Brain Research, 10, 51-66.
Hommel, B., Müsseler, J., Aschersleben, G., & Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding (TEC): A framework
for perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24, 849+.
Ivry, R. B., & Spencer, R. M. C. (2004). The neural
representation of time. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
14, 225-232.
Kolers, P. A., & Brewster, J. M. (1985). Rhythms and
responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 11, 150-167.
Madison, G., & Merker, B. (2004). Human sensorimotor
tracking of continuous subliminal deviations from
isochrony. Neuroscience Letters, 370, 69-73.
Nijhawan, R. (1994). Motion extrapolation in catching.
Nature, 370, 256-257.
Patel, A. D., Iverson, J. R., Chen, Y., & Repp, B. H. (2005).
The influence of metricality and modality on
synchronization with a beat. Experimental Brain
Research, 163, 226-238.
Penhune, V. B., Zatorre, R. J., & Evans, A. C. (1998).
Cerebellar contributions to motor timing: A PET study of
auditory and visual rhythm reproduction. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 752-765.
Posner, M. I., Nissen, M. J., & Klein, R. M. (1976). Visual
dominance: An information-processing account of its
origins and significance. Psychological Review, 83, 157–
71.
Repp, B. H. (2003). Rate limits in sensorimotor
synchronization with auditory and visual sequences: The
synchronization threshold and the benefits and costs of
interval subdivision. Journal of Motor Behavior, 35, 355370.
Repp, B. H. (2005). Sensorimotor synchronization: A
review of the tapping literature. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 12, 969-992.
Repp, B. H., & Penel, A. (2002). Auditory dominance in
temporal processing: New evidence from synchronization
with simultaneous visual and auditory sequences. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 28, 1085-1099.
Repp, B. H., & Penel, A. (2004). Rhythmic movement is
attracted more strongly to auditory than to visual rhythms.
Psychological Research, 68, 252-270.
Roerdink, M., Peper, C. E., & Beek, P. J. (2005). Effects of
correct and transformed visual feedback on rhythmic
visuo-motor tracking: Tracking performance and visual
search behavior. Human Movement Science, 24, 379-402.
Thaut, M. H., Kenyon, G. P., Schauer, M. L., & McIntosh,
G. C. (1999). The connection between rhythmicity and
brain function. IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology,
18, 101-108.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Bruno Repp and Peter Keller for
comments on an earlier draft and funding from the APA and
Mind and Life Institute to MJH.

References
Aschersleben, G. (2002). Temporal control of movements in
synchronization. Brain and Cognition, 48, 66-79.
Astafiev, S. V., Stanley, C. M., Shulman, G. L., & Corbetta,
M. (2004). Extrastriate body area in human occipital
cortex responds to the performance of motor actions.
Nature Neuroscience, 7, 542-548.
Bertelson, P., & Radeau, M. (1981). Cross-modal bias and
perceptual fusion with auditory-visual spatial discordance.
Perception & Psychophysics, 29, 578-584.
Brass, M., Bekkering, H., & Prinz, W. (2001). Movement
observation affects movement execution in a simple
response task. Acta Psychologica, 106, 3-22.
Chen, Y., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2003). Task-related
power and coherence changes in neuromagnetic activity
during visuomotor coordination. Experimental Brain
Research, 148, 105-116.
Chen, Y., Repp, B. H., & Patel, A. D. (2002). Spectral
decomposition of variability in synchronization and
continuation tapping: Comparisons between auditory and
visual pacing and feedback conditions. Human Movement
Science, 21, 515-532.
Conway, C. M., & Christiansen, M. H. (2005). Modalityconstrained statistical learning of tactile, visual, and
auditory sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Downing, P. E., Jiang, Y., Shuman, M., & Kanwisher, N.
(2001). A cortical area selective for visual processing of
the human body. Science, 293, 2470-2473.
Dunlap, K. (1910). Reactions to rhythmic stimuli, with
attempt to synchronize. Psychological Review, 17, 399416.
Eerola, T., Luck, G., & Toiviainen, P. (2006). An
investigation of pre-schoolers’ corporeal synchronization
with music. In M. Baroni, A. Addessi, R. Caterina, & M.
Costa (Eds.), Proceedings of the Ninth International
Conference on Music Perception and Cognition (pp. 472476). Bologna.
Fraisse, P. (1948). Rythmes auditifs et rythmes visuels.
L’Année Psychologique, 49, 21-41.

802

