UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparing Risk Reductions: On the Interplay of Cognitive Strategies, Numeracy,
Complexity, and Format.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3xg3q8bw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Barton, Adrien
Cokely, Edward
Galesci, Mirta
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparing Risk Reductions:
On the Interplay of Cognitive Strategies, Numeracy, Complexity, and Format
Adrien Barton (barton@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Edward T. Cokely (cokely@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Mirta Galesic (galesic@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Anna Koehler (koehler@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Mario Haas (haas@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
ABC, Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Effective communication of risks requires a theoretical
understanding of the influences of cognitive and task
constraints. We present progress toward the identification of
performance parameters in an experiment that explores the
dynamic interplay of four key risk communication variables
(i.e., cognitive strategies, numeracy, complexity, and format).
Specifically, we conducted a protocol analysis to trace the
types of cognitive strategies used when comparing the
helpfulness of two treatments. Variability in cognitive
strategies was also examined as related to (1) format
(expressed either as absolute or relative risk reductions in
either a frequency or single-event probability format); (2) task
difficulty; and (3) numerical skill. Results indicated that
highly numerate people often effectively used more complex
strategies. However, the performance advantage of highly
numerate people only existed when comparing two relative
risk reductions (which requires a complex strategy), but not
when comparing two absolute risk reductions (which requires
a simple strategy). A frequency format was also found to
produce additional benefits in very difficult tasks (i.e., when
comparing absolute and relative risk reductions). Generally,
although strategies and accuracy are influenced by many
factors, risk communication tended to be most transparent
when presented in terms of absolute risk reductions.
Keywords: Risk communication; framing; risk reduction;
frequency format; single-event probability; individual
differences; numeracy; cognitive strategies; protocol analysis.

Introduction
Absolute and relative risk reductions
How can we effectively communicate risks? The answer
depends on the dynamic influences of skills, strategies, and
task complexity and formats. For example, many studies
have shown that the framing of risk information (i.e. the
way the information is formatted) can have a large influence
on judgments and decisions (Edwards, Elwyn, Covey,
Matthews & Pill, 2001; Gigerenzer, 2003; Tversky &
Kahneman, 1981). In particular, two indicators can be used
in order to convey risk reductions afforded by a treatment
including (1) the absolute risk reduction and (2) the relative
risk reduction. Consider two groups of people: One is a trial
group taking a treatment and the other is a control group. A
definition of risk reduction requires the identification of the

base-line risk (BL – i.e., the proportion of participants in the
control group who have the disease) and the proportion of
participants in the trial group who have the disease (T).
Accordingly, an absolute risk reduction is defined as BL-T,
and a relative risk reduction as (BL-T)/BL (note that a
relative risk reduction is normalized to the base-line risk).
To illustrate potential sources of confusion, a relative risk
reduction of 25% could mean a reduction in disease from
40% to 30% (corresponding to an absolute risk reduction of
10%) or from 0.4% to 0.3% (corresponding to an absolute
risk reduction of only 0.1%). Relative risk reductions are
often larger percentages than absolute risk reductions and
thus may be perceived as more effective. For example, a
relative risk reduction of 25% may be perceived as more
effective than an absolute risk reduction of 0.1%, even when
they are equivalent. This can be particularly problematic
when the nature of the risk reduction (absolute or relative) is
not explicitly stated. Of course, most treatments have
negative side effects, which may affect subjective
preferences for treatment. Nevertheless, given that relative
risk reductions are normalized to the base-line risks they do
not enable an accurate estimate of the trade-offs between
benefits and side-effects (or costs).
Risk communication and risk reductions are not limited to
medical treatments. Generally, the effect of every action
which reduces any risk can be expressed as a relative or an
absolute risk reduction (e.g., an education program to reduce
risky driving behavior). Therefore, it is crucial to develop a
detailed theory that will allow effective communication of
risks to the public, to policy makers, and to those who
routinely deal with risk (e.g., physicians, bankers).

Study of biases in comparing risk reductions
Several studies have shown that physicians and patients
favor a treatment, or consider it more helpful, if its
beneficial effects are expressed as a relative risk reduction
rather than an absolute risk reduction (for a meta-analysis of
the scientific literature see Covey, 2007). This could be
considered a type of bias. One could however have both
normative and descriptive concerns about this claim.
Normative aspects In the meta-analysis of Covey (2007),
only three studies out of twenty-eight provided the base-line

2347

risk in addition to the relative risk reduction. Without baseline risk there is no normative criterion enabling the
determination of whether participants exhibit bias when
comparing a relative with an absolute risk reduction.
When base-line risk is provided, it can be argued that
participants are biased if they overestimate the same risk
reduction in a relative format than in an absolute format.
However, the meta-analysis on these three studies did not
provide a clear indication that people favor risk reductions
framed in a relative format when base-line risks were
provided. Moreover, one cannot determine the direction of
the bias. Do people overestimate the efficiency of treatments
whose risk reduction is communicated in a relative format?
Alternatively, do people underestimate the efficiency when
it is communicated in an absolute format? Interestingly,
Covey (2007) also questioned whether the relative nature of
the risk reduction was sufficiently explicit: In some studies,
participants may have interpreted the relative risk reduction
as an absolute one. Covey concluded that this bias may be
partially attributed to the methodological procedures.
Descriptive aspects To the best of our knowledge, research
has yet to directly investigate the cognitive strategies people
use when trying to estimate the helpfulness of a treatment
on the basis of its risk reduction – whether absolute or
relative. The examination of cognitive strategies is a
necessary part of ongoing psychological research, in order
to assess the most common misconceptions. Moreover,
several studies have mixed probability/frequency formats,
which can complicate interpretation (i.e., probability on one
side and frequency on the other side). For example,
Sheridan, Pignone and Lewis (2003), expressed relative risk
reduction as probability and absolute risk reductions as a
mixture of probability and frequency (for further discussion
see Gigerenzer, 2003). If one wants to study the difference
caused by relative versus absolute format, one should
express all risk reductions consistently (frequency or singleevent probability).

Experiment
We conducted an experiment and protocol analysis in order
to examine the cognitive strategies people use when
comparing different risk reductions in conjunction with the
influence of numeracy, format (absolute or relative risk
reduction, frequency or single-event probability), and task
difficulty. All materials provided base-line risks, and made
clear for each risk reduction whether it was absolute or
relative, specifying the reference class to which the risk
reduction applied.

Method, material and procedures
Fifty-five participants (28 men, 27 women) were recruited at
the Max Planck Institute for Human Development (Berlin)
and paid 17€ for their participation. Participants completed a
demographics questionnaire (e.g., sex, age) and the
numeracy test of Lipkus, Samsa and Rimer (2001), which
assesses one’s general facility with probabilities (note: an

additional item was taken from the scale of Schwartz,
Woloshin, Black and Welch, 1997 – the item involving a
coin toss).
Structure of each task Every participant was given four
risk reduction tasks, each quantifying the helpfulness of two
treatments either in a relative or in an absolute risk
reduction format. In every task, two diseases were
presented. For each of them, the following information was
given: the base-line risk (BL), the amplitude of the risk
reduction (RR) and the reference class (RC) of the risk
reduction. The reference class was presented as either
(1) the whole population, which corresponds to an absolute
risk reduction; or (2) the population who would otherwise
get the disease, which corresponds to a relative risk
reduction.
Absolute risk reduction and relative risk reduction The
four tasks had the same structure, including independent
variables BL1, RR1, BL2, RR2 (integers) and RC1, RC2
(expressions); the instructions read as follows:1
“[First paragraph] Consider two different diseases D1 and
D2 with similar symptoms; for each of them, a particular
treatment (which can be for example a vaccine, a medical
prescription, a particular lifestyle…) could reduce the risk of
contracting the disease. [Second paragraph] BL1% of the
whole population normally get the disease D1 in their life.
But following the treatment A would prevent RR1% of RC1.
[Third paragraph] BL2% of the whole population normally
contract the disease D2 in their life. But following the
treatment B would prevent RR2% of RC2.”
The expressions RC1 and RC2 read either as “the whole
population”, which will be abbreviated “Abs” (as this
corresponds to an absolute risk reduction); or as “the
population who would otherwise get this disease”, which
will be abbreviated “Rel” (as this corresponds to a relative
risk reduction).
Frequency or single-event probability Half of the
participants (N=27: 15 men, 12 women) received their
instruction in a modified single-event probability format;
the second and third paragraph then read as follows:
“[Second paragraph] An average person in the whole
population has a BL1% probability of getting the disease D1
in her life. But following the treatment A would reduce the
probability of getting this disease of RR1% for RC1. [Third
paragraph] An average person in the whole population has a
BL2% probability of getting the disease D2 in her life. But
following the treatment B would reduce the probability of
getting this disease of RR2% for RC2.”
In this single-event probability format, the expressions
RC1 and RC2 read either as “an average person in the whole
population”, abbreviated as “Abs”; or as “an average person
in the population who would otherwise get the disease”,
abbreviated as “Rel”.
1

2348

The original text was presented in German.

Tasks The following values were used across the four tasks:
Table 1: Independent variables for the four tasks2

T1
T2
T3
T4

BL1
15
30
15
3

RR1
4
1
2
1

RC1
Abs
Rel
Abs
Abs

BL2
20
2
10
5

RR2
4
10
1
1

RC2
Abs
Rel
Rel
Rel

The order was randomized in the following way: half of
the participants received the tasks in the order T1, T4, T3, T2;
and the other half in the order T3, T2, T1, T4.
Dependent variables At the end of each task, the
participants were asked to indicate their answers to the two
following questions. Question 1. “Without treatment, which
disease is more dangerous for the whole population? (1) The
disease D1 is more dangerous than the disease D2. (2) The
disease D2 is more dangerous than the disease D1. (3) Both
are equally dangerous.” Question 2. “Which treatment
would be more helpful for the whole population? (1) The
treatment A would be more helpful for prevention of disease
D1 than the treatment B for prevention of disease D2. (2)
The treatment B would be more helpful for prevention of
disease D2 than the treatment A for prevention of disease D1.
(3) Both treatments would be equally helpful.”
Normative strategies The normative strategy for question 1
consists of selecting the disease whose base-line risk BL is
higher. Question 1 was only given to prevent an invalid
conversational implicature. The maxim of quantity of Grice
(1989) enjoins not to make a contribution more informative
than is required. If we had only asked question 2, this could
have suggested that base-line risks had to be used to answer
this question. The addition of question 1 limits the reasons
to believe this. This was necessary as a critical issue of our
study involve analyses of the answers to question 2.
Question 2 asked which treatment is the most helpful for
the whole population. Therefore, it required the selection of
the treatment with the higher absolute risk reduction. When
the effect of the treatment was expressed as a relative risk
reduction, one had to multiply this value with the base-line
risk in order to get the absolute risk reduction. When both
risk reductions were absolute, the normative strategy was to
select the treatment which had the highest RR value (this is
a simple task). When both risk reductions were relative, the
normative strategy was to select the treatment which has the
highest BL × RR value (this is a moderately complex task).
And when one risk reduction was absolute and the other
relative, the normative strategy was to compare the RR
value of the absolute risk reduction with the BL × RR value
of the relative risk reduction, and to select the treatment

2

Some lifestyle interventions could lead to very low relative
risk reduction such as 1% relative risk reduction.

associated with the higher of these two values (this is a
complex task).
Of note, there is an alternative interpretation of some
instructions. Consider for example the task T3, in which
treatment A would prevent 2% of the whole population
from getting this disease, whereas treatment B would
prevent 1% of the population who would otherwise get this
disease from getting it. Participants could think that the 2%
of the whole population immunized by treatment A could be
people who would anyway not get the disease; whereas
treatment B is sure to save at least some people who would
otherwise get this disease. This would lead to the selection
of the treatment corresponding to a relative risk reduction as
the best treatment, because it is sure to save some people
(classified thereafter as strategy S5b). Although this was not
our initial understanding of the text, we acknowledge that it
is a possible understanding and a “rational” interpretation.
Classification of strategies To trace cognitive strategies we
conducted a concurrent protocol analysis. Participants were
instructed to “think aloud” while completing risk
comparison tasks. These verbal reports were then identified
and coded based on the presence of unique processing
products (for an example see Cokely & Kelley, 2009; but
for a detailed review see Ericsson & Simon, 1993).
Specifically, strategies were coded with respect to their
complexity, which was operationalized as follows. In order
to compare helpfulness of a treatment, participants could
consider two numerical cues including (1) the risk reduction
amplitude (RR), and (2) the base-line risk (BL). If a strategy
used no more than one cue, it was classified as simple. If a
strategy used both numerical cues or took into consideration
the reference class RC (whose relevance to the problem is
not obvious at a first sight) it was classified as complex.
We divided the possible strategies as described in Table 2.
Table 2: Strategies: description and complexity
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

S6
S7

Select treatment with higher RR
value.
Ethical or intuitive considerations.
Simple alternative strategies.
Select treatment with higher
BL × RR value.
In case one RC is Abs and the other
is Rel, either:
- S5a: select the treatment which has
the highest value of RR (for
RC=Abs) or BL × RR (for RC=Rel).
- S5b:
select
the
treatment
corresponding to RC=Rel.
Complex alternative strategies.
Impossible to identify.

Simple
Simple
Simple
Complex
Complex

Complex
/

The normative strategy for task T1 is S1; the normative
strategy for task T2 is S4; and the normative strategy for
tasks T3 and T4 is either S5a or S5b, depending on the

2349

interpretation of the task (it should be noted that both
strategies S5a and S5b imply that the participant noticed the
difference of reference class implied by the two treatments).
Moreover, the strategies S1, S2 and S3 were classified as
simple strategies; and the strategies S4, S5 and S6 were
classified as complex strategies.

Hypotheses
We hypothesized that people should perform better on tasks
that required simpler strategies (e.g., the more they would
use the normative strategy); people would then perform
better on T1 than on T2, and better on T2 than on T3 and T4.
We also hypothesized that numeracy would predict
complexity of strategies (for similar effects in risky choice
see Cokely & Kelley, 2009) and that numeracy would also
predict use of normative strategies.
Research has shown that some frequencies can be
beneficial in some tasks (natural frequencies for Bayesian
tasks, cf. Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995; simple frequencies
for conjunction effect, cf. Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). It is
currently unclear whether frequencies that are strongly
isomorphic to single-event probabilities can improve
performance. We therefore also examined whether a
frequency format would increase normative strategies (and
for whom).

Figure 1 displays the proportions of strategies that were
classified into the seven categories for respectively tasks T1,
T2, T3 and T4, separated for higher and lower numerate
participants.
Numeracy and complex strategy For each participant, we
computed, among the answers that were recognized (i.e.
categories S1 to S6), the proportion of complex strategies.
Highly numerate participants strongly favored more
complex strategies (M = 0.57, SD = 0.44) as compared to
low numeracy participants (M = 0.23, SD = 0.27), t (41.8) =
-3.39, p = 0.001, one-tailed4, Cohen’s d = 1.1.
14
12
10

6
4
2
0
14
12
10

Results were similar and significant for either rater. The
current data analysis is based on the coding of MH.

Task T2

Normative
strategy

8
6
4
2

Numeracy Numeracy (0-12) was assessed (M = 10.1,
SD = 1.86). Median split was performed to divide highly
numerate (M = 11.5, N = 29) from less numerate (M = 8.5,
N = 26) participants.

3

Task T1
Low numeracy
High numeracy

8

Results

Protocol analysis Verbal reports of answers to question 2
were analyzed independently by two raters (MH and AB)
and each classified in one of the seven categories. Across
the coding of the 220 strategies (4×55) the inter-rater
reliability was substantial (kappa = 0.61, p = 0.001).3
Participants used many different variants of similar
strategies. For example, strategies which were coded as S3
included: select the treatment associated with the lowest
RR; select the treatment associated with the highest BL.
Strategies coded as S6 included: select the treatment
associated with the highest ratio RR/BL; select the treatment
associated with the highest ratio BL/RR; select the treatment
associated with the lowest difference BL-RR. Strategies
coded as S2 included: select both treatments, for ethical
reasons; choose by gut feelings; choose at random. In S7,
we categorized non verbalized strategies (e.g., “I think
treatment A would be more helpful” or “[reading the
instructions] Treatment B would be more helpful; yes,
correct”) and ambiguous strategies (e.g., “Most efficient for
the whole population? Hmm, 1%, 1% [stammering]
because… Prevention, more efficient for the prevention…
[stammering]”).

Normative
strategy

0
14

Task T3

12

Normative
strategy

10
8
6
4
2
0
14

Task T4

12

Normative
strategy

10
8
6
4
2
0

S1
S2
S3
Simple strategies

S4
S5
S6
Complex strategies

S7

Figure 1: Frequency of strategies used in the four tasks
Numeracy and normative strategy For each participant,
we computed the proportion of normative strategies (S1 for
T1, S4 for T2, and S5 for T3 and T4) and non-normative
strategies (including non-verbalized and ambiguous
strategies). Overall, as the task complexity increased, the
4

Results show correction for unequal variances revealed by
Levene’s test.

2350

proportion of normative strategies decreased linearly
(F (1,55) = 30.4, p < 0.001, R² = 0.36).
Figure 2 shows the dependence of the performance on
complexity of the tasks and numeracy. Participants low in
numeracy only performed well in the simpler task, T1
(which simply required that one compares risk reduction
numbers). When normative strategies were complex, less
numerate participants were unable to solve the
corresponding task. Highly numerate participants performed
well in both simple tasks (T1) and moderately difficult (T2)
tasks. For example, on the task T2, highly numerate
participants more often used normative strategies (M = 0.52,
SD = 0.51) as compared to participants low in numeracy
(M = 0.05, SD = 0.22), t (30.3) = -4.06, p < 0.001, onetailed4, d = 1.5. Both participants high and low in numeracy
performed poorly in the most difficult tasks (T3 and T4) (see
Figure 2).

Figure 2: Proportions of normative strategies, depending on
numeracy and format
Format and normative strategy Frequency formats did not
improve performance on tasks T1 and T2, which used the
same reference class (absolute or relative) for both risk
reductions. However, frequency formats did improve
judgment for tasks T3 and T4, which mixed absolute and
relative risk reductions. Participants in the probability group
never answered a single question correctly (Figure 2). When
considering T3 and T4, a two-way mixed ANOVA showed a
moderate-sized performance difference between participants
in the frequency and in the single-event probability
condition, F (1,53) = 4.05, p = 0.05, R² = 0.07.

likelihood of attending to differences between reference
classes, particularly when tasks are difficult.

Numeracy and bias
The protocol analysis provided a more detailed description
of the types of strategies and thus biases that influence risk
reduction comparisons. The most commonly used strategy
was the direct comparison of the two risk reductions
(strategy S1). This indicates that the most common bias –
which is particularly pronounced in low numerate
individuals – is a type of reference class neglect.
Participants tend to interpret all risk reductions as if
concerning the same population. Consistent with Galesic,
Garcia-Retamero, and Gigerenzer (2009), this suggests that
most people are better able to understand absolute risk
reduction (which always concerns the whole population) as
compared to relative risk reductions (which are normalized
to the population who would otherwise suffer the effect
from the risk). This further suggests that people may
commonly overestimate the helpfulness of a treatment when
expressed as a relative risk reduction (Covey, 2007).
Individuals high in numeracy were less likely to exhibit
reference class neglect: Numerate individuals performed as
well in comparing two absolute as two relative risk
reductions. It must be stressed that our sample was generally
highly numerate, in comparison with the scores observed in
the general population (cf. Galesic & Garcia-Retamero,
2008). This suggests that only a very small portion of the
population would normally be likely to understand the
meaning of relative risk reductions.
Results indicate that, in order to limit reference class
neglect, risk reduction communications should be presented
in an absolute reduction format. Relative risk reduction is an
artificial construct, normalized to the base-line risk. When
relying on relative risk reduction for risk communication
one must be sure that the interlocutor is highly numerate and
base-line risks should also be provided. Given that relative
risk reductions do not provide additional information and
otherwise may obscure benefits, their use should be limited.
Our study also revealed an unanticipated obstacle in the
interpretation of risk communication data. Although we
provided the base-line risk, made clear the reference class
concerned by the risks reductions, and consistently used the
same wording (frequency or single-event probability),
protocol analysis revealed an unexpected interpretation of
some texts and its associated normative strategy (namely
S5b). Generally, process tracing techniques, such as protocol
analysis, seem to be valuable yet underutilized when
examining biases and the rationale of various judgments.

Discussion
Our results illustrate that the efficacy of risk communication
will predictably vary as a function of skill, format, and task
difficulty. Our results suggest three major implications: (1)
people low in numeracy tend to neglect reference classes;
(2) highly numerate people tend to use more complex (but
not necessarily normative) strategies in comparing risk
reductions, and (3) frequency formats can increase the

Numeracy and complexity of strategy
Highly numerate participants consistently used more
complex strategies (even in the task T1, where the normative
strategy, S1, is simple). They also used more numerical cues
and used a cue (the reference class) whose relevance to the
problem was not immediately obvious. This suggests that
numeracy may generally predict a beneficial metacognitive

2351

style that relies on more careful and elaborative cognitive
processing (Cokely & Kelley, 2009). This also suggests that
the superior decision performance in task T2 may be partly
explained by elaborative heuristic search strategies.

Frequency format and mixing of reference classes
This experiment indicates that effective, transparent risk
communication should not mix absolute with relative risk
reductions. Such a presentation is confusing, even for highly
numerate individuals, and thus very few people manage to
use a normative strategy. It must be emphasized that this
cannot be attributed to a simple lack of understanding of
relative risk reductions, given that many highly numerate
participants performed well when comparing two relative
risk reductions. The critical problem stems from the mixing
of two different reference classes. One requirement of
transparent risk communication is therefore the consistent
use of the same reference class. Our results also suggest that
the frequency format may benefit decision making as they
seem to attract more attention to the difference in reference
classes (although some caution is merited when generalizing
these results, as only a few people gave normative answers
to tasks T3 or T4). Generally, more empirical investigation is
needed to explain when frequencies differ from single-event
probability, and to test specific theoretical predictions.
The current study concerned very specific frequency and
single-event probability formats, which were strongly
isomorphic. Future research may also need to investigate
other frequency formats, for example using integers (like “4
out of 100 persons”; see Barton, Mousavi & Stevens, 2007,
for a statistical taxonomy differentiating frequency formats).
One could also investigate numbers needed to treat, which is
the inverse of the absolute risk reduction, rounded to the
closest integer. In this case an absolute risk reduction of 4%
corresponds to a number needed to treat of 25. This means
that 25 people should be treated so that one would be saved.
Such numbers give a good sense of which treatment is the
most useful – the treatment whose number needed to treat is
the lowest is the most helpful for the whole population.
Moreover, it enables an estimate of the balance between
benefits on one hand and side-effects (or costs) on the other
hand. Is it reasonable to have 25 persons suffering sideeffects so that one would be saved? Further studies should
investigate which strategies people use when they need to
compare numbers needed to treat from different treatments5.
We suspect that in such a case, people would tend to
perform better as compared to a task requiring the
comparison of two relative risk reductions. Critically, future
research and theory on the influence of context must not
neglect the dynamic influences of variables such as
strategies, skills, and task complexity.

5

In a case, contrary to Sheridan, Pignone & Lewis (2003),
where base-line risks could vary.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Gregor Caregnato for conducting the
experiment, Mona Merkert for careful transcriptions of
protocols, and Gerd Gigerenzer for helpful remarks on an
earlier pilot study.

References
Barton, A., Mousavi, S., & Stevens, J. R. (2007). A
statistical taxonomy and another “chance” for natural
frequencies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 255-256.
Cokely, E. T., & Kelley, C. M. (2009). Cognitive abilities
and superior decision making under risk: A protocol
analysis and process model evaluation. Judgment and
Decision Making, 4, 20-33.
Covey, J. (2007). A meta-analysis of the effects of
presenting treatment benefits in different formats.
Medical Decision Making, 27, 638–654.
Edwards, A., Elwyn, G. J., Covey, J., Mathews, E., & Pill,
R. (2001). Presenting risk information––A review of the
effects of "framing" and other manipulations on patient
outcomes. Journal of Health Communication, 6, 61–82.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Revised Ed.). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Galesic, M., & Garcia-Retamero, R. (2008) Statistical
numeracy for health: A cross-cultural comparison.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Galesic, M., Garcia-Retamero, R., & Gigerenzer, G. (2009).
Using icon arrays to communicate medical risks to lownumeracy people. Health Psychology, 28, 210-216.
Gigerenzer, G. (2003). Why does framing influence
judgment? Journal of General Internal Medicine, 18,
960–961.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684–704.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lipkus, I. M., Samsa, G., & Rimer, B. K. (2001). General
performance on a numeracy scale among highly educated
samples. Medical Decision Making, 21, 37–44.
Schwartz, L. M., Woloshin, S., Black, W. C., & Welch,
H.G. (1997). The role of numeracy in understanding the
benefit of screening mammography. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 127, 966-972.
Sheridan, S., Pignone, M. P., & Lewis, C. L. (2003). A
randomized comparison of patients' understanding of
number needed to treat and other common risk reduction
formats. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 18, 884–
892.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211,
453-458.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional versus
intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability
judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293–315.

2352

