UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptualizations of Gender in Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69s2385t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Atagi, Natsuki
Sethuraman, Nitya
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptualizations of Gender in Language
Natsuki Atagi (NATAGI@Indiana.Edu)

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

Nitya Sethuraman (NITYA@Umd.Umich.Edu)
Department of Behavioral Sciences, 4901 Evergreen Road
Dearborn, MI 48128 USA

Linda B. Smith (SMITH4@Indiana.Edu)

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

Abstract

Study 1

Previous research has shown that speakers of gendered
languages think about and categorize nouns in accordance
with the noun’s grammatical gender. Past studies have often
used languages that do not mark grammatical gender as
“genderless” control languages. We examine whether this
characterization of non-gendered languages is in fact correct,
by examining whether native speakers attribute gender to
English nouns and adjectives. Our results suggest that adult
and child native speakers of English do attribute gender to
adjectives and nouns, despite the lack of grammatical gender
in English. Additionally, these gender attributions appear to
be ones that develop with age.

The purpose of this study was to collect a set of adjectives
that adult English speakers consistently associate with
masculine, feminine, or neutral genders. These adjectives
will be used in subsequent studies to measure participants’
attributions of genders to nouns.

Method
Participants Twenty participants between eighteen and
twenty-five years of age were recruited for this study.
Participants were undergraduate students at Indiana
University and native, monolingual speakers of English.

Keywords: Language and cognition; grammatical gender;
semantic gender; cross-cultural comparisons; cross-linguistic
comparisons; language development

Introduction
In the past, nouns in various gendered languages have been
studied to determine whether the gender of a noun
influences the way people think about that noun (e.g.,
Boroditsky, et al., 2003; Sera, et al., 2002). For example, a
native speaker of a gendered language, such as Spanish, is
more likely to categorize a feminine noun with
stereotypically feminine conceptualizations (e.g., Konishi,
1993; Sera, et al., 1994). The consensus view is that these
effects emerge because grammatical gender (and often the
sound properties of the words) is associated with semantic
gender for semantically gendered nouns (e.g., la in Spanish
is associated with the nouns that label girl, queen, nun, and
so forth), and thus through an associated contagion effect
imparts notions of semantic gender to what would seem to
be neutral things, such as shoes and bridges. In contrast to
past studies, this study examines whether native speakers
attribute gender to English nouns. Theoretically, English
nouns do not have gender; however, associations among
words with and without semantic gender in English may,
through processes that create the observed effects in
gendered languages, also cause English speakers to
consistently attribute gender to nouns.

Stimuli Twenty-one stereotypically gendered adjectives
were collected for this study via three methods. In the first
method, adjectives were elicited from Indiana University
undergraduate students between the ages of eighteen and
twenty-two years. These students were asked, “What
adjectives do you use to stereotypically describe femininity
and masculinity?” The MacArthur-Bates Communicative
Development Inventory: Words and Sentences (MCDI)
and/or a thesaurus was used when the adjective suggested
would not be appropriate for a child between the ages of
four- and five-years (e.g., clean for hygienic).
In a second method, adjectives were collected from
children’s picture books, fairytales, poetry, television
shows, and movies. For example, in the children’s book
Peter Rabbit, adjectives that described Peter were selected
as stereotypically masculine; adjectives that described
Peter’s younger sisters were selected as stereotypically
feminine. The adjectives that described both Peter and his
sisters were considered neutral, and used as a control. Data
obtained through these methods are listed in Table 1.
In a third method, the strength of the gender associations
among these adjectives was explored. Pairs of adjectives
from Table 1 were matched to twelve pairs of male and
female stick figures, as shown in Figure 1. The stick figures
were given American names that are stereotypically male
and female, listed in Table 2.

1804

Table 1: Adjectives.

Figure 2: Adults’ adjective results.
Figure 1: Sample stick figures.
Table 2: Names.

Procedure Judgments were elicited from adult native
speakers of English to determine whether particular genders
are in fact associated with English adjectives. The
participants were each shown twelve pairs of stick figures—
one male and one female—and were asked which stick
figure is best characterized by a particular description: “This
is [male name from Table 2] and this is [female name from
Table 2]. Who’s [adjective from Table 1]?” For example, a
participant may be told, “This is Michael and this is Katie.
Who’s brave?” and have the options of choosing Michael
(i.e. the male stick figure) or Katie (i.e. the female stick
figure).

Results
Adjectives were assigned the gender of the stick figure with
which they were associated, and a “gender score” was
calculated based on the sum of all responses. Specifically,
male stick figures were coded as -1 and female stick figures
were coded as +1. A gender score was calculated for each
adjective by using these values and obtaining a sum of all
the responses given for each adjective. Adjectives with more
positive scores were interpreted as feminine, and adjectives
with more negative scores were interpreted as masculine.
Adjectives with gender scores near zero had been associated
by participants with the male and female stick figures at
roughly equal rates; these adjectives were interpreted as
neutral gender. Percentages of these scores were calculated
for the purpose of comparison and are given in Figure 2.

These results suggest that adult native English speakers
do consistently attribute gender to adjectives, although some
associations are stronger than others. Regardless of the sex
of the participant, the adjective pretty was strongly
associated with feminine gender, and messy was strongly
associated with masculine gender. However, strong was
associated with feminine gender among female participants
while being associated with masculine gender among male
participants. In contrast, clean is associated with masculine
gender among female participants but associated with
feminine gender among male participants. The gender
association differences between adjectives and between the
sexes of the participants suggested by Method 3 are issues
we plan to explore in future studies. We use the adjectives
in Table 1 in Studies 2, 3, and 4 described below.

Study 2
The purpose of this study was to measure attributions of
gender to common English nouns by adult English speakers.

Method
Participants Forty participants between eighteen and
twenty-five years of age were recruited for this study.
Participants were undergraduate students at Indiana
University and native, monolingual speakers of English.
Stimuli Forty-eight early-learned, common nouns were
used. Half the nouns label natural objects and the other half
label artificial (or man-made) objects that are used by both
sexes. Additionally, half the objects are labeled by nouns
rooted in Latinate languages, whereas the other half have
Germanic roots; both roots are gendered. These nouns are
listed in Table 3 by semantic and etymological categories.
Black-and-white clipart pictures of these objects were also
found online from open sources; examples are given in
Figure 3.

1805

Table 3: Nouns.

one of the two statements. Examples of the stimuli used in
each of these conditions are given in Figure 4.

Results
Nouns were assigned the genders of the adjectives with
which they were associated, and a “gender score” was
calculated based on the sum of all responses, in a manner
similar to that used in Study 1. Specifically, masculine
adjectives received a score of -1; feminine adjectives
received a score of +1; and neutral adjectives received a
score of 0. Gender scores for the nouns were calculated by
obtaining the sum of all the responses given for each noun.

Nouns Results: All Conditions

Figure 3: Sample clip art stimuli.
Procedure Participants were asked to decide whether a
target noun was better described by a stereotypically
feminine, masculine, or neutral adjective. The adjectives
used were obtained in Study 1. Participants were randomly
divided into the Labeled condition, the Unlabeled condition,
or the Survey condition.
In the Labeled and Unlabeled conditions, participants
were shown forty-eight clipart pictures of target nouns and
were asked, “Is this [adjective judged as feminine /
masculine / neutral in Study 1]? Or is this [adjective judged
as feminine / masculine / neutral in Study 1]?” An example
trial would involve showing the participant a clipart picture
of an object (e.g., a dolphin) and asking, “Is this pretty? Or
is this messy?” Participants were asked to choose one of the
two statements. The Labeled and Unlabeled conditions
involved the same procedure, except that in the Labeled
condition, participants were shown the clipart pictures with
the object named underneath (e.g., Dolphin); in the
Unlabeled condition, participants were shown only the
clipart pictures.

(a)

(b)

Gender Score in percentage

(c) A dolphin is sweet. A dolphin is naughty.

Figure 5: Adults’ noun results.

Figure 4: (a) Example of Labeled Condition; (b) Example of
Unlabeled Condition; (c) Example of Survey Condition.
In the Survey condition, no clipart stimuli were provided.
Participants were instead given a survey with forty-eight
sets of statements about the objects (e.g., “A dolphin is
good.” / “A dolphin is careless.”) and were asked to circle

Thus, more positive scores (obtained by participants
choosing more feminine adjectives to describe that noun)
were interpreted as feminine; more negative scores
(obtained by participants choosing more masculine
adjectives to describe that noun) were interpreted as
masculine; and scores near zero (obtained by participants
choosing (1) roughly equal numbers of masculine and

1806

feminine adjectives, or (2) more neutral adjectives to
describe that noun) were interpreted as neutral. Percentages
of these scores were calculated for comparison.
Overall, our results suggest that adult native English
speakers do consistently attribute gender to nouns, although
some associations appear to be stronger than others. Apple,
toothbrush, and mitten were judged to be very strongly
feminine; towel, volcano, and tooth were judged to be very
strongly masculine; and knife, house, and nose were rated as
relatively neutral. Some nouns—e.g., cloud, diaper, leaf,
sun, and truck—did not have a consistent gender across
conditions; this requires further investigation into the roles
pictures and words play in our understanding of language.
There are many questions raised by Studies 1 and 2 that
require further investigation. One such question involves the
developmental trajectory of these gender associations in
children, an issue we explore in Studies 3 and 4.

scores were interpreted as feminine, and adjectives with
more negative scores were interpreted as masculine.
Adjectives with gender scores near zero were interpreted as
neutral gender. Percentages of these scores were calculated
for the purpose of comparison and are given in Figure 6.

Study 3
The purpose of this study was to determine whether young
English speakers consistently attribute masculine, feminine,
or neutral genders to adjectives, and if so, whether their
gender associations are similar to the adults’ in Study 2.

Method
Participants Sixteen children between the ages of four and
five years (4;0 - 5;11) were recruited for this study. All
participants were native, monolingual speakers of English,
and residents of Bloomington, Indiana.
Stimuli The stimuli used in Study 1 were used here. The
twenty-one stereotypically gendered adjectives used in
Study 1 (Table 1) were randomly matched to the twelve
pairs of male and female stick figures used in Study 1
(Figure 1). All stick figures were given the stereotypically
American male and female names used in Study 1 (Table 2.)
Procedure The procedure used in Study 1 was used here,
with the sole difference that the children were shown six
pairs of stick figures, instead of the twelve pairs shown to
the adults. Child participants were asked which stick figure
is best characterized by a particular description: “This is
[male name from Table 2] and this is [female name from
Table 2]. Who’s [adjective from Table 1]?” For example, a
participant may be told, “This is Michael and this is Katie.
Who’s brave?” with the option of choosing Michael (i.e. the
male stick figure) or Katie (i.e. the female stick figure).

Results
A gender score was calculated for each adjective, in a
manner identical to that used in Study 1. Adjectives were
assigned the gender of the stick figure with which they were
associated. Male stick figures were coded as -1 and female
stick figures were coded as +1; a gender score was
calculated for each adjective by adding up all the responses
given for each adjective. Adjectives with more positive

Figure 6: Children’s adjective results.
Overall, our results suggest that children who speak
English do consistently attribute gender to adjectives,
although some associations appear to be stronger.
Some adjectives were consistently judged a particular
gender by both boys and girls. Regardless of the sex of the
participant, naughty and good were both strongly associated
with feminine gender, while clean was strongly associated
with masculine gender. The children’s judgments of
naughty and clean are contrary to uses of these adjectives in
children’s media and require further investigation.
Judgments on some other adjectives differed by the sex of
the participant. Brave, happy, old, and messy were strongly
associated with the feminine gender among female
participants, while being associated with masculine gender
among male participants. Examining this divergence of
gender association is another issue to explore in the future.

Study 4
The purpose of this study was to measure attributions of
gender to English nouns by children who speak English.

Method
Participants Sixteen children between the ages of four and
five years (4;0 - 5;11) were recruited for this study. All
participants were native, monolingual speakers of English
and residents of Bloomington, Indiana.
Stimuli The stimuli used in Study 2 were used here. Fortyeight early-learned and common nouns were used, taken
from the MCDI (Table 3). Black-and-white clipart pictures
of these objects (e.g., Figure 3) were also found online from
open sources.
Procedure The procedure used in Study 2 was used here,
with the sole difference that the children were given half as
many trials as the adults. Participants were asked to decide

1807

whether a target noun was better described by a
stereotypically feminine, masculine, or neutral adjective,
obtained in Study 1. Participants were randomly divided
into the Labeled condition or the Unlabeled condition. No
Survey condition was used in Study 4 as most four- and
five-year-olds cannot yet read at that level.
Participants were shown clipart pictures of twenty-four
target nouns and asked, for each noun, “Is this [adjective
judged as feminine / masculine / neutral in Study 1]? Or is
this [adjective judged as feminine / masculine / neutral in
Study 1]?” An example trial would involve showing a
participant the clipart picture of the dolphin (Figure 4) and
asking, “Is this pretty? Or is this messy?” Participants could
choose one of the two adjectives to describe the noun.

Results
Following Study 2, nouns were assigned the genders of the
adjectives with which they were associated, and a “gender
score” was calculated based on the sum of all responses.
Nouns Results: All Conditions

Specifically, masculine adjectives received a score of -1;
feminine adjectives received a score of +1; and neutral
adjectives received a score of 0. Thus, more positive scores
were interpreted as feminine; more negative scores were
interpreted as masculine; and scores near zero were
interpreted as neutral. The percentages of these scores were
calculated for the purpose of comparison.
Overall, children who speak English do appear to
consistently attribute gender to nouns, although some
associations appear to be stronger than others. Paper was
judged as feminine 100% of the time across both conditions,
and turtle and diaper were also judged to be very strongly
feminine. Hand was judged to be very strongly masculine,
while nose, lemon, leaf, and apple were rated as relatively
neutral. Some nouns—such as carrot, mountain, boat,
mitten, and sun—did not have an agreed upon gender across
conditions and require further investigation.

General Results
A comparison of the results from Studies 2 and 4 show
some interesting trends. First, although both children and
adults show a bias towards choosing the stereotypically
feminine adjectives, the children show a “feminine bias”,
describing the majority of nouns with feminine adjectives,
as shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8: “Feminine bias” among children vs. adults.
As suggested by Sera, Berge, and del Castillo Pintado
(1994), natural and artificial objects tend to be considered
feminine and masculine, respectively, by Spanish and
English speakers. Our results show exactly this same trend,
with natural objects rated as more feminine than artificial
objects by both children and adults (Figure 9); however,
children in general rated both natural and artificial objects
overall as more feminine than adults did.

Gender Score in percentage

Figure 9: Natural vs. artificial objects

Figure 7: Children’s noun results.

1808

Lastly, we were interested in whether etymological roots
played a role in gender assignment. In examining children
and adults’ ratings of Latinate vs. Germanic nouns, we
interestingly find large differences, but in opposite
directions, for children and adults. Overall, children judge
Latinate nouns as more feminine than Germanic nouns,
whereas adults associate more feminine adjectives with
Germanic nouns than Latinate nouns, shown in Figure 10.

Figure 10: Latinate vs. Germanic roots
The interpretation of these results remains to be fully
explored; however, both child and adult speakers of English
clearly do associate gender with English nouns, and these
associations appear to undergo some change with age.

genders to each noun. For example, children appeared to
have a “feminine bias”. These differences suggest that
gender associations may (1) change over the course of
cognitive and social development, or (2) differ by
generation and be influenced by cohort effects.
Finally, a larger issue raised by this study is whether these
lesser-considered influences impact established gendered
languages, as well as whether they exist in other nongendered languages. The larger scope of this project
examines these questions in a cross-linguistic study of
English, Japanese, Spanish, German, and Dutch, which offer
possible examples of different historical linguistic roots.
English and Japanese are languages spoken by members
of our experimental group; Spanish, German, and Dutch are
the languages spoken by members of our control group.
Examining these languages would enable us to further our
understanding of how social, cultural, historical, and
linguistic factors interact to influence the formation of
gender conceptualizations and categorizations.

Acknowledgments

General Discussion
The results obtained in Studies 1, 2, 3, and 4 suggest that
gender associations exist for English nouns and adjectives,
despite the fact that English has no grammatical gender or
other forms of overt markings of gender, raising the
question of whether there are more factors involved in
categorizing gender in languages than previously thought.
Previous research has shown that grammatical gender
influences semantic gender and vice versa in gendered
languages; following this, it has been assumed that semantic
gender exists solely with reference from biological sex in
non-gendered languages (Boroditsky, et al., 2003; Konishi,
1993; Sera, et al., 1994). However, it could be that this
account still applies to the gender associations observed in
the English data presented here. It may be the case that these
English gender associations arise from associations within
the language between nouns that label categories with and
without biological gender, a possible gender contagion
based in co-occurrence and associative relations and perhaps
in the sound patterns of the words themselves.
Alternatively, it may be the case that our results
suggesting the presence of gender associations in a nongendered language can still be explained by grammatical
gender, through the influence of a “heritage” grammatical
gender on a related non-gendered language. In the case of
English, the “heritage” grammatical gender would be
derived from its Latinate and Germanic roots. To test for
this possibility, further studies must be conducted in which
the “heritage” of these nouns is varied more systematically.
A third issue regards comparisons of our preliminary
adult and child data, which suggest that adult and child
English speakers do not necessarily attribute the same

We thank the Indiana University Cognitive Development
Laboratory, the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
and Asifa Majid. This research is supported by NIH grant
T32 HDO7475 and NIMH grant ROI MH 60200 to Linda
Smith and the Hutton Honors College Research Partnership
Grant and Research Grant to the first author.

References
Boroditsky, L. & Schmidt, L. (2003). Sex, Syntax, and
Semantics. Gentner & Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language
in Mind: Advances in the study of Language and
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Konishi, T. (1993). The semantics of grammatical gender: A
cross-cultural study. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 22, 5, 519-534.
Potter, B. (1902). The Tale of Peter Rabbit. London:
Penguin Books Ltd.
Sera, M., Berge, C., & del Castillo Pintado, J. (1994).
Grammatical and Conceptual Forces in the Attribution of
Gender by English and Spanish Speakers. Cognitive
Development, 9, 3, 261-292.
Sera, M., Elieff, C., Burch, M.C., Dubois, D.P., Forbes, J.,
& Rodríguez, W. (2002). When Language Affects
Cognition and When It Does Not: An Analysis of
Grammatical Gender and Classification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 131, 3, 377-397.

1809

