UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Conceptual Integration in Arithmetic is the Same for Digits and Words: It's the Meaning,
Stupid!

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xj367t7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bassok, Miriam
Fisher, Kristie
Osterhout, Lee

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Conceptual Integration in Arithmetic is the Same for Digits and for Words:
It’s the Meaning, Stupid!
Kristie J. Fisher (kjfisher@u.washington.edu)
University of Washington, Department of Psychology
Box 351525, Seattle, WA 98195-1525 USA

Miriam Bassok (mbassok@u.washington.edu)
University of Washington, Department of Psychology
Box 351525, Seattle, WA 98195-1525 USA

Lee Osterhout (losterho@u.washington.edu)
University of Washington, Department of Psychology
Box 351525, Seattle, WA 98195-1525 USA
Abstract

consistency. For example, a sentence that begins with the
words “She likes to go to ___” is conceptually constrained
to places where an individual could conceivably like to go,
such as “the park,” “the theater,” etc. If the sentence
continues with a word or string of words that is conceptually
incompatible, such as “fork,” “blue,” etc., the reader may
have trouble integrating such words with the initial meaning
of the sentence. This process of attempting to coordinate
the meanings of a particular item, in this case a word, with
the meanings of preceding items, in this case a string of
other words, is known as conceptual integration.

Research on people’s arithmetic knowledge (e.g., 2 + 5 = 7)
suggests that it is organized and accessed in a way analogous
to other forms of conceptual knowledge (e.g., tulips and
daisies are flowers). Evidence for this claim comes in part
from research that recorded event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) and found that incorrect arithmetic facts evoke a
response that is analogous to the “N400” response evoked by
semantically incongruous words in sentences. Some
researchers debate this conclusion by pointing out various
differences between responses to arithmetic and language
stimuli as well as differences among the studies on arithmetic.
These differences could be due to variations in methodology,
properties of the stimuli (digits vs. words), or properties of the
semantic networks in question (language vs. arithmetic). To
examine these possibilities, we elicited the N400 effect in
arithmetic by closely following the ERP methodology used in
language research and varying the presentation format of the
arithmetic stimuli (12 + 3 = 15 or Twelve plus three equals
fifteen). A comparable N400 effect was elicited by incorrect
answers in both presentation format conditions. We conclude
that the N400 incongruency effect in arithmetic is analogous
to that in language. However, the peak of the arithmetic
incongruency effect occurred about 100ms earlier than is
typically observed in language. We suggest that this onset
difference is due to differences in the size and the constraints
of the arithmetic and the language networks.

Conceptual Integration & ERPs in Language

Keywords: arithmetic, conceptual integration, N400, ERP

Introduction
People excel at comprehending meaning. They posses an
extensive store of highly interrelated conceptual knowledge
in a variety of domains, and they access this knowledge in a
way that fits the context of the situations they encounter.
Research on language comprehension has documented the
rapid and fluent way in which people coordinate the
meanings of words with the meaning of preceding words,
sentences, and paragraphs (e.g., Kutas & Hillyard 1980,
1984). Indeed, it is well established that the first words of a
sentence begin immediately to constrain its meaning and,
consequently, determine what following words could and
could not be appropriate for maintaining conceptual

The process of conceptual integration in language has been
studied extensively using electrophysiology. More
specifically, researchers have used the technique of event
related brain potentials (ERPs). Kutas and Hillyard (1980,
1984) were the first to use this technique to study
conceptual integration in language. They found that, under
most conditions, words elicit a negative-going waveform
that peaks between 300-500ms after the word is presented.
The amplitude of this component is negatively correlated
with the semantic congruity between a word and its
preceding context—the less congruent it is, the larger the
negative-going amplitude of the N400. The difference in
the negative-going amplitudes of incongruent and congruent
words at this time window is known as the N400 effect1. To
illustrate, in the sentences “The cat will bake the food” and
“The cat will eat the food,” “bake” will produce a much
larger negative going waveform than will “eat.”
Furthermore, the N400 effect is modulated by the degree of
contextual incongruence of the word in question. The
incongruent sentence, “He takes milk and sugar in his dog”
would elicit an N400 effect of greater magnitude than “He
1

Note that when a word comes at the end of a sentence, often no
baseline N400 wave is observed (e.g., Jost, Henninghausen, &
Rösler, 2004). However, an “N400 effect” can still occur in that
an incongruent word still elicits a large negative wave relative to
the correct condition.

2142

takes milk and sugar in his juice” when compared with the
congruent sentence “He takes milk and sugar in his coffee.”
The N400 incongruency effect in language is very robust,
and numerous researchers have replicated it over the last
two decades. In all cases, different violations of semantic
congruity change the amplitude of the N400 effect. Though
semantic violations reliably affect the amplitude in various
ways, the time window at which this effect occurs is very
stable (between 300-500ms). It is also important to note that
non-semantic sentence anomalies, such as grammatical
errors (e.g., “The cat will eating the food”) (Osterhout &
Holcomb, 1992), or irregular, “surprising” surface features
(e.g., “The cat will EAT the food”) do not elicit the N400
effect (Osterhout, McKinnon, Bersick, & Corey 1996).
Based on such findings, it is inferred that the N400 effect
uniquely reflects the process of conceptual integration as it
pertains to semantic meaning.

Conceptual Integration & ERPs in Other Domains
Other researchers have elicited the N400 effect in nonlinguistic domains. Researchers have reported N400 effects
elicited by incongruent stimuli in pictures (e.g., McPherson
& Holcomb, 1999), and films of real-world events (e.g.,
Sitnikova, Holcomb, Kiyonaga, & Kuperberg, 2008). An
N400 effect can also be elicited in priming paradigms with a
variety of stimuli (e.g., Holcomb 1993). Also observed in
these domains are modulations of the N400 effect under
different degrees of semantic incongruity that seem
comparable to modulations of the effect in language.
However, the morphology, topographical distribution, and
the onset of the N400 effect in all these non-language
studies do have some variations. These variations raise the
questions of whether all of these effects are indeed versions
of the N400 incongruency effect and whether or not the
N400 effect can be considered an amodal index of
conceptual integration (Kutas & Federmeier, 2000).
More recently, arithmetic processing has also been
investigated with ERP methodology. A strong analogy has
been drawn between the memory networks of language and
mathematical concepts (see Ashcraft, 1992 for a review).
These network models of arithmetic have been verified with
many studies that have shown priming and interference
effects similar to those found in language (e.g., Campbell,
1990; LeFevre, Bisanz, & Mrkonjic, 1988).
When participants are shown incorrect answers to simple
arithmetic problems (e.g., 2 + 3 = 7), an N400-like effect is
elicited in comparison to the correct answer (Jost,
Henninghausen, & Rösler, 2004; Szucs & Csépe, 2005;
Wang, et al., 2000; Zhou et al., 2006). Furthermore, in
multiplication, this effect is modulated by how closelyrelated the incorrect answer is to the correct answer (e.g., 4
x 5 = 25 elicits a smaller-magnitude N400 effect than 4 x 5
= 27) (Niedeggen & Rösler, 1999). However, numerical
distance between the correct answer and an unrelated
incorrect answer (e.g. 2 + 3 = 7 vs. = 25) does not, in itself,
affect the N400 amplitude (Szucs & Csépe, 2005). These
effects seem analogous to the way that different degrees of

semantic incongruency influence the magnitude of the N400
effect in language. In most of these arithmetic ERP studies,
though, the N400 effect occurs approximately 100 ms
earlier than it does in language. It is possible that this
earlier onset in the N400 effect reflects differences between
the arithmetic and language memory networks. However,
there is also a great deal of variation among the studies in
the onset and morphology of the effect, so comparison is
difficult and the reason for the differences is unclear.
Arithmetic and semantic conceptual networks vary greatly
in size, constraints, and organization. In particular,
arithmetic knowledge is rule-based, and for any given
simple arithmetic problem, there is only one correct answer.
By contrast, sentences vary in their degree of constraint, in
that for many sentences there is more than one word that can
be used in a particular place while still maintaining a
sensible semantic meaning. Furthermore, knowledge of
mathematics and language are acquired in very different
ways and at different time points during early learning and
development (e.g., Siegler, 1981). These differences in
initial acquisition may affect the way that the two domains
of knowledge are constructed and utilized.
Although it is possible that the N400 effect indexes an
analogous conceptual integration process in both the
arithmetic and language domains of knowledge, the N400
effect differences between the two domains, particularly in
the onset of the effect, leave open the possibility that the
conceptual integration process for arithmetic and language
is qualitatively different. Our study was designed to help
distinguish between these two possibilities.

Purpose of Present Investigation
We investigated two possible sources of variation between
the ERP studies of arithmetic and of language. First, unlike
most previous studies that document an arithmetic N400
effect, we used a task and a presentation methodology that is
standard in language research. Second, we examined
whether the presentation format, digits in arithmetic and
words in language, could be contributing to the differences
in the onset of the ERP waves. To this end, we presented
individuals with identical arithmetic problems in two
different presentation formats. One format condition
presented arithmetic concepts as digits that were related by
arithmetic symbols (e.g., 12 + 3 = 15). In the other format
condition, the same problems were presented in words, in
the form of an English sentence (e.g., Twelve plus three
equals fifteen). In both cases, participants were asked to
verify the correctness of the answers (1 5 or fifteen,
respectively). In controlling for the conceptual meaning
while varying the presentation format (digits vs. words), we
were able to examine the possible influence of format on the
arithmetic N400 effect.

Method
Participants
Participants were 33 volunteer graduate and undergraduate
students (18 female, 15 male). They were either

2143

compensated $15/hr for their participation or given extra
credit for the introductory psychology course in which they
were enrolled, as applicable. The average age of the
participants was 23.55 years (SD = 4.58). All participants
were either native English speakers or had been speaking
English since the age of six. Participants were randomly
assigned to either the Digit format condition (N = 16) or the
Word format condition (N = 17).
Stimuli & Design Stimuli were two-operand arithmetic
problems with either correct or incorrect answers. The
problems were constructed in a way that satisfied a number
of constraints established by cognitive arithmetic literature,
and constraints that were required by a separate experiment
not described here2. First, the two operands could be both
added and divided (e.g., 12 + 3; 12 / 3). Second, we
excluded tie problems (e.g., 2 + 2) and problems containing
a one, zero, or 10 as an operand, as evidence from prior
work suggests that these types of problems are processed
differently (e.g., using rule-based procedures), and often
more easily, than other simple arithmetic problems
(Ashcraft, 1992; McCloskey, 1992). Third, we only
selected problems that fell into the “small” category of
division problems, defined as having a divisor lesser than
25, in order to avoid some of the issues of the problem-size
effect3 (see Zbrodoff & Logan, 2004 for a review ). Finally,
we controlled for answer parity (LeMaire & Reder, 1999).
Within these constraints, we created a set of 48 problems
(24 addition, 24 division).
Pilot testing was done in order to ensure that the addition
and the division problems were of equivalent difficulty. To
create an answer verification task for our stimuli, we
constructed two different incorrect answers for each
problem. The “close” incorrect answer was derived by
adding or subtracting the value one or two to or from the
correct answer (e.g., 12 + 3 = 14). The “other” incorrect
answer was derived by performing a different arithmetic
operation on the operands. For example, the “other”
incorrect answer for 12 + 3 was 12 + 3 = 4, with 4 being a
correct answer to the division operation. Based on the
results of this pilot study, we selected a set of 12 addition
and 12 division problems, composed of identical operand
pairs, that were the most closely equivalent in difficulty
across the two operations.
We then created our two experimental format conditions.
In the Digit-format condition, the problems were presented
2
This particular experiment required that: 1) Addition and
division were the only operations used, and 2) One of the
“incorrect” answer conditions was derived from the correct answer
of the alternative operation. For example, for the equation 12 + 3
= 15, one of the incorrect answers would be 14, and one would be
4.
3
Note, however, that “small” division problems translate into
“large” addition problems. As described in this section, the stimuli
selection pilot study was conducted primarily to ensure that the
addition and division problems selected were of equivalent
difficulty.

as a traditional arithmetic combination of digits and symbols
(e.g., 12 + 3 = 15). In the Word-format condition, the digits
and symbols were converted to words. The first word was
capitalized in order to resemble a sentence format similar to
one that might be presented in a traditional language ERP
study (e.g., 12 + 3 = 15 was changed to Twelve plus three
equals fifteen).
Using these stimuli, we constructed a 2 (Format: Digits,
Words) x 2 (Operation: Addition, Division) x 2 (Answer:
Correct, Incorrect), mixed factorial experiment. Format was
manipulated between participants, and Operation and
Answer type were manipulated within participants. Also,
the Operation factor was not of theoretical interest to the
question we address here, so for the sake of simplicity each
operation was analyzed separately (see results section). The
experiment consisted of three blocks of trials. During each
block, each of the twenty-four problems was presented
twice with a correct answer, once with a “close” incorrect
answer, and once with an “other” incorrect answer. Though
we distinguished between the “close” and “other” answer
types when collecting data, responses to these two incorrect
answer categories were collapsed in the analyses. There
were 96 total trials in each block, with 50% correct
equations in each block; trial order was randomized
individually within each of the three blocks. There were a
total of 288 trials during the experiment.
Procedure After giving written informed consent, the
participant was fitted with an electrode cap. The participant
did not complete any practice trials, but were given a trial
demonstration and a thorough explanation of the task from
the experimenter. Participants initiated the start of each
block by pressing a key and were given a break, of the
duration of their choosing, after each 96-trial block. Within
each block, equations appeared in a randomized order. Each
trial consisted of a fixation point (an asterisk, ‘*’) of
duration 500ms, followed by the presentation of a complete
arithmetic problem in a delayed-verification paradigm.
Each item of the problem was presented alone on a screen
for 350ms followed by a 250ms inter-stimulus interval, for a
total trial duration of 3.75sec. A response screen followed
the problem presentation. Participants responded using a
hand-held controller and were asked to strive for 100%
accuracy. The Y E S response hand was counterbalanced
across participants, and their response triggered the onset of
the next trial. They were asked not to blink between the
onset of the fixation point and the appearance of the
response screen. They were permitted to blink and take a
short break while the response screen was displayed, as
response time was not recorded. ERPs of interest were those
evoked during the presentation of the answer (e.g., 15 in 12
+ 3 = 15). Most participants finished the experimental task
within 45 minutes, making the entire experiment time,
including set-up, less than two hours.

2144

Data Acquisition & Results
EEG recording
Continuous EEG was recorded from 19 tin electrodes
attached to an elastic cap (Eletro-cap Inernational) in
accordance with the extended 10-20 system. Vertical eye
movements and blinks were monitored by two electrodes,
one placed beneath the left eye and one placed to the right
of the right eye. The 19 electrodes were referenced to an
electrode placed over the left mastoid and were amplified
with a bandpass of 0.01-100Hz (3db cutoff) by an SAI
bioamplifier system; an additional low-pass filter at 15Hz
was applied prior to final analysis. Impedances at scalp and
mastoid electrodes were held below 5 µΩ. Trials associated
with blinking, excessive eye movement or amplifier
blocking were removed prior to averaging (approximately
9% of all trials). Stimuli were displayed to participants on
an 18” CRT monitor approximately three feet from the
participants at eye-level (participants were seated during the
experiment) with white font on a black background.
N400 Component All analyses were performed on mean
voltage amplitudes in the following time windows: 200400ms, 250-450ms, and 300-500ms following the
presentation of the answer to each arithmetic problem,
which was the critical item of each trial. These three time
intervals were chosen based on the typical onset observed
for the N400 effect in other work. Effects were not
significant in the 300-500ms window, and were strongest in
the 200-400ms time window. Thus, these are the only
results reported here. It is important to note that this time
window represents a peak of the N400 effect in a time
window that is approximately 100ms earlier than is typically
observed in language studies, a finding that is consistent
with prior studies on arithmetic.
Analyses were performed separately for Addition and
Division. We conducted three factorial ANOVAs4 in the
200-400ms time window for different locations. For the
answer type variable (correct vs. incorrect), planned
comparisons revealed no significant differences between the
two types of incorrect answers (“close”, and “other”). Thus,
these two answer types were collapsed into an overall
“Incorrect” condition. The midline analysis was a 2
(Format: Numbers, Words) x 2 (Answer Type: Correct,
Incorrect) x 3 (Electrode Location: Fz, Cz, Pz) mixed
ANOVA; the lateral analysis was a 2 (Format: Numbers,
Words) x 2 (Answer Type: Correct, Incorrect) x 2
(Hemisphere: Left, Right) x 5 (Electrode Location: Fp, F, C,
P, O, respective to each hemisphere) mixed ANOVA; the
peripheral analysis was a 2 (Format: Numbers, Words) x 3
(Answer Type: Correct, Incorrect) x 2 (Hemisphere: Left,
Right) x 5 (Electrode Location: F, T, P, respective to each
hemisphere) mixed ANOVA.
There were no main effects of the between-participants
variable of format (Digits vs. Words) for either operation at
4

A Greenhouse- Geisser correction for violation of
was used whenever necessary.

sphericity

any electrode location group. This finding indicates that the
conceptual processing of correct and incorrect arithmetic
problems does not depend on the presentation format. A
robust N400 effect was found for incorrect answers in both
addition and division operations (see Figure 1), and it was
comparable for both format conditions. The magnitude and
equivalence of the effects is best represented by the
difference waveforms in Figure 1. All ANOVA values for
the main effect of answer type are listed in Table 1.
To summarize, incorrect answers to arithmetic problems
elicited a large-amplitude, negative-going waveform relative
to correct answers. This N400 effect did not depend on the
presentation format (Digits vs. Words), and was similar to
the N400 effect found in language for semantic violations.
Nonetheless, as in previous studies on the arithmetic N400,
this effect peaked about 100ms earlier than it does in
language.
Table 1: ANOVA values for the main effect of Answer
Location

Operation
Addition

Midline
Division
Addition
Lateral
Division
Addition
Peripheral
Division

F & MSE
F(1, 31) = 58.12***
MSE = 2.94
F(1, 31) = 24.92***
MSE = 6.13
F(1, 31) = 59.99***
MSE = 5.74
F(1, 31) = 37.82***
MSE = 8.67
F(1, 31) = 54.49***
MSE = 1.66
F(1, 31) = 34.35***
MSE = 2.70

* p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001
Topography The effect mostly displayed a centro-parietal
topographical distribution, with a slight bias to the right
hemisphere. Although there were no main effects of format
on the N400 effect, there were significant topographical
differences between the two formats in the distribution of
the effect, as can be seen in Figure 2.
For addition, the N400 effect was slightly stronger over
the midline sites in the Words vs. the Digits format, as
evidenced by an interaction effect at those sites between
answer type and format, F(1, 31) = 8.03, MSE = 2.85, p <
.01 and a three-way interaction between answer type,
midline electrode position, and format, F(2, 62) = 5.32,
MSE = .56, p < .05. There were also interactions between
format and electrode sites in the lateral and peripheral
regions, indicating that the electrode locations where the
N400 effect was strongest differed between Words and
Digits. In particular, there was a significant interaction
between answer type, lateral electrode position, and
condition, F(4, 124) = 7.41, M S E = 2.12, p < .01; a
significant four-way interaction between answer type,
hemisphere, lateral electrode position, and format condition,
F(4, 124) = 2.90, MSE = 1.90, p < .05; and a three-way

2145

interaction between answer type, peripheral electrode
position, and format F(2, 62) = 5.88, MSE = .91, p < .01.
For division, similar differences in topography were
observed, though there is somewhat less variability between
the Digits and Words conditions as compared to addition.
For division, the N400 effect was more strongly distributed

on the right hemisphere at both lateral F(1, 31) = 2.98, MSE
= 2.08, p = .09, and peripheral sites, F(1, 31) = 5.03, MSE =
3.74, p < .05, though the effect at the lateral sites was only
marginally significant. It is possible that these differences
in topography reflect differences in memory organization
and access. We address this possibility in the discussion.

Figure 1. Raw and difference waveforms of the Digit and Word Condition on a representative midline electrode

Figure 2. Topographical distribution of the N400 effect (200-400ms time window) in each condition

Discussion
In this study, we wanted to investigate possible reasons for
various differences between the N400 effect in arithmetic
and in language observed in previous work. To this end, we
compared the ERP responses elicited by the conceptual
integration of identical mathematical concepts presented
either in Digit format (e.g., 12 + 3 = 15) or in Word format
(e.g., Twelve plus three equals fifteen). For both, we used a
methodology that is standard in language research. In doing
so, we examined two possible sources of difference between
previous N400 studies in arithmetic and in language.
We found that incorrect answers to addition and division
problems, relative to correct problems, elicited a robust,
negative-going waveform, similar to that elicited by
semantic violations in language. The same effect was

elicited regardless of whether the arithmetic problems were
presented in Digit or in Word format. These results provide
strong support to the conjecture made by other researchers
(e.g., Niedeggen & Rösler, 1999; McPherson & Holcomb,
1999) that the N400 effect is not specific to language.
Rather, despite small variations, it is probably an index of
conceptual integration in a variety of semantic knowledge
domains, including arithmetic.
Interestingly, the N400 effect in our study peaked
approximately 100ms earlier than is typically observed in
traditional language studies. We suspect that this is possibly
due to differences between the arithmetic and language
memory networks. Among other differences, the arithmetic
memory network is much smaller and more tightly
constrained, in terms of connections among items, compared
to the language network. The fact that we conducted our

2146

study with such a small subset of arithmetic problems may
have added further constraints. Thus, conceptual integration
within this smaller, more constrained “conceptual space”
may occur more quickly. Of course, more work needs to be
done to determine if this is the case, possibly by trying to
find conditions under which the onset of the language N400
can be reliably shifted 100 ms earlier.
Even though there were no significant differences of
arithmetic problem format on the onset or overall amplitude
of the N400 effect, there were topographical differences in
the distribution of the N400 effect between digits and
words. These differences were most pronounced in addition.
Previous work in cognitive arithmetic has suggested that the
format in which numerical concepts are presented (digits vs.
words) can influence memory encoding and access (e.g.,
Noel, Fias, & Brysbaert, 1997). Therefore, it is possible
that the variance observed in the topographical distributions
reflects such differences. The fact that addition problems,
which have a stronger representation in verbal memory
(e.g., Ashcraft, 1992), showed more variation between the
two formats would be consistent with this idea.
Importantly, our results demonstrate that regardless of the
avenue in memory used to access the concepts in the
arithmetic problem, the process of integrating those
concepts together to be able to verify an answer is
equivalent for both digits and words.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by the University of
Washington’s Royalty Research Fund, with a grant awarded
to Miriam Bassok. Thanks to the members of the Cognitive
Neuroscience of Language Lab for help with data collection
and theoretical insights.

References
Ashcraft, M.H. (1992). Cognitive arithmetic: A review of
data and theory. Cognition, 44, 75-106.
Campbell, J. I. D. (1990). Retrieval inhibition and
interference in cognitive arithmetic. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 44, 445-464.
Campbell, J. I. D., & Penner-Wilger, M. (2006). Calculation
latency: The mu of memory and the tau of transformation.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 217-226.
Holcomb, P. J. (1993). Semantic priming and stimulus
degradation: Implications for the role of the N400 in
language processing. Psychophysiology, 30, 47-61.
Jost, K., Hennighausen, E., & Rösler, F. (2004). Comparing
arithmetic and semantic fact retrieval: Effects of problem
size and sentence constraint on event-related brain
potentials. Psychophysiology, 41, 46-59.
Kutas, M. & Federmeier, K. D. (2000). Electrophysiology
reveals semantic memory use in language comprehension.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 463-470.
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1980). Reading Senseless
Sentences: Brain Potentials Reflect Semantic Incongruity.
Science, 207(4427), 203-205.

Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S. A. (1984). Brain potentials during
reading reflect word expectancy and semantic association.
Nature, 307(5947), 161-163.
LeFevre, J., Bisanz, J., & Mrkonjic, L. (1988). Cognitive
arithmetic: Evidence for obligatory activation of
arithmetic facts. Memory & Cognition, 16, 45-53.
LeMaire, P. & Reder, L. (1999). What affects strategy
selection in arithmetic? The example of parity and five
effects on product verification. Memory & Cognition, 27,
364-382.
McCloskey, M. (1992). Cognitive mechanisms in numerical
processing: Evidence from acquired dyscalculia.
Cognition, 44, 107-157.
McPherson, W. B., & Holcomb, P. J. (1999). An
electrophysiological investigation of semantic priming
with pictures of real objects. Psychophysiology, 36, 5365.
Niedeggen, M., & Rösler, F. (1999). N400 effects reflect
activation spread during retrieval of arithmetic facts.
Psychological Science, 10, 271-276.
Noel, M.-P., Fias, W. & Brysbaert, M. (1997). About the
influence of the presentation format on arithmetical-fact
retrieval processes. Cognition, 63, 335-374.
Osterhout, L. McKinnon, R., Bersick, M., & Corey, V.
(1996). On the languge specificity of the brain response
to syntactic anomalies: Is the syntactic positive shift a
member of the P300 family? Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 8, 507-526.
Osterhout, L. & Holcomb, P. J. (1992). Event-related
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 785-806.
Siegler, R. (1981). Developmental sequences within and
between concepts. Monographs of the Society of Research
in Child Development, 46, 1-84.
Sitnikova, T., Holcomb, P., Kiyonaga, K., & Kuperberg, G.
(2008). Two neurocognitive mechanisms of semantic
integration during the comprehension of visual real-world
events. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 20372057.
Szucs, D., & Csépe, V. (2005). The effect of numerical
distance and stimulus probability on ERP components
elieicted by numerical incongruencies in mental addition.
Cognitive Brain Research, 19, 10-27.
Wang, Y., Kong, J., Tang, D., Zhuang, D., & Li, S. (2000).
Event-related potential N270 is elicited by mental conflict
processing in human brain. Neuroscience Letters, 293,
17-20.
Zbrodoff, N. J., & Logan, G. D.(2005).What everyone finds:
The problem size effect. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.),
Handbook of mathematical cognition (pp. 331-346). New
York: Psychology Press.
Zhou, X., Chen, C., Dong, Q., Zhang, H., Zhou, R., Zhao,
H., et al. (2006). Event-related potentials of single-digit
addition,
subtraction,
and
multiplication.
Neuropsychologica, 44, 2500-2507.

2147

