UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Congenitally Blind do not Comprehend Better I Grasp the Idea than I See the Idea: A
Challenge to the Use of Sensory-motor Conceptual Metaphors in the Comprehension of
Metaphorical Expressions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kb574bn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Martin, Alejandra
Minervino, Ricardo Adrian
Trench, Maximo

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Congenitally Blind do not Comprehend Better I Grasp the Idea than I See the Idea:
A Challenge to the Use of Sensory-motor Conceptual Metaphors in the
Comprehension of Metaphorical Expressions
Ricardo A. Minervino (Minervinor@Jetband.Com.Ar)
Facultad de Ciencias de la Educación, Universidad Nacional del Comahue, H. Irigoyen 2000,
8324 Cipolleti, Río Negro, Argentina

Alejandra Martín (Alejandramartin_@Hotmail.Com)
Facultad de Ciencias de la Educación, Universidad Nacional del Comahue, H. Irigoyen 2000,
8324 Cipolleti, Río Negro, Argentina

Máximo Trench (Maxtrench@Fibertel.Com.Ar)
Facultad de Psicología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Independencia 3065, Piso 3,
1425 Buenos Aires, Argentina
Abstract
An experiment was carried out to test the thesis that people
employ sensory-motor conceptual metaphors to understand
metaphorical expressions. Congenitally blind and sighted
participants paraphrased metaphorical expressions derived
from the UNDERSTANDING is GRASPING and
UNDERSTANDING is SEEING conceptual metaphors, and
evaluated to what extent they felt they had understood them.
On the one hand, congenitally blind participants did not
comprehend better UNDERSTANDING is GRASPING
expressions than UNDERSTANDING is SEEING
expressions. On the other hand, sighted participants did not
comprehend UNDERSTANDING is SEEING expressions
better than the blind. The implications of the results for the
embodied Conceptual Metaphor Theory of Lakoff and
Johnson are discussed.
Keywords:
concepts

conceptual

metaphor;

embodiment;

blind;

Introduction
There are some obscure points in the theory and This is an
illuminating paper on the subject are part of an English
family of metaphorical expressions (MEs), in which words
corresponding to the domain of seeing are employed to talk
about understanding. According to the Conceptual Metaphor
Theory (CMT) of Lakoff and Johnson (1980, 1999) and
other cognitive linguists (e.g., Kövecses, 2000), such a
cluster provides evidence for the existence of a conceptual
metaphor (CM) in English speakers’ minds, that is, an
analogy between the concepts of seeing (the base domain)
and understanding (the target domain). A huge body of
research demonstrates that there are a large number of such
clusters, also documented in other languages (Gibbs, 2006).
According to the linguistic assumption of the CMT, CMs
are used to produce and interpret MEs (Lakoff, 1993).
Moreover, in terms of CMT we need to employ CMs to
understand MEs because the abstract target concepts of such
CMs have acquired their meaning from more concrete base
concepts, and their semantic structure is still dependent on
them (the conceptual assumption).

Classic cognitive science has tended to consider concepts
as amodal and arbitrary symbols, whereas embodied
cognition theorists have proposed that concepts consist in
modal and analogical symbols (see Barsalou, 1999) and,
finally, of neural patterns of sensory-motor activity (Lakoff
& Gallese, 2005; Lakoff, 2008). If one adopts the first
perspective, CMs should be conceived as analogies between
symbols represented in an amodal code (e.g., Gentner and
colleagues extended their structure-mapping view–a theory
that asumes a propositional format of representations–to
explain CMs; cf. Bowdle & Gentner, 2005). In contrast, in
terms of the embodied theory of concepts proposed by
CMT, CMs are modally represented, in the sense that they
allow conceptualization of abstract target concepts through
mental simulations of the sensory-motor experiences we
have had with the referents of their corresponding concrete
base concepts (Lakoff & Gallese, 2005; Lakoff, 2008). At
least for certain basic CMs, CMT (Grady, Taub & Morgan,
1996; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999) defends the thesis that
they originate in experiential correlations between certain
cognitive states (e.g., subjective feeling of comprehending)
and sensory-motor activities (e.g., the activity of exploring
objects visually) that take place in early childhood.
The present study was interested in determining whether
sensory-motor CMs enrich our understanding of MEs
derived from them. We reasoned that if those sensory-motor
CMs are indeed acquired through experiential correlation
during infancy, then people exposed to such correlations
should differ from people not exposed to them in their
comprehension of MEs corresponding to those sensorymotor CMs. We thus compared how sighted and
congenitally blind people comprehend MEs derived from
UNDERSTANDING is GRASPING (a CM whose
correlational basis was experienced by both populations)
and from UNDERSTANDING is SEEING (a CM whose
correlational basis was only experienced by sighted people).
The central empirical questions were: 1) Do the congenitally
blind
comprehend
better
MEs
derived
from
UNDERSTANDING is GRASPING than MEs derived from

3004

UNDERSTANDING is SEEING?, and 2) Do the sighted
comprehend MEs derived from UNDERSTANDING is
SEEING better than the congenitally blind?
In the next section we will present the available
psychological data supporting the linguistic assumption of
CMT.

Evidence for the Linguistic Assumption of
Conceptual Metaphor Theory
We will describe two studies that can be taken as examples
of the kind of experiments that have been done to prove the
linguistic assumption of the CMT. The first of such
experiments considered CMs as represented in terms of
amodal symbols, whereas the second one took into account
their possible sensory-motor grounding.
Employing a classic paradigm, McGlone and Harding
(1998) showed that people employed moving-ego CMs (in
which temporal events are conceived as stationary relative
to a moving observer) or moving-time CMs (in which
temporal events are conceived as moving relative to a
stationary observer) to interpret MEs about time. Their
participants read a series of MEs derived from the same CM
(e.g., We’re approaching the deadline; We have reached the
deadline, etc., consistent with the moving-ego CM) and
afterwards a target ME. While in a consistent condition the
same CM was maintained throughout, in an inconsistent
condition the CM was changed between the initial series and
the target ME (e.g., the initial sentences consisted of
moving-ego MEs whereas the final one consisted of a
moving-time ME, as in The deadline is drawing nearer to
us). Given that the participants’ reading times for the final
sentence were longer for the inconsistent condition than for
the consistent one, the authors inferred that the lecture of
such MEs required the use of the CMs they were derived
from.
Studies like McGlone and Harding (1998) and many
others (e.g., Boroditsky, 2000; Thibodeau & Durgin, 2007).
have not been particularly concerned with the sensory-motor
nature of CMs (i.e., they mostly used conceptual stimuli),
their results being compatible with a disembodied conception
of CMs. On the other hand, a very recent line of work has
intended to investigate the sensory-motor basis of CMs. For
example, Wilson and Gibbs (2007) demonstrated that
performing an action associated with a base concept (e.g.,
grasping) facilitates reading MEs in which this concept is
employed metaphorically (e.g., John grasps the idea). They
concluded that reading MEs entails the activation of
sensory-motor CMs. However, it is doubtful that this kind
of data demonstrate the sensory-motor nature of CMs. As
Wilson and Gibbs (2007, pp. 729-730) themselves
recognized, the following explanation about the phenomena
encountered is still compatible with a view that conceives
CMs as represented in terms of amodal symbols: a)
performing an action keeps activated the sensory-motor
pattern associated with that action, b) this pattern in turn
activates the base amodal literal concept to which it
isassociated, c) since this amodal literal concept, as part of

the CM, is employed in the interpretation of MEs, the task
of comprehending them becomes facilitated (for a similar
argument, see Mahon & Caramazza, 2008). In sum, to our
knowledge, there is no conclusive evidence about the use of
sensory-motor CMs to interpret MEs.
We now turn to see the thesis of the CMT about the
origins of sensory-motor CMs.

The development of Primary and Complex
Conceptual Metaphors
CMT distinguishes between two kinds of CMs: primary and
complex (Grady et al., 1996; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999).
Primary CMs derive directly from our common bodily
experience, whereas complex CMs are combinations of
primary CMs and cultural beliefs. Primary metaphors arise
from correlations in everyday experience. In each primary
metaphor, such as UNDERSTANDING is SEEING or
UNDERSTANDING is GRASPING—Gibbs (2006) and
Lakoff & Johnson (1999) classify these two CMs as primary
ones—, an experience brings together a subjective judgment
(here, judgments about comprehension) and a sensory-motor
occurrence (here, the act of seeing or the act of grasping,
respectively). From the neural perspective of the CMT
(Lakoff, 2008) this coactivation causes the strengthening of
connections between the neural circuits supporting the
different experiences. These connections give rise to CMs,
thus determining that abstract target concepts will be
understood in terms of sensory-motor activities corresponding to the base domain. To the extent to which certain
sensory-motor components of base concepts constitute the
meaning of the abstract metaphorical concepts, the CMT
states that understanding MEs involves some partial
simulation of the sensory-motor activities implied by these
MEs (Lakoff & Gallese, 2005; Lakoff, 2008).
Complex CMs are built out of primary CMs plus cultural
models. For instance, a CM such as PURPOSEFUL LIFE is
A JOURNEY—that is the source of MEs like She’s living
without direction—is composed of the primary CMs
PURPOSES are DESTINATIONS and ACTIONS are
MOTIONS plus cultural beliefs such as that people should
act so as to achieve their purposes; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999.
Complex CMs do not arise from direct correlational
experiences (e.g., there is no correlation between purposeful
lives and journeys) but its sensory-motor nature is inherited
from the grounding of each primary component CM.
As was already analyzed, evidence bearing on the use of
sensory-motor CMs during the comprehension of MEs is
scarce and equivocal. We reasoned that a proper way of
testing whether having a sensory-motor CM has some
influence on the comprehension of MEs derived from it
would be to compare to what extent people that have (or
have not) passed through correlational experiences
understand abstract target concepts when metaphorically
conceptualized in terms of its corresponding base concepts.
According a hard version of the embodied linguistic thesis,
those participants who have not undergone the correlational
experiences relevant to a given sensory-motor CM should

3005

show no comprehension at all of MEs derived from it, since
having sensory-motor CMs is necessary to perform this
task. This prediction sounds extremely crude. Perhaps, a
soft embodied linguistic assumption may sound more
sensible. It is possible that the people who have undergone
correlational experiencies haver their amodal CMs grounded
in those experiential basis. As such embodied grounding
would enrich their understanding of the CMs and the MEs
derived from them. In this sense, they should surpass people
who had not undergone such correlational experiences (for a
similar hybrid proposal, see Mahon & Caramazza, 2008)
With this objective in mind we compared how sighted and
congenitally blind comprehend MEs derived from the
UNDERSTANDING is SEEING and the UNDERSTANDING is GRASPING CMs. According to the CMT,
sighted subjects build their concept of comprehending
projecting sensory-motor schemata taken from vision
(among other modalities) onto it. On the other hand, as it is
obvious, congenitally blind subjects have not experienced
correlations between visual phenomena and subjective states
of comprehension. The haptic sense seems to be the best
substitute for their lack of vision to provide enough
information about the characteristics and functions of
objects in the world (Landau & Gleitman, 1985). According
to the soft embodied linguistic assumption considered
above, they should comprehend grasping MEs better that
seeing MEs. It also follows that the sighted should
comprehend seeing MEs better than the blind.
Participants were presented with a series of MEs; they
had to paraphrase them and to evaluate to what extent they
felt they had understood them. Paraphrases were rated by
independent judges. Taking into account that a paraphrase
of the meaning of a ME will be rather conceptual (it may go
well for making explicit an amodal CM but not so well for
informing of sensory-motor simulations), we considered
that these expressions would not be completely capable of
capturing blind-sighted differences in the subjective sense of
comprehension derived from being able to engage in
sensory-motor simulations. If differences were only found
for subjective evaluations, we reasoned, we could attribute
this difference to that experiential –not conceptual- plus
which is not capable of being paraphrased so well1.

1

The standard measure employed in the area to evaluate
differences in comprehension of MEs is reading time. This
measure is not adequate for the purposes of our study, since we are
only trying to compare if the blind and sighted’s final
understanding of seeing and grasping MEs are equivalent, no
matter how much effort it is involved in the processes they employ.
If blind and sighted people can understand seeing MEs equally
well as reflected in both objective and subjective measures, it
should be concluded that sensory-motor grounding of CMs gives
no advantage to the sighted. If the sighted advantage the blind in
comprehension, this advantage should be attributed to their
capacities to complement amodal comprehension with sensorymotor simulations. Given this, differences in reading times would
be difficult to interpret, since it is not clear whether the amodal or
the amodal-plus-modal processing would consume more time.

Experiment
Method
Participants Fifteen congenitally blind and 15 sighted
participants volunteered to take part in the experiment. All
of them were 1st and 2nd year undergraduates studying
Natural Sciences at major Argentine universities. In each
group there were seven woman and eight men. They
received payment in return for their participation.
Materials We generated a total of 36 MEs: 12
UNDERSTANDING is SEEING, 12 UNDERSTANDING
is GRASPING and 12 fillers in which the target domain was
not understanding and the base domains were neither
grasping nor seeing. Fillers were included so as to prevent
blind subjects from acknowledging that they were being
evaluated for comprehension of MEs related to vision (post
experiment questions indicated that only one blind person
suspected she was being evaluated in her comprehension of
seeing MEs). To be sure that MEs were equivalent in all
respects except for the base domain (i.e., the variable being
manipulated) we generated pairs of MEs consisting of a
seeing ME and a grasping ME. The seeing ME of a pair
expressed the same idea about the same dimension of the
target topic than the grasping ME (see examples in Table 1).
In this way, we intended to control for any variables that
could affect comprehension of MEs besides the base domain
employed in the MEs (e.g., grammatical aspects, wording,
extension, complexity of the stated idea, target dimension
referred, etc.). Given that it was near impossible to construct
pairs of novel MEs about comprehension that were identical
in all aspects except for the base domain (grasping or
seeing), we employed conventional MEs. We evaluated
conventionality empirically (see procedure below). We
performed a 2 x 2 analysis of variance (ANOVA) to
evaluate the effects of visual condition (blind and sighted)
and type of ME (seeing and grasping) on conventionality
scores given to MEs. The conventionality score given by the
blind for seeing MEs was 4.78 (SD = .52) and 4.30 for
sighted (SD = .55). The conventionality score given by the
blind for grasping MEs was 4.32 (SD = .56) and 4.35 for
sighted (SD = .54). Main effects were neither found for type
of ME, F (1, 28) = .013, MSE = .038, p > .05, nor for visual
condition, F (1, 28) = .056, MSE = .077, p > .05. The
interaction between these variables was also non significant
F (1, 28) = 1.421 MSE = .038, p > .05, thus indicating that
both
sighted
and
blind
subjects
rated
our
COMPREHENDING
is
SEEING
and
our
COMPREHENDING is GRASPING sets of MEs as being
equally conventional. The COMPREHENDING is SEEING
MEs received similar scores of conventionality from the
sighted and the congenitally blind groups. The order of
presentation of the MEs was counterbalanced. The members
of each pair of ME always appeared separated by at least
four other MEs.

3006

Table 1: Examples of MEs employed in the experiment.
UNDERSTANDING
IS
SEEING
Juan tiene mucho ojo [eye]
para los negocios
(Juan has much knowledge
and ability for business)
Ver [seeing] las ideas
centrales de un texto
facilita su comprensión
(Identifying the central
ideas of a text facilitates
its comprehension)

were found for type of ME, F (2, 56) = 6.421, MSE = .009,
p < .01, but not for visual condition, F (1, 28) = .010, MSE
= .165, p > .05. The interaction between these variables was
significant, F (2, 56) = 3.640, MSE = .009, p < .05.

UNDERSTANDING
IS
GRASPING
Juan tiene mucha mano
[hand] para los negocios
(Juan has much knowledge
and ability for business)
Agarrar [grasping] las ideas
centrales de un texto facilita
su comprensión
(Identifying the central ideas
of a text facilitates its
comprehension)

Table 2: Objective comprehension of MEs
Sighted
Blind
M
SD
M
SD
Seeing MEs
3.71
.27
3.64
.26
Grasping MEs
3.60
.19
3.58
.22
Filler MEs
3.60
.25
3.66
.28
Note. MEs: metaphorical expressions

Design and procedure We used a mixed design, in which
the independent variables were type of metaphorical
expression (seeing MEs, grasping MEs and filler MEs), a
within-subjects variable, and visual experience (congenitally
blind vs. sighted), a between-subjects variable. The
dependent variables were subjective comprehension and
objective comprehension of MEs. Each participant was
evaluated individually in a quiet room. Participants were
told that they were going to listen to a series of metaphors
and that, for each one of them, they would have to answer
some questions with no time limit. The procedure for each
ME would be as follows: after listening to each metaphor
twice they would have to explain, in their own words, what
did the person intend to say with such metaphor. In addition
they would have to evaluate in a scale ranging from 1 (poor
comprehension) to 5 (very good comprehension) to what
extent they felt they had comprehended it. Finally, they
were asked to evaluate the degree of conventionality of the
ME. After being told that “a metaphor is highly
conventional when it is frequently used in our culture” they
were asked to rate the ME on a scale ranging from 1 (highly
novel) to 5 (highly conventional). Before starting the
experiment, participants were trained in the procedure.
Next, they were presented with the MEs. All the materials
had been previously recorded by an adult that did not know
the purpose of the study, and were presented to participants
with the help of a computer. The answers of the participants
were tape-recorded.

Results
Paraphrases given by participants were transcribed and
handed to two judges (advanced literature students at
University of Buenos Aires) who independently scored
them for comprehension of their corresponding MEs. The
judges proved highly reliable, Cronbach’s α = .8586. Table
2 displays the mean scores of objective comprehension for
sighted and blind participants.
A 2 x 3 mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) with visual
condition (blind and sighted) as between-subjects factor and
type of ME (seeing, grasping and filler) as within-subjects
factor, was carried out to reveal the effects of these variables
on the degree of objective comprehension. Main effects

Within the blind group, seeing MEs and Filler MEs were
better comprehended than grasping MEs, t(14) = 2.250, p <
.05, and t(14) = 3.698, p < .01, respectively. Filler MEs
were not better comprehended than seeing MEs, t(14) =
1.132, p > .05. Within the sighted group seeing MEs were
better comprehended than grasping MEs, t(14) = 2.223, p <
.05, and also better comprehended that filler MEs, t(14) =
2.420, p < .05. Filler MEs were not better comprehended
than grasping MEs, t(14) = 0.021, p > .05. Finally, no
significant differences were found between blind and sighted
on seeing MEs, t(28) = .662, p > .05 Cohen’s d = .25, nor on
grasping MEs, t(28) = .312, p > .05 or on filler MEs, t(28) =
.650, p > .05, nor on filler MEs, t(28) = .650, p > .05. Data
thus showed that the sighted and the blind participants
comprehend seeing MEs equally well, suggesting that
exposure to correlations between the subjective experiences
of seeing and understanding does not yield noticeable
advantages for the comprehension of MEs. Additionally,
data showed that the blind do not comprehend better
grasping MEs than seeing MEs—as a matter of fact, they
comprehended better seeing MEs than grasping MEs—
again showing that going through experiential correlations
does not enhance comprehension of their corresponding
metaphorical expressions.
In light of the possibility that the objective measure of
comprehension was not suitable to capture embodied
aspects of comprehension, we included a subjective
measure, which was obtained through asking participants to
evaluate in a 5 point Likert scale (1 = poor comprehension;
5 = very good comprehension) to what extent they considered they had comprehended a given ME. Table 3 displays
the mean subjective measures given by blind and sighted
subjects to each type of MEs.
We performed a 2 x 3 mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with visual condition (blind and sighted) as
between-subjects factor and type of ME (seeing, grasping
and filler) as within-subjects factor in order to reveal the
effects of these variables on the degree of subjective
comprehension. Main effects were neither found for visual
condition, F (1, 28) = .013, MSE = .391, p > .05, nor for
type of ME, F (2, 56) = .003, MSE = .016, p > .05.

3007

However, the interaction between variables was significant,
F (2, 56) = 4.266, MSE = .016, p < .05.
Table 3: Subjective comprehension of seeing and grasping
MEs by the blind and the sighted
Sighted
Blind
M
SD
M
SD
Seeing ME
4.50
.34
4.59
.36
Grasping Mes
4.60
.29
4.49
.46
Filler Mes
4.57
.31
4.55
.46
Note. MEs: metaphorical expressions
Within sighted subjects, no significant differences were
found between seeing MEs and grasping MEs, t(14) =
1.734, p > .05, nor between seeing MEs and filler MEs,
t(14) = 1.674, p > .05, nor between filler MEs and grasping
MEs, t(14) = .565, p > .05, Within the blind, significant
differences were found between filler MEs and grasping
MEs, t(14) = 2.330, p < .05. No significant differences were
found between seeing MEs and grasping MEs, t(14) =
1.705, p > .05, Cohen’s d = .91 nor between seeing MEs and
filler MEs, t(14) = .719, p > .05. No significant differences
were found between the blind and the sighted on seeing
MEs, t(28) = .659, p > .05, Cohen’s d = .25, nor on
grasping MEs, t(28) = .758, p > .05, or on filler MEs, t(28)
= .153, p > .05. As with the objective measure of
comprehension, these data suggest that having been exposed
to correlations between the subjective experiences of seeing
and understanding does not influence the subjective sense of
comprehending UNDER-STANDING is SEEING MEs. On
the other hand, rates of subjective comprehension given by
the blind participants showed they feel they had
comprehended seeing and grasping MEs equally well. This
lack of difference again suggests that having been exposed
to correlations between the subjective experiences of
understanding and grasping—while not to correlations
between comprehending and seeing—did not affect
subject’s sense of comprehension of the MEs derived from
these two CMs.
In general, subjective comprehension measures were
superior to the objective comprehension measures obtained
from judge’s evaluation of the paraphrases. It is likely that
this difference is caused by an overconfidence bias in
subjects self estimation of their comprehension as well as by
the difficulty implied in paraphrasing the meaning of MEs.

Discussion
The CMT has postulated that sensory-motor CMs are
necessary to interpret MEs. As has been said, evidence in
favor of any version of the sensory-motor linguistic
assumption is scarce and ambiguous. According to the hard
version of the linguistic assumption of CMT, people that do
not have a particular sensory-motor CM (e.g., the blind have
not passed through correlational experiences that give rise to
them) should not be capable of understanding MEs derived

from such CMs at all. According to the soft version of such
linguistic assumption, people have amodal CMs but, in the
case they have passed through correlational experiences like
the ones postulated by CMT, such CMs should also have a
sensory-motor grounding. Therefore, their corresponding
abstract target concepts should have a richer semantics. We
examined the second version by testing if such grounding of
CMs allows the sighted to comprehend seeing MEs better
than the blind. On the other hand, we intended to find out if,
given the reasons mentioned above, the congenitally blind
have a better understanding of grasping MEs than of seeing
MEs.
We found no differences between the blind and the sighted
in neither objective comprehension nor subjective feelings
of comprehension of seeing MEs. Moreover, the blind did
not show better objective comprehension or superior
feelings of comprehension for grasping MEs than for seeing
MEs. The fact that we did not find such differences cannot
be attributed to the effect of other variables that could affect
comprehension, since in the preparation of materials each
seeing ME was paired with a grasping ME that was identical
to the former except for the base concept which
corresponded to the domain of grasping or seeing. It also
cannot be ascribed to the differences in the degree of
conventionality of the seeing and grasping MEs, since we
found no such differences.
We worked with highly conventional MEs because
generating the desired controls with novel MEs resulted to
be an intrinsically difficult task. Regarding this, a possible
objection to the obtained results would underline the fact
that we only worked with such kind of MEs. It would be
certainly interesting to test the claim that having sensorymotor CMs has some incidence on the comprehension of
novel MEs. However, it is worth considering that the
linguistic assumption of CMT concerns conventional MEs
as much as novel ones. The idea that this assumption could
only be valid for novel MEs is advocated by theories that
are confronted with CMT, such as the career of metaphor
theory (Bowdle & Gentner, 2005), in terms of which
conventional metaphorical concepts are independent of the
literal concepts from which they originated. This proposal is
rejected by CMT followers like Gibbs et al. (Gibbs, 2006;
Wilson & Gibbs, 2007).
A possible interpretation of these results would consist in
proposing that the literal concepts of seeing are abstract
concepts than can be acquired via intercultural exchange
with the sighted, maybe through analogies between these
visual concepts and certain haptic concepts (Landau &
Gleitman, 1985). Once the blind have acquired these literal
concepts, they become capable of understanding their
metaphorical extensions to the domain of understanding
(i.e., they acquire an amodal version of the
COMPREHENSION is SEEING CM). This CM is then
used to understand conventional and novel MEs (e.g.,
Thibodeau & Durgin, 2007). According to a second
interpretation of these results, given that the employed
metaphorical concepts were highly conventional (e.g.,

3008

“obscure” means “difficult to understand”), it is possible
that the blind interpreted the MEs without activating an
amodal CM, but directly activating a second meaning of
such metaphorical concepts which was already available in
their mental lexicon and that has lost its link with the
corresponding original literal meaning (Glucksberg, 2001;
Bowdle & Gentner, 2005).
In terms of any of these possible disembodied
interpretations, not only the linguistic assumption of CMT
(both in its hard and soft versions) is taken into question, but
also the sensory-motor conceptual assumption of CMT,
since if it is true that engaging in sensory-motor simulations
of vision is not necessary to understand metaphorical uses
of the seeing concept, it should also be the case that the
semantics of such metaphorical concepts is independent of
any experiential grounding. However, there is still the
possibility that the negative findings presented in this
experiment were due to the fact that the blind, just like the
sighted,
do
have
and
use
a
sensory-motor
COMPREHENSION is SEEING CM. It is possible that the
blind acquire this CM in a way alternative to the one
postulated by the CMT for the sighted, for instance, by
forming visuospatial images out of their tactile exchanges
with the world (Kerr, 1983). In this line of argument, we
could postulate that their subjective experiences of
understanding “correlate”—via touching and grasping—
with the activity of forming visuospatial images. This
reformulation implies, however, weakening to a large extent
the meaning of “having experiences of seeing”, since it
would imply accepting the claim that the activity of forming
visuospatial images is experientially equivalent to the
sighted’s experience of vision (this would be necessary in
order to explain the lack of differences observed between
the blind and sighted in their comprehension of seeing
MEs). It would also imply that forming these images would
have the same experiential weight as the very activity of
grasping that gives rise to the formation of such visuospatial
images (this would be necessary in order to explain that the
blind do not comprehend better grasping ME than seeing
ones). However, as an explanation of our results, the
disembodied options presented above appear simpler and
more plausible. The embodied view of CMT would need to
reformulate central aspects of its developmental
assumptions and/or its sensory-motor linguistic assumptions
to accommodate results like the ones obtained in our
experiment.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant PICT33150 from the
ANCyT of Argentina and Grant C076 of National
University of Comahue, Argentina.

Bowdle, B. F. & Gentner, D. (2005). The career of
metaphor. Psychological review, 112, 193-216.
Gallese V. & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain’s concepts: The
role of the sensory-motor system in reason and language.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 455-479.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (2006). Embodiment and cognitive
science. Cambridge: University Press.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language:
From metaphors to idioms. New York: Oxford.
University Press.
Grady, J., Taub, S. & Morgan P. (1996). Primitive and
compound metaphors. In Goldberg, A. (Ed.) Conceptual
structure, discourse and language. Stanford: CSLI
publications.
Kerr, N. (1983). The role of vision in “visual imagery”
experiments: Evidence from the congenitally blind.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 112, 265277.
Kövecses, Z. (2000). Metaphor and emotion. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1993). The contemporary theory of metaphor. In
A. Ortony (Ed.) Metaphor and thought (2nd ed.). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G. (2008). The neural theory of metaphor. In Gibbs,
R. W. Jr. (Ed.) The metaphor handbook. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Landau, B. & Gleitman, L. R. (1985). Language and
experience. Evidence from the blind child. Cambridge
(Mass): Harvard University Press.
Mahon, B. Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at
the Embodied Cognition Hypothesis and a new proposal
for grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology Paris, 102, 59-70.
McGlone, M. S., & Harding, J. H. (1998). Back (or
forward?) to the future: The role of perspective in
temporal
language
comprehension.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 1211-1223.
Thibodeau, P., & Durgin, F. H. (in press). Productive
figurative communication: Conventional metaphors
facilitate the comprehension of related novel metaphors.
Journal of Memory and Language.
Wilson, N. & Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (2007). Real and imagined
body movement primes metaphor comprehension.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 31(4),
721 – 731.

References
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.

3009

