UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Connectionist Modeling of Situated Language Processing: Language and Meaning
Acquisition from an Embodiment Perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1sm072jg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Baumann, Peter
Konieczny, Lars
Muller, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Connectionist Modeling of Situated Language Processing:
Language and Meaning Acquisition from an Embodiment Perspective
Helmut Weldle (helmut.weldle@misc.uni-freiburg.de), Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de),
Daniel Müller (daniel@cognition.uni-freiburg.de), Sascha Wolfer (sascha@cognition.uni-freiburg.de),
Peter Baumann (peter.baumann@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, Friedrichstr. 50
D-79098 Freiburg i. Br., Germany

analogical nature this could be a guideline for subsymbolic
accounts for grounding language comprehension.

Abstract
Recent connectionist models and theories of embodied
cognition offer new perspectives on language comprehension.
We review the latest accounts on the issue and present an SRNbased model, which incorporates ideas of embodiment theories
and avoids (1) vast architectural complexity, (2) explicit
structured semantic input, and (3) separated training regimens
for processing components.
Keywords: language acquisition, comprehension, production;
sentence processing; language-vision integration; visual
attention; embodied cognition; connectionist modeling; SRNs.

Connectionist models of language comprehension
Several connectionist architectures deal with the task of
language comprehension and integration of language and
events, proposing different realizations of semantic
representation and implementations of the integration process.
Rohde (2002) introduced the Connectionist Sentence
Comprehension and Production Model, an architecture based
on extended simple recurrent networks (SRNs, Elman, 1990)
which is capable of comprehending and producing complex
sentences, covering a wide range of well-known empirical
phenomena. The model clearly focuses on scalability,
however possibly at the expense of explanatory power and
psychological plausibility. Especially relevant for our issue is
the realization of the semantic component: Rohde's model is
trained with explicit propositional representations prior to the
corresponding target sentence. This greatly assists the
network, leaving no way to tell whether it simply succeeds
because the semantic representation provided all crucial
information explicitly. Learning of the propositions is
achieved through a query mechanism, inquiring each of its
parts, a process questionable in its cognitive adequacy.
The problem of explicit information holds similarly for the
Incremental Nonmonotonic Self-organization of Meaning
Network (Mayberry, 2003). The semantic representations
used in the model are based on Minimal Recursion Semantics
(Copestake et al., 2005), which makes them very powerful
and complex information carriers. The model is capable of
parsing natural language corpora, an impressive achievement,
reached at the expense of a highly complex, opaque
architecture and pre-fabricated semantic content. In a more
recent study Mayberry, Crocker and Knoeferle (2005)
introduced the Coordinated Interplay Account Network
which integrates a scene representation with the incremental
input of a sentence description, enabling adaptive use of
context information. Since the presented scenes are externally
segmented into agent, action and patient, the major part of
semantic interpretation is provided to the model explicitly.
While these models certainly achieved good results
concerning their aims, they show several shortcomings
making them unsuitable for our approach. Firstly, extensive
use of different layers and components makes it impossible
to deduce responsible structures and working mechanisms

Introduction
'Gavagai!' If we heard a native speaking a foreign language
utter this word upon seeing a rabbit, we would be faced with
the problem Quine described in Ontological Relativity
(1968): How do we know what exactly an utterance refers to
in an infinitely rich set of objects, events and relations our
environment provides? But this problem appears almost
trivial compared to a human child confronted with the task to
acquire its mother's language. Several sub-tasks have to be
solved simultaneously to achieve this grounding of speech to
referential meaning: there is the problem of a highly complex
world rich in details, happenings and relations. There is the
problem of a continuous stream of words. There is the large
problem of relating the one to the other. And there is the
problem that there is no previously given language to help
finding this relation.
In other words, the task is to bind a holistic situation to a
sequential series of related linguistic expressions. This affords
to integrate representations of language and the outside world,
both represented in distinctive forms, following completely
different rules and depending on different hierarchical and
causal relations. A central aspect of models of language
comprehension and acquisition is how they account for these
questions. In connectionist models, language interpretation
and integration of situational context is based on mechanisms
of association and self-organization.
Theories in embodied cognition research offer an account
for assignment of linguistic structures to constructions of
coherent semantic interpretations. Language comprehension
is considered to be a simulation of perceptual experiences of
the hearer, and the linguistic structure serves as an instruction
for the correct construction of the situation. Due to its

827

from internal states of the model, prohibiting analysis of
ongoing processes. Secondly, reliance on explicit, extremely
powerful semantic representations that do most of the work
of semantic processing prevents clear assignment of
performance properties to inherent connectionist
mechanisms. Thirdly, the use of separated training for the
components (e.g., pre-training of the semantic layer before
coupling it with sequential linguistic input) reduces
integration to an interface between independent modules.
This contradicts the idea of grounded language acquisition,
inhibiting examination of mutual and synergetic effects
between syntactic and semantic components.
The Distributed Situation Space model (Frank et al., 2007)
does not use explicit propositions. It uses Self Organizing
Maps (Kohonen, 1995) to represent simple and combined
events in a microworld and maps descriptive sentences on
corresponding situation vectors using SRNs. The model
implements the idea of non-propositional semantic
representations, preserving analogy of internal representations
to external states on the dimension of transition and
combination probabilities of events. Frank, Haselager and
van Rooij (2009) explored the capability of this model to
capture semantic systematicity beyond simply implementing
symbolic computation. They concluded that connectionist
systematicity emerges from interaction with the environment,
reflecting the observed and derived structural correlations.
Considered from an embodied cognition perspective, the
model preserves analogy in its internal representations. But
it still waives central qualities that need to be explored: it
reduces semantic content to co-occurrences of events and
does not aim at modality at all, thereby leaving out
inferences on behalf of event-internal relations.

Our model directly addresses the discussed issues by
imposing restrictions on the architecture, the nature of
representations and tasks. Basically we assume that meaning
is not an inherent feature of language, but must be assigned
by grounded language acquisition: the meaning of a linguistic
expression is the activated mental simulation of the
corresponding event. Interpretation processes are guided by
mechanisms of constraint-satisfaction, naturally inherent in
artificial neural networks. Our focus lies on the integration of
sequential linguistic and static situational information. The
network is trained to achieve the simultaneous completion of
different tasks: prediction of the sequential succession of
linguistic units and recognition and classification of visual
patterns related to the linguistic input. The tasks pose
different requirements: extraction of sequential structures and
their probabilities as well as extraction and generalization of
diverse static patterns. Our aim is to explore the ability of the
model to integrate these tasks, the mechanisms to map the
contents of the differing information systems, and the usage
of corresponding information of the respective system as an
additional source of constraints.

Embodiment theories of language comprehension

Architecture and flow of information

Embodied cognition posits that the structure of embedded
systems emerges as a consequence of interaction with the
environment. This leads to an alternative perspective on
cognitive processes and conceptualizations, which is highly
compatible with recent connectionist and emergentist
assumptions and enables the development of proposition-free
comprehension systems.
With the Perceptual Symbol Systems framework, Barsalou
(1999) emphasizes cognition to be grounded in perception,
operating on modal and analogue symbols. These are derived
directly as neural substrates of activations corresponding to
perceptions of the external world and share the same
functional brain areas. This is claimed to obviate the
grounding
and
transduction
problem.
Language
comprehension is seen as a mental simulation process of
perceptual states of neural activation, triggered by linguistic
input. Joyce et al. (2003) proposed connectionism as a
suitable framework for closing some explanatory gaps
concerning the question, how such a system could actually
be implemented. Based on an SRN-model of perceptual
symbol formation they drew further specifications of the
required mechanisms and how they come to work.

We tried to avoid the inflationary use of hidden layers and
different modules to keep functional assignments transparent
and interrelated effects of the components analyzable. The
base architecture is an SRN, with different input and output
layers for linguistic and visual/situational information
processing (Figure 1).
The syntax component 1 gets linguistic input (at Input I) in a
sequential manner – sentences word by word – and is trained
to predict the next input (at Output I), thereby extracting word
classes, word transition probabilities and exploring structural
relations in the input. Activation is forwarded from Input I
over the Integration Layer to Output I. Learning of sequential
structures is enabled through a context layer, which provides
information about previous states of activation by copying the
hidden layer and returning it at the next cycle.
The situational component propagates compressed simple
static situations and is trained to reproduce its crucial
information. The actual representations of the situational
component are provided by the visual input and teaching
examples: Input II presents static situations with simple

Zwaan (2004) introduces an explicit framework for
embodied language comprehension that integrates several
empirical findings. In his Immersed Experiencer Framework,
situational entities correspond to activated functional neural
webs instantiated by lexical items. These webs become
integrated to construals by means of constraint-satisfaction
mechanisms, representing events corresponding to clauses.
The approach claims to replace propositional representations,
which are stated to be merely illustrative shorthand.

Modeling situated language comprehension

1

The labels syntax and semantics are used as abbreviations for
sequential linguistic vs. situational semantic component.

828

objects on a two-dimensional grid, constituting a retina-like
interface for the model. Activation is forwarded to the
Integration Layer through an additional hidden layer
(Encoder: Semantics) encoding a distributed representation of
Input II and reaches Output II via a second additional hidden
layer (Decoder: Semantics). Output II provides a prototype
version of the scene, forcing the network to extract crucial
information about space and objects.
Output I: Syntax

positively interacting systems, as proposed in syntactic and
semantic bootstrapping theories.
Visual patterns. To generate visual patterns, we used four
discrete distinctive objects, named minus (-), pipe (|), slash (/)
and backslash (\), distributed freely on a two-dimensional
grid. Up to three of these objects were placed in different
locations on that grid. Our situations differ in the number of
involved objects, the identity of the selected objects, the exact
location of these objects, and, as a consequence, in the spatial
relation between those objects. The left panel of Figure 3 in
the results section provides an example of an input situation
depicting a backslash positioned roughly above the minus and
slightly left above the pipe (this is obviously just one of
several equally possible descriptions).
Concerning the retina-like implementation: our intention is
not to provide a cognitively plausible model of visual
processing, as for example realized by Coventry et al.
(2005) in the Functional Geometric Framework. The retinal
grid merely provides an intuitive and simplistic presentation
format and offers several advantages: orientation towards
modal features, analogy on the spatial dimension on the
situational level and sparsely structured, non-explicitly
encoded access to information about the situations.
The target grids contain prototype versions of
corresponding input situations, reduced in several ways: they
represent only two objects of an arbitrary number of initially
presented objects, reflecting attentional focus on selected
entities. It reduces the spatial expansion and idealizes the
relative positions of considered objects to a prototypical
spatial relation. Again using Figure 3 as illustrative example,
the selected prototype for the input situation is the backslash
positioned directly above the minus, blinding out the pipe.
Mapping onto prototypes forces the network to instantiate
self-organized internal representations of the situations that
are selective and schematic in nature, extracting relevant
information. This enables the model to distinguish the objects
and to develop the concept of relative spatial positions, a
presupposition for the mapping of corresponding linguistic
input. Dominey (2003) demonstrated such a purely
associative mechanism to be sufficient to inductively acquire
productive grammatical constructions.

Output II:
Prototyped situations
Decoder: Semantics

Integration layer

Encoder: Semantics

Input I: Syntax
Input II: Visual grid
for 2-D situation

Figure 1: Extended SRN-architecture for integration of
linguistic and situational information.
Both types of information – static situation and
corresponding sequential linguistic input – are presented
simultaneously. The situation is maintained as long as
linguistic processing is in progress. The information from
both components is integrated in the Integration Layer –
allowing generalization over co-occurrences of incremental
linguistic and static situational input. The network is forced to
find common representations to solve the differing tasks of
both components. In contrast to other connectionist models
covering sequential tasks, we did not use a separated training
regimen for the syntax and semantics components, but trained
the complete network in a holistic fashion on the different
information sources.

Semantics and situational representation
Following the idea of embodied language comprehension
theories, conceptualization is assumed to be modal and
analogue, encoded as schematic abstractions of events and
objects in the environment. Meaning is assigned to linguistic
units on different levels by mapping the units onto the internal
structure that simulates the corresponding object, action or
event structure. We can distinguish between a non- or prelinguistic representation that conceptualizes the perceived
world independently of linguistic labeling and a linguistic
semantics that is constituted by assignment processes,
corresponding to the relation between prototype theory and
prototype semantics (Rosch, 1978). So, semantics is seen as a
process rather than a state, led by constraint-satisfaction
mechanisms, which dynamically adjust categories based on
new experiences. We assume an intertwined development of

Table 1: Syntactic inventory for situation description.
object-A be-located deictic-particle eos
deictic-particle be-located object-A eos
object-A be-located location-relative object-B eos
object-B be-located inverse-location-relative object-A eos
location-relative object-A be-located object-B eos
inverse-location-relative object-B be-located object-A eos

We used a very limited microlanguage for situation
description (Table 1). The linguistic input consists of
sentences presented sequentially word by word. The
vocabulary contains lexical units for the distinguishable
objects, for relative positions of the objects in space, a state
verb, a deictic particle and an end-of-sentence marker. It is

829

encoded in a localist fashion, each active unit representing
one word. Visual situations are complex in that they entail
several possible spatial relations between several objects. By
expressing one of these relations between exactly two objects,
the network is forced to direct its focus of attention.

softmax function to enforce output activation complying with
an interpretation of word probability. The test set used a
sample of scene constellations excluded during the training
phase. It was constructed corresponding to the training
stimuli, providing full or single-sided reduced information:
testComplete, testProduction and testComprehension.

Hypotheses on network performance
Results and discussion

We expect language to have a positive effect on the
discrimination and categorization of the components
establishing the corresponding situations. Vice versa, we
expect beneficial effects of the visual input on word
prediction, based on the assumption that the network makes
use of mutual informative cues. This is not as obvious as it
may appear, since one could just as well assume that the tasks
interfere with each other due to their different representation
formats and the narrow resource of representational space.
In the test phase the network should be able (1) to derive
the situational prototype without relying on the information of
the situational input by exclusively using the sequential
linguistic input and (2) to derive a coherent and correct
sequential linguistic output, exclusively using the information
of the static situation input. Furthermore the network is
expected (3) to show systematic performance when coping
with ambiguous cases occurring several times. When tested
on the complete information including vision and language,
we expect the network (4) to use the integrated crossover
information to draw inferences on the correct output and to
rule out irrelevant possibilities.

The proposed architecture has the potential to simulate and
predict behavior relevant to research areas ranging from
language acquisition to visual attention. What we present here
are preliminary results of network performance using a subset
of the possible training and test variations. The results are
reported in three sections, treating (1) vision/comprehension,
(2) word prediction and (3) language production, including
relevant aspects concerning their interaction.
Vision/Comprehension In the testComplete condition with
two objects in the input the model manages to produce the
correct vision prototype at time step 1 already, without
showing wrong objects. Over successive time steps, already
clear objects get activated even stronger receiving additional
support from the linguistic input. In ambiguous visual
situations the vision output provides a preferred reading (due
to slightly different frequencies in the training set). If the
interpretation is falsified by the linguistic input, it adjusts the
visual image to the linguistically referred position
immediately.
In the three objects condition, the vision output first
provides a diffuse but by no means arbitrary activation
pattern: it contains all possible objects in their possible
relations, in most cases with preferences for one constellation.
During the time course of the incoming sentence, affirmation
of the selected constellation by the linguistic description
guides the vision output to adjust the pattern to the
predetermined state, using at each step the available
information at hand. New information reducing the possible
constellation leads directly to a correction. At the last step
only the requested pattern is produced, leaving no deviant
activation (compare Figure 2). Importantly, at the final steps
in both conditions the vision output contains only the
activation of the correct predetermined constellation.
For the two-objects condition, this adjustment process
could best be described in terms of disambiguation and
discrete categorization. The process for the three-objects
condition is rather a shift of attentional focus. Corresponding
to the linguistic information, irrelevant aspects of the scene
are shifted out of the focus of interpretation, while the
relevant information receives highlighting by exclusive
activation (Figure 3). This high context sensitivity emerges
from implicit constraint-satisfaction mechanisms of the
network, inherently establishing a frame-of-attention
mechanism not built into the system artificially.

Materials and simulations
We ran the simulations on LENS (Rohde, 1999). Language
input and output layers consisted of 16 units each, vision
input had a grid size of 9 x 9 (= 81) units, prototyped vision
output had a grid of 7 x 7 (= 49) units. Hidden layers
consisted of 40 units each. The presented visual scenes
showed up to three out of four different objects (minus,
pipe, slash, backslash), forming complex spatial relations.
The training sets contained 60% randomly chosen situations
of the 130708 possible constellations of objects.
The training regimen consisted of three different stimuli
settings. (1) trainComplete provides visual and linguistic
stimuli in parallel, (2) trainProduction provides only visual
stimuli to force the network to perform language production
for observed scenes, (3) trainComprehension provides only
linguistic stimuli forcing the language comprehension
process. The target information always included both visual
scene and corresponding linguistic description. The three
training conditions were presented in an alternating manner.
The networks were trained for 10 epochs, but already
showed very good performance on early epochs. We used the
backpropagation-through-time
algorithm,
applying
momentum 0.3, an initial weight range of 0.3 and a learning
rate of 0.2, which was incrementally decreased by a factor of
0.02 per epoch. 2 The language output layer received a

Results were largely robust for most combinations of parameters,
showing slight performance loss for some combinations, but
preserving the qualitative systematicity of performance.

2

We ran several sets of networks, varying learning rate (0.05 to
0.2), momentum (0.0 to 0.6) and initial weight range (0.1 to 1.0).

830

Word prediction. Like the vision output the linguistic output
is highly accurate in the testComplete condition with two and
three objects. At time step 1 the network prefers to predict the
spatial relations. It states only possible relations according to
the visual input. The same holds for the following time steps.
During object prediction, the network predicts only objects
observed at the visual retina. At functional syntactic positions
(verb, end-of-sentence marker), the network produces optimal
activation.
Moreover, in successive time steps, it predicts only those
objects and relations that can occur corresponding to the
descriptive sequence given before (e.g., after the object
location 'right-of', only objects are linguistically predicted,
that can occur in a 'right-of' constellation). So it achieves far
more than POS-tagging or grammatical probability matching
(as criticized by Steedman, 1999). Its predictions are sensitive
to word transition probabilities and grammatical category,
and at the same time sensitive to possible descriptions of the
scenes as provided by the visual context. We interpret this as
visual priming, determining the linguistic performance by
pre-activation of the relevant lexical items. In the condition
testComprehension, the word prediction component could not
rely on additional visual information. Therefore it activated
all possible objects and relations at the respective syntactic
positions, which are the only constraints provided by the
preceding linguistic information.

In the testComprehension condition we can observe the
same behavior of direct correspondence between provided
linguistic information and constructed scene prediction.
Slightly different from the testComplete set, it produced even
clearer constellation predictions, since input is less distorted
by competing relations. The comprehension process succeeds
incrementally, using all new information to construct a scene
prediction as complete as possible. As soon as all relevant
information is provided by the linguistic input, a stable visual
scene prediction is constructed, containing only correct
activations. This proves that the comprehension mechanism
works independently from provided visual information and is
able to construct complete visual scenes from linguistic
descriptions, when no visual information is provided.

Language production. For the testProduction set we
reconfigured the trained network with a copy-connection
from the language output layer (Output I) to the language
input layer (Input I) and equipped the output layer with a
winner-take-all functionality. 3 We have just begun analyzing
production data, so the results are somewhat preliminary. The
network produces mainly correct and complete sentences.
These sequences contained only objects and relations that
were given in the visual input, however not always expressing
the correct constellation of objects. The network always
instantiated linguistic starting points driven in correspondence
to the distinctiveness of the visual input (e.g., clarity of spatial
relation). While the network did rarely produce wrong
sentences, it sometimes produced sentences that did not
accurately correspond to the visual scene. Sometimes, objects
were repeated (slash is left-of slash), or objects appeared in
reverse order. The majority of sentences however expressed
the correct constellation of objects.
The successful integration of information and interaction
between the two components is reflected in the strong
correspondence between language and vision: even when the
network assumes a wrong constellation (e.g., for ambiguous
cases and for three objects with initially wrong preferred
constellations), this is predicted consistently on the vision and
language output. Moreover, activation strengths for the
objects and locations in the visual output and their respective
word nodes correspond to each other (Figure 2, second

Figure 2: Comprehension and inference effect.
During the incremental construction of the situation model
one can observe different strategies for using given and
inferring missing information. As soon as a spatial relation is
referred to, the vision component displays placeholders for
the respective positions. In some cases, these take the shape
of some object, indicating an expected default. If an object is
already given, it is positioned correctly, leaving the second
underspecified. With no spatial relation given, an introduced
object is instantiated with weak and slightly obscured
activation on multiple positions.

3

This feedback loop triggers sequential routines to control the
production process, providing the actual output as input stimulus
on the next time step (e.g., Rohde, 2002).

Figure 3: Comprehension and attentional focus effect.

831

pattern). Furthermore, new linguistic information can lead to
a reconstruction of the visual prototype preferred so far,
revising both spatial relation and concerned objects.
One important aspect to analyze the achieved integration is
still to be done: the examination of representational structures
in the internal layers. This is the key to understanding the
actual achievements of the model. Since we have ensured its
performance quality, this will be the next step of our research.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Copestake, A., Flickinger, D., Pollard, C., & Sag, I. A.
(2005). Minimal recursion semantics: an introduction.
Research on Language & Computation, 3 (4), 281-332.
Coventry, K.R., Cangelosi, A., Rajapakse, R., Bacon, A.,
Newstead, S., Joyce, D., & Richards, L.V. (2004). Spatial
prepositions and vague quantifiers: implementing the
functional geometric framework. Proceedings of the
Spatial Cognition Conference, Frauenwörth.
Dominey, P.F. (2003). Learning grammatical constructions
in a miniature language from narrated video events.
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Boston.
Elman, J.L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-211.
Frank, S.L., Haselager, W.F.G., & van Rooij, I. (2009).
Connectionist semantic systematicity. Cognition, 110,
358-379.
Frank, S.L., Koppen, M., Vonk, W., & Noordman, L.G.M.
(2007). Modeling multiple levels of text representation. In
F. Schmalhofer, & C.A. Perfetti (eds.). Higher level
language processes in the brain: inference and
comprehension processes. Mahwah, Erlbaum, 133-157.
Joyce D., Richards L., Cangelosi, A., & Coventry K.R.
(2003). On the foundations of perceptual symbol systems:
Specifying embodied representations via connectionism.
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling, Bamberg.
Kohonen, T. (1995). Self-organizing maps. Berlin: Springer.
Mayberry, M.R. (2003). Incremental nonmonotonic parsing
through semantic self-organization. Doctoral Thesis.
University of Texas, Austin.
Mayberry, M.R., Crocker, M.W., & Knoeferle, P. (2005). A
connectionist model of sentence comprehension in visual
worlds. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Nashville.
McClelland, J.L., & Rumelhart, D.E. (1985). Distributed
memory and the representation of general and specific
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 114
(2), 159-188.
Quine, W.V. (1968). Ontological Relativity. The Journal of
Philosophy, 65 (7), 185-212.
Rohde, D.L.T. (1999). LENS: the light efficient network
simulator. MIT, Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburg.
Rohde, D.L.T. (2002). A connectionist model of sentence
comprehension and production. Doctoral Thesis. MIT,
Carnegie Mellon University Pittsburg.
Rosch, E. (1978). Cognition and categorization. Hillsdale,
N.J., Erlbaum.
Steedman, M. (1999). Connectionist sentence processing in
perspective. Cognitive Science, 23 (4), 615-634.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In B.H.
Ross (ed.). The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
44. New York, Academic Press, 35-62.

Conclusions
The proposed model performed constantly well over all test
sets in every imposed task. It comprehends language in an
incremental manner and produced correct syntactic strings,
even with only the mutually restricted information available.
It showed systematic behavior for different demands and
conditions concerning missing or ambiguous information.
Notably, all specifics of the behavior resulted from inherent
properties and were not imposed artificially. The model
integrates different information sources, which enables it to
produce context sensitive behavior, to reduce irrelevant
information and to draw inferences on possible target states.
This leads to effects best described in terms of visually
induced linguistic performance and language driven shift of
visual attentional focus.
Our retina-like representation format clearly limits the
possibilities of representing world situations. But it avoids the
theoretical shortcomings of using explicitly assigned
relations. We assume that it is an inherent and distinctive
feature of connectionist models to extract and assign the
relations given in the world by themselves.
Further elaboration of the model will first of all encourage
an independent generation of prototype situations. The
weakest point of the model at present is the explicitly
provided prototypicality, i.e. the supervised training of the
situations using pre-structured prototypes. To ensure
complete independence of the model, we need to equip it with
an unsupervised training algorithm that self-organizes
prototype extraction using auto-associative learning
mechanisms. This way, the model could construct its own
prototypical instantiations, corresponding to the achievement
of auto-associative lexical models (e.g., McClelland &
Rumelhart, 1985). A further improvement of the expressive
and predictive power is the extension of situational
complexity. The dimensional aspects of time and causality
could be introduced by object movement and interaction. This
will subsequently extend the vocabulary and the syntactic
complexity of the linguistic input, enabling us to construct
richer and more language-like descriptions.
Embodiment theories guided the implementation of the
connectionist model. On the other hand, explorations of the
inherent systematic performance of artificial neural networks
can provide a useful subsidiary explanation base to sharpen
some opaque conceptualizations in the embodied cognition
literature.

832

