UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-situational Word Learning Respects Mutual Exclusivity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/69z2k5jz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Frank, Michael
Ichinco, Denise
Saxe, Rebecca

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-situational Word Learning Respects Mutual Exclusivity
Denise Ichinco, Michael C. Frank, & Rebecca Saxe
{ichinco, mcfrank, saxe}@mit.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract
Learners are able to infer the meanings of words by observing the consistent statistical association between words and
their referents, but the nature of the learning mechanisms underlying this process are unknown. We conducted an artificial cross-situational word learning experiment in which either
words consistently appeared with multiple objects (extra object condition) or objects consistently appeared with multiple
words (extra word condition). In both conditions, participants
learned one-to-one (“mutually exclusive”) word-object mappings. We tested whether a number of computational models
of word learning learned mutually exclusive lexicons. Simple
associative models learned mutually exclusive lexicons in at
most one of the two conditions. In contrast, a more complex
Bayesian model—which assumed that only some objects were
being talked about and only some words referred—learned
mutually exclusive lexicons in both conditions, consistent with
the performance of human learners.
Keywords: mutual exclusivity; statistical learning; word
learning; language acquisition

Introduction
Learning the meanings of words is hard. To begin learning
a simple object noun like “dog” or “ball,” a language learner
must be able to identify what the word refers to. The wordworld mapping problem presents a difficult learning challenge because there are an infinite number of possible referents available to be mapped in any given situation.1 Each
conversational situation, considered alone, is highly ambiguous.
In order to learn the meanings of words, learners often must
aggregate information across multiple situations, and recent
experiments suggest that human learners can succeed when
this kind of computation is required. Yu et al. (2007) tested
adult learners’ ability to use cross-situational information in
learning the meanings of object nouns. A single conversational “situation” was modeled by a single trial in which a
number of different words and possible referents (represented
by pictures of objects) were present. In three different conditions, Yu and colleagues presented sets of 2, 3, or 4 objects together with the corresponding words. Each situation
gave only ambiguous evidence about which words and objects were paired. Despite this ambiguity, adult learners were
able to learn the mappings between words and objects, and
young children also showed evidence of success in a simplified version of the paradigm (Smith & Yu, 2008).
These experiments suggest that human learners are able to
keep track of information about the co-occurrence of words
1 Here

we consider only the problem of mapping a word to a single referent and leave aside the problem of how to infer the full set
of referents for a word from a limited set of examples (Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007).

and objects across situations, but the mechanisms underlying
this ability are still unknown. Proposals about the computations carried out by human learners can be tested by instantiating these proposals as computational models, which can
then be run on the stimuli from human experiments and evaluated on their fit to human performance. Unfortunately, although the pattern of results described in Yu & Smith (2007)
is highly informative relative to the abilities of human learners, the task is simple enough that all existing computational
models of word-world mapping are able to succeed. Thus, the
existing data do not allow us to distinguish simple associative
models from more sophisticated models of word learning (Yu
& Ballard, 2007; Frank et al., in press).
The phenomenon of “mutual exclusivity” may provide a
method for distinguishing models of word learning. Children
prefer to map novel names to novel objects, rather than to familiar ones for which a name is already known (Markman,
1990). Although a variety of experiments have shown that
even young infants are able to use mutual exclusivity to learn
new words, there is no consensus on what mechanisms underlie mutual exclusivity inferences. Prior developmental explanations include both pragmatic accounts (Clark, 1987) and
lexical constraints models (Markman, 1990). However, our
previous computational work has shown that several models of cross-situational word learning—including the intentional word learning model proposed by Frank et al. (in press)
and several simpler associative models—can succeed in conventional mutual exclusivity tasks without reference to either
pragmatic principles or lexical constraints.
The success of these models in mutual exclusivity tasks
suggests that the mechanisms of statistical learning may account for human learners’ inferences in traditional mutual
exclusivity experiments. This hypothesis can be tested by
exposing participants to ambiguous, cross-situational word
learning tasks which contain possible one-to-many mappings.
If participants still acquire only one-to-one mappings, this
would provide support for the view that mutual exclusivity
inferences are compatible with (and perhaps even driven by)
mechanisms of statistical learning. In addition, to the extent
that models of cross-situational word learning make different
predictions in a more probabilistic mutual exclusivity task,
this may allow us to differentiate models on their fit to human
performance.
Recent evidence suggests that word learning can occur in
cross-situationally ambiguous paradigms even when not all
mappings are one-to-one. Yurovsky & Yu (2008) trained participants using materials in which a single word was consistently associated with multiple objects. They found that

2214

100

The goal of our first experiment was to replicate the finding of
cross-situational word learning by adults (Yu & Smith, 2007).
To mimic the various degrees of ambiguity possible in real
speech, each participant received exposure to conditions in
which 2, 3, and 4 words and pictures were presented during
each trial.

Methods
Participants Twenty-four MIT students and members of
the surrounding community participated and received $5 in
compensation.
Stimuli Possible referents were represented by line drawings of unreal but geometrically possible objects, as shown
in Figure 1 and first used in Kanwisher et al. (1997). Pictures were distinct from one another but not easily nameable.
The images were presented in a horizontal row and displayed
only as long as the words were being played. Novel words
obeyed the phonetic rules of English and varied in length
from 1-3 syllables. They were generated using AT&T’s

60

80

Experiment 1

20
0

participants sometimes chose the first object and sometimes
the second, indicating that they were able to succeed even in
non-one-to-one learning situations. However, because their
experiment averaged across words and participants and may
have only tested the associations between any given word and
a single object, it was not possible to determine whether the
lexicons participants learned were consistent with mutual exclusivity.
Here we report the results of experiments designed to address this issue. Experiment 1 replicated Yu & Smith (2007)’s
experiments with a new stimulus set. Experiment 2 then used
this stimulus set to create a cross-situational mutual exclusivity situation in which we were able to test whether individual
participants learned multiple (non-mutually exclusive) mappings for individual items, both words and objects. We found
that participants learned one-to-one mappings for both words
and objects. We then conducted simulations to test whether
existing models of word learning could account for our results
in Experiment 2. We conclude that while a Bayesian word
learning model may account for our results, the bi-directional
mutual exclusivity results that we observed pose serious problems for simpler associative models of statistical word learning.

40

percent correct

Figure 1: An example trial in the 3×3 condition. Objects appeared on the screen simultaneously and the participant heard
the words one after another in random order.

2x2

3x3

4x4

condition

Figure 2: Percentage correct at test, plotted by training condition. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean. Participants learned more pairings between words and pictures
when fewer words and pictures are presented in each trial.
Because learning was tested with a four-alternative forcedchoice test, chance was 25% correct, as indicated by the dotted line.
freely-available, web-based text-to-speech generator (voice:
Christine). There were 54 words and pictures in total.
Procedure Each participant took part in three learning conditions, 2×2, 3×3 and 4×4, counterbalanced for order across
subjects. Each condition consisted of a training and a testing
phase.
The training phase was divided into trials in which a set
of pictures was shown simultaneously and the corresponding
words were played sequentially. No indications were given as
to which word belonged with which picture, and the order of
words with respect to pictures was randomized. Participants
were told that each word they heard belonged with one of
the pictures, but that they could not be sure which one. An
example trial is shown in Figure 1.
A testing phase occurred immediately after each training
phase. During each test trial, participants heard one word
and saw four pictures and were asked to indicate the picture
named by the word they heard. There was one trial in the
testing phase for each word that was presented in the training
phase. The target picture and the 3 foils were all drawn from
the set of stimuli that were used in that condition.
Eighteen word/picture pairings were randomly selected for
each condition from the total stimulus set, and no pairings
were seen in two different conditions by the same subject.
Within the training phase of each condition, each word was
seen six times, so the number of trials and the duration of
individual trials differed between conditions.

Results and Discussion
We were primarily interested in whether participants were
able to learn correct word-object pairings from cross-

2215

situationally ambiguous evidence. Condition means are
shown in Figure 2. Participants who learned more than 9/18
pairings for any condition were significantly above chance
for that condition, as defined by a chi-square test: χ2 (1, N =
18) = 6, p < .05. Participants who learned 5/18 pairings were
above chance; nearly all participants (24, 22, and 20 for the
2×2, 3×3, and 4×4 conditions) performed above chance for
all conditions. Overall, the performance of the group was significantly above chance for each condition, as determined by
a one-sample t-test comparing participants’ correct answers
to chance. For the 2×2 condition, t(23) = 7.4, p < .001; for
the 3×3 condition, t(23) = 6.4, p < .001; for the 4×4 condition, t(23) = 3.97, p < .001.
A larger number of words and objects presented in a single
trial caused poorer learning performance (F(2, 23) = 13.07,
p < .001) due to the greater degree of ambiguity in which object mapped to which word. Our results directly replicate Yu
& Smith (2007), who also found above chance performance
in all conditions with a main effect of condition.2

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we build upon Experiment 1 by creating
a situation in which two pairings are equally supported by
the data but prior knowledge about an item in one of the
pairings (a familiar word or picture) could allow a smart
learner to disambiguate. Because several associative models of cross-situational word learning operate by estimating a
uni-directional conditional probability measure, we included
two conditions in our experiment: an “extra word” condition in which there was an opportunity to learn that a word
mapped to two objects (shown in Figure 3), and an “extra
picture” condition in which two words might map to a single
picture.
We broke the experiment into two blocks. In the first block,
we gave participants cross-situational experience with a set
of words which were paired with pictures (henceforth called
old words and old pictures). This block was identical to the
3×3 condition of Experiment 1. Then in the second block we
added an extra item to each trial such that there were either an
extra word with 3 pictures or 3 words with an extra picture.
This extra item was chosen to co-occur perfectly with an new
picture or new word (respectively) so that in order to learn
the new pairing, participants would have to make a mutual
exclusivity inference on the basis of their experience in the
first block.
Previous experiments have attempted to test whether participants are able to learn in the presence of non-mutually
exclusive stimuli (Yurovsky & Yu, 2008). In order to test
whether the mappings participants learned were mutually exclusive, we included in our design a large number of test trial
2 The means reported for the three conditions in the Yu & Smith
(2007) study were significantly higher than the means we found.
Although students and non-students show the same pattern, the student group in our study performed significantly better than the nonstudents, so we believe that differences in the sample population may
account for the differences in means.

Old Word
.5

1

Old Picture

New Word
1
.5

1

1

New Picture

Figure 3: Co-occurrence frequencies in the “extra word” condition. An arrow from a to b should be read “if a has occurred,
the probability that b has occurred is x.”

types to determine for each item and participant whether multiple mappings were learned.

Methods
Participants Thirty-two MIT students and members of the
surrounding community participated in exchange for payment ($6). Fifteen participants were in the “extra picture”
condition and 17 were in the “extra word” condition. None
had also participated in Experiment 1.
Stimuli The stimulus set used in Experiment 2 was identical to that used in Experiment 1.
Procedure Participants were told that they had been kidnapped by aliens who were trying to teach them their language through two episodes of alien television. The experiment was divided into two blocks: an initial exposure block
and a mutual exclusivity block. During the training phase of
each block, a “television” was shown around the images to
reinforce the idea of learning an alien language via a training
video. Participants were not given any information about the
relationship between the words they would hear and the pictures they would see—in particular, they were not told that
each word belonged with only one picture.
The initial exposure block was identical to the 3 × 3 condition of Experiment 1. Participants were randomly assigned to
either the “extra word” condition or the “extra picture” condition. The training phase of the mutual exclusivity block differed only in that an extra item (either an old word or an old
picture, respectively) was shown during each trial. The extra
item was chosen from the set of items in the initial exposure
block for which the participant had given the most correct answers. The extra item always appeared in the same trials as a
particular pairing of a new word and new picture and thus was
perfectly correlated with that pairing within the second block.
The co-occurrence statistics for the extra word condition are
shown in Figure 3.
Each test trial was a forced choice in which participants
were given a word and asked to choose between four pictures.
Three trial types were used to ascertain, for each set of items,
whether participants had learned a non-mutually exclusive set
of pairings:
1. Old word / old picture trials tested whether the pairing
learned in the initial exposure block was remembered.
2. New word / new picture trials tested whether the new

2216

Results and Discussion
In our first analysis, we examined whether we replicated the
results of Yu & Smith (2007) and Experiment 1. Results from
the initial exposure block of Experiment 2 were comparable
to the results of Experiment 1 in the 3×3 condition. On average, participants answered 56% of trials correctly. On control
trials in the second (mutual exclusivity) block, participants
gave correct answers on 51% of trials testing items from the
first block and on 65% of trials testing items from the second
block. Thus, the additional items in the mutual exclusivity
block did not hinder learning, though performance could have
improved in the second block due to practice and familiarity
with the task, so we cannot conclude that the additional items
were helpful.
In our second analysis, we looked at the critical trials for
the mutual exclusivity block: the trials that tested which pairings each participants learned for each item. To perform this
analysis, we tabulated for each participant and word which
objects were paired with the word at test; we considered that
a participant had learned a pairing only if they answered both
the critical trial correctly and did not choose an incorrect

60

80

40

new

both
new

40

both

percent of pairings

60

80

100

Extra Picture

100

Extra Word

percent of pairings

20
0

20

old
old

0

pairing was learned.
3. Old word / new picture (extra word condition) or
New word / old picture (extra picture condition) tested
whether a non-mutually exclusive pairing was made.
In addition to the three critical trial types, there were also
two “preference” trial types. These trials tested each word
that had multiple pairings, and both of the word’s meanings
were presented as options. These trials allowed participants
to show (for those trials on which they learned both possible
mappings) whether they preferred the old picture or new picture mapping. We also used these trials to confirm answers a
subjects’ answer on the corresponding critical trials: for example, we excluded a correct response for an old word / old
picture trial when the same participant chose an incorrect response (neither the old picture nor the new picture) on that
old word’s preference trial.
Finally, control trials assessed subjects’ ability to learn
words that were paired with only one picture. These trials
assessed mappings from both the initial exposure block and
the mutual exclusivity block.
Each block had exactly 24 word/picture pairings and each
pairing was shown 6 times. In the mutual exclusivity block,
8 words or pictures (depending on condition) that had been
learned during the initial exposure block were chosen to be
old words or old pictures and were paired with 8 new words
and these old words were also shown exactly 6 times. There
were 72 trials in the training phase of each block. The initial exposure block had 48 test trials, while the mutual exclusivity block contained 72 test trials: 24 critical trials (3
types × 8 words/objects), 16 preference trials (2 types ×
8 words/objects), 16 control trials from the initial exposure
block, and 16 control trials from the mutual exclusivity block.
Test trials were presented in a random order. The experiment
lasted approximately 30-40 minutes.

old word new picture

old picture new word

Figure 4: Results from the second, “mutual exclusivity” block
of Experiment 2: the extra word condition (left) and the extra
picture condition (right). For each condition, we show what
percentage of mappings (with standard error of the mean)
were made to each possible mapping target for both “new”
items (introduced in the second block) and “old” items (introduced in the first block) that participated in multiple pairings.
In the “extra word” condition, the old word and new picture
participated in multiple pairings, and vice versa in the “extra
picture” condition—see Figure 3.
answer on the corresponding preference trial. For example,
for a participant in the extra word condition, for a particular
old word learned in the initial exposure block, we tabulated
whether the participant selected the corresponding old picture
in the old word / old picture trial and whether they selected
the corresponding new picture in the old word / new picture
trial. The participant also needed to choose the old picture on
the old word preference trial to be counted as having learned
the old word-old object pairing; on the new word preference
trial, the participant would be counted as having learned the
correct pairing if they chose either the old picture or the new
picture.
The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 4. Though
participants did occasionally learn multiple pairings, they did
this far less often than they mapped old words to old pictures
and new words to new pictures. In general, we found that
they were far more likely to learn one pairing for each word
or picture than two pairings (all values of t > 4.6, all values of p < .001). Put another way, out of the set of 8 items
in each condition, participants learned multiple pairings for
an average of less than one item. For example, in the extra
word condition, participants were more likely to remember

2217

Model
Name
Version
Co-occurrence
Cond. prob.
p(w|o)
Cond. prob.
p(o|w)
Translation
p(w|o)
Translation
p(o|w)
Mutual info.
Bayesian model

Condition
Extra Word Extra Picture
X
X
X
X
X

X

Table 1: For each model in our comparison (and for each
version of the model, where appropriate), whether the model
learned a lexicon consistent with mutual exclusivity in the
extra word and the extra picture conditions.

the pairing between the old word and the old picture than to
learn the a pairing between the new word and the old picture;
they were also more likely to learn the pairing between the
new word and the new picture than the pairing between the
new word and the old picture.
The number of exclusive pairings that were made for the
old and new items did not differ reliably across conditions
(for old word / old picture mappings in the extra word and extra picture conditions, t(30) = −.93, p = .36, and for the new
word / new picture mappings, t(30) = −1.63, p = .11). More
generally, the basic distribution of responses across conditions appeared highly similar.
In our final analysis, we asked whether, in the cases when
participants selected multiple pairings, they had a consistent
preference for one pairing over the other. For example, in
the extra word condition, for an old word, a participant might
answer correctly in both old word / old picture trials and old
word / new picture trials, but have a consistent preference for
the old picture when both pictures were presented side-byside. To test this, we analyzed participants’ responses in the
preference test trials of the mutual exclusivity block. Even in
the small number of cases that they chose two pairings for a
single item, participants still had a consistent preference for
the mutual exclusivity-consistent pairing, choosing the new
word with new picture in the extra picture condition 73% of
the time and choosing the old word with the old picture 68%
of the time in the extra word condition.
To summarize our findings: participants learned equally
well in Experiment 2 (which had data which might support
non-mutually exclusive mappings) as they did in Experiment
1. The pairings that participants did learn were on the whole
consistent with mutual exclusivity, and the pattern of performance was quite similar across the two conditions, suggesting
that participants did not learn either many-to-one or one-tomany lexicons.

Computational Models
We next tested whether a range of computational models of
word learning would capture the basic pattern of experimental results reported in the two conditions of Experiment 2.

The set of comparison models for this section is the same as
those reported in Frank et al. (in press): basic models based
on co-occurrence, conditional probability models, and mutual
information; the translation model of Yu & Ballard (2007);
and the Bayesian intentional model proposed in Frank et al.
(in press).
The models which relied on direct measures of
association—including co-occurrence frequency, conditional probability, mutual information, and the translation
model of Yu & Ballard (2007)—did not capture the basic
result of Experiment 2: namely that participants learned
mappings for ambiguous words which still respected mutual
exclusivity (Table 1). The simple co-occurrence model
learned non-mutually exclusive pairings because the cooccurrence of old words and new pictures was exactly equal
to the co-occurrence of old words and old pictures in the
extra word condition, and vice versa in the extra picture
condition.
Models relying on unidirectional conditional probability
(e.g., that compute either p(w|o) or p(o|w), where w is a
word and o is an object picture)—including the translation
model—succeeded in learning a mutually exclusive lexicon
for one condition but failed for the other. For example, models that computed p(w|o) learned a mutually-exclusive lexicon in the extra word but not extra picture conditions. Finally,
the model based on the mutual information between words
p(w,o)
) failed as well. To underand objects (MI(w, o) = p(w)p(o)
stand this finding, consider that, in the extra word condition,
the mutual information of the old word and the old picture
was the same as the mutual information of the old word and
the new picture. No associative model that we evaluated was
able to match human performance across both conditions.
In contrast, the Bayesian model of intentional word learning gave a higher posterior probability to the correct mutually exclusive lexicon than to the comparable non-mutually
exclusive lexicon in both conditions. This model posits a referential intention—a particular object or set of objects that
the speaker intends to talk about (implemented as a subset of
the set of objects that are present in the context). The introduction of this hidden variable mediating between objects and
words has two consequences. First, the model does not have
to assume that all objects in the context are talked about. Second, the model assumes that some words refer to the objects
in the referential intention, but that others are non-referential
(e.g., function words or property terms); thus, not every word
that is uttered must be mapped to an object.
We evaluated the Bayesian model by computing the posterior score (the non-normalized posterior probability) of possible lexicons on sample exposure sets from both the extra
word and extra picture conditions. We evaluated three possible lexicons: (1) a lexicon which respected mutual exclusivity, mapping old words to old pictures and new words to new
pictures (as participants in our experiment largely did), (2) a
non-mutually exclusive lexicon corresponding to the full set
of mappings that would be learned by a co-occurrence model

2218

in the extra word condition, and (3) a corresponding nonmutually exclusive lexicon for the extra picture condition. We
set the parameters of the model to the settings which resulted
in learning the best lexicon in previous work and found that
in both conditions, the model assigned higher posterior probability to the mutually exclusive lexicon.
To summarize: the associative models capture the basic human pattern of results in at most one condition of Experiment
2. In contrast, the Bayesian intentional model preferred the
mutually exclusive lexicon in both conditions, consistent with
human performance.

General Discussion
We investigated the mechanisms underlying cross-situational
word learning via two experiments. The first experiment
replicated the results of Yu & Smith (2007) and suggested
that cross-situational learning in adults is a robust and general phenomenon. The second experiment set out to test
whether mutual exclusivity inferences were made even in
cross-situationally ambiguous contexts. In the first block, we
taught participants one set of words; then in the second block
we presented new words in situations in which they were confounded with words from the first block. We found that participants learned pairings that largely respected mutual exclusivity, de-confounding co-occurrence for the later words via
the knowledge they learned in the earlier block. In addition,
performance was similar when multiple words co-occurred
with a single picture and when multiple pictures co-occurred
with a single word.
What does this result tell us about the mechanisms of mutual exclusivity and cross-situational learning? To the extent that the performance of human participants in our experiment is due to the operation of learning mechanisms, our
results can be used to test models of cross-situational learning. We evaluated a range of models of associative word
learning on the stimuli from Experiment 2 and found that the
pattern of performance from simple associative models based
on co-occurrence and conditional probability failed to match
human performance. However, the results from a more sophisticated intentional model were consistent with the performance of our participants. In addition, in a previous test of
the model (Frank et al., in press), it was able to learn one-tomany or many-to-one maps when they were supported by the
data, much as humans eventually come to learn polysemous,
homonymous, or synonymous words.
Were the mutual exclusivity inferences that participants
made in our experiment conscious or meta-cognitive inferences? As with the experiments reported by Yu & Smith
(2007), some participants in our experiment did not believe
that they had learned anything at all. On the other hand, it is
possible that some participants did pursue a conscious strategy, either by making task-specific assumptions or by inferring that the mismatch between the number of words and the
number of objects indicated that some words did not refer
to objects or some objects did not refer to words. The latter

kind of conscious inference is the same kind of inference that
is licensed by the structure of the intentional word learning
model, and it may well be explicit (at least in some cases),
since it is not automatic or unavoidable (Halberda, 2006).
Human learners have the ability to acquire word-object
mappings from ambiguous, cross-situational evidence. But
the learning mechanisms underlying this ability should not
be assumed to be simple on the basis of the simplicity of the
experimental contexts in which this ability has been demonstrated. On the contrary, we hope that our current work provides some evidence that simple associative models of human
learning are not sufficient to account for the rich variety of
phenomena in children’s early word learning.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully thank Nancy Kanwisher for providing the novel
object stimulus set and the saxelab for helpful comments.
MCF was supported by a Jacob Javits Graduate Fellowship.

References
Clark, E. V. (1987). The principle of contrast: A constraint
on language acquisition. In B. MacWhinney (Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B.(in press).
Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early crosssituational word learning. Psychological Science.
Halberda, J. (2006). Is this a dax which I see before me?
use of the logical argument disjunctive syllogism supports
word-learning in children and adults. Cognitive Psychology, 53, 310–344.
Kanwisher, N., Woods, R., Iacoboni, M., & Mazziotta, J.
(1997). A locus in human extrastriate cortex for visual
shape analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 133–
142.
Markman, E. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57–77.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics. Cognition, 106, 1558–1568.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. (2007). Word learning as Bayesian
inference. Psychological Review, 114, 245.
Yu, C., & Ballard, D. (2007). A unified model of early word
learning: Integrating statistical and social cues. Neurocomputing, 70, 2149–2165.
Yu, C., Smith, L., Klein, K., & Shiffrin, R.(2007). Hypothesis
testing and associative learning in cross-situational word
learning: Are they one and the same? Proceedings of the
30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414–420.
Yurovsky, D., & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusiviy in crosssituational statisical learning. Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 715–720.

2219

