UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-cultural differences in analogical reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/89z144hd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kuwabara, Megumi
Smith, Linda B.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-cultural Differences in Analogical Reasoning
Megumi Kuwabara (mekuwaba@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth Street Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth Street Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

experimenter’s set) might be comprised of a small
car, medium cup, and big house. The other set (the
participant’s set) might include a small cup (that is
the same as the medium cup in the other set), a
medium house (that is the same one as the big house
in the other set), and a big floor pot. One object in the
experimenter set (say the middle sized cup) was
indicated as the winner and children were asked to
indicate the winner in their set. They could choose
the middle-sized object in their set (same relation but
different object) or they could choose the cup (same
object but in a different relation to other objects).
Three and four year old children consistently choose
the matching objects; adults choose the object in
same relational role in the set. In brief, younger
children appear to attend to objects and adults more
to relations.
A subsequent study (Rattermann and
Gentner, 1998) showed that making the objects
simpler increased relational responding by children.
The experimenter constructed sets in which all
objects were cups, only varying size, or in which, as
described above, they were richly detailed and varied
in kind. Children made many more object responses
and few relational responses with the rich than with
the simpler stimuli. Apparently, the rich stimuli
pushed children to attend to the objects – as
individuals – rather than to their role in the larger
scene. In general, the results in this robust literature
show that older children and adults are much better
able to ignore objects and discern the relations even
in complex scenes than the younger children. The
key developmental changes occur around 4 years of
age and are sometimes referred to as the “relational
shift” (e.g. Gentner, 1988; Rattermann & Gentner,
1998).

Much research in developmental psychology and cognitive
development presumes a universal developmental trend that
is independent of culture. One such trend, from object to
relational knowledge, is seen over and over. However, most
of this research is based on the study of children and
individuals from Western cultures. This paper considers the
possibility that this developmental trend might differ in
different cultures.

Introduction
A relation is a structured connection
between entities that is about the role of those
components in the event.
The participating
components are relevant to this relational structure,
not because of their own individual properties but
rather because of their relation to the other entities.
Thus for the relation “A is bigger than B”, the size of
A matters, but not its particular size, only its size in
comparison to that of B.
Relations and relational reasoning are
arguably the core of higher human thought. Research
has shown relational structures to be important to
human perception and reasoning (Hummel &
Biederman, 1992; Doumas, Hummel, & Sandhofer,
2008), mathematics (e.g. Mix, 2008), analogy (e.g.
Gentner, 1983), science (Gentner, 1982a), and
language (e.g. Gentner, 1982; Gentner & Namy,
2006).
Objects are the problem
Considerable research has focused on the
development of relational reasoning. The key
developmental problem appears to be one of going
beyond the properties of the individual objects. That
is, young children often fail in relational reasoning
tasks because they attend to the objects as
individuals, not the relations among the objects
(Gentner, 1988, Gentner & Namy, 1999; Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991; Gentner & Toupin, 1986,
Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). In one study,
Rattermann, Gentner, and DeLoach (1990) presented
three and four year old children and adults with sets
of three objects with the objects in the set ordered by
increasing size.
For example, one set (the

Cultural differences?
The priority of objects over relations is
likely to be universal aspect of human cognition.
Gentner (1982b) proposed two related hypotheses
with respect to this idea. First, she proposed that
objects were perceptually and cognitively prior than
relations because they derive from universal

1722

psychological processes and a common physical
world. Second, she suggested that relations were not
only developmentally later and cognitively more
difficult, but also more variable across cultures and
dependent for their development on culturally
specific support (such as language). Consistent with
this proposal, there is now considerable evidence
showing
cross-cultural
and
cross-linguistic
differences in particular relations, especially in the
domains of quantity (e.g. Zhang & Schmitt, 1998)
and space (e.g. Majid, et al., 2004).
The question we ask here, however, is
whether there are more general cultural differences,
not in how one thinks about a particular relational
structure but in the general tendency to focus on
objects as individuals versus in terms of their roles in
a relational structure. This possibility is suggested by
recent findings indicating broad cross-task
differences in attentional and perceptual styles as a
function of the cultural background of the individual.
In particular, Nisbett (Nisbett, et al., 2001) and his
colleagues found that people in Eastern cultures are
more holistic – focusing on the whole scene and its
relational structure whereas people in Western
cultures are found to be more analytic – focusing on
the focal objects (Masuda & Nisbett, 2001). For
example, in one study, adults from the United States
and from Japan were asked to describe scenes; in one
case, the scene was of an aquarium. Adults from the
United States described the scene in terms of the
main focal object (a large fish in the center). Adults
from Japan described many more peripheral
components (water color, plants, small fish) in
relation to the central fish. Moreover, in subsequent
memory tests, adults from the United States did not
notice changed aspects of the scene (e.g., water color)
whereas adults from Japan did. These findings
suggest a broader whole scene attentional style for
Easterners and a more object-focused style for
Westerners.
These differences need not mean that
individuals from Eastern cultures are generally more
sensitive to relational structures than Westerners, but
it might. If so, it might also mean that the welldocumented developmental trend from more object
based to more relational based reasoning in children,
the so-called relational shift (e.g. Gentner, 1988;
Rattermann & Gentner, 1998), might more robustly
characterize the cognitive development of children
growing up in Western than Eastern cultures.

objects in a particular relation. The shown relation
might be described as small-big-small or more
abstractly as a symmetrical relation around a center
object, ABA. The children are then presented with
two choice cards, shown below, and asked to select
the one that “matches” or “goes with” the target
card. As shown in Figure 2, different choice cards
for the very same target card may be constructed to
assess just the abstractness of children’s relational
representations. For example, the first pair of
choice cards in Figure 2, use the very same objects
as in the target card and thus the relational match is
also an identity match that does not require children
to ignore individual object properties. Notice,
however, that it is still a relation match. If children
merely represented the individual objects with no
relations represented then all the cards would be
representationally the same – big and small red
hexagons. The second set of choice cards (size to
size) samples a somewhat more abstract relation –
small-big-small; the third and fourth cards require a
more abstract representation of the relation that can
be realized with many different object properties
(size, shape, color) that is, symmetry around a center
object, ABA. Considerable research with western
children show that they are much more likely to
make relational matches based on more perceptual
relations than ones based on more abstract relations
(Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). As noted earlier, one
can also vary the complexity (or objectness) of the
elements from which the relation is composed (as
illustrated in Figure 5 as compared to Figure 1).
Western children succeed with simpler objects more
readily than with complex ones.

Present Purpose
There have been no systematic cross-cultural
studies that investigate the development of relational
reasoning and the “relational shift.” This is the main
purpose of the present study. Building on past
research, the study compares 4 years old children’s
performances in the relational matching tasks
illustrated in Figures 1 and 5, testing for the
abstractness of the relation apprehended by children
as illustrated in Figure 2. Experiment 1 uses simpler
stimuli and Experiment 2 uses more complex and
richly detailed objects.

Experiment 1: Simple Geometric Shapes
Method
Subjects

Relational judgments are not all–or-none
Figure 1 illustrates one task commonly used
to study relational reasoning in children (see
Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). Children are presented
with a target card (shown on the box) with three

The participants were 27 children residing in
Yamanashi, Japan and Indiana, USA: 13 monolingual
English-speaking children and 14 monolingual
Japanese-speaking children. The mean age of English

1723

speaking children was 48.0 months and Japanesespeaking children was 47.1 months ranging from 40
to 54 month olds. The gender of participants was
about equally distributed in both populations.

match and the other with non-relational match.
Children were asked to pick one of the choice cards,
such as “Which one is more like this one” by
pointing to the target card on the box in English and
“Docchi ga kore mitai?” in Japanese. Children were
asked to pick the card of their choice and place the
card in the box.

Stimuli
The task was based on that of Kotovsky and Gentner
(1996) and is illustrated in Figure 1.

Results
As shown in Figure 3, children in both groups
predominantly chose the relational match given these
simple stimuli. Overall, the mean percentage of
relational match choice chosen by children was
74.0% for children from the United States and 75.9%
for children from Japan, which did not differ,
F(1,26)=.052, p=.82.
Both Japanese and American children
matched relationally significantly above chance
(50%), t(12)=4.35, p<.01 children from the United
States and t(13)=4.395, p<.01 for children from
Japan.

Figure 1
Stimuli Example: a small-big-small trial

Figure 3
Graph of overall relational response

Children were presented with one relational target
(either ABA or BAA structure) on the box. The same
target card was used for all testing trials. Then, they
were given two choice cards, one was a relational
match and the other did not provide a match. The
spatial location of the choice cards on each trial was
randomly determined. Trials were presented in a
series, with 4 test trials for a target card that
progressed from less to more abstract relational
matches as indicated in Figure 2. There were 7
unique testing choice cards (constructed from
different shapes, colors and sizes) tested twice for a
total of 7 by 2 repetitions (or 14 judgments per child).
The order of target cards (either ABA or BAA) was
randomly determined.
Figure 2: Relational matches based on increasingly
abstract choices.

Figure 4 shows the performance as a function of the
abstractness of the relation. Performance for both
groups declined as a function of abstractness, though
not reliably (report main effect for ANOVA for kind
of choice); this decline was greater for children from
the United States than for children from Japan;
however, the interaction is not reliable, F(1,25)=.66,
p=.42.
Figure 4
Performance as a function of the abstractness of the
relation.

Procedure
On each trial, children were shown the target card
and the card was placed on the box. Then, children
were shown two choice cards – one with relational

1724

Overall both groups of children preformed very well,
and equivalently with these simple stimuli. Indeed,
the overall high level of performance may make the
task insensitive to the detection of cultural
differences. At the very least, then, Experiment 1 tells
us that children in both cultures – at least with simple
stimuli – understand the task and can apprehend the
relations. This sets up the goal for Experiment 2; to
challenge children’s relational reasoning by making
the constituent objects more complex and known
kinds. Does this manipulation have a greater effect on
children from the United States than from Japan?

Figure 6: Relational matches based on increasingly
abstract choices.

Experiment 2: Complex Objects
Method
The experimental method was identical to the
experiment 1 except that we used drawing of
common everyday objects, as illustrated in Figure 5,
instead of simple geometric patterns.

Results
As shown in Figure 7, children from Japan continued
to perform well even with these more complex
objects, but children from the United States
performed poorly. Overall, the mean percentage of
relational match choice chosen by children was
55.7% for US children and 72.1% for Japanese
children, F(1,26)=6.32, p<.05. Japanese children
chose relational matches significantly above chance
(50%), t(14)=4.57, p<.01, but US children’s
relational matches did not differ from that expected
by chance (50%), t(11)=1.42, p=.18.

Subjects
Twenty-seven children residing in Yamanashi, Japan
and Indiana, USA participated: 12 monolingual
English-speaking children and 15 monolingual
Japanese-speaking children. The mean age of English
speaking children was 46.2 months and Japanesespeaking children was 46.8 months ranging from 40
to 54 month olds. The gender of participants was
about equally distributed in both populations. All
participants
completed
both
training
trials
successfully.

Figure 7
Graph of overall relational response

Stimuli and Procedure
All aspects of the experiment were identical as
Experiment 1 except for the stimuli. We used clip art
objects instead of geometric shapes that were used in
the Experiment 1. An example of stimuli is shown in
Figure 5. An example of the 4 choice sets for one
target – increasing in the abstractness of the relational
match – is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 5
Stimuli Example: Same polarity and same dimension
set (Size to Size)

1725

These results strongly suggest that competing
representations in terms of individual objects are a
bigger challenge for children developing in the
Western culture of the United States than for children
developing in Japan.

General Discussion
These results raise the possibility that
aspects of the well-documented relational shift, and
in particular the potency of object-centered
representations, may be a particularly characteristic
aspect of development in Western cultures that is
weaker or less robust in other cultures. Although this
is a first result in this area and although further
studies are needed before firm conclusions are
warranted, the findings nonetheless remind that
cognitive development takes place in the large
context of language and culture and thus the patterns
discerned in any experimental study may be specific
to that context.
As has been noted by many others (e.g
Nisbett, 2001; Lucy, 1992), western thought and
languages are highly object focused. One domain in
which these differences have been noted is in
language. English is a more noun-heavy language
than Japanese (Gopnik & Choi, 1995; Yoshida &
Smith, 2001): For example, in spoken language to
children, there are many more nouns in English than
Japanese but more verbs in spoken language in
Japanese than English; further and related to this,
English requires speakers to explicitly express the
subjects and objects in sentences (the arguments for
the relational verb) whereas these arguments are
frequently dropped in Japanese, leaving sentences
that consist of the verb, the relational term, only.
This observation raises the question of the observed
differences – and the particularly poor performance
of the children from the United States with rich and
nameable objects is dependent on their nameability.
A further related question is whether naming the
objects, perhaps even the simple ones, would increase
the group differences. Another domain in which a
more relational versus more individualistic stance has
been noted in comparisons of eastern and western
judgments concerns social relations. For example,
studies have shown that adults from eastern culture
judge emotion of the focal person considering the
emotional expressions of surrounding person
(Masuda, et al. 2008) whereas adults from western
culture judge emotion of focal person individually.
Thus it is possible that the origins of these differences
derive not from language per se, but from broader
cultural perspectives that emphasize all kinds of
relations.
In sum, the present results suggest that
children growing in an eastern culture are more

Perhaps, the most remarkable finding is that US
children’s poor performance characterized the more
perceptual matches as well as the more abstract
matches. For less abstract sets, the mean percentage
of relational match choice chosen by children from
the United States was 54.17% as compared to
75.83% for children from Japan. Given that children
from the United States performed poorly on even
these matches suggests that they represented the
cards merely in terms of the objects, e.g., “clocks”.
Under such an object representation, there is no basis
for choosing between the two choice sets. For more
abstract sets, the mean percentage of relational
matches by children from the United States was
57.29% but 68.33% for children from Japan.
Japanese children’s relational matches exceeded that
expected by chance for both the less and more
abstract choice sets, t(14)=4.12, t(14)=4.36,
respectively, for both sets p<.01. However, children
from the United States performed at the chance level
(50%) for both less and more abstract sets,
t(11)=.886, p=.394, t(11)=1.63, p=.13, respectively as
shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8
Relational responding as a function
abstractness of the relational choices.

of

the

1726

sensitive to relations in the context of interesting and
complex individual objects whereas children growing
in a western culture are less able to resist
representations in terms of individual objects. If this
interpretation is correct, we should find that children
from the United States are better than children from
Japan in tasks requiring them to attend to individual
objects and ignore their relation to other surrounding
objects. We are currently testing this hypothesis. If
the expected group differences are observed, they
would emphasize the dependence of cognition – and
cognitive development – on the cultural context in
which cognition and development take place.

Merriman (Eds.) Beyond names for things (pp.
63-80). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hummel, J.E. & Biederman, I. (1992). Dynamic
binding in a neural network for shape
recognition. Psychological Review, 99(3), 480517.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational
similarity. Child Development, 67, 2797, 2822.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Grammatical categories and
cognition: A case study of linguistic relativity
hypothesis. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Majid, A. Bowerman, M. Kita, S. Haun, D. B.M., &
Levinson, S.C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. TRENDS in
Cognitive Sciences, 8(3), 108-113.
Masuda, T., Ellsworth, P.C., Mesquita, B., Leu, J.,
Tanida, S. & de Veerdonk, E.V. (2008). Placing
the face in context: cultural differences in the
perception of facial emotion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 94(3), 365381.
Masuda, T. & Nisbett, R.E. (2001). Attending
holistically versus analytically: comparing the
context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
81(5), 922-934.
Mix, K.S. (2008). Children’s equivalence judgments:
Crossmapping effects. Cognitive Development,
23, 191-203.
Nisbett, R.E., Peng, K. Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A.
(2001). Culture and system of thought: holistic
versus analytic cognition. Psychological Review,
108(2), 291-310.
Rattermann, M.J., & Gentner, D. (1998). More
evidence for relational shift in the development
of analogy: Children’s performance on a causalmapping task. Cognitive Development, 13, 453478.
Rattermann, M.J., Gentner, D., & DeLoache, J.
(1990). The effects of familiar labels on young
children’s performance in an analogical mapping
task. Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
22-29. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates
Yoshida H. & Smith, L.B. (2001). Early noun
lexicons in English and Japanese. Cognition, 82,
B63-B74.
Zhang, S., & Schmitt, B. (1998). Languagedependent
classification:
The
mental
representation of classifiers in cognition,
memory, and ad evaluations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 4, 375-385.

Acknowledgments
We thank children participated in this study.
This research was supported by NIH MH60200 to the
second author.

Reference
Doumas, L.A.A., Hummel, J.E., & Sandhofer, C.M.
(2008). Psychological review, 115(1), 1-43.
Gentner, D. (1982a). Are scientific analogies
metaphors? In D. Miall (Ed.) Metaphor:
Problems and perspectives (pp 106-132).
Wilmington, CA.: Harvester Press Ltd.
Gentner, D. (1982b). Why nouns are learned before
verbs: Linguistic Relativity versus natural
partitioning. In S. Kuczaj II (Ed.) Language,
thought and culture (pp 301-334). Hillsdale, N.J.:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7,
155-170.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping:
the relational shift. Child Development, 59, 4759.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L.L. (1999). Comparison in
the development of categories. Cognitive
Development, 14, 487-513.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L.L. (2006). Analogical
processes in language learning. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 15(6), 297301.
Gentner, D. & Rattermann, M.J. (1991). Language
and the career of similarity. In S.A. Gelman &
J.P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on thought and
language: Interrelations in development (pp.
225-277). London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Gopnik, A. & Choi, S. (1995). Names, relational
words, and cognitive development in English
and Korean speakers: nouns are not always
learned before verbs. In M. Tomasello & W.E.

1727

