UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cultural Evolution of Language: Implications for Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74d0x8hp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Chater, Nick
Christiansen, Morten H.
Griffiths, Thomas
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cultural Evolution of Language: Implications for Cognitive Science
Moderator: Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University & Santa Fe Institute

Nick Chater (n.chater@ucl.ac.uk)
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London

Thomas L. Griffiths (tom_griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley

Simon Kirby (simon@ling.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh

Keywords: language evolution; cultural transmission; language
acquisition; inductive biases; genetic constraints

Introduction
The past couple of decades have seen an explosion of
research on language evolution, initially fueled by Pinker
and Bloom’s (1990) groundbreaking article arguing for the
natural selection of biological structures dedicated to
language. The new millennium has seen a shift toward
explaining language evolution in terms of cultural evolution
rather than biological adaptation. Indeed, theoretical and
computational considerations indicate that there are
substantial restrictions on what linguistic properties can
evolve through natural selection (Chater, Reali &
Christiansen, 2009; Christiansen & Chater, 2008). In
contrast, cultural evolution is now emerging as a key
paradigm for understanding the evolution of language.
A rapidly growing bulk of work has begun to show how
nonlinguistic inductive biases amplified by cultural
transmission across generations may help explain many
facets of linguistic structure observable in today’s languages
(see Brighton, Smith & Kirby, 2005, for a review). The
basic insight from this work has been that wherever there is
imperfect transmission from one agent to another, the
transmission process becomes an adaptive system. Put
simply, the inevitable product of cultural transmission is a
system of behavior that appears to be designed to optimize
transmissibility. In the case of language, computer
simulations suggest that many key features of syntactic and
phonological structure arise as adaptations to constraints
like stimulus poverty, noise, processing constraints, etc.
Crucially, this research has many important implications
for cognitive science, not only in terms of the nature of the
biases to consider in language acquisition but also for
cognition, more generally. So far, however, little of this
work has surfaced at this conference or in the Cognitive
Science journal. In this symposium, we therefore take stock
of current work on the cultural evolution of language,
highlighting key implications of this work for cognitive
scientists from different perspectives, ranging from
philosophical considerations (Chater) and Bayesian analyses

(Griffiths) to evolutionary psycholinguistics (Kirby) and
molecular genetics (Christiansen).
The participants in this symposium have all worked
extensively on both language evolution and cognitive
science, more generally. Chater has been exploring the
interaction of language acquisition and evolution, especially
using formal analyses. Griffiths has been using
mathematical analyses and laboratory experiments to
explore how inductive biases influence the outcome of
cultural evolution. Kirby has used multi-agent simulation
modeling to understand the adaptive dynamics of the
cultural transmission of language, and more recently has
constructed close analogs of these simulations in laboratory
experiments. Christiansen has conducted both agent-based
simulations and artificial language learning experiments to
explore cultural evolution of linguistic structure, and is
currently using molecular genetics to investigate the innate
preconditions for the cultural transmission of language.
Together, the participants have published nearly 100 papers
relating to language evolution, including in high-quality
journals such as Behavioral & Brain Sciences, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, Proceedings of the
Royal Society, and Trends in Cognitive Sciences.

Chater: Cultural Induction and Language
Acquisition
There are two very different types of inductive inference
problems. In induction about the natural world, data is
generated by some external source, and the learner attempts
to predict how it continues. In cultural induction, by
contrast, the objective is to make the same predictions as
other learners. Thus, in language acquisition, children
receive partial linguistic input, and must generalize to many
new linguistic structures—but the standard of correctness is
to generalize in the same way as other learners. To the
extent that learners have the same biases and prior
experience, this dramatically simplifies the learning
problem, because their generalizations will typically agree.
More generally, language evolution itself can be viewed as
the accretion of successive generalizations upon which
learners converge. This perspective radically reshapes the

2075

problem of language acquisition, and other aspects of
cognitive development concerned with learning culturally
agreed patterns (Chater & Christiansen, submitted).

Griffiths: Uncovering Inductive Biases through
Cultural Evolution
Understanding the influence of language acquisition on
language evolution requires analyzing the relationship
between the inductive biases of individual learners and the
outcome of cultural evolution. Modeling learning as
Bayesian inference provides the opportunity to explore this
relationship, making the inductive biases of learners
transparent through a prior distribution. Analyses of simple
models of the transmission of languages and concepts along
chains of Bayesian learners suggest that inductive biases
should have a strong influence on the outcome of cultural
evolution (Griffiths, Kalish & Lewandowsky, 2008).
Laboratory experiments with human learners confirm these
predictions (Kalish, Griffiths & Lewandowsky, 2007).
These results provide insight into how cultural transmission
can take some of the burden of explaining the structure of
languages from biological evolution. In addition, they
suggest that simulating cultural evolution in the laboratory
may be an effective method for exploring human inductive
biases.

Kirby: Language Evolution through Iterated
Learning
Early work on the cultural evolution of language used
computational simulation to explore how population-level
behaviors like language can emerge out of iterated learning,
the repeated cycle of production of specific behaviors and
the perception/learning of those behaviors by another agent
(e.g., Kirby, Dowman & Griffiths, 2007). A key question is
whether a similar adaptive process can be observed in real
human learners. By placing the artificial language learning
paradigm within a cultural transmission framework, we can
observe the evolution of languages in the laboratory (Kirby,
Cornish & Smith, 2008). Results from these experiments
show that linguistic structure does indeed emerge from
initially random systems, and furthermore that this process
is non-intentional. In other words, this cultural process
provides “design without a designer” just as biological
evolution does. This has important implications for where to
look when seeking an explanatory mechanism for adaptive
complexity in any culturally transmitted behavior,
particularly one that has previously been assumed to require
biologically evolved innate constraints (Pinker & Bloom,
1990).

Christiansen: Genetic Constraints on the
Cultural Evolution of Language
Research on the cultural evolution of language also provides
a new perspective on the study of the genetic bases of
language, highlighting the importance of domain-general
mechanisms (Christiansen & Chater, 2008). For example,

sequential learning and language both involve the extraction
and further processing of discrete elements occurring in
complex temporal sequences. Past simulation work
combining biological evolution of sequential learning
abilities with cultural evolution of language in a population
of connectionist agents showed that constraints on
sequential learning can shape the evolution of linguistic
structure (Reali & Christiansen, 2009). A subsequent
molecular genetic study showed that common allelic
variations in the FOXP2 gene are associated with
differences in sequential learning (as measured by a serialresponse time task) and language (Tomblin et al., 2007).
These results suggest that FOXP2 influences systems that
are important to the development of both sequential learning
and language, supporting the hypothesis that language may
have been shaped through cultural evolution constrained by
underlying mechanisms for sequential learning.

References
Brighton, H., Smith, K. & Kirby, S. (2005). Language as an
evolutionary system. Physics of Life Reviews, 2, 177-226.
Chater, N. & Christiansen, M.H. (submitted). Language
acquisition meets language evolution. Submitted ms.
Chater, N., Reali, F. & Christiansen, M.H. (2009).
Restrictions on biological adaptations in language
evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106, 1015-1020.
Christiansen, M.H. & Chater, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 31,
489-558.
Griffiths, T.L., Kalish, M.L. & Lewandowsky, S. (2008).
Theoretical and experimental evidence for the impact of
inductive biases on cultural evolution. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society, 363, 3503-3514.
Kalish, M.L., Griffiths, T.L. & Lewandowsky, S. (2007).
Iterated learning: Intergenerational knowledge transmission
reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review,
14, 288-294.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105,
10681-10686.
Kirby, S., Dowman, M. & Griffiths, T.L. (2007). Innateness
and culture in the evolution of language. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 104, 5241-5245.
Pinker, S. & Bloom, P. (1990). Natural language and natural
selection. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 13, 707-727.
Reali, F. & Christiansen, M.H. (2009). Sequential learning
and the interaction between biological and linguistic
adaptation in language evolution. Interaction Studies, 10, 530.
Tomblin, J.B., Christiansen, M.H., Bjork, J.B., Iyengar, S.K.
& Murray, J.C. (2007). Association of FOXP2 genetic
markers with procedural learning and language. Poster
presented at the 57th Annual Meeting of the American
Society of Human Genetics, San Diego, CA.

2076

