UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Damned by Faint Praise: A Bayesian account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5j3388v0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Corner, Adam
Hahn, Ulrike
Harris, Adam

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

“Damned by Faint Praise”: A Bayesian account
Adam Harris (harrisaj@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Tower Building, Park Place,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK.

Adam Corner (corneraj@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Tower Building, Park Place,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK.

Ulrike Hahn (hahnu@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Tower Building, Park Place,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK.
positive evidence in these cases (which are the focus of the
present paper) as the Faint Praise effect.
Upon first consideration, the Faint Praise effect represents
a considerable challenge for the Bayesian theory of belief
revision – how can positive evidence ever lead to negative
belief change? Here we present and test a Bayesian
formalization within which the Faint Praise effect is readily
explained.

Abstract
“Damned by Faint Praise” is the phenomenon whereby weak
positive information leads to a negative change in belief.
However, in a Bayesian model of belief revision positive
information can seemingly only exert a positive change in
belief. We introduce a version of Bayes’ Theorem
incorporating the concept of epistemic closure. This
reformalization is able to predict the conditions under which a
‘damned by faint praise’ effect is observed. Moreover, good,
parameter-free fits are observed between the Bayesian model
and the experimental data. This provides further support for
the Bayesian approach to informal argumentation (e.g., Hahn
& Oaksford, 2007).

Formalising the Faint Praise Effect
The Bayesian framework provides a normative theory for
belief revision. On receipt of new evidence, people should
update their beliefs in a hypothesis in line with Bayes’
Theorem:

Keywords: Argument from ignorance; Bayesian probability;
Epistemic closure; Evidence

P ( h | e) 

Introduction

P ( h ) P (e | h )
P (e)

where P(h) is a person’s prior belief in the truth of the
hypothesis under scrutiny and P(e|h) is the likelihood term,
which captures the sensitivity of the test in signal detection
theory terms. This conditional probability is the individual’s
subjective belief in the probability that the provided piece of
evidence would be found given that the hypothesis were
true. P(e) corresponds to the base rate of the evidence item,
and P(h|e) is the individual’s posterior degree of belief in
the hypothesis given this new piece of evidence. Assuming

‘James is always punctual and polite’
The above sentence clearly identifies positive aspects of
James’ character. Were this however the only information
you were given about James within the context of a
reference letter, it is likely that your overall impression of
James would not substantially improve. In fact, it seems
more likely that your impression of him might be lowered
through the receipt of this information. In colloquial
English, one might say that James was ‘damned by faint
praise’.
The ‘Boomerang effect’, by which a very weak positive
argument can actually lead to a negative change in belief,
through the internal generation of stronger counterarguments, is already well documented within social
psychology (e.g., Petty & Cacioppo, 1996). We, however,
are specifically concerned with the effect of weak
arguments that clearly exclude important information
relating to the issue in question. Following the familiar
colloquial expression ‘damned by faint praise’, we shall
refer to negative belief change following the receipt of

P ( e | h )  P (e | h )

that is, assuming the evidence is not known to be
misleading, evidence in favor of the hypothesis, no matter
how weak, can never decrease the person’s degree of belief
in the hypothesis. Bayes’ theorem stipulates that positive
evidence should only have a positive impact on belief
change (see e.g., Lopes, 1985). Yet the Faint Praise effect is
seemingly a demonstration of the opposite: weak positive
evidence resulting in a negative change in belief.
A consideration of a well-known type of informal
argument, however, the so-called “argument from

292

ignorance”, suggests that the Faint Praise effect may
actually be amenable to a Bayesian formalization.
Arguments from ignorance are arguments based on the
absence of evidence, such as:

(Grice, 1975/2001, p. 171). Thus, the possible impact of
such evidence is best understood as an example of an
argument from ignorance – that is, the effect of not saying
“James is good at maths”.
Hahn and colleagues (Hahn & Oaksford, 2007; Hahn et
al., 2005) proposed a Bayesian formalization of the
argument from ignorance which included the concept of
epistemic closure. In addition to e and ¬e, a third
possibility, represented by the term n is included in this
Bayesian formalization. Here, n (as in ‘nothing’) refers to a
lack of evidence (i.e., not explicitly saying either “e” or “not
e”) whilst ¬e refers to explicit negative evidence. Such an
approach is familiar from Artificial Intelligence where one
might distinguish three possibilities in a database search
regarding a proposition (h): the search can either respond in
the affirmative (e), the negative (¬e), or it can find nothing
on the subject (n). Epistemic closure has been invoked here
to license inferences from search failure (i.e., a query
resulting in nothing) to non-existence, given that the
database is assumed to be complete.
The Bayesian formalization of epistemic closure is
directly analogous, except that it is probabilistic, and hence
accommodates arbitrary degrees of closure (Hahn &
Oaksford, 2007). For example, one might be certain that one
has lost a red sock after looking throughout the house, but
also be fairly certain if one has only looked in several key
locations, such as the drawer and the washing machine.
This three-valued approach to evidence, which allows one to
capture degree of closure by varying the probability of a 'no
response' (P(n|h)), helps capture two kinds of arguments
from ignorance:

‘Ghosts exist because nobody has proved that they
don’t.’
Examples like this have led to the view that arguments
from ignorance are fallacious (e.g., Copi & Cohen, 1990;
Evans & Palmer, 1983; Van Eemeren & Grootendorst,
2004). Oaksford & Hahn (2004), however, noted that not all
arguments from ignorance seem equally weak (see also
Walton, 1992). There are examples of this argument form
which seem far more plausible and, indeed, form the basis
of modern science. For example:
‘This drug is safe because the British Medical Association
have not found any evidence of side effects’
One factor that influences the strength of arguments from
ignorance is the notion of epistemic closure (Hahn &
Oaksford, 2007; Hahn, Oaksford, & Bayindir, 2005;
Walton, 1992). Epistemic closure is perhaps best understood
by means of an example: Upon consulting a railway
timetable to determine whether the 12:45 Cardiff to London
train stops at Oxford, one assumes that the timetable
provides a complete list of all the stations, and only those
stations, at which the train will stop (i.e., the timetable is a
database that is epistemically closed). Consequently, if
Oxford is not included on the timetable then one can
confidently conclude that the train will not stop at Oxford.
Hence, the following argument from ignorance seems
entirely reasonable:

(a) not (Database says: not exists), therefore exists
e.g., Ghosts exist, because nobody has proven that they
don’t, and

‘The train will not stop in Oxford, because an Oxford stop
is not listed in the timetable’

(b) not (Database says: exists), therefore not exists
How, then, can this concept of epistemic closure explain
the ‘damned by faint praise’ phenomenon? We propose that
when a weak argument results in a change in belief in the
opposite direction to that intended by the argument, it is as a
result of implicatures drawn by the argument’s recipient
relating to evidence not included in the argument.
Consequently, the change in belief brought about by such a
weak argument results from an implicit argument from
ignorance. If James’ maths teacher writes a reference to
support James’ application for a university mathematics
course that reads ‘James is punctual and polite’, then he his
flouting the conversational maxim of quantity: “Make your
contribution as informative as is required” (Grice,
1975/2001, p. 171). Through a recognition that James’
maths teacher would surely know more about James than
these two facts (such as, for example, his maths ability) and
presumably be motivated to include this information were it
true, the reader can imply that the referee must “be wishing
to impart information that he is reluctant to write down”

e.g., I cannot find my sock, hence it is lost.
We propose that the “damned by faint praise”
phenomenon stems from an inference of type (b) above. To
return to our earlier example, the referee does not say that
James is good at maths, so the inference that is subsequently
made is that he is not good at maths. The reader’s degree of
belief in the falsity of a given hypothesis having not
received a specific item of evidence is therefore given by:

P ( h | n ) 

P ( h ) P ( n | h )
P ( n)

where P(n|¬h) = 1 – [P(e|¬h) + P(¬e |¬h)] and P(n) = 1 –
[P(e) + P(¬e)]. Thus, this account incorporates a result of
Gricean pragmatics of conversation into a normative
Bayesian framework.

293

Within the present conceptualization, the faint praise
effect will occur wherever P(n|h) < P(n|¬h). Hence, it
should be observed where a motivated (or positively
inclined), but non-lying source is presenting an argument.
By contrast, there is no reason for a faint praise inference in
the case of a maximally uninformed source, P(n|h) ≈
P(n|¬h), who simply knows nothing on the topic, or given a
source who prefers, where possible, to provide negative
information P(n|h)  P(n|¬h).
Returning to our example of the reference letter, consider
that instead of being written by James’ maths teacher, it has
been written by James’ tutor who does not teach maths and
who only rarely meets with James. In this instance, it could
reasonably be assumed that his tutor would not possess any
specialist knowledge concerning James’ maths ability. With
this assumption, the reader of the reference letter could not
make any inferences pertaining to James’ intelligence on the
basis of the letter. Consequently, our theory would not
predict the occurrence of a “damned by faint praise” effect
in this instance as P(n|h) ≈ P(n|¬h).
It should also be clear from the above, and our focus upon
what is not being said as the explanation for the ‘damned by
faint praise’ effect, that material that has preceded the weak
argument will affect its influence. Returning again to our
example of the reference letter, we suggest that inferences
will be made about James’ maths ability as a result of the
referee not mentioning his maths ability within the letter.
Now consider the case in which the referee has already
stated that the candidate is a very good mathematician.
Following this reference it is likely that the reader has raised
his opinion of James’ maths ability. If the referee now adds
that the candidate is punctual (our previous weak argument),
what effect will it have upon the reader’s newly revised
degree of belief? Because our theory assumes that a weak
positive argument has a negative impact through an implicit
argument from ignorance (as a result of not including
important positive information), a negative impact is no
longer predicted (as the important positive information is
included). A strong argument in favour of the candidate has
already been presented, and so this new evidence will have a
persuasive impact based solely upon the importance that the
reader places upon punctuality. Hence, his opinion of the
candidate will either remain unchanged or increase, but it
will not decrease.1
The hypotheses of the present study are therefore that a
weak argument from an expert source will result in a
decrease in degree of belief of the hypothesis being
advocated (a Faint Praise effect), whilst a weak argument
from a non-expert source will not have this effect. In
addition, a weak argument preceded by a strong argument
will also not have this effect. The first prediction is
consistent with findings of Birnbaum and colleagues
(Birnbaum & Mellers, 1983; Birnbaum & Stegner, 1979)
who found that effects of source bias were greater for
sources of greater expertise.

Method
Participants
95,
predominantly
female,
Cardiff
University
undergraduates participated in the experiment in exchange
for course credit. They were randomly assigned to one of
three experimental conditions.

Design, Materials and Procedure
We manipulated two independent variables: the perceived
expertise (i.e., the presumed knowledge) of the source, and
the type of argument presented. There were three
experimental conditions, such that participants either read a
strong followed by a weak argument from an expert source,
only a weak argument from an expert source, or only a weak
argument from a non-expert source. The remaining possible
condition (a strong argument, followed by a weak argument
from a non-expert source) was not included as it did not
impact directly on our experimental predictions.
Participants were presented with a fictional UCAS
application2 containing background information about
James Driver (date of birth, address, GCSE3 grades
obtained). Based on this information, participants were
required to indicate on a scale from 0 (definitely not) – 100
(definitely) whether they thought the applicant should be
accepted to study mathematics at Newcastle University.
Depending on the experimental condition they were
assigned to, they were then presented with either one or two
arguments from an expert or a non-expert source. The
expert source was an A-level mathematics teacher, who had
‘taught James maths throughout his AS and A-level course.’
The non-expert source was the personal tutor of the
applicant, who only met him ‘once a term to discuss any
concerns James has’. The weak argument stated that James
was:
‘punctual, and always did his best to look smart’.
The strong argument stated that the applicant was:
‘sharp and clever with an ability to critically analyze
others’ proofs and theories. When new material is
introduced he is quick on the uptake. On the odd occasion
when he has failed to grasp a concept straight away, he
has demonstrated considerable maturity in his use of the
library’s resources to help him understand the topic in
question.’

2
UCAS is the organization through which British school pupils
apply to university.
3
GCSEs are the first public examinations taken by pupils in the
UK.

1
Assuming, of course, that the reader of the reference letter does
not consider punctuality to be a negative trait.

294

Following each argument, participants were asked to
provide updated ratings of whether they thought James
should be accepted onto the course.
After providing their numerical ratings, participants were
also asked to indicate why they did (or did not) change their
ratings.
As an additional test of our Bayesian account we then
obtained participants’ estimates of the relevant conditional
probabilities for a Bayesian formalization of the argument.
Through such data we were able to provide a direct,
quantitative test of the validity of a Bayesian formalization
of the Faint Praise effect. As our formalization predicts that
the effect occurs because of a lack of information, at the end
of the experiment participants gave 6 conditional
probabilities, three conditional on the state of affairs that
James is an intelligent and resourceful mathematician, and
three conditional on the state of affairs that James is NOT an
intelligent and resourceful mathematician. The format in
which these questions were asked is given below:

Mean belief change brought about
by the weak argument

of this effect negates the possibility that these data could be
an artifact of floor or ceiling effects. Having received the
strong argument, participants’ ratings of James’ suitability
(M = 77.50; SD = 11.29) were higher than their priors in the
weak argument only condition (M = 58.44; SD = 10.88),
t(62) = 6.88, p<.001.
In addition, the weak argument from the non-expert
source had a significantly weaker negative effect than that
from the expert source on ratings of James’ suitability, t(61)
=1.83, p<.04 (1-tailed). Indeed, the weak argument from the
non-expert source exerted no reliable effect on people’s
judgments of James’ suitability, t(30) = 0.78, p>.05.

In your opinion, if James is an intelligent and resourceful
mathematician, what is the chance that his maths teacher,
who has taught James all his AS-level and A-level maths,
would state in his UCAS reference for James:
(a) that James is an intelligent and resourceful
mathematician
(b) that James is not an intelligent and resourceful
mathematician
(c) he would make no mention of this information

8
6
4
2

Weak argument

0

Strong and weak
argument

-2
-4
-6
-8
Expert

Non-expert
Referee

Figure 1: Mean effect of weak argument on ratings of
applicant’s suitability in each experimental condition. Error
bars are plus and minus 1 standard error.

Please report your answers as numbers between 0
(absolutely no chance) and 100 (would be certain to report
this information)

A scan of participants’ explanations detailing why their
degree of belief had changed supported our intuition that the
Faint Praise effect is a result of an inference from missing
evidence – participants’ cited reasons such as: “He left out
lots of information about his ability.” In addition to this
qualitative support, we were also able to analyze the
predictions derived from Bayes’ Theorem using the
conditional probabilities supplied by participants . From an
analysis of participants’ subjective conditional probabilities,
it was possible to split the data, for those participants
receiving only the weak argument, into groups of
participants whose subjective conditional probabilities
would predict them to show the faint praise effect (that is,
P(n|h) < P(n|¬h)) and those whose probabilities would not.4
Only four (out of 62) participants reported conditional
probabilities that did not satisfy this inequality and none of
these demonstrated a Faint Praise effect, supporting a
Bayesian formalization of the phenomenon. Participants
who had received both a strong and weak argument were
not included in any parameter-based analyses, because the

(a) __________
(b) __________
(c) __________
Participants in all experimental groups completed these
questions, but for those in the non-expert group, the words
‘maths teacher, who has taught James all his AS-level and
A-level maths’ were replaced by: ‘tutor, who meets with
James once a term to discuss any concerns he might have’.

Results
Both experimental predictions were supported by the data.
Figure 1 shows the effect of the weak argument on
participants’ ratings of whether James should be accepted to
read mathematics at Newcastle University. It is clear from
Figure 1 that a weak argument presented on its own by an
expert had a significant negative effect on participants’
judgments of James’ suitability, t(31) = 2.93, p<.01, while
the very same argument presented after a strong argument
had a positive effect, t(31) = 2.98, p<.01. A t-test confirmed
that the difference between the two conditions was
significant, t(62) = 3.67, p=.001. Additionally, the direction

4
One participant did not provide conditional probabilities and
therefore could not be included in this analysis.

295

relevant conditional probabilities were not provided in this
condition.
As a general check of the validity of the Bayesian
approach to argument convincingness, a correlation was
performed between the responses made by participants, and
those predicted from their conditional probabilities
(calculated from Bayes’ Theorem).5 The strong correlation
between observed ratings and those predicted from their
Bayesian conditional probabilities, r(60) = .43, p<.001, does
however provide a good fit of the Bayesian model to the
experimental data. Notably, there were no free parameters in
the model which could be ‘tweaked’ to match the data. In
addition, the model is compared simultaneously with the
individual data points of all eligible participants. Thus, the
model evaluation has not benefited from any averaging of
experimental data (as is usually performed for such
analyses) which would reduce the amount of noise in the
estimates (see e.g., Ariely et al., 2000; Cohen, Sanborn, &
Shiffrin, 2008; Wallsten, Budescu, Erev, & Diederich,
1997).

tentatively suggested that averaging might be less likely to
occur in situations where stimuli were more clearly
‘marked’ in support of or against a given hypothesis.
Subsequently, Lopes (1987) succeeded in reducing
participants’ use of an averaging rule by instructing them to
separate their judgments of belief updating into 2 steps,
where the first was the labelling of a piece of evidence as
either favouring or countering the hypothesis. We believe
that our participants did not show the use of sub-optimal
averaging strategies as the domain used is familiar to them
and hence the evidence is subjectively well ‘marked’ as to
the hypothesis it supports. The failure to observe the use of
averaging strategies in this context suggests that previous
documentation of their sub-optimal usage (e.g., Lopes,
1985) may result from the unfamiliar and artificial nature of
traditional belief updating tasks (e.g., the bookbag and poker
chip paradigm).
McKenzie, Lee and Chen (2002) described data, using
both legal and informal interpersonal dispute paradigms,
demonstrating that evidence in favour of side A sometimes
decreased confidence in side A (thus resembling the Faint
Praise effect). They propose that such data can be captured
by traditional adding and averaging models of belief
revision if the reference point against which the evidence is
compared is dynamic and more demanding than neutrality.
McKenzie et al. presented the data from four experiments
which supported their proposal of a new standard against
which a case’s strength should be assessed, its Minimum
Acceptable Strength (MAS). They propose, and offer
empirical support for, three claims related to the MAS.
Firstly, they show that it is more demanding than neutrality.
Secondly, they show that the MAS for the second case is
influenced by the strength of the first case, such that it is
more demanding following the presentation of a strong
opposing case. Thirdly, they show that it is more demanding
than neutrality because the cases are presented with a bias.
In other words, the evidence presented is not a random
selection of all the information available about the
hypothesis in question, but is specifically chosen by the
discussant to support their own interests. McKenzie et al.’s
theory could extend to explain the data reported in this
paper through this third claim. The reference point for an
argument being presented in a reference letter might be
considered more demanding than neutrality because
references are normally written to enhance the positive
aspects of their subject and as such they are positively
biased. If an argument does not meet the MAS then
participants’ implicit reasoning appears to be along the lines
of ‘If that’s the best they can do, then I believe the other
side (even) more.’” (McKenzie et al., 2002, p. 14). We,
however, propose that the present, Bayesian, account of
such empirical findings represents greater parsimony for it
is able to account for the result within the existing Bayesian
framework without the need to add a new comparative
standard (MAS) to an already existing theory. In addition,
the finding that the relevant conditional probabilities

Discussion
At first glance, the Faint Praise effect would seem to present
a challenge to the Bayesian theory of belief revision. How
can positive evidence ever lead to negative belief change?
We have proposed that the effect is an example of an
implicit argument from ignorance – and so the negative
belief revision is being driven by inferences about the
absence of positive information. A Bayesian formalization
incorporating the concept of epistemic closure enabled
empirical predictions to be made and tested. The
experimental data matched Bayesian predictions, and a good
parameter free fit was obtained between participants’ ratings
and the Bayesian model.
Notably, our results cannot be accommodated by
averaging models of belief adjustment as these would
predict the opposite effect to that observed in our data (e.g.,
Hogarth & Einhorn, 1992; Lopes, 1985). An averaging
model effectively evaluates the polarity of a piece of
information with respect to current belief. Thus, such
models predict a stronger negative effect of positive
evidence after the receipt of a strong argument than without
the prior receipt of a strong argument. Such a result is often
observed in traditional belief updating tasks (see Hogarth &
Einhorn, 1992; Lopes, 1985, and references therein). Lopes
has suggested that the propensity for people to use
averaging models can explain conservatism in traditional
belief updating tasks (e.g., Edwards, 1968). Lopes (1985)
5
Although the hypothesis that James is an intelligent and
resourceful mathematician is not the same as the hypothesis that he
should be accepted to read mathematics at Newcastle University,
this analysis proceeded from the assumption that James being an
intelligent and resourceful mathematician is the central concern of
whether or not he should be admitted to a mathematics course at
Newcastle University. Consequently it is presented only as an
indication of the potential power of the Bayesian formalization
rather than as direct evidence.

296

predicted the Faint Praise effect provides quantitative
support for this Bayesian account.
Perhaps the most fundamental point to be taken from this
experiment is that the relationship between source and
message characteristics is a complicated one, and the effect
that an argument will have on the recipient of that argument
cannot be predicted without information pertaining to the
source of that argument. Indeed, in some situations these
interactions can result in seemingly counter-intuitive results,
such as a weak message being less persuasive from an
expert source than from a non-expert source. This work
extends that of Hahn and colleagues (e.g., Hahn &
Oaksford, 2007; Oaksford & Hahn, 2004) in which a
Bayesian approach to argument fallacies has been
introduced. A practical problem for this approach is
determining how the relevant probabilities are derived. The
results of this study suggest that among the factors
influencing the conditional probabilities [P(e|h); P(¬e|h);
P(n|h)] is the subjective impression of the depth of
knowledge and bias of a message communicator, which
must be considered within the context of the conversational
pragmatics that govern language use (Grice, 1975/2001).

Evans, D., & Palmer, H. (1983). Understanding Arguments.
Cardiff, UK: Department of Extra-Mural Studies,
University College, Cardiff.
Grice, H. P. (1975/2001). Logic and conversation. In A. P.
Martinich (Ed.), The Philosophy of Language (4th Edition)
(pp. 165-175). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2007). The rationality of
informal argumentation: A Bayesian approach to
reasoning fallacies. Psychological Review, 114, 704-732.
Hahn, U., Oaksford, M., & Bayindir, H. (2005). How
convinced should we be by negative evidence?
Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, 27, 887-892.
Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1992). Order effects in
belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. Cognitive
Psychology, 24, 1-55.
Lopes, L. L. (1985). Averaging rules and adjustment
processes in Bayesian inference. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 23, 509-512.
Lopes, L. L. (1987). Procedural debiasing. Acta
Psychologica, 64, 167-185.
McKenzie, C. R. M., Lee, S. M., & Chen, K. K. (2002).
When negative evidence increases confidence: change in
belief after hearing two sides of a dispute. Journal
of
Behavioral Decision Making, 15, 1-18.
Oaksford, M., & Hahn, U. (2004). A Bayesian approach to
the argument from ignorance. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58, 75-85.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1996). Attitudes and
persuasion: Classic and contemporary approaches.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Van Eemeren, F. H., & Grootendorst, R. (2004). A
systematic theory of argumentation: the pragmadialectical approach. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D. V., Erev, I., & Diederich, A.
(1997). Evaluating and combining subjective probability
estimates. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 10,
243-268.
Walton, D. N. (1992). Nonfallacious arguments from
ignorance. American Philosophical Quarterly, 29, 381387.

Acknowledgments
Adam Harris and Adam Corner were supported by ESRC
studentships. We thank James Close, Carl Hodgetts and
Andreas Jarvstad for assisting with data collection and
Harriet Over for helpful comments on an earlier draft of the
manuscript.

References
Ariely, D., Au, W. T., Bender, R. H., Budescu, D. V., Dietz,
C. B., Gu, H., et al. (2000). The effects of averaging
subjective probability estimates between and within
judges. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 6,
130-147.
Birnbaum, M. H., & Mellers, B. A. (1983). Bayesian
inference: combining base rates with opinions of sources
who vary in credibility. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 45, 792-804.
Birnbaum, M. H., & Stegner, S. E. (1979). Source
credibility in social judgment: bias, expertise, and the
judge’s point of view. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 48-74.
Cohen, A. L., Sanborn, A. N., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2008).
Model evaluation using grouped or individual data.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15, 692-712.
Copi, I. M., & Cohen, C. (1990). Introduction to Logic (8th
Edition). New York: Macmillan.
Edwards, W. (1968). Conservatism in Human Information
Formal
Processing. In B. Kleinmuntz
(Ed.),
Representation of Human Judgment (pp. 17-52). New
York: Wiley.

297

