UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Detecting Audio-Video Tempo Discrepancies between Conductor and Orchestra

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4v46c1k7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Danz, Adam
Janyan, Armina

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Detecting Audio-Video Tempo Discrepancies between Conductor and Orchestra
Adam D. Danz (adam.danz@gmail.com)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Armina Janyan (ajanyan@cogs.nbu.bg)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria
Abstract
Tempo perception has been studied using many different
methodologies in trying to isolate the motion patterns of a
conductor in experimental stimuli. In doing so, the context of
conducting has been ignored including secondary bodily
motion, expression and communication from the conductor,
and conducting gestures outside of the realm of tempo
control. The aim of this study is to test the ability of trained
musicians to detect tempo discrepancies between a conductor
and an orchestra using natural footage of a conductor from a
musician’s perspective under manipulated experimental
conditions.
Keywords: tempo discrepancy;
perception; audio-visual; RT.

conducting;

orchestra;

Introduction
The ability of humans to subdivide a flowing continuum of
music into equal and regular temporal components known
as tempo has been studied using many different
experimental paradigms (Lapidaki, 2000; Moelants &
McKinney, 2004; Repp & Keller, 2004; Wang, 1984).
However, in efforts to isolate independent variables and
eliminate confounding variables, experimenters have
created stimuli that no longer represent realistic
performance conditions. Stimuli have been reduced to mere
auditory metronomic pulses, conductor motions have been
restricted and confined to the isolated motion of arms or
hands, and only small segments of music have been used in
stimuli not representing the experience of movements and
phrases heard in music performance.
The present study investigates the ability of trained
musicians to detect audio-visual tempo discrepancies
between a conductor and an orchestra by using natural and
unrestrained video footage of a conductor accompanied by
an orchestra. The video was then manipulated to create the
experimental conditions. This study is not only the first to
use a natural setting of conductor and orchestra but also the
first to investigate detection of tempo discrepancies via
manipulation of visual modality in simultaneous comparison
to a steady audio tempo.

Tempo Ranges and Preferred Tempo
Tempo in music is measured by beats per minute (bpm) and
represents a division of time that cycles for a finite period
during music performance. Just as the human visual system
is limited in perceiving only a small segment of the
electromagnetic spectrum, the human auditory system is

limited in perceiving a certain range of tempi (Van Noorden
& Moelants, 1999). A tempo above ~300 bpm (200 ms or 5
Hz) is perceptually difficult to discern due to physical
constraints of the human ears and information processing
abilities. A tempo under ~40 bpm (1500 ms or 0.67 Hz)
results in perceptual isolation of each beat and is beyond the
capacity of the working memory to process two consecutive
beats that are required to create a tempo. Moelants (2002)
implied that there must be a zero point between these ranges
where tempo perception is optimal. Using a taping
paradigm, Moelants found the range to be centered around
120 bpm (500 ms, 2 Hz) with a range from 115-127 bpm.
Using a similar tapping paradigm, Moelants and McKinney
(2004) showed that tempi near 120 bpm are more likely to
be accurately perceived than tempi further to either
extremity. Faster and slower tempi resulted in higher
ambiguity of perceived tempo.
Vos et. al. (1997) used a forced directional response
paradigm to investigate perceived tempo change in three
tempo conditions: (240, 120, and 60 bpm) across 11
incremental conditions ranging from a 10% increase to 10%
decrease in tempo. Subjects were presented with auditory
stimuli and were instructed to report either an increase or
decrease in tempo change. More accelerations were
detected than decelerations with the higher tempo value and
more decelerations were detected than accelerations in the
lower tempo value. An equal amount of accelerations and
decelerations were detected with the 120 bpm condition.
Vos et. al. (1997) showed that auditory sensitivity to
changes in tempo increases as the change in tempo moves
further in either direction from 120 bpm.
Similar to the procedure used by Vos et. al. (1997),
Jongsma et. al. (2007) performed an ERP study of auditory
tempo discrepancies in seven conditions including increase
and decrease of tempo discrepancies of 2%, 5%, 10%, and a
control condition exhibiting no change. Base tempi were a
bit under the 120 bpm ‘preferred tempo’. Individual
participants differed greatly in their ability to detect small
tempo change. Some participants were able to identify all
quantities of tempo change above chance level while others
were only able to detect the more obvious 10% changes.
Interestingly, the direction of tempo change (increase or
decrease) had no effect with respect to response accuracy.
This might be due to the stimuli falling within a tempo
range close to the preferred range described by Moelants.
(2002).

3064

Incorporating visual tempo
There are many sources of tempo in musical performance.
Auditory sources include sound produced by other
instrumentalists in the ensemble as well as base tempi that
could be provided by a metronome. Visual source of tempo
include the conductor, the motion of other instrumentalists
such as stringed instruments moving their bows in
synchrony, or tapping of the foot of another instrumentalist
across the ensemble. Furthermore, internal representations
of perceived, expected, or interpreted tempi may affect a
musician’s performance. Luck & Sloboda (2007) tested
musicians’ ability to synchronize with visual cues provided
by a conductor using a point-light paradigm where a
reflective marker is attached to each of the conductors’ right
index finger which is recorded by a motion-capturing
camera recording the position of the marker in 3D space at
60 frames per second. Two different conductors with
different levels of conducting experience were used to
produce the videos. Among the independent variables were
slow, medium, and fast tempi (60, 90, 120 bpm
respectively). Video recordings were made without the use
of a metronome. Participants in the study were instructed to
tap in time with the point-light motions. The experienced
conductors provided more consistent beat patterns compared
to the less experienced conductor. Surprisingly, the less
experienced conductor elicited slightly more consistent
synchronization from participants compared to the
experienced conductor. With concern to the tempi, the
smallest mean standard deviation (MSD) was associated
with the fast tempo (120 bpm) and the largest MSD was
associated with the slow tempo (60 bpm).
The point-light paradigm has been often used in music
research but lacks contextual data that is pertinent in music
performance.
Luck & Slaboda’s (2007) stimuli, for
example, only tracks the right hand leaving the left hand of
the conductor, often used for dynamic control, beginning
and ending of phrases, and expression (Holden, 2003),
unaccounted for. Not only this, but point-light paradigms
representing conducting patterns excludes other bodily
motion, facial expression, and eye contact used by
conductors to communicate and express to the musicians.

Incorporating Context
Whereas most experimental paradigms of tempo
discrimination involve isolation of audio or visual tempi
from other factors by using metronomic beats or point-light
methods, in an attempt to add context into an experimental
paradigm, Wang (1984) programmed a symphonic excerpt
into a computer so that tempo of a musical composition
could be altered and tested. Other factors were tested as
well including even and uneven rhythm, solo melody and
accompanied melody, etc. Each item began with 72 bpm
and remained steady for at least eight beats. 88 college
students were asked to tap their fingers while counting the
number of beats and to note when the change of tempo
occurred and if the change was faster or slower. Tempo
changed at +/- 1 bpm per measure after onset. “…subjects

needed more time to perceive tempo increase than tempo
decrease, more time to perceive tempo change when the
rhythm was uneven than even, and when the melody was
played alone than when accompanied with steady rhythm.”
(p. 174). Furthermore, 4% of the responses indicated a
tempo change before the experimentally manipulated
change actually took place. Similar premature responses
occurred in the present study and will be discussed later.
Clemens (2008) investigated the perception of expressive
movements used by conductors as seen from three different
positions using five different conductors. Participants with
orchestral performance experience watched video sequences
of a conductor from three different positions: left hand side
of the conductor, a frontal view, and to the right of the
conductor. Two pianists performed music with the
conductor. Participants judged the expressiveness of the
conductor with a continuous response interface and then
rated several items including amount of information, level
of arousal, valence, expressive communication, facial
expression, rhythmical clarity, and charisma. Amount of
information, level of arousal, and rhythmical clarity resulted
in higher ratings from the frontal perspective while
expressive communication was rated higher from the lefthand perspective compared to the right-hand perspective.
Significant differences also occurred in these dimensions
between conductors. There were no differences in the
findings according to the participants’ usual positions in an
orchestra given his or her particular instrument. Therefore
habituated perspectives of the conductor had no effect when
viewed from other angels.
Considering the above, the present study investigates the
interplay of audio and visual tempi as experienced by a
musician in an orchestral setting with real instrumentation
and a full view of a conductor (from the waist up). Unlike
previous studies, audio aspects remained the same while the
visual timing was manipulated by an increase and decrease
of 5 and 20 percent tempo adjustments. All subjects viewed
the conductor from the same perspective at about fifteen
degrees to the left of the conductor which, according to
Clemens’ findings, offers maximal information to the
musician of tempo and expression.
The change of
perspective from the participants’ normal placement in an
orchestra according to their instrument to the current fixed
perspective used in this study should also have no effect.

Method
Participants
Sixteen musicians (7 males) participated in the experiment
including 5 violinists, 5 vocalists (three soprano, one tenor,
and one alto), 3 pianists, 2 trumpeters, and a trombonist
with an overall mean age of 32 years (19-50 years; 9.4 SD).
Of these participants, three had previous experience
conducting, one of which reported a high level of
conducting experience and ability. The only requirement
for participation was a minimum of two years experience in

3065

an orchestra or choir lead by a conductor. See table 1 for
summary of participant data.
Table 1: Characteristics of the participants, means and
standard deviations in parenthesis.
M (SD)
Self estimated proficiency in instrument 5.31 (1.22)
Self estimated proficiency in
understanding a conductor
5.56 (1.07)
Years of performance in an orchestra or
choir
10.63 (7.00)
Years of experience with perspective
instrument or voice
17.88 (9.10)
Age
32 (9.40)

Eschman & Zuccolotto, 2002). Of the 180 clips, 10 were
practice trials and 12 were left unchanged and without
discrepancy. Two of these clips were used as practice trials
and as unchanged trials. The remaining 160 clips were the
40 experimental conditions represented in all four
conditions. The trials that did not have an experimentally
manipulated tempo discrepancy varied in length from 1731s.
This particular video was chosen because of the moderate
experience level and low familiarity of the conductor and
musicians. The low resolution of the original video was
also desirable in that it completely camouflaged the visual
lag effects that usually accompany temporal editing of
video.

Procedure
Note. Proficiencies were self-rated on a seven point scale
where seven is most proficient.

Stimuli
180 short video clips were segmented from a six-minute
video of a graduate student from Texas State University
conducting an orchestral version of O Magnum Mysterium
arranged by Morten Lauridsen (2000) at about 76 bpm. The
original video was compressed with low resolution. The
view of the conductor was stable throughout the video at an
estimated angle of 15 degrees to the conductor’s left with
full frontal view of the conductor from waist up. No
musicians were in view and the conductor’s waist-to-head
stretched from bottom to top of the visual display while his
arms and hands were in full view throughout each clip.
From these six minutes, 180 clips were segmented into 1733 seconds each. Segments therefore overlapped with other
segments but never shared the same starting point nor point
of tempo discrepancy. Certain parts of the video were
avoided in creating the stimuli including refrains, tempo
changes, and whole notes played by the ensemble since they
do not exhibit an auditory tempo. Each clip began on the
downbeat, or ‘beat one’, of a measure or within a few
milliseconds of the downbeat.
Using Ulead VideoStudio 8.0 SE Basic, the audio portion
of each clip was separated from the video. At least four
beats into each clip, or four conducting strokes, a downbeat
was selected as a point of discrepancy where the video
aspect was increased and decreased at five and twenty
percent making a total of four clips of the same segment of
music in four separate conditions (2x2 (direction of tempo
change: increase vs. decrease) x (magnitude of tempo
change: 5% vs. 20%)). Each clip ended ten seconds after
the point of discrepancy allowing for the same temporal
window for detection for each clip. However, depending on
the magnitude and direction of the tempo change, this
window will vary in the number of visual beats after the
discrepancy from 10 (decrease of 20%) to 15 beats (increase
of 20%).
The clips were then reformatted into MPEG format
suitable for use with the E-prime software (Schneider,

Subjects were tested individually on a Dell laptop computer
(1.70 GHz processor with 1 GM RAM) with E-prime
software (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002).
Subjects sat comfortably in front of the laptop wearing full
coverage headphones with volume control and an external
mouse with one button. Subjects were provided with
written instructions to press the mouse button if and when
they feel that there is a discrepancy between the conductor
and the orchestra.
Subjects were informed by the
experimenter to listen to the ensemble as a whole rather than
concentrating on individual instruments. Additionally,
subjects were instructed to answer as quickly as possible but
to focus on accuracy and to be sure that they have detected a
discrepancy before depressing the button.
Four
pseudorandomized lists were generated so that no more than
two stimuli of the same conditions occurred in concession.
Non-manipulated trials were placed throughout the list.
Each trial began with a 500ms fixation cross followed by
the clip. The intertrial interval was set at 1500 ms. After 10
practice trials, subjects read a second instruction to ask
questions if there is anything unclear. The experimental
session then followed lasting between 20-28 minutes.

Results
Dependent variables included reaction time (RT) and
percentage of error in detecting the discrepancy between
visual and audio tempi. From the 800 total trials, 160 were
non-manipulated control trials. The remaining 640 were
experimentally manipulated independent variables (320 in
each factor of increase and decrease). Of these 640 tempo
discrepancies, 27.5% were missed by participants and no
RT was recorded. From the remaining 464 trials that
exhibited detection, 317 (49.5% of the whole number of
trials) resulted in detection after the onset of the stimuli
while the remaining 147 trials (23%) exhibited detection
before the onset of the stimuli. These data suggest that
either 1) the participants were not good enough in detecting
audio-visual tempo discrepancy, 2) the stimuli exhibited
unintentional tempo discrepancies by the musicians and/or
conductor, 3) quality of the video effected participants’
judgment, or 4) any combination of these factors.

3066

Reaction time analysis was based on correct responses
only. For a response to be correct, discrepancy detection
was required to occur within the ten-second window after
the discrepancy onset. This eliminated trials that did not
feature a discrepancy as well as trials where participants
clicked the button before the discrepancy onset. 23% of the
trials resulted in a detection before the onset of the
manipulated discrepancy. There are several explanations
for this relatively high error rate. First, as discussed
previously, the quality of performance of the conductor and
the orchestra was moderate at best. The beginning of some
phrases were not directly on cue with the downbeat of the
conductor. The performance of the brass section was a bit
weak at times as well. Also, the conductor naturally
exhibited slight tempo variances from time to time, typical
of live performance. Therefore the participants could have
had valid reason to press the button in detecting the smaller
fluctuations of tempo that were outside of experimental
control. This may be a result of using contextual stimuli
extracted from real performance rather than experimentally
controlled or simplified stimuli.
Another cause of possible tempo ambiguity is the low
resolution of the video which made the conductor’s larger
arm movements appear to have a slight lag compared to the
smaller detailed movement. Lastly, due to being instructed
to detect tempo variations, subjects put extra attention into
tempo and may have been sensitive to any type of
fluctuation in tempo whatsoever. For these reasons,
detection of a discrepancy before the experimentally
manipulated onset was not counted as error nor measured in
reaction time analysis.

instruments in this study and no participant had recognized
or previously performed the piece.
A 2x2 ANOVA analysis on item and subject RT means
obtained main affect of magnitude of change (20% vs. 5%
change) (Fi (1, 134)=31.83; p<0.001; Fs (1, 56)=13.31;
p<0.001) which suggests that participants detected 20%
tempo changes faster (4665 ms) than 5% changes (6754
ms). The first reason for high RT is because of the
somewhat slow base tempo of 76 bpm of the stimuli. Two
consecutive beats at this tempo consume 790 ms which
would be the minimal time necessary to identify the 76 bpm
tempo.
Secondly, unlike other tempo detection
experiments, subjects were instructed to focus on a visual
tempo change in comparison to an audio tempo counterpart
being perceived simultaneously. This requires a vast
amount of working memory and timing processes that are
not necessary in single-tempo processing. Lastly, the high
RT values may suggest that the process of detecting visual
tempo-changes at this tempo is neither simple nor automatic
and may require additional processes or mechanisms to
confirm the change in tempo. No main effects of directional
tempo change (increase vs. decrease) or interaction were
obtained in either item or subject analysis (p >0.1). In other
words, participants exhibited quicker reaction time to 20%
visual tempo changes than 5% changes but the direction of
the change (increase or decrease) had no effect. (cf. Table
2).
Table 3: Mean error rates (in %) and standard deviations (in
parentheses) for four experimental conditions, item means.

Table 2: Mean response times (in ms) and standard
deviations in parentheses for four experimental conditions,
item means.

increase
decrease

5%
6994(1871)
6396(3409)

increase
decrease

20%
4420(1760)
4922(1276)

Table 2 shows mean reaction time and standard deviation
per condition. Standard deviation scores are high due to
high variability between participants and their formal
experience and training. Conducting gestures are highly
individual requiring much exposure to a single conductor
before musicians are able to read and understand his non
verbal communication. This particular conductor was
unknown by any of the participants who were reading his
gestures for the first time. Secondly, the musical education
and experience of the participants varied greatly. There
were five participants acquainted with string instruments,
three with brass, three piano, and five vocalists. 31% of the
participants therefore have most experience with choir
conducting which varies in style from orchestral conducting.
Though O Magnum Mysterium is originally a choir piece
(Lauridsen, 2000), it was performed only with brass

5%
36 (33)
73 (29)

20%
18 (19)
13 (22)

Error analysis only included experimentally manipulated
stimuli that were left undetected by participants. Trials
where subjects pressed the button before the programmed
discrepancy were not included as error, for the subject may
have detected the smaller unintentional perturbations of
tempo by the conductor. A 2x2 ANOVA analysis on item
and subject error means obtained both main effect and
interaction. A main effect of direction of tempo change
(Fi(1, 155)=14.69; p<0.001; Fs(1, 60)=5.79; p<0.05) showed
that participants made less errors in the tempo increase
condition (27%) than in the decrease condition (44%). A
main effect of magnitude of change (Fi(1, 155)=85.42;
p<0.001; Fs(1, 60)=38.49; p<0.001) replicated the RT effect
showing that participants made considerably fewer errors in
the 20% change condition (16%) than in the 5% condition
(54%). Finally, an interaction between direction of tempo
change and magnitude of change (Fi(1, 155)=25.00;
p<0.001; Fs(1, 60)=11.64; p<0.01) confirmed the strong
magnitude of change effect and showed that the tempo
change effect is present only in the 5% change condition (cf.
Table 3 for error means). Thus, the most difficult condition
for participants was the 5% decrease of tempo change. The

3067

least difficult, predictably, was the 20% change in
magnitude of discrepancy. The results unambiguously
suggest that 20% change in tempo overrides the directional
manipulation of increase and decrease of tempo.

Discussion
The present study differs from other tempo discrepancy
research in that audio tempo remains stable while visual
tempo cues are what is experimentally manipulated.
Furthermore, subjects were required to simultaneously
process more than one tempo via two different modalities.
Therefore, results should supplement previous research and
care should be taken in comparing these results with
experiments that measure audio tempo perception alone.
Furthermore, stimuli used for the present study were
extracted from an actual orchestral performance not
arranged for experimental purposes.
While careful
consideration was taken in manipulating and controlling the
independent variables, many confounding variables existed
in order to portray a contextually accurate orchestral setting.
The present study did not concur with the findings of Vos
et. al. (1997) as well as Moelants (2002). In the present
study, participants made fewer errors in the tempo increase
condition (27%) than in the decrease condition (44%).
Being that the base tempo for all stimuli in the present study
was around 76 bpm, detection of tempo decrease should
have had higher accuracy and perhaps quicker RT according
to Vos et. al. (1997) because a decrease in tempo from 76
bpm is going farther from the ‘preferred tempo’ and
therefore should be more easy to detect. Furthermore, in
Vos et. al. (1997), audio tempo discrepancies diverging
from 60 bpm resulted in higher accuracy for decelerations of
tempo than accelerations. Only 16 bmp greater, the present
study resulted in higher accuracy of detecting increases of
tempo discrepancy. This may be because Vos et. al. (1997)
greatest magnitude of tempo change was 10% whereas the
present study manipulated tempo at 20%. Furthermore, it
can not be emphasized enough that a comparison is being
made between audio tempo experimentation (Vos et. al.
1997) and visual tempo experimentation with simultaneous
audio tempo perception (present study).
Participants in the present study made considerably fewer
errors in the 20% change condition (16% error) than in the
5% condition (54% error). A 20% change from 76 bpm
results in an instant jump to either 61 or 91 bpm which is
considerable faster or slower from the original tempo. A
5% change results in only +/- ~4 bpm which is naturally
more difficult to detect (Vos et. al., 1997). 20% temporal
changes made during the editing process will naturally
affect the quality of video but once again, the low resolution
of the original video camouflaged these effects and no
subject reported detection of video-editing artifacts.
The current results support the findings of Moelants &
McKinney (2004) in that ambiguous tempi are more
accurately perceived as the base tempi approach 120 bpm
while tempi at further extremities results in higher
ambiguity. Tempo increases from the base tempo of ~76

bpm resulted in less error. Also noted in Moelants &
McKinney (2004) and relevant to the present study,
structural characteristics of music such as deviating accents,
etc, can add to ambiguity of perceived tempo.
As Wang (1984) has demonstrated, tempo is not the only
factor that effects processing time of tempo discrepancies.
Even and uneven rhythm affected RT in detection of tempo
change as well as solo vs. accompanied melody. While
rhythm remained even for all stimuli used in the current
study, melody and instrumentation varied as some segments
featured solo horn sections and others featured accompanied
melody. Detection of tempo discrepancies before the onset
of the experimentally manipulated discrepancy was
common in both the current study (23% extraneous
detections) and in Wang (1984) (4% extraneous detections).
The higher extraneous discrepancy detection in the current
study may have resulted from the previously discussed
confounding variables (video quality, skill level of the
conductor, performance of the musicians, etc.).
Additionally, Wang used programmed melodies played by a
computer without visual tempo (i.e. conductor) whereas the
present study used contextual video of a conductor and
orchestra requiring dual concentration across two modalities
and processing and comparison of two tempi in each trial.
Another source of difficulty for participants could have
been the slow tempo of each stimulus. Luck and Slaboda
(2007) had already confirmed that synchronization with
slower tempi (60 bpm) resulted in less consistency with
subjects who were instructed to tap along with the tempo.
Being that the current study is within this slower range of
tempi, perhaps synchronization with the auditory aspect (the
orchestra) was difficult making the task of following the
visual tempo (the conductor) even more challenging.
Whereas the previous studies have isolated one type of
tempo (audio or visual), the present study requires
participants to put forth attention to both modalities without
specific instruction to concentrate on a particular modality.
This causes an increase in processing and, along with the
slower tempo range, an increase in working memory.
While the quality of video used in the stimuli was not of
high resolution, the conductor’s arms and motions were
always in view and completely discernable. Furthermore,
along with Clemens’ (2008) findings, the angle of view of
the conductor provided maximal information for both tempo
and expression to the viewers. What is more, Clemens’
findings state that habitual viewpoint of the musicians (i.e.,
where they usually sit in the orchestral setting) should have
no effect on the fixed viewpoint in the stimuli.
The educational levels of the conductor in the current
study and the conductor used in Luck & Slaboda’s (2007)
study both are at a master class level of performance at the
time of recording. Luck and Slaboda found that the less
experienced conductor aforementioned elicited more
consistency in synchrony from subjects compared to the
more experienced conductor they used in their study. This
provides support that the lower experience level of the

3068

conductor in this current study should not affect
participants’ synchrony of tempo.
Lastly, as in Jongsma et. al. (2007), individuals differed
greatly in detection of tempo changes. 31% of participants
in the present study were choir members who are typically
exposed to a slightly different style of conducting than
orchestral musicians. This is another advantage of the lower
experience level of the conductor used as he has not yet
adopted the strong characteristics of orchestral conducting
and his gestures can be interpreted in varying genres.
The data does not concur with previous studies and many
of the trials were abandoned in statistical analysis due to
extraneous tempo discrepancy detections. This is most
likely a result of the stimuli used (i.e. the quality of
recording, efficacy of conductor, and abilities of musicians
performing in the orchestra) but may be a result of visual
tempo detection ability. Simplified stimuli should be
created for future studies but without the elimination of
contextual attributes. Higher resolution would be desirable
as would a more proficient conductor and orchestra.
Furthermore, audio-visual tempo discrepancy should be
investigated holistically whereas the present study only
manipulated visual aspects while auditory tempo remained
constant.

temporally ambiguous. 8th intern. conference on music
perception & cognition, Evanston, IL.
Repp, B. H., & Keller, P. E. (2004). Adaptation to tempo
changes in sensorimotor synchronization: Effects of
intention, attention, and awareness. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57A, 499-521.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software
Tools Inc.
Van Noorden, L., Moelants, D. (1999). Resonance in the
perception of musical pulse. Journal of New Music
Research, 28(1): 43-66.
Vos, P. G., van Assen, M., Franek, M. (1997). Perceived
tempo change is dependent on base tempo and direction
of change: Evidence for a generalized version of
Schulze’s (1978) internal beat model. Psychological
Research 59, 240- 247.
Wang, C. (1984). Effects of some aspects of rhythm on
tempo perception. Journal of Research in Music
Education, 32, 169-176.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported financially by the ANALOGY
project (NEST program, contract 29088) funded by the EC.
We thank our participants for their patience, Svetoslava
Georgieva for use of equipment and three anonymous
reviewers for their useful comments and suggestions.

References
Clemens W., C., Auhagen, W. (2008). Perceiving
Conductors' Expressive Gestures from Different Visual
Perspectives. An Exploratory Continuous Response Study
Music Perception 26 (2), 129–143.
Holden, R. (2003). The technique of conducting. In J. A.
Bowen (Ed.), The Cambridge companion to conducting.
Cambridge: University Press.
Jongsma, M.L.A., Meeuwissenc, E., Vosd, P.G., Maes, R.
(2007). Rhythm perception: Speeding up or slowing down
affects different subcomponents of the ERP P3 complex.
Biological Psychology 75 (3), 219-228
Lapidaki, E. (2000). Stability of tempo judgments in music
listening. Music Education Research, 2(1), 25-44.
Lauridsen, M.J. (2000). O Magnum Mysterium [Score].
Southern Music Publishing Co. Inc.
Luck, G., Sloboda, J. (2007). Synchronizing with complex
biological motion: An investigation of musicians’
synchronization with traditional conducting beat patterns.
Music Performance Research, 1(1), 26–46.
Moelants, D. (2002). Preferred tempo reconsidered.
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Music
Perception and Cognition, Sydney
Moelants, D., & McKinney, MF. (2004). Tempo perception
and musical content - what makes a piece fast, slow or

3069

