Table 1: Dependent and independent variables used to construct the six graphs in the experiment.
Graph
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Dependent
Variable
Response Time
Fractures
Rainfall
Wellbeing
Percent Error
Weight Gain

Independent Variable 1
Name
Levels
Task
AA, AB
Temperature
Cold, Hot
Cloud Cover
High, Low
Gender
Male, Female
Experience
Low, High
Protein Source Beef, Cereal

Independent Variable 2
Name
Levels
Stimulus Type Words, Pictures
Stress
Low, High
Cloud Seeding
No, Yes
Exercise
High, Low
Time of Day
Day, Night
Protein Type
High, Low

tions depending on which variable was plotted on the x axis
and which in the legend (or z variable—we will use the two
terms interchangeably).
They found that people’s understanding of the quantitative
relationship between the variables plotted on the x and y axes
was much more comprehensive than that of the relationship
between the variables plotted in the legend and on the y axis.
They argued that this is because readily-interpretable features
of the lines (e.g., slope and height) make the x–y relationship more salient and the quantitative relationship between
these variables rapidly and easily available. Their participants tended to uses the markers of the continuous z variable
as nominal labels but to describe the characteristics of the x
variable in much greater detail. By contrast, in order to understand the characteristics of the z–y relationship in similar
detail, people are required to note the values of the z variable markers identiﬁed in the legend and infer the effect the z
variable is having on the dependent variable.
Given the representational differences between line and bar
graphs outlined above, there arises an interesting question
whether this effect would be found in bar graphs. Unlike
the lines in line graphs, bars are anchored to the x axis and
draw the user’s attention (Peebles, 2008). This may have the
effect of reducing the initial focus on the z variable and allow the user to generate a more balanced interpretation of the
data. One of the aims of the current experiment was to test
this hypothesis.

Experiment
Method
Participants Twenty-nine students and members of staff
from the University of Huddersﬁeld volunteered to take part
in the experiment; 14 men and 15 women. The age of participants ranged from 23.1 to 62.2 years with a mean of 42.8
years (SD = 12.7). The majority (48.3%) were academic staff
from various schools in the university with smaller proportions of non-academic staff (20.7%), postgraduate (20.7%)
and undergraduate (10.3%) students.
Design The experiment was an independent groups design
with two between-subject variables: type of diagram used
(bar or line graph) and the allocation of independent variables
to the x axis and legend. Participants were allocated to graph

Scale
Range
50–500
2–20
1–10
15–150
10–100
10–100

Scale
Increment
50
2
1
15
10
10

conditions so as to equalise as much as possible the number
of undergraduate and postgraduate students and academic and
non-academic staff between graph conditions. 18 participants
saw the line graphs and 11 participants saw the bar graphs.
Materials The experiment was carried out using a PC computer connected to a Tobii 1750 remote desktop eye tracker
with a 17 inch display. The twenty-four graphs for the experiment were created using the variables shown in Table 1.
The data for each graph were selected to create the range of
interactions and other relationships between three variables
commonly encountered in line graphs (e.g., parallel, crossed
and converging lines, one horizontal line and one sloped line,
two lines sloping at different angles, etc.). Figure 1 shows
four graphs of the type used in the experiment.
Six ‘normal’ bar and line graphs were created with IV1
on the x axis and IV2 in the legend and a further six ‘reversed’ graphs were then created by switching the IVs on the
x axis and the legend, thus producing 12 line graphs and 12
bar graphs. Variable names in the graphs were concatenated
(e.g., “Weight Gain” was written as “WeightGain”) in order
to facilitate the eye movement ﬁxation analysis.
Procedure In both the line and bar graph conditions, half of
the participants saw the normal graphs and half the reversed
graphs. They were instructed that they would be presented
with six three-variable graphs and that their task for each one
was to try to understand the information it was conveying as
fully as possible while thinking aloud.
Participants studied each graph for as long as they were
satisﬁed that they had understood it mas much as they could,
at which point they ended the trial and started the next one
until all six had been completed. If a participant went silent
during the course of a trial they were prompted by the experimenter to continue thinking aloud. All graphs were presented
in random order.

Results
Participants’ eye movements were recorded as part of a
broader research aim to investigate the cognitive processes
involved in the comprehension of bar and line graphs. For
reasons of space however, the eye movement data are not reported here.
Participants’ verbal protocols were transcribed and anal-

2939

AB
Task

(a) “Normal” line graph 1

AB

500
400
350
300
250

ResponseTime
Pictures
StimulusType

(b) “Normal” bar graph 1

200
150
50
0

Words

Task

AA
AB

100

150
50
0
AA

Task

450

450
250

ResponseTime

300

350

400

AA
AB

100

150
100
50
0
AA

ResponseTime as a function of StimulusType and Task

Task

200

250

ResponseTime

300

350

400

Words
Pictures

200

300
250
200
0

50

100

150

ResponseTime

350

400

Words
Pictures

ResponseTime as a function of StimulusType and Task

StimulusType

450

450

StimulusType

500

ResponseTime as a function of Task and StimulusType
500

500

ResponseTime as a function of Task and StimulusType

(c) “Reversed” line graph 1

Words

Pictures
StimulusType

(d) “Reversed” bar graph 1

Figure 1: Example bar and line graphs used in the experiment.

ysed according to the three-level model of graph comprehension ability identiﬁed by Friel, Curcio, and Bright (2001).
According to this model, people at an elementary level focus primarily on reading off values but do not elaborate on
what similarities or differences in values mean. At an intermediate level people interpret the data presented in the graph
and, to some extent at least, integrate the information. At an
advanced level people make inferences beyond what is explicitly stated in the graph by hypothesising based on trends
depicted therein.
To ascertain participants’ level of comprehension ability,
their statements were categorised according to the above criteria and a classiﬁcation allocated based on the proportion of
statements in each category across the six trials. The number
of participants in each comprehension category for the two
graph conditions is shown in Table 2. The data show that
a large proportion in each condition were at an intermediate
level, being able to read individual points and integrate the
information into coherent statements. There was also a small
number of advanced users who were able to extrapolate from
the data and read beyond it to a certain extent.
The most surprising aspect of the analysis however, was the
large number of line graph users (39%) who failed to understand them at even an elementary level and so were unable to
interpret them in any meaningful way. These pre-elementary
participants were unable to read values of individual points
accurately (e.g., in Figure 1a were unable to say something
like “when the stimulus type is words and the task is AA, then
response time is a hundred”) and made a number of common
errors.
Participants were categorised as pre-elementary if after the
ﬁrst two trials they were still unable to point read and were
still making mistakes. Participants’ transcripts were coded
by the second author and a sample (approximately 45% from
each graph type) was independently coded by the ﬁrst author.
The level of agreement reached between the two codings was
94% of trials and 100% of pre-elementary categorisations.
According to these criteria no bar graph participants were

classiﬁed as being pre-elementary. A Fisher’s exact test on
graph type found a signiﬁcant difference between number of
participants coded as pre-elementary in the bar and line graph
condition (p < .05). The types of errors produced by the preelementary line graph users are outlined below.

Table 2: Number of participants in the four comprehension
ability levels in each graph condition.
Comprehension
Level
Pre-elementary
Elementary
Intermediate
Advanced

Graph Condition
Line
Bar
7
0
0
1
9
9
2
1

Ignoring the x variable In line with the results of Carpenter and Shah (1998), a common practice of the line
graph users was to focus on the legend variable. Many preelementary users however, simply described the effect of this
variable and ignored the x axis variable altogether. This can
be more or less damaging to overall interpretation depending
on the nature of the data being depicted. For example, it may
be only a partial understanding of the relationships depicted,
for example if a participant looking at Figure 1a said “Response time is longer for words than pictures” since the graph
shows that this is the case for only one level of the x variable.
These were classiﬁed as incorrect interpretation (z).
Focussing entirely on the z variable may not always result
in an incorrect interpretation because the nature of the data
depicted sometimes makes the resulting statement a correct
description of a relationship. Such statements were classed
as limited interpretation (z) because they did not take into account the effects of both IVs—speciﬁcally the x axis variable.
According to these criteria, pre-elementary line graph users
made six incorrect interpretation (z) statements and seven
limited interpretation (z) statements whereas bar graph users

2940

made only three limited interpretation (z) statements.
Ignoring the z variable The inverse of the situation described above is where the participant describes the effect of
the x axis variable but ignores the legend variable, which was
classiﬁed as an incorrect interpretation (x). Pre-elementary
line graph users made ﬁve limited interpretation (x) statements, whereas bar graph users made none.
Ignoring a level of the x variable Sometimes preelementary line graph users would take the x variable into
account but ignore one of its levels when describing its effect.
Typically this occurred when the user identiﬁed a level of the
legend variable (e.g., “when stress is high”), then described a
property of the plotted line but relates this to only one level
of the x variable (e.g., “fractures increase when temperature
is hot”). This type of statement occurs seven times in the line
graph condition but not once in the bar graph condition.

Table 3: Type and frequency of errors for the bar and line
graphs in the experiment.

Error type
Ignoring the x variable
Ignoring the z variable
Ignoring a level of the x variable
Pattern description and missed trials
Miscellaneous

Frequency
Line Bar
16
3
5
0
7
0
9
1
5
0

General levels of comprehension In general, line graph
users had a greater level of difﬁculty in interpreting the data
appropriately or fully, as evidenced by the number of miscellaneous errors, simple pattern descriptions and missed trials.
A statement was categorised as a miscellaneous error if
participants were relating all three variables together but their
interpretation was incorrect, or if they included information
in their interpretation that was not depicted on the graph.
Miscellaneous errors were less systematic than the other response patterns and each instance typically occurred only
once. However this class of error occurred ﬁve times in the
line graph condition but not at all in the bar graphs.
An example of a miscellaneous error for reversed line
graph 2 in Figure 2a is “when it’s cold there are fractures.
When there’s low stress it’s leaning towards hot. Fewer fractures when hot”. Although all three variables are incorporated into the interpretation, it is incorrect because the graph
is showing that when it is cold, whether stress is low or high,
fractures are the same. However, when it is hot, fractures are
lower at cold temperature and higher at hot temperature.
Often pre-elementary participants would simply describe
the pattern at the centre of the graph and make no attempt to
relate the pattern back to the variables, or name the variables
but not relate them to the pattern. For example, one participant’s sole comment for normal line graph 4 (Figure 2b) was

“Two level lines—one is at thirty and the other is at ninety”.
A missed trial was recorded when participants missed a
whole trial without saying anything, their verbalisations were
incoherent, or not related to the information the graph was
displaying (e.g., if a participant said “this is hard”, “I’ve no
idea what this means”, etc.).
Statement patterns In general, the results of this experiment are consistent with those of Carpenter and Shah (1998)
in that they conﬁrm that line graph users focus initially on
the legend variable as this is where the plotted lines may be
individuated into nominal categories. In bar graphs however,
because the bars are anchored to the x axis, the visual features
vying for the user’s attention are more ‘balanced’ in terms of
which IV the user may look to ﬁrst. Although colour may still
attract them to the legend variable, the location of the bars
may draw them to the x variable. Therefore we should expect
the line graph situation to at least be reduced or possibly even
reversed.
To determine whether this was the case we used a modiﬁed
version of the coding scheme devised by Shah and Carpenter
(1995) to code participants’ statements according to whether
they described the x–y or z–y relationship. If people mentioned the inﬂuence of one level of the z variable on the x–y
relations the statement was classiﬁed as metric-x. A typical
metric-x statement for the graph shown in Figure 1a would be
“when the stimulus type is words, response time is faster for
task AA than for task AB”.
Conversely, if the inﬂuence of one level of the x variable
on the z–y relations was mentioned, the statement was classiﬁed as metric-z. An example metric-z statement for the graph
shown in Figure 1a would be “when the task is AA, response
time is faster for words than for pictures”.
As with the previous analysis, all of the participant’s transcripts were initially coded by the second author and a sample
(approximately 14%) was independently coded by the ﬁrst
author. The level of agreement reached between the two codings was 95%. Figure 3 shows the number of metric-x and
metric-z statements for the two graph conditions.
The ﬁgure reveals a signiﬁcant difference in the number of
metric-x and metric-z statements made by bar and line graph
users (χ2 = 57, df = 1, p < .001). For the line graphs, this
pattern of performance is consistent with the results of Carpenter and Shah (1998). However, the pattern is reversed for
the bar graphs and indicates that these users tended to focus
on the x variable, identify a level of that, and then compare
the two levels of the z variable associated with it. For example people should typically interpret Figure 3 by saying
something like “for the bar graphs, people make many more
metric-z statements than metric-x statements whereas the situation is reversed for line graphs, where people make many
more metric-x statements than metric-z statements”.

Discussion
The use of line graphs to present the interactive effect of
two two-level variables on a dependent variable is common

2941

Wellbeing as a function of Gender and Exercise
150

20

Fractures as a function of Stress and Temperature

High
Low

90
75

Wellbeing

10

0

0

2

15

4

30

6

45

60

12

14

105

16

120

18

Cold
Hot

8

Fractures

Exercise

135

Temperature

Low

High
Stress

(a) “Reversed” line graph 2

Male

Female
Gender

(b) “Normal” line graph 4

Figure 2: Two line graphs used in the experiment.

practice and is recommended by authorities in the ﬁeld (e.g.,
Kosslyn, 2006). The beneﬁts of doing so are clear: once the
patterns representing the various relationships are known, interpretation of at least the general characteristics of the data
becomes easier and more rapid.
However, there are speciﬁc issues in using this representation that graph producers should be mindful of if they wish
to minimise misinterpretation. Apart from the possibility of
users overly focussing on the x–y relationship noted earlier
(Shah & Carpenter, 1995), others have found that users have a
strong tendency to interpret lines as representing trends rather
than identifying the line ends and interpreting them discretely
(Zacks & Tversky, 1999). This can happen to such an extent
that users can sometimes describe discrete categories continuously (e.g., “The more male a person is, the taller s/he is”,
(Zacks & Tversky, 1999)), leading some to advocate the use
of bar graphs to present this form of data (Aron, Aron, &
Coups, 2006).
The research reported here suggests that the high salience
of lines in line graphs can not only distort interpretation, but
may actually be making line graphs harder for non-expert
users to interpret to a basic level of understanding. Preelementary line graph users were unable to integrate the information, primarily because they ignored the x variable entirely, or if they did incorporate it, ignored one of its values.
This pattern of errors indicates that the salience of the lines
is such that it draws the user’s attention to them and then—
through a process of colour matching—to the legend variable,
which they then try to interpret. Because they are focussing
on the lines however, they are less able to identify the points
at the ends of the lines and interpret them as discrete values
associated with levels of the x variable.
In the bar graph however, each level of the z variable is depicted by a bar projecting from the x axis. This allows participants to match bar colour to the appropriate z variable level
in the legend and, because the bars are located directly above
the value labels on the x axis, more easily ﬁnd the associated
x variable level. The results of this experiment reveal that this

balances out attention to the two IVs and promotes a richer
understanding of the relationship between them.
The study also shows however, that although attention is
more evenly divided in bar graphs on the whole, they do have
the opposite effect of line graphs by making z–y relations
more salient.
This reversal effect can be explained by Gestalt principles
of perceptual organisation. In the case of bar graphs, the legend variable values are grouped together as bars on the x axis
and, by the Gestalt principle of proximity (Wertheimer, 1938)
the cluster of bars forms a visual chunk. This leads participants to use the x variable values as labels and describe the
relationship between the z and y variables.
In the case of line graphs however, data points are connected by the x–y lines which, by the Gestalt principle of
connectedness (Palmer & Rock, 1994), form individual visual chunks. This leads participants to use the z variable values as labels and describe the relationship between the x and
y variables.
This ﬁnding suggests that people presenting data in graph
form should consider plotting the variables differently in the
two graphs, even for the same communicative goal. For threevariable line graphs, the variable that the graph producer
wishes to emphasize is often plotted on the x axis, consistent
with the graph’s emphasis on x–y trends. These results suggest however, that for three-variable bar graphs, the variable
to be emphasised should be allocated to the legend to make
z–y relations more salient.
Retrieving and reasoning about information in graphs and
diagrams is a complex skill requiring the interaction of three
key factors: the cognitive abilities of the user, the graphical
properties of the external representation, and the speciﬁc requirements of the task (Peebles & Cheng, 2003). This complex interaction makes the task of balancing the costs and
beneﬁts of using a particular representation all the more difﬁcult. In weighing up the evidence Kosslyn (2006, p. 50)
suggests that, on balance, the risk and costs of misinterpreting line graphs are outweighed by the beneﬁts provided by
the familiar line patterns.
This judgement rests on the assumption that the target user
knows how to interpret the patterns, and if this is indeed the
case, then the user should no doubt be able to interpret the
information rapidly and effectively. If the interpretive skills
of the target audience are unknown or are known to be limited
however, it may be more beneﬁcial to them to present the data
in bar graph form. In our study users with limited knowledge
of the speciﬁc interpretive schemas and procedures associated
with a representation were more readily confused by the line
graphs whereas bar graph users were able to beneﬁt from the
more balanced representational features of the bar graphs.
Therefore, even though it may require more time and cognitive effort to interpret interactions between variables presented in bar graph form, this is a minor cost to that associated
with misinterpreting or being unable to interpret information
presented in a line graph.

2942

80

Statement Type

40
0

10

20

30

Frequency

50

60

70

Metric−x
Metric−z

Bar

Line
Graph Type

Figure 3: Frequency of metric-x and metric-z statements for
bar and line graphs.

Although interpreting three-variable data is not trivial, to
ﬁnd such a large proportion of pre-elementary line graph
users was surprising, and we were obliged to recruit additional participants in order to obtain examples of expert
line graph users. Furthermore, the pre-elementary participants were not all undergraduate students (with presumably
less prior exposure to such graphs) but academic and nonacademic staff, some with doctoral-level education.
We are currently conducting further studies to determine
the robustness of these ﬁndings and to investigate how the
interpretation of line graphs by non-expert users may be improved by modifying their design. It seems clear from the
current study however, that graph producers must take the
abilities of the user more fully into account when considering a format, be mindful that what may be appropriate for
experts may actually hinder the interpretation of less experienced users, and consider adopting a more appropriate representation in such cases.

homogeneity, and object interaction. Perception & Psychophysics, 47, 157–168.
Carswell, C. M., & Wickens, C. D. (1996). Mixing and
matching lower-level codes for object displays: Evidence
for two sources of proximity compatibility. Human Factors, 38(1), 1–22.
Culbertson, H. M., & Powers, R. D. (1959). A study of graph
comprehension difﬁculties. Audio-Visual Communication
Review, 7, 97–110.
Friel, S. N., Curcio, F. R., & Bright, G. W. (2001). Making
sense of graphs: Critical factors inﬂuencing comprehension and instructional implications. Journal for Research
in Mathematics Education, 32, 124–158.
Kosslyn, S. M. (2006). Graph design for the eye and mind.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Palmer, S. E., & Rock, I. (1994). Rethinking perceptual organization: The role of uniform connectedness. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 1, 29–55.
Peebles, D. (2008). The effect of emergent features on
judgments of quantity in conﬁgural and seperable displays.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14(2), 85–
100.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2003). Modeling the effect
of task and graphical representation on response latency in
a graph reading task. Human Factors, 45, 28–45.
Pinker, S. (1990). A theory of graph comprehension. In
R. Freedle (Ed.), Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of
testing (pp. 73–126). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schutz, H. G. (1961). An evaluation of formats for graphic
trend displays—experiment II. Human Factors, 3, 99–107.
Shah, P., & Carpenter, P. A. (1995). Conceptual limitations
in comprehending line graphs. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 124, 43–62.
Simcox, W. A. (1983). A perceptual analysis of graphic
information processing. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Tufts University, Medford, MA.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Laws of organization in perceptual
forms. In W. D. Ellis (Ed.), A source book of Gestalt psychology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Zacks, J., Levy, E., Tversky, B., & Schiano, D. J. (1998).
Reading bar graphs: Effects of extraneous depth cues and
graphical context. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 4, 119–138.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Bars and lines: A study
of graphic communication. Memory and Cognition, 27(6),
1073–1079.

References
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Coups, E. J. (2006). Statistics for
psychology (4th ed.). London: Pearson.
Carpenter, P. A., & Shah, P. (1998). A model of the perceptual
and conceptual processes in graph comprehension. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 4, 75–100.
Carswell, C. M., & Wickens, C. D. (1990). The perceptual
interaction of graphical attributes: Conﬁgurality, stimulus

2943

