UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Different Classes of Words Are Learned in Different Ways

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/85t6439m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Hidaka, Shohei

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Different Classes of Words Are Learned in Different Ways
Shohei Hidaka (shhidaka@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychology and Brain Sciences
1101 E. Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405-7007 USA

Abstract
What determines vocabulary growth patterns? The research
presented here examines the growth pattern of words listed in
the McArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory
using a computational model. Our model characterizes
vocabulary growth curves based on the sampling of learning
relevant events and a threshold (the number of such events
needed) for acquisition of the word. Using this general class
of models, fits of vocabulary growth curves suggests a
transition from one in which acquisition is primarily limited
by the threshold for acquisition to one in which acquisition is
primarily limited by sampling speed. Further analyses suggest
that these parameters of the learning model link to meaningful
psychological factors: specifically the acquisition of threshold
limited (and earlier learned) words are correlated with
frequency whereas sampling-speed-limited words are
correlated with imageability of the word in the input.
Keywords: Vocabulary Growth; Age of Acquisition;
Statistical Analysis.

What predicts vocabulary growth patterns?
In the first years of life, children begin to comprehend and
produce words. Between 8 and 16 months of age, children’s
receptive vocabularies nearly double in size every two
months (Dale & Fenson, 1996). From 12 to 24 months, their
expressive vocabularies follow a similar path of productive
growth. It has been estimated that between 18-months and
18-years of age children acquire approximately ten new
words per day, or one new word every hour and a half the
child is awake (Bloom, 2000). The words a child learns in
this time period include nouns, verbs, determiners,
preposition, however, nouns are acquired at a faster rate
than other word classes.
What processes underlie this efficient learning pattern?
Traditionally the growth pattern was described in terms of a
sudden acceleration proposed to occur when children are
18-month-old or their number of acquired words reaches 50
words. This idea of a vocabulary spurt suggests a unitary
change the sudden realization that things have names
(Reznick & Goldfield, 1992), the onset of categorization
abilities (Gopnik &Meltzoff, 1987), or the acquisition of
word learning constraints (Mervis & Bertrand, 1994). More
recent accounts conceptualize the process in terms of a
single or set of self-accelerating processes (van Geert, 1998).
This view recognizes the fact that the age of acquisition
(AoA) of any word will depend on a variety of factors:
frequency, word length, phonological similarity, semantic
similarity, lexical density, familiarity, imageability, and etc.

Moreover, these variables tend to be correlated to each other.
For example, more frequent words tend to be more familiar
in general and to appear in more diverse contexts. All this
makes the prediction of the age of acquisition of any single
word complicated indeed. Also patterns of acquisition are
subject to show considerable individual differences, which
makes sense in many factors that are characteristic of
individual experiences matter (see Bates, Dale, & Thal,
1995). One way to get a handle on all this is to consider
vocabulary growth from a population perspective –
populations of words with various properties in the learning
environment and populations of children learning those
words. This is the approach taken here. We examine the
growth patterns of the proportion of children in large
normative studies reported to “know” a word as an index of
the properties of words and learners that make for earlier
and later acquisition.
Our approach is based on the following ideas: (1) many
complexly related psychological variables relevant to age of
acquisition (2) generalization of growth patterns from
individual children to population level patterns and vice
versa requires an integration of these relevant factors via a
learning process to outcome (AoA). Considering only the
correlation between relevant factors in the input (e.g.,
frequency, diversity, concreteness) and output (AoA) is not
enough to describe a coherent picture of word learning.
Thus, the larger goal of this work is to specify the triplet,
not a dyad, the relation among the properties of words, the
learning process, and AoA. Here we present initial results
that build on recent findings by Goodman et al. (2008) of
nonlinear effects of frequency on AoA, a result which
clearly suggests the complexity of the processes that
determine the AoA of any word.

It’s Complicated
There is general agreement that no simple psychological
variable can account for the entire range of vocabulary
growth. Although several studies show the some part of
vocabulary growth seems strongly related to the input
frequency of the words, the effect of frequency on
vocabulary growth itself is also not simple. Goodman et al.
(2008) analyzed the frequency effect on vocabulary growth
in different classes of words and found that the AoA of
words in the MCDI have a complicated correlational
structure to frequency of words. Across the entire corpus of
early learned words, there is a very small correlation
between AoA and the frequency of the word in child
directed speech. However, their analyses also suggest that

2316

this is a surface outcome of two different frequency effects.
That is, they found that AoA and frequency of words within
classes (e.g., with the noun class or within the verb class)
are positively correlated (the more frequent, the earlier).
However, the average AoA for a class and average
frequency of words in a class (i.e., the between class
correlations) were negatively correlated. For example,
function words are highly frequent but learned late.
Although frequency matters (the within-class effects), its
relevance is complicated and clearly modulated by other
factors.

Learning Process
How and why properties such as the frequency of words
matter depend on the learning process, which may itself
depend on the kind of word to be learned (see Sandhofer,
Smith & Luo, 2000). There are various kinds of learning
mechanisms to be considered that relate the input to the
output, including connectionist and associative learning
(Plunkett, 1993), Bayesian inferences (Xu & Tenenbaum,
2007), and so on. Within these models, it is possible to
conceptualize a learning mechanism in which learning
gradually accelerates; this could be due to generalization of
statistical regularity in connectionism models, learning of
higher-order level representation in Bayesian inference. And,
indeed, there is empirical evidence from children that
teaching them words does actually speed their acquisition of
subsequent words (Gershkoff-Stowe & Smith, 2004).
Alternatively, the shape of the growth curve may reflect
properties of a population of learners and a population of
words; not the learning mechanism itself. For example,
vocabulary growth curves (in the form of the number of
words known by an individual child or the numbers of
words known by a population of children as a function of
age) are often well fit by logistic models (van Geert, 1998;
Fenson et al., 2000). According to these logistic models,
both word acquisition and learning rate depend on the
threshold of a given variable (e.g., age, frequency or etc),
but the underlying process (variable) goes from through
sub- to super-threshold at a constant rate. A similar idea
using a threshold but formulated in a slightly different way
is proposed recently (McMurray, 2007).
Summing up this proposal, some approaches have focused
on the learning processes and suggest there is an actual
acceleration in the rate at which new words are acquired as a
function of age and/or vocabulary size; other approaches
have focused on the shape of the learning curve itself and
suggest that there may be no underlying change in the rate
of learning new words as vocabulary itself grows. Between
these two dichotomous options (i.e., acceleration or constant
speed) there are additional possibilities such as the shape of
the learning curve and the nature of changes in that shape as
function of vocabulary growth depending on the properties
of the to-be-learned words.

The Approach in the Present Study
Our approach has three parts. First, we examine the growth
of individual words (and classes of words) in terms of the
proportion of children (in a large normative study) who are
said to know that word at mo
nthly age intervals. Thus,
we examine growth not in terms of the number of words and
an individual child knows as a function of age (the usual
sense of a growth curve) but in terms of a population of
children. This is a potentially useful approach for thinking
about the relation between the properties of words in the
learning environment (which are, after all, population
statistics rather than the statistics for individual children)
and their likelihood of being learned early or late. More
specifically, we use the month by month data from the
MCDI data on the proportion of children from 16 to 30
months who are reported by parents to produce each of 654
early learned words (Fenson et al., 1993).
Second, we consider a general model of growth –one that
includes the possibility of both an accelerating rate of
acquisition and a constant learning rate. We ask how well
specific cases of this model fit the data.
Finally, we consider how properties of different kinds of
words relate to the observed results in terms of different
growth patterns for different kinds of words. We specifically
examine word frequency in adult use and in child-parent
conversation, measure of familiarity, of imageability, of
number of associations, etc.
The Model We propose a simple computational model
which conceptualizes word learning in terms of a sampling
of relevant events with the word being acquired once its
passes a given threshold. The model assumes that children
acquire a word if they are exposed to a given number of
events relevant to acquisition of the word (McMurray,
2007). There are two theoretically important parameters –
the threshold for acquisition and the learning rate. The
model assumes the number of the sampled events is linearly
or polynomially correlated to physical learning time (i.e.,
age, square of age, square root of age etc.). Thus, the model
considers word learning as sampling until a given threshold
is met and that learning may be constant, accelerated or
decelerated in terms of the sampled events. More
specifically, this is an extension of two statistical
distributions such as the gamma and Weibull distribution.
Since it is natural extension that includes these two models
as special cases, we call it the hyper gamma-Weibull model.
Note that this model provides a description of the shape of
the learning curve and its key parameters do not specify in
any straightforward way specific psychological mechanisms.
Hypotheses about those mappings –from parameters of the
growth curve to learning processes – are developed from the
properties of the words that are best fit by different versions
of this general model.
Any vocabulary growth curve is roughly S-shape, and
models with a constant learning rate or an accelerated
learning rate can generate such curves. However, under
close examination different classes of curves can be

2317

distinguished. To help readers grasp the big idea, we show
how different models yield somewhat different growth
curves in Figure 1. The top row shows the cumulative
density function the gamma, Weibull, hyper gammaWeibull, and the logistic model. The bottom row shows
their hazard functions which are conditional probabilistic
densities. In other words, the hazard function may be
interpreted as the probabilistic density that children who
have not acquired a word at one moment will acquire the
word at another given moment. All four distributions have
the same mean value, and their cumulative distributions all
look similar (i.e., S-shape). However, the hazard plots
reflect the underlying different parameters in these models.
The hazard function of gamma model is convex up, but that
of Weibull model is convex down. The hyper model (given
particular parameter settings) has a peak, and that of logistic
model is identical to its cumulative density function except
for the scale. Next we specifically describe how the
computational process in the gamma-Weibull model is
related to the vocabulary growth curve.

Figure 1: The cumulative density and hazard functions of
the gamma-Weibull model and logistic model.

Word learning as accelerated/decelerated sampling
until a given threshold
We assume that word acquisition is a product of
experienced events. Formally, then, acquisition can be
assumed to be a function of the rate of sampling (from the
learning environment) of those relevant events until some
threshold for acquisition is passed. By this conceptualization
the relevant parameters for the acquisition of any single
word are the sampling rate of these learning events and the
threshold. From this, we can derive that the duration to
reach the threshold for acquisition will follow the gamma
distribution. Let f and N be the sampling rate and the
threshold until acquisition of word i, and also let M be the
cumulative number of total events. Then we obtain the
probability that the amount of exposure to the word, k, is
larger than N as follows.
P (k ≥ N ) = ∑ k = N Γ (M + 1)Γ (k + 1) Γ (M − k + 1) f
−1

M



= Γ (M + 1)Γ ( N ) Γ(M − N + 1)
−1

−1

−1

∫

f

0

k

(1 − f )M −k

t N −1 (1 − t )

M −N

dt

where Γ(N ) is the gamma function, and the second line is
equivalent transformation using the incomplete beta
function. When the cumulative number of events M is

sufficiently large, the cumulative beta distribution can be
approximated by the cumulative gamma distribution.
Besides, we assume f(M-N)=(δ-1T)d that the development of
number of events (M-N) follows a polynomial function of
time T with a constant δ and the exponent d. Then we obtain
an extended form of the cumulative gamma
distribution: P(T ; δ , N , d ) = Γ( N )−1 ∫ t N −1 exp(− t )dt where
x

0

x=(δ-1T)d and δ, N, d>0. The δ is also the sampling rate
parameter, N is the threshold of sampled events until
acquisition, and d is the exponent of polynomial function of
T which indicates the efficiency of the sampling events per
unit of time.
Special cases The cumulative distribution P(T;δ,N,d) is an
extension upon both Weibull and gamma distribution. In the
case N = 1 , the number of required exposures for acquisition
(the threshold) is one, it follows the Weibull distribution. In
the case d = 1 , the development of sampled events is at a
constant rate, following the gamma distribution. In the case
d>1, the number of sampled events as a function of time
increases (acceleration), and in the case d<1, it decreases
(deceleration). In the case N=d=1, it follows the exponential
distribution. Thus, P(T;δ,N,d) is considered as a hyper
model upon the exponential, gamma and Weibull
distributions. In sum, the exponential or gamma model
indicates learning with a constant sampling rate over time;
on the other hand, the Weibull model or .hyper model
indicates learning with accelerated or decelerated sampling
rate over time.
The logistic model The logistic model is defined as
follows: P(T ;α , β ) = (1 + exp(− α (T − β )))−1 where the α is
the sensitivity parameter and β is threshold parameter.
Although the logistic model also has a threshold, its
threshold β is directly dependent on the independent
variable T (e.g., age). In contrast, the threshold in the
gamma-Weibull model N is on the sampled number of
events which may vary for a given T .

Analysis: Vocabulary Growth Curves
As described earlier, we analyzed the growth of acquisition
of individual words among a population of children. Since
different kinds of words may show different growth curves
that are informative about the underlying processes, we also
examine different classes of words.

Method
Acquisition The growth curves were derived from the
normative data on productive vocabulary growth from 15 to
30 months of age. These data were collected from parental
reports of children’s productions and are the normative basis
for the MCDI, a parent checklist widely used to measure
individual children’s vocabulary development (Fenson et al.,
1993). The MCDI list includes monthly acquisition rates of

2318

654 words. The words are divided into 21 lexical classes
Action Words, Animals, Body Parts, Clothing, Connecting
Words, Descriptive Words, Food and Drink, Furniture and
Rooms, Games and Routines, Helping Verbs , Outside
Things, People, Places to Go, Pronouns, Quantifiers and
Articles, Question Words, Small Household Item, Sound
Effects, Toys, Vehicles, and Words about Time. For this
analysis, we use these lexical categories to define different
kinds of words. So the dataset to be fit by the models is the
proportion of children reported to know each of the 654
words at 15 monthly intervals (16 to 30 month of age).
Properties of words To help us understand the meaning of
the fits we also considered properties of words that have
been shown in other studies to be related to acquisition,
these are adult judgments of AoA, word frequency,
familiarity, as given in the MRC database (Coltheart, 1981),
frequency of caregivers’ speech in the CHILDES corpus
(MacWhinney & Snow, 1990), the number of associations
for each word in the University of South Florida Free
Association Norm (Nelson, McEvoy, & Schreiber, 1998),
the number of semantic categories for each word according
to Roget’s thesaurus (Roget, 1911), the number of synsets
(synonym sets) in WordNet (Miller, 1995), and the
imageability of each word (Cortese & Fugett, 2004).
Analysis Acquisition rates for each word, defined as the
proportion of children who have acquired the word at each
month of age from 16 to 30 month olds was fit to each
model: hyper gamma-Weibull model, its subsets (i.e., the
exponential, Weibull, and gamma model) and the logistic
model. The analyses of all words share the common set of
independent variable T={16, 17, …, 30} for 16 to 30 month
of ages. The hyper model has three parameters, the Weibull,
gamma and logistic model have two parameters, and the
exponential model has only one parameter for each
word.The parameters in the model are estimated by
maximizing the likelihood of models to provide the given
number of children who have acquired each word at each
month. The likelihood is given as follows:
L = n∑i ,m {p im log(q im ) + (1 − p im ) log(1 − qim )} where pim and
qim are proportion of children who have acquired the given
word i until month of age m in the MCDI and the model
respectively. And n=1800 is the number sampled children
(Fenson et al., 1993). Since these models have different
degree of freedom, we compared their BIC (Schwatz, 1978)
calculated as log-likelihood with penalty on the number of
parameters: BIC = −2 × L + log(n0 ) × k where k is the number
of parameters and n0=1800*654*15 is degree of freedom of
the data.

Results
In order to determine which model is the best descriptor, we
compared the degree-of-fit of the five models. The best
fitting model is the hyper model ( BIC = 1.7335 × 107 , fitting
the best for 45.0% of words). The better models follows in

order of the gamma model ( BIC = 1.7344×10 7 , the best for
33.6% of words), the logistic model ( BIC = 1.7364× 107 ,
fitting the best for 12.0% of words), the Weibull model
( BIC = 1.7375 × 10 7 , fitting the best for 9.0% of words) and
the exponential model ( BIC = 1.9657×107 , fitting the best for
0.003% of words). Since all four models but the logistic
model derive from a nested class of models, the logistic
model and the hyper-gamma-Weibull family are compared.
The logistic fits only 12% of words, in contrast, the gammaWeibull family fits 88% of words. Remember that the
logistic model assumes that each word is learned at a
constant rate but has a threshold (age) for acquisition. The
fact that the gamma-Weibull models fits more words
suggests that the growth pattern of most words depends on
the number of sampled events rather than merely age.
Further, since the gamma-Weibull model fits most of words,
we focus on the specific versions of this model.
We next determined, for each word, whether its growth
function was better fit by the Weibull or gamma model. We
analyzed how much proportion of words in each class fits
the Weibull model relative to gamma model. The result
shows that more abstract words such as “question words” or
“connecting words” tend to be fitted with the Weibull model,
in contrast, basic level nouns tend to be fitted with the
gamma model (Figure 2). Further analysis shows a positive
correlation between average acquisition rates across 16 to
30 month olds and the proportion of words in the word class
which fits to the Weibull model against the gamma model
(Figure 3; R=-0.614, p<0.05) with the gamma model fitting
more early words and the Weibull model better fitting late
acquired words. In the hyper model with all three
parameters, there is high correlation between the threshold
N (gamma) and exponent d (Weibull) parameters across all
words. The regression equation log(d ) = −0.59 × log(N ) + 0.39
accounts for 96.2% of variance. This power function shows
a sort of tradeoff: the threshold is high if the exponent is low
and vice versa. Accordingly, this result suggests that there is
continuous transition across all words between vocabulary
growth fitting the Weibull distribution and that fitting the
gamma. This tells us that there are different growth patterns
for different words but it does not tell us why.
The gamma model: threshold based learning A further
analysis examined the significant parameters in two models.
First we analyzed the sampling rate parameter δ in the
gamma model. This parameter indicates how many events
are sampled at a given time. This parameter, thus, might be
expected to be related to the frequency of words in the
learning environment. The correlation between the
logarithm sampling rate parameters in the model and the
word frequency in CHILDES is -0.252 (p<0.01 and n=609).
This correlation is higher than the correlation between
average acquisition rates in MCDI and the logarithm of
word frequency in CHILDES corpus (R=0.03, p=0.39 and
n=609). As Goodman et al. (2008) have shown, across all
word classes, frequency is not strongly related to age of
acquisition. However, the result shows that the sampling

2319

rate parameters which are also estimated from the
vocabulary growth curve are more strongly related to
frequency than is AoA.
Since the previous analysis suggests that word frequency
has a positive correlation within a word class (Goodman et
al., 2008) and our analysis also shows the gamma and
Weibull models fit different classes of words. We analyzed
the frequency in the CHILDES corpus for each word class
(Figure 3). The analysis shows that only several subsets of
nouns and verbs have significant positive correlations in
words within its word class. The word classes shown as
triangles are significantly correlated with frequency (p<0.05,
the range from 0.3 to 0.7). These classes are those that are
learned earlier and are also the classes that are better fit by
the gamma model than the Weibull model. The correlation
between proportion of words fitting the gamma model and
within-class frequency-parameter correlation is 0.61
(p<0.05). In brief, the AoA of words in classes best fit by
the gamma model are correlated with frequency and
sampling rate and these tend to be early learned words,
mostly nouns and verbs.
The Weibull model: acceleration of sampling words
A small set of words are best fit by the Weibull model.
Many of these words (but not all) are closed class words
(Figure 2): The Weibull distribution is characterized by the
exponent parameter of polynomial function of age (i.e., d in
the model), and the threshold for learning is one (N=1). The
exponent parameter indicates how the number of sampled
events develops as a function of age (i.e., in constant,
accelerated, or decelerated rate). If the exponent d=1, the
number of sampled events increases linearly, but in case of
d=2, it increases as a square of age. Roughly, the exponent
parameters for words range from 1 to 9, meaning that most
words tend to be learned faster by older children.
In order to gain insight as to what this exponent parameter
might mean in terms of psychological mechanism, we again
looked to the how this parameter correlates with properties
of words known to be related to age of acquisition. Of all
the variables examined, only imageability was correlated
(R=0.564, p<0.01, n=351). Within the Weibull model, the
exponent d and AoA have a close relationship, since these
parameters are estimated from the AoA pattern. Thus, in
order to exclude a spurious correlation between the
exponent parameter via AoA, we analyzed the partial
correlation which subtracts the effect of AoA. Table 1
shows the correlation and partial correlation among AoA,
shape parameters, and imageability of all individual words
common between the MCDI and Cortese & Fugett’s norm
(n=351) The AoA in this analysis is defined the average
acquisition rates from 16 to 30 months. The AoA of all
individual words has positive correlation to the imageability
ratings. This means that words acquired earlier tend to be
easy to image. This is natural and consistent with the
previous result (Cortese & Fugett, 2004). The important
point here is whether the parameters in the Weibull or
gamma model are more strongly correlated with

imageability higher than is AoA. The (partial) correlations
of the exponent (Weibull) and threshold (gamma)
parameters to the imageability of words are shown in bold
letters in Table 1. This result shows that only exponent
parameter in the Weibull model is more strongly related to
imageability than AoA. In sum, the growth of the words
fitting to the Weibull distribution (i.e., closed class words)
can be characterized with the exponent parameter which is
correlated to imageability.
Table 1: The correlation and partial correlation among AoA,
exponent or threshold parameters, Imageability of words.
AoAParameter- Image.
Parameter Image.
-AoA
Corr.
Weibull
-0.860
0.448
-0.564
Partial. -0.822
-0.392
-0.088
Gamma
Corr.
-0.542
-0.463
0.448
Partial. -0.422
-0.294
0.264

Figure 2: Mean acquisition rates in each word class as
function of the proportion of words fitting the Weibull
model

Figure 3: Correlation between the threshold parameter
and frequency in the CHILDES in each word class. The red
triangle indicates significant correlation.

2320

Discussion
There are three main results. First, the gamma-Weibull class
of models fit the vocabulary growth curve better than the
logistic model does. This result suggests that, for most
words, acquisition depends on the sampling of some events
rather than simply on age. Second there is a continuous
transition from gamma-type growth in earlier learned words
to Weibull-type growth in later acquired ones (Figure 2).
Early learned show a constant learning rate, but later learned
word classes show an accelerating rate. This suggests that
words in different classes or words learned in different
periods are learned in different ways. Third, from the
detailed analysis of parameters, the two main parameters in
the model are correlated with different properties of words,
frequency versus imageability.
Finally, we raise a possible underlying learning process
of different classes of words from all results mentioned
above. For nouns but not function words, the relevant events
in the learning environment may be naming events. This is a
reasonable interpretation because the sampling rate in the
model is highly correlated to frequency in the input for these
words. For the other words, which are more of a mixed bag
but include function words, the key events may not be the
target word alone but also its relation to other words. One
possibility is that the exponent parameter may reflect how
many words in the learning environment are relevant in this
way to learning the target word. This conjecture stems from
the present observation that the growth curves of the
function words tend to be characterized by the acceleration
of sampling; a the number of possible combinations of
words would grow faster as a function of words already
known (e.g., the number of possible pairs of words grow in
quadratic order). This construes the correlation between
imageability and exponent parameters. A more relational
word with high exponent parameters might be less
imageable and vice versa, because such a relational word
has fewer meanings itself but has meaning only in relation
to other words.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by grants from NIH MH60200.

References
Bates, E., Dale, P., & Thal, D. (1995). Individual
differences and their implications for theories of language
development. In P. Fletcher & B. MacWhinney (Eds.),
Handbook of child language (p. 96-151). Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Bloom, P. (2000). How child learn the meanings of words.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497505.
Cortese, M. J., & Fugett, A. (2004). Imageability ratings for

3,000 monosyllabic words. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36 (3), 384-387.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 28 (1), 125-127.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J. S., Bate, E., Hartung, J.,
Pethick, S., et al. (1993). MacArthur communicative
development inventories. San Diego: CA: Singular
Publishing.
Fenson, L., Pethick, S., Renda, C., Cox, J. L., Dale, P. S., &
Reznick, J. S. (2000). Short-form versions of the
macarthur communicative development inventories.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 21 , 95-116.
van Geert, P. (1998). A dynamic systems model of basic
developmental mechanisms: Piaget, Vygotsky, and
beyond. Psychological Review, 105 (4), 634-677.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L. B. (2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child Development, 75 (4), 10981114.
Goodman, J. C., Dale, P. S., & Li, P. (2008). Does
frequency count? Parental input and the acquisition of
vocabulary. Journal of Child Language, 35 (1),
515-531.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1987). The development of
categorization in the second year and its relation to other
cognitive and linguistic developments.
Child Development, 58 , 1523-1531.
MacWhinney, B., & Snow, C. (1990). The child language
data exchange system: An update. Journal of Child
Language, 17 (2), 457-472.
McMurray, B. (2007). Defusing the childhood vocabulary
explosion. Science, 317 (5838), 631.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the
novel name-nameless category (N3C) principle. Child
Development, 65 , 1646–1662.
Miller, G. A. (1995). WordNet: An on-line lexical database
for English. Communications of the ACM, 38 (11), 39-41.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998).
The University of South Florida word association, rhyme,
and word fragment norms. Available from
http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/
Plunkett, K., & Marchman, V. (1993). From rote learning to
system building: Acquiring verb morphology in children
and connectionist nets. Cognition, 48 , 21-69.
Roget, P. M. (1911). Roget’s thesaurus of English words
and phrases (1911 ed.). Available from
http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/10681
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model.
The Annals of Statistics, 6 (2), 461-464.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning as
Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114 (2), 245272.

2321

