UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Different Cognitive Mechanisms Account for Different Types of Procedural Steps

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7684378h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Ament, Maartje
Blandford, Ann
Cox, Anna

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Different Cognitive Mechanisms Account for Different Types of Procedural Steps
Maartje G. A. Ament (M.Ament@ucl.ac.uk)
Ann Blandford (A.Blandford@ucl.ac.uk)
Anna L. Cox (Anna.Cox@ucl.ac.uk)
UCL Interaction Centre
MPEB 8th Floor
University College London
Gower Street
London, WC1E 6BT
Abstract
Device-specific errors occur on steps that do not directly contribute to the main goal; examples are the post-completion error and device-initialisation error. Device-specific steps are
more likely to be forgotten than their task-specific counterparts. We hypothesise that this is caused by a lower cognitive salience on device-specific steps, resulting in lower associated activation levels. In addition, associative links between
device-specific steps may not be as strong as those between
task-specific steps. The first experiment explores the differences in performance and eye movements between device- and
task-specific steps. The second experiment looks more closely
at the origin of procedural cues for the different types of steps.
It was found that eye-movements and performance differ between the types of steps, indicating that different cognitive processes are at work. No differences were found in where cues
come from, so an alternative explanation is discussed.
Keywords: human error, post-completion error; devicespecific error; eyetracking; cognitive salience; cueing.

Introduction
Post-completion errors occur when the last step in a task is
forgotten, because the main goal has already been achieved.
A similar error has been observed at the beginning of a task,
before the main goal is initialised. An example is forgetting to
touch in with your Oyster card on the London Underground.
These errors share the property of not directly contributing to
the main goal, and are therefore called device-specific errors
(as opposed to task-specific ones).
Based on task-structure, three types of device-specific
steps can be identified. First, there are those at the beginning of a procedure or sub-task, which form so-called initialisation steps. Second, there are those that form a ‘cleanup’ step after a task or sub-task has been completed. These
are referred to as post-completion steps. And third, there are
those device-specific steps that are functionally independent
from their neighbours, and are therefore termed independent
device-specific steps.
Previous studies have found relatively high error rates
on post-completion steps across a number of different tasks
(Byrne & Bovair, 1997; Back, Cheng, Dann, Curzon, &
Blandford, 2006). It is expected that errors on other devicespecific steps are also more common than their task-specific
counterparts. A study by Li, Blandford, Cairns, and Young
(2008) supports this prediction, showing a relatively high error rate on sub-task initialisation steps.

Altmann and Trafton (2002) developed the Activationbased Goal Memory (AGM) model. This model suggests that
goals in memory have activation levels associated with them.
The goal with the highest activation level is executed. Goals
may gain activation by an increased sampling rate, and lose it
through interference and decay over time. The priming constraint requires that suspended goals are primed before they
can become active again, by means of a retrieval cue. This retrieval cue can be internal, such as associative links between
successive steps in a procedural task, or external, such as a
visually salient item in the interface.
Our hypothesis is that the mechanism for these increased
error rates lies in cognitive salience. Because device-specific
steps do not form a natural part of the task, but are instead required by the device, they are thought to have lower cognitive
salience than task-specific steps. This leads to the prediction that associative links between device-specific steps are
weaker than those for task-specific steps. This would explain
the observed higher error rates on the former.
Device-specific and task-specific steps rely on different
kinds of knowledge: device knowledge and task knowledge
respectively (Cox & Young, 2000; Li et al., 2008). This may
indicate that they also rely on different cognitive processes.
Two experiments are presented here that study the cognitive
processes underlying the various types of steps.
The first experiment provides a general exploration of the
different device-specific steps, and their underlying cognitive
mechanisms. A novel task that includes a variety of devicespecific and task-specific steps is introduced.
The second experiment looks at retrieval cues in more detail, focusing on the difference between device-specific and
task-specific steps. It is hypothesised that internal cues are
more important for task-specific steps, and external cues are
more important for device-specific steps.

Experiment 1
The first experiment aimed to explore the difference between
device-specific and task-specific steps, using a variety of
measures such as error rates and eye movements.

2170

Method
Participants Twelve undergraduate students took part in
the experiment, all were paid £6 for their time.
Stimuli A new task called the spy game was developed for
this experiment. It required participants to follow a procedure
to fly a plane to a certain destination, and deliver a secret
message. Figure 1 shows a screen shot of the interface.
The spy game involves a number of different devicespecific steps. There were 4 initialisation steps, such as
switching on the cockpit and switching on the radio. There
were 5 post-completion steps, including switching the engines back into forward thrust and switching off the radio.
Also, there were 2 independent steps, releasing the brakes
and retracting the landing gear.

Figure 1: The spy game.
Design All participants completed the same task. Steps
were varied in a within-participants design, so each participant completed a variety of different steps: 11 device-specific
steps (as outlined above), and 17 task-specific steps.
The dependent measures are error rate and completion
time. Errors are counted systematically and are defined as
any action that deviates from the required action at a certain
step. To ensure only inappropriate actions are counted and
not each individual inappropriate click, only one error was
counted on each step.
In addition, eye-movement data was collected. First, the
three classical eye movement measures, average fixation duration, number of fixations and total fixation duration, were
recorded. Second, the order in which steps are focused on
was also recorded.
Procedure The experiment started with an on-screen information sheet that explained the cover story and the steps necessary to complete the task. Participants were then walked
through the task step by step: an instruction was shown su-

perimposed on the task interface, until the corresponding step
was completed accordingly. Any errors made during the
training were pointed out immediately using the default Windows XP error sound, and proceeding was not possible until
the error was corrected. Participants practiced until they completed two trials without making any errors. The main task
then started, on which 11 trials had to be completed. The total duration of the experiment was approximately 50 minutes.

Results
Error Data Data from 12 participants was recorded, but
one had to be excluded because of a faulty data recording.
A total of 28 errors could be made on a single trial. Each
participant completed 11 trials, and data from 11 participants
was analysed, giving a total opportunity for errors of 28 x
11 x 11 = 3388. Across all participants, a total of 106 were
made, giving an overall error rate of 3.1%.
Error rates for device-specific steps were higher than for
task-specific steps, 5.3% and 1.8% respectively. A paired
samples t-test showed that this difference is significant, t =
2.953, p < 0.05. Looking at device-specific errors in more
detail, the error rate on initialisation steps is 5.6%, on postcompletion it is 4.3% and on independent steps the error rate
is 7.0%. These differences were not significant, as shown by
a repeated-measures ANOVA, F(2, 22) = 0.682, p = 0.516.
Eye-movement Data One eye-movement recording had to
be removed from analysis due to faulty calibration. The analysis of the eye-tracking data focuses on the eye-movements
just prior to a step: for each step, the data from the moment the previous step is clicked on until the next meaningful
mouse click was isolated.
The classical measures (number of fixations, average fixation duration and total fixation duration) were compared for
task- and device-specific steps on trials when an error was or
was not made. Table 1 shows a summary. The step types in
straight font represent all correct cases. The associated cases
when an error was made are displayed in italics. When an
error was made, there are no significant differences between
task- and device-specific steps, for all three eye tracking measurements (number of fixations: F = 1.886, p = 0.174, average fixation duration: F = 1.023, p = 0.315, total fixation duration: F = 2.640, p = 0.109). When an error was not made,
on the other hand, the measures do show significant differences between task- and device-specific steps. The number
of fixations is significantly greater on device-specific steps,
F = 80.776, p < 0.001. The average fixation duration is significantly shorter on device-specific steps, F = 47.197, p <
0.001. The total fixation duration is significantly longer on
device-specific steps, F = 60.820, p < 0.001.
Looking at the different types of device-specific steps in
more detail, an ANOVA test shows that there were differences
between the three categories as well. The average fixation
duration is significantly lower on initialisation than on postcompletion and independent device-specific steps (as shown
by Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test), F = 23.840, p < 0.001. No

2171

Table 1: Summary of eye tracking data for device-specific and task-specific steps.
Type of step
Task-specific
error
Device-specific (total)
error
Initialisation
error
Post-completion
error
Independent
error

Number of fixations
3.32 (3.62)
8.71 (7.27)
4.82 (4.58)
6.71 (4.99)
4.96 (4.78)
6.41 (3.73)
4.92 (4.20)
5.17 (4.15)
4.25 (5.03)
9.07 (6.56)

Average fixation duration
692 (403)
621 (294)
584 (342)
712 (393)
488 (260)
529 (239)
634 (370)
879 (377)
657 (372)
721 (481)

differences are shown for the number of fixations, F =
1.625, p = 0.197. The total fixation duration is significantly
longer on post-completion device-specific steps (as shown by
Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test): F = 10.475, p < 0.001.
Fixation Order A pilot study had revealed an interesting pattern in fixation order on some device-specific steps.
Before the correct step was focused on, participants sometimes first looked at the next step. The occurrence of this
pattern was counted for each of the different categories of
steps. For task-specific steps, the pattern was observed in
5.6% of cases. For initialisation device-specific steps, this
was 28%, for post-completion steps it was 14% and for independent device-specific steps the pattern was observed in
16% of cases1 . A one-way repeated measures ANOVA shows
a significant difference between the different types of steps,
F(2, 40) = 3.712, p < 0.05. Post-hoc tests revealed that only
the initialisation step was significantly higher than the others.

Discussion
The first experiment aimed to gain a deeper understanding of
performance and the patterns in eye movements associated
with errors and error free performance for task-specific and
device-specific steps.
Error Rates The overall error rate falls below the level at
which they would be called systematic (5%). As expected,
there is a significant difference between device-specific and
task-specific error rates: more errors are made on the former. This provides further support for the distinction between
device- and task-specific steps. According to Cox and Young
(2000) and Li et al. (2008), they rely on different types of
knowledge: device-knowledge and task-knowledge, respectively. Moreover, their underlying procedural representations
may be different, in this case leading to a lower cognitive
salience on device-specific steps.
1 It should be noted that this was almost exclusively caused by
one step. On the other step in this category, the percentage was
close to 0.

Total fixation duration
1736 (1316)
4302 (2348)
2197 (1598)
3523 (1680)
2051 (1616)
2768 (987)
2442 (1587)
3423 (1516)
1872 (1498)
4570 (2070)

Eye-movement Data The traditional measures of average
fixation duration, number of fixations, and total fixation time
were studied. They showed that, when an error was made,
there are no significant differences between task and device
specific steps, for all three eye movement measurements.
When an error was not made, on the other hand, the measures
do show significant differences between task- and devicespecific steps. On the correct execution of device-specific
steps, the average fixation duration was shorter and the number of fixations was higher. Moreover, the total fixation duration was longer than for task-specific steps.
This difference may indicate that different cognitive mechanisms are at work for the different types of steps. A greater
number of fixations and shorter fixation durations may indicate that searching behaviour is taking place. Engaging in
searching behaviour may mean that participants are having
more trouble retrieving device-specific steps from memory.
They may rely on cues from the environment, or might prefer
to get information from the interface rather than doing effortful memory retrieval. This is in line with the hypothesis that
device-specific steps have lower cognitive salience, and thus
need stronger environmental cues to reach the appropriate activation level.
Fixation Order The eye movement data showed an interesting pattern: when a device-specific step was correctly executed, eye gaze was sometimes first directed at the next step,
before returning to the correct step. This pattern was found
on approximately a quarter of the initialisation steps, and on
a sixth of post-completion and independent device-specific
steps. On task-specific steps, this pattern was only occasionally seen.
An explanation for this observed pattern is that taskspecific steps may be more cognitively salient than devicespecific steps, so their activation value will be higher and
they are more likely to be activated. Cox and Young (2000)
suggest that task-specific steps are integral to the task sequence, whereas device-specific steps are dictated by the device. Therefore, procedural links are more likely to exist in
the former. The activation may naturally flow to the next,

2172

salient task-specific step, instead of to the correct, but less
salient device-specific step, because the underlying procedural representation favours task-specific steps. If there is a
functional link between the device-specific step and the next
task-specific step, for instance when the device-specific step
enables the execution of the task-specific step in the interface, the task-specific step may provide a cue for the devicespecific step. If this cue is not strong enough, or if the activation of the task-specific step is too high, an error is likely to
be made.
As such, this eye-movement pattern is expected only on
initialisation steps, because only on these is the devicespecific step followed by a task-specific one. This is not
the case on post-completion and independent steps, on which
procedural links take a different form. Indeed, at 28%, the
eye movement pattern was observed many more times on initialisation steps than on any other step.

Experiment 2
The first study showed an interesting difference in the eye
movement patterns for device-specific and task-specific steps.
Fixations were shorter and more numerous just before devicespecific steps. Error rates on these steps were also higher, indicating that different cognitive mechanisms may be at work.
Li et al. (2008) suggested that procedural links may be less
strong for certain device-specific steps. The first experiment
is in line with this. It is hypothesised that for task-specific
steps, cues relatively often originate internally, whereas on
device-specific steps, they are not always readily available. In
this case the environment, such as the interface, must be relied on. The idea behind this is that device-specific steps have
lower cognitive salience and are less strongly anchored in the
user’s task model, and thus additional support is necessary for
these steps to reach the appropriate activation level. Therefore, any disruption of the interface should affect devicespecific steps more severely than task-specific steps. Effects
are likely to be seen in error rates and in the time it takes
for a step to be done: they are both expected to be higher on
device-specific steps.

Method
The origin of cues can be studied by manipulating their availability and looking at the effects of this on the time it takes
to complete a step and on error rates. If a potential cue is
made less available, and the completion time and error rates
are affected, this is an indication that the cue was important.
Design The availability of procedural cues is difficult to
manipulate experimentally. Internal cues are very difficult to
influence in a controlled manner, so instead this study focuses
on external cues only. It was thought that the most important
part of an external cue comes from the actual visual representation of the step, such as a button, text input field or other
interface item. Removing this visual representation will then
also reduce the cueing capability of the step.
The same spy task as in the previous study was used, with

an adjustment to allow the manipulation of cues. Some of the
interface items, such as a button or an input field, were temporarily hidden from the screen to stop them from providing
a cue. The removal of the element did not mean that the step
could not be carried out: the underlying area on the interface
was still functional, so clicking on it completed the step in
the same manner that clicking on the actual interface element
did.
The hidden items were changed on each step during the
procedure. They were chosen semi-randomly: in approximately 50% of the cases it was the next correct step, and in
the other 50% it was a random other step. This ensured that
the hidden step was not always the correct one, which would
have allowed participants to simply look for the empty area
to help them do the task.
To stop the disappearance of a step from grabbing visual
attention and thereby inadvertently cueing the next step, the
interface element was always hidden a step early. As a result,
the hiding of a step had to last for two consecutive steps: the
current, relevant step and the step directly preceding it. Thus,
two steps were hidden at all times, and on each next step only
one of them was changed.
All participants completed the same task. Steps were varied in a within-participants design, so each participant completed a variety of different steps (see experiment 1). There
were two independent variables: the type of step (initialisation, post-completion or independent device-specific, or taskspecific) and whether or not its interface element was hidden.
The dependent variables were error rate, time to complete a
step, average fixation duration, number of fixations, total fixation duration and the order in which steps are fixated on.
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of the first
experiment.
Participants Twelve participants were recruited amongst
undergraduate students; all were paid £5 for their time. Only
participants who had not taken part in the previous study were
allowed to take part.

Results
Data from 12 participants was recorded. Each participant did
11 trials, although some did a few more or less as a result of
a bug in the program2 . A total of 28 errors could be made on
a single trial, and the total opportunity for errors was 3961.
Error Rates Across all participants, a total of 121 errors
were made, giving an overall error rate of 3.1%. Error rates
for device-specific steps were higher than for task-specific
ones, 6.3% (SD = 4.7%) and 1.1% (SD = 1.3%) respectively.
A paired samples t-test showed that this difference is significant, t(11) = 3.815, p < 0.005. Looking at device-specific
steps in more detail, the error rate on initialisation steps is
2 The

bug caused the program to crash at random points, after
which it was restarted. However, the number of trials already completed could not be determined precisely, hence some participants
did a few more or less.

2173

7.0% (SD = 6.3%), on post-completion steps it is 7.6% (SD
= 9.5%) and on independent ones it is 2.8% (SD = 2.9%).
Error rates on hidden steps were higher than on visible
steps, 4.0% (SD = 2.7%) and 2.5% (SD = 2.0%) respectively.
A paired-samples t-test showed this difference to be significant, t(11) = 3.000, p < 0.05.
However, no significant interaction was found between
the two conditions, as shown by a 2-way repeated measures
ANOVA. Since the assumption of sphericity was violated,
the Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied: F(3, 33) =
0.516, p = 0.587.
Completion Time The mean time to complete one step
was 2372.8ms for device-specific steps (SD = 800.7), and
2554.3ms for task-specific steps (SD = 500.4). A 2-way repeated measures ANOVA showed that this small difference
was not significant, F(1, 10) = 1.148, p = 0.309.
When looking at device-specific steps in more detail, the
data show a significant difference between initialisation and
post-completion steps only (with the former being higher,
F(3, 30) = 3.247, p = 0.036).
There was no significant difference between hidden (M =
2362.4ms, SD = 613.4) and visible (M = 2564.7ms, SD =
714.9) steps, F(1, 10) = 2.720, p = 0.130. Also, an interaction between the two conditions was not present, F(1, 10) =
0.057; p = 0.815.
Eye Movements Eye movements of only 11 of the 12
participants were recorded as a result of faulty hardware.
The analysis of the eye-tracking data focuses on the eyemovement patterns just prior to a step. For each step, the
data from the moment the previous step is clicked on until the
next meaningful mouse click was isolated.
The number of fixations per step was higher for devicespecific steps (M = 5.38, SD = 1.80) than for task-specific
steps (M = 4.14, SD = 1.16). A 2-way repeated measures ANOVA showed that this difference was significant,
F(1, 10) = 24.509, p < 0.001. Looking more closely at the
three different categories of device-specific steps, there were
no differences between them. The number of fixations per
step averaged at M = 4.59 (SD = 1.38) for the hidden condition, and M = 4.93 (SD = 1.86) for the visible condition. This
small difference was not significant, F(1, 10) = 1.974, p =
0.190. No interaction between the type of step (devicespecific or task-specific) and visibility of the step (hidden or
not) was found, F(1, 10) = 2.670, p = 0.133.
The average fixation duration was greater for task-specific
steps (M = 711.5ms, SD = 104.8) than for device-specific
steps (M = 586.3ms, SD = 96.0). This difference was shown
to be significant, F(1, 10) = 33.905, p < 0.001. A closer look
at the individual categories shows that the average fixation
duration is shortest for initialisation steps.There was no significant difference in the average fixation duration between
hidden (M = 657.4ms, SD = 115.5) and visible conditions (M
= 640.4ms, SD = 122.2), F(1, 10) = 1.539, p = 0.243. There
was also no interaction between the type of step and its visi-

bility, F(1, 10) = 0.172, p = 0.687.
The total fixation duration was larger on device-specific
steps (M = 2502.2ms, SD = 552.0) than on task-specific steps
(M = 2157.4ms, SD = 449.9). This difference was found
to be significant, F(1, 10) = 16.138, p = 0.002. A closer
look at the categories shows that the total fixation duration is
longest for initialisation and post-completion steps, whereas
those for independent and task-specific steps are shortest.
There was no significant difference between hidden steps (M
= 2324.1ms, SD = 460.3) and visible steps (M = 2335.4ms,
SD = 597.9), F(1, 10) = 0.017; p = 0.900. There was also
no significant interaction effect between the two conditions,
F(1, 10) = 1.638, p = 0.229.
The first experiment showed an interesting effect in fixation order: the order in which steps are fixated on does not
always match up with the order in which steps have to be
executed. Similar patterns were found on the second experiment. On device-specific steps, participants looked at
the next step before looking at the current step in 21.1% of
cases. For task-specific steps, this was 9.7%. When looking
at the categories in more detail, it becomes apparent that the
pattern occurred most often on initialisation steps (in 30%
of cases), and less often on the others (16% on both postcompletion and independent steps). A 1-way repeated measures ANOVA reveals a significant difference between the
conditions (F(4, 50) = 11.147, p < 0.001); a post-hoc test
showed that only the initialisation step differed significantly
from the others.

Discussion
The second experiment looked at the origin of procedural
cues. It was hypothesised that for device-specific steps, these
cues come relatively often from the environment, and for
task-specific steps, they more often originate internally. From
this follows the prediction that making cues less available
by hiding them should affect device-specific steps more than
task-specific steps.
Error Rates As expected, the results show that more errors
are made on device-specific steps. This confirms the findings of the first experiment. It is thought to be due to devicespecific steps having lower cognitive salience, and thus they
are more at risk of losing their activation before being executed.
The error rates on hidden steps were shown to be higher
than on visible steps. This shows that the manipulation
worked, and that it was effective in disrupting cues. This was
essential, because if there was no difference at all it would
have been likely that the manipulation did not have an effect,
compromising the findings of the experiment.
However, the lack of interaction between the type of step
(device-specific or task-specific) and the visibility (hidden or
not hidden) on error rates means that the disruption of cues
did not differentially affect performance on device- and taskspecific steps. This is against expectations, because it does
not support the idea that cues come from the environment

2174

more often for device-specific than for task-specific steps.
Several explanations for this can be found. First, of course,
is that the hypothesis is false, and that there is indeed no difference in where cues come from on device- and task-specific
steps. However, considering the relatively small number of
participants, caution has to be taken not to dismiss the hypothesis in error. Also, the error rates were rather small, which
may have led to a floor effect. It is therefore possible that an
interaction between the two conditions is simply too small to
pick up.
Second, it is possible that the experimental manipulation
did not work as expected. It is likely that factors other than
visibility play a role in the cueing process, such as location
or relation to other interface items. Manipulating only one of
these may result in the experiment only tapping part of the
cueing process. Nevertheless, the experimental manipulation
did have an effect, as demonstrated by the difference in error rates between hidden and visible steps. Thus, while this
study successfully manipulated external cues, they may be
more complex than it has accounted for.
Third, a potential confounding factor is that the hidden step
may have been used as a predictor for the correct next step.
In 50% of cases, the hidden step is indeed the correct step; in
the other 50% it is a random other step. Therefore, although
half of the time the prediction will be wrong, the other half of
the time the hidden step will correctly predict the next step.
So while it may be more effective and efficient to retrieve the
next correct step from memory, there may still be a benefit to
using the hidden area as a predictor.

occur more often on the former than on the latter. Previous studies have also made similar distinctions (i.e. Cox &
Young, 2000), but have not studied the implications of this on
human error.
Moreover, the experiments presented here show that the
distinction makes sense from a cognitive point of view. Eye
movement patterns for the different types of steps differ. This
is an indication that different cognitive processes are at work.
What exactly the nature of these processes is, remains to be
studied in the future.
The second experiment attempted to determine where cues
originate, for device-specific and task-specific steps. The hypothesis was that for device-specific steps, the predominant
source of cues is the environment, whereas for task-specific
steps, cues more often originate internally. However, this hypothesis could not be confirmed. Although it could also not
be dismissed with certainty, alternative explanations must be
sought. Perhaps the difference lies more in whether cues are
used at all. Li et al. (2008) argue that certain device-specific
steps may not rely on cueing as much. Instead, their execution
relies more on a deliberate and less automatic mechanism.
In any case, the two experiments have made it clear that
cueing is a complex process. Other possible mechanisms
need to be explored, such as cues from the location or from
the relation to other items in the interface. Future experiments
can manipulate these, and find out what the effects are on task
performance and eye movements. In this manner, the nature
and origin of cues can be explored in more detail.

Eye Movements The three classical eye movement measures, average fixation duration, number of fixations and total
fixation duration, were investigated. On device-specific steps,
the average fixation duration was shorter, the number of fixations was larger and the total fixation duration was longer
than on task-specific steps. This is exactly as expected, and
in line with previous results. It supports the idea that information from the interface is used differently on different types of
steps. Moreover, many short fixations can be an indicator of
searching behaviour taking place, or of environmental cues
being taken from the interface.
No such differences in eye movements were observed between visible and hidden steps.
The previous two studies showed an interesting effect in
fixation order: the order in which steps are fixated on does
not always match up with the order in which steps have to
be carried out. This is especially the case for initialisation
device-specific steps, on which people first look at the next
step, before returning to the correct step. The same pattern
was observed in the current results on a quarter of cases, for
initialisation steps. This finding once again suggests that cueing is a more complex process than previously thought.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by an EPSRC DTA studentship.

References
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39-83.
Back, J., Cheng, W. L., Dann, R., Curzon, P., & Blandford,
A. (2006). Does being motivated to avoid procedural errors
influence their systematicity? In Proceedings of hci 2006
(Vol. 1, p. 2-9).
Byrne, M. D., & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory model
of a common procedural error. Cognitive Science, 21(1),
31-61.
Cox, A. L., & Young, R. M. (2000). Device-oriented and
task-oriented exploratory learning of interactive devices. In
N. Taatgen & J. Aasman (Eds.), Proceedings of the third
international conference on cognitive modelling (p. 70-77).
Veenendaal,The Netherlands: Universal Press.
Li, S. Y.-W., Blandford, A., Cairns, P., & Young, R. M.
(2008). The effect of interruptions on postcompletion
and other procedural errors: An account based on the
activation-based goal memory model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 14(4), 314-328.

General Discussion
The current studies have shown that a distinction between
device-specific and task-specific steps is a useful one: errors

2175

