UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effects of the Change Temporal Order technique on eyewitness memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vk4n9ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dando, Coral
Ormerod, Thomas

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effects of the Change Temporal Order technique on eyewitness memory
Coral J. Dando & Thomas C. Ormerod (c.dando; t.ormerod@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, LA1 4YF, UK
Abstract
An experimental study is reported of the retrieval by mock
eyewitnesses of a scripted video crime event, comparing free
recall against Change Temporal Order (CTO) recall, in which
event retrieval is prompted in reverse order. Contrary to
proponents of the technique who suggest that CTO allows
greater discovery of script incidental information and
increases the amount of information recalled, CTO was found
to impair retrieval, leading to fewer script consistent events,
reduced recall of correct information, increased
confabulations, and lowered accuracy proportional to items
retrieved. The disruptive effects of CTO are interpreted as
providing further evidence for the role of temporal clustering
highlighted in the CMR model of memory. Impairment
induced by the CTO technique continued to influence
retrieval negatively even during a secondary free recall phase.
We suggest that CTO prevents the blocking of confabulations,
and that these confabulations may subsequently contribute to
forgetting by population dilution.
Keywords: Memory retrieval; Scripts; Eyewitness testimony;
Cognitive Interview; Temporal clustering; Population
dilution.

Introduction
Retrieving witness information is typically a one-off
opportunity. Facilitated by an interviewer, the aim of the
retrieval process is to elicit as much correct information as
possible while limiting errors of commission and omission.
To that end, investigators in the UK are taught to implement
the Cognitive Interview procedure (Fisher & Geiselman,
1992). This procedure comprises a number of individual
mnemonic components designed to maximize opportunities
for accurate retrieval of witnessed episodes. One of these
components is the change temporal order technique (CTO),
in which witnesses are instructed to attempt retrieval in a
backwards order, from either the last memorable act/event
or some other prominent memorable point of the to-beremembered scenario. The imposition of this technique is
intended to displace the natural memorial strategies of
individuals to good advantage. In doing so, it assumes that
schematic organisation of memory (e.g., Schank, 1999) can
play a negative role in determining accurate witness recall.
In this paper, we present data showing that, while it does to
some extent displace schema-driven recall strategies, the
CTO technique appears to reduce the retrieval of target
events, regardless of whether the events are central or
incidental to a typical event script held by the participant
population. Moreover, we propose that the technique may
impact adversely on individuals’ use of temporal contiguity
as a retrieval cue (e.g., Polyn, Norman & Kahana, 2009).

In an eyewitness context, Fisher and Geiselman (1992)
promote the efficacy of the CTO technique on the grounds
that it may limit the influence of predictive schemata/scriptbased retrieval (Schank & Abelson, 1977). Scripts are
organizational structures that capture appropriate sequences
of events in particular contexts, supporting abstraction from
specific episodes as well as generating expectations about
likely events, both prospectively and retrospectively
(Schank, 1999). The role of scripts in understanding and
organizing sequential event material in memory has
received much empirical support (e.g., Mandler, 1984;
Pezdek et al., 1989; Taylor & Crocker, 1981). Scripts seem
to capture, not only everyday events of which people have
personal experience (Bower, Black & Turner, 1979), but
also less common events that have not been personally
experienced (e.g., Holst & Pezdek, 1992; Tuckey & Brewer,
2003).
One of the implications of script-based theories of event
memory organization is that individuals will make strategic
use of scripts to guide retrieval of complex events. In the
context of witness memory, this may provide a source of
errors, particularly errors of commission in which items are
included in retrieval that are present in a generic event script
but absent from the episode itself. Crime-related scripts
have been shown to be a significant source of gap-filling
errors of commission in eyewitness performance (Greenberg
et al., 1988; Holst & Pezdek, 1992; Tuckey & Brewer,
2003). The CTO technique is assumed to disrupt a strategy
of script-based retrieval and hence it should reduce errors of
commission, since it prevents individuals from retrieving
events based on their typical temporal sequence rather than
on their actual appearance.
In addition to a role in suppressing script-based retrieval,
Fisher and Geiselman (1992) also suggest that CTO is an
effective method for accessing previously inaccessible
memories, by encouraging witnesses to use an unusual
retrieval path. They refer to the multiple trace hypothesis
(Bower, 1967), suggesting that reversing the order in which
individuals retrieve episodic information activates different
traces, which increase the probability of item recall.
However, recent theories of temporal order effects on longterm memory lead to the opposite prediction. Kahana
(1996) found that temporal clustering of items can be more
influential than semantic relatedness in determining
effective retrieval. Polyn, Norman & Kahana (2009)
embody temporal clustering in their Context Maintenance
and Retrieval (CMR) model, in which semantic, temporal,
and source factors combine to organize material in memory.
According to this theory, similarities in temporal clusters
between internal and external event representations lead to

2644

enhanced retrieval, while their disruption will impair it. If
CTO acts to disrupt the access of temporal clusters in
memory, then according to the CMR model, one might
expect CTO to impair rather than facilitate retrieval.
Despite having been part of the cognitive interview
procedure since its inception, CTO has received limited
empirical validation. Indeed, a review of the literature
reveals that little is known as to whether the technique
actually enhances eyewitness memorial performance as
posited by Fisher and Geilselman (1992) or detracts from it.
One might expect that, when assessing the efficacy of CTO
in an eyewitness context, empirical research would consider
both (i) script consistent/inconsistent recall performance and
(i) overall memorial performance. The former provides an
indication as to whether the procedure limits the influence
of predictive schemata/script-based recall, while the latter
indicates whether CTO might be an effective method of
accessing previously inaccessible memory codes. However,
this has not been the case. Researchers have considered only
overall memorial performance (quality and quantity), and
have never employed a scripted crime event. Even so,
results have been mixed. Some have found CTO to be an
effective method for eliciting extra details (Boon & Noon,
1994; Whitten & Leonard, 1981), while others have found it
no more effective than a free recall or try harder retrieval
attempt (Milne & Bull, 2002; Memon, Cronin, Eaves, &
Bull, 1996). Recently, CTO has been found to increase
erroneous recall, resulting in a significant reduction in
memorial accuracy rates (Davis, McMahon & Greenwood,
2005).
The purpose of the present research was to investigate the
efficacy of the CTO technique in a mock eyewitness
context. The primary aims were to explore whether CTO is
useful (i) as an additional retrieval strategy and (ii) as
method of limiting script guided recall. To address the
second aim, a script-consistent stimulus was produced,
consisting of crime film depicting a mobile phone robbery.
Given that the mock witnesses in this research were
undergraduate students, we assessed empirically their script
norms for a mobile phone robbery. One hundred
undergraduate students (who did not participate as mock
witnesses) completed a questionnaire designed to collect
information concerning the actions they believe typically
occur during a mobile phone (cellphone) robbery event, and
in what order (a procedure adapted from Bower et al., 1979;
Holst & Pezdek, 1992). The criterion for inclusion was any
action event mentioned by at least 60% of respondents.
Once identified, ten script-consistent event actions (see
Table 1 for a list of the items) were incorporated in the film
alongside ten script-incidental event actions (see Table 2).
The latter were action events that had not been mentioned
by any of the 100 respondents.
As we were primarily interested in enhancing practical
methods for eliciting eyewitness memory in criminal
enquiries, the CTO technique was incorporated into an
interview procedure, comprising two distinct retrieval
attempts. This procedure facilitated analyses of memorial

performance as a function of both interview procedure and
retrieval attempt. If a positive CTO effect exists, as
predicted by Fisher and Geiselman (1992), then including
CTO in an interview procedure should increase overall
memorial performance (total amount of information
recalled) per se. Further, a CTO interview should increase
recall of script-incidental action events compared to a free
recall interview procedure. An alternative hypothesis,
derived from the CMR model, is that a CTO interview will
be no more effective in terms of enhancing overall memorial
performance or eliciting script incidental events compared
to a control free recall interview, and might even impair
memorial performance relative to free recall since temporal
clusters that contribute to organisation of, and therefore
access to, long term memory are disrupted.
Table 1: Empirical script norms for mobile phone robbery
action events (N = 100.) indicates inclusion in scripted
stimulus event.
Scripted action event
Victim is talking on the phone
Robber watches victim
Robber is in a gang/group
Robber follows victim
Robber runs up to/approaches
victim
Robber shouts/demands phone
Robber pushes/grabs victim
Victim cries/shouts
Robber grabs phone
Robber runs away

% respondents
mentioning event
65
60
60
80
61
60
82
75
65
80

Method
Design A between subjects design was employed. The
independent variable was retrieval interview on three levels,
each comprising two retrieval attempts that were
manipulated according to condition by varying the
combination and order of presentation ; (i) Free recall – Free
recall (FR-FR), (ii) Free recall – CTO (FR-CTO), and (iii)
CTO-Free recall (CTO-FR). The dependant variables were
memorial performance measured (i) by the number of
correct items recalled, incorrect items recalled (e.g., saying
the girl’s hat was black rather than brown), the number of
confabulations (mentioning a item/event that was not
present or did not happen), and accuracy rate (proportion of
correct details as a percentage of the total number of items
recalled), and (ii) recall of script incident/inconsistent
actions/occurrences.
Participants Fifty-four undergraduates volunteered to
participate as mock witnesses. The sample comprised 34

2645

females and 20 males with a mean age of 22 years (SD =
2.90), ranging from 18 to 27 years.
Table 2: Script incidental action events in event order
Robber has a dog
Gang member covers face with a scarf
Robber removes his hood
Gang member hands his mobile phone to robber
Robber uses mobile phone
Robber calls gang member by name (Peter)
Robber drops mobile phone
Peter kneels on victims back
Robber puts stolen phone in coat pocket
Robber's dog runs after a passing car
Materials and Procedure At Time 1, mock witnesses
individually viewed the stimulus crime film. The film was
one minute 20 seconds in duration and depicted a mobile
phone robbery. At Time 2 (48 hours later) participants
returned and were randomly allocated to one of three
retrieval conditions and were interviewed accordingly.
Interviews were conducted by the first author. The
protocols for each of the three retrieval conditions were
based on the current UK investigative interview model (see
Milne & Bull, 2001). Each was similarly structured,
comprising the same number of phases and retrieval
attempts in the same order, according to condition; (i)
explain procedure (identical across conditions), (ii) first
retrieval attempt (according to condition), (iii) second
retrieval attempt (according to condition), (iv) interview
closure (identical across conditions). Retrieval instructions
were read verbatim by the interviewer.
When inviting free recall retrieval, participants were
instructed to “Please tell me what you remember about the
film you saw a couple of days ago, in any order that you
wish…just as you remember it”. When inviting a CTO
retrieval, participants were instructed “I would like you to
tell me what you remember about the film you saw a couple
of days ago. Before you tell me about the film I would like
you to try something that sometimes helps people to
remember more. What I am going to do is to ask you to tell
me what happened backwards. I know it sounds hard but I
am going to help you. OK to start what is the very last thing
that you remember happening...What happened before
that…What happened just before that”. This prompt was
repeated until the participant reaches the beginning of the
TBR event (Milne & Bull, 2001). All retrieval attempts
were uninterrupted by the interviewer and participants were
allowed unlimited time.
Interviews were recorded and scored as follows. A
comprehensive list of all events/occurrences in the film
(inclusive of the 10 script-consistent and 10 script-incidental
events) was compiled, totaling 143 items of information.
Recordings of each interview were analysed using the
scoring template technique (Memon et al., 1996). Every

item of information, when first mentioned, was classified as
either correct, incorrect or a confabulation. Its position
within the interview was also noted (retrieval attempt 1 or
2). Information items were scored only once. Any further
mention was disregarded, provided the initial classification
remained consistent. However, where recall was
inconsistent (i.e. initially correct but repeated incorrectly
later in an interview and/or vice versa) both classifications
were scored. Any preceding and/or subsequent statements
were disregarded (e.g., “I’m not sure but I think she was
wearing a black hat” was treated as “she was wearing a
black hat). Subjective statements or opinions were
disregarded. To assess inter-rater reliability, 15 interviews
were selected at random and then scored by a second
researcher. Pearson correlations for the three overall
memorial measures were calculated (as positive
relationships were expected analyses were one-tailed).
Results revealed a good inter-rater reliability between the
coders for all three measures; total correct items r (15) =
.915, p < .001, total incorrect items r (15) = .927, p < .001,
and total confabulations r (15) = .876, p < 001.

Results
Univariate analyses of variance were conducted (applying
Bonferroni’s correction) for each of the overall memorial
performance dependant variables (correct, incorrect,
confabulations, and accuracy). Significant findings were
examined using the Games – Howell post hoc test.
The number of correct items recalled revealed a
significant difference across conditions, F (2, 51) = 4.969, p
=.011, η2 = 0.19. More correct items were recalled by
participants in the FR-FR condition (M = 48.94), p = .013
than by those in both the FR-CTO (M = 42.16) and the
CTO-FR (M = 38.67) conditions, with no difference
between the latter two conditions. The number of
confabulations also revealed a significant difference, F (2,
51) = 6.702, p = .003, η2 = 0.26. Participants in the FR-FR
(M = 0.23) condition confabulated less often than those in
the CTO-FR (M = 1.44) condition, p < .001. There was no
difference between the FR-FR and FR-CTO (M = 0.68)
conditions. Accuracy rates differed significantly between
conditions, F (2, 51) = 7.191, p = .002, η2 = 0.28.
Participants in the FR-FR condition were more accurate (M
= 97.60), p = .021, than participants in both the FR-CTO (M
= 93.80) and CTO-FR (M = 91.70) conditions, with no
difference being found between the latter two conditions.
The amount of incorrect information recalled revealed no
significant differences among conditions, F (2, 51) = .527, p
= .594.
Means and standard deviations for overall performance
measures as a function of retrieval attempt are presented in
Table 3. There was a significant difference among
conditions for the amount of correct information recalled in
both retrieval attempt 1, F (2, 51) = 4.910, p = .011, η2 = 19
and retrieval attempt 2, F (2, 51) = 8.156, p = .001,η2=18. .

2646

Table 3: Adjusted means (standard deviations) for memorial performance as a function of retrieval attempt.
FR-FR

CTO-FR

FR-CTO

Retrieval 1
(FR)

Retrieval 2
(FR)

Retrieval 1
(CTO)

Retrieval 2
(FR)

Retrieval 1
(FR)

Retrieval 2
(CTO)

Correct

38.56 (11.49)

10.38 (1.45)

29.00 (10.76)

13.16 (5.72)

34.47 (12.51)

4.20 (3.84)

Errors

0.72 (0.42)

0.56 (0.50)

0.94 (1.04)

0.98 (0.67)

1.03 (0.93)

0.38 (0.29)

Confabulations

0.12 (0.46)

0.11 (0.39)

1.22 (0.39)

0.22 (0.42)

0.11 (0.26)

0.57 (0.80)

Participants in the FR-FR (M = 38.56) and FR-CTO (M =
34.47) conditions recalled more correct information at
retrieval attempt 1 than those in the CTO-FR condition (M
=29.00), with no difference between the former conditions.
At retrieval attempt 2, participants in both the FR-FR (M =
10.38) and CTO-FR (M = 13.16) recalled more correct
information than those in FR-CTO condition (M = 4.20),
with no difference being found between the former two
conditions.
The number of confabulations revealed a significant
effect at retrieval attempt 1, F (2, 51) = 17.978, p = .001.
Participants in both the FR-FR (M = .12) and FR-CTO (M =
.11) conditions confabulated less than those in the CTO-FR
(M = 1.22) p = .001 condition, with no difference between
the former conditions. There was no significant difference
among conditions at retrieval attempt 2, F (2, 51) = 1.541, p
= .223. Moreover, no significant difference emerged for the
number of errors at either retrieval attempt 1, F (2, 51) =
.794, p = .457 or retrieval attempt 2, F (2, 51) = 3.006, p =
0.58.
An analysis of retrieval of script-consistent and scriptincidental information was also conducted. Irrespective of
retrieval condition, significantly more script-consistent
events (M = 8.20) were recalled than script incidental events
(M = 4. 04), t (54) = 17.677, p = .001. No significant effect
of retrieval condition emerged for total recall of script
consistent events, F (2, 51) = 2.401, p = .085, or for script
incidental events, F (2, 51) = 4.483, p = .748.
However, as previously described, the retrieval interviews
comprised 2 retrieval attempts. Hence, an analysis was
conducted as a function of retrieval attempt (1 and 2) across
conditions. Means and standard deviations for script
consistent and script inconsistent information recalled
across retrieval attempts are presented in Table 4. There was
a significant difference between conditions for script
consistent events elicited in recall attempt one, F (2, 51) =
14.731, p < .001, η2 = .45. Participants in the CTO-FR (M =
5.47) condition recalled significantly fewer script consistent
events compared to both the FR-FR (M = 7.13) and FRCTO (M = 7.73) conditions. No significant differences were
found between the latter two conditions. No significant
difference was found for the number of script consistent
events elicited in recall attempt two, F (2. 51) = 3.097, p =

.621. Furthermore, there was no significant differences
between conditions for the number of script incidental
events elicited in recall attempt one, F (2, 51) = 1.205, p =
.317 or attempt two, F (2.51) = 2.000, p = .104.
Table 4: Adjusted means (standard deviations) for script
consistent and script incidental memorial performance as a
function of retrieval attempt.
FR-FR

CTO-FR

FR- CTO

Script consistent
retrieval 1

7.13 (0.74)

5.47 (0.74)

7.73 (0.80)

Script consistent
retrieval 2

1.20 (0.68)

1.87 (1.06)

1.00 (0.53)

Script incidental
retrieval 1

3.07 (1.03)

2.14 (0.92)

2.67 (1.44)

Script incidental
retrieval 2

1.53(0.91)

1.27 (0.96)

1.00 ( 0.53)

Discussion
In this study, we set out to test the efficacy of the Change
Temporal Order (CTO) technique, which is one of a battery
of mnemonics included in the cognitive interview approach
to interviewing witnesses of criminal events. We assessed
mock witness memorial performance by measuring their
recall of a scripted video stimulus event involving a mobile
phone (cell phone) robbery. Forty-eight hours after having
viewed the video, participants took part in retrieval based
interviews. Two of the three retrieval conditions (FR-CTO
& CTO-FR) included the CTO technique followed or
preceded by free recall (FR). Compared to a FR-FR
interview, both CTO interviews elicited fewer items of
correct information and more confabulated information,
resulting in a significant reduction in accuracy.
Consideration of the individual retrieval attempt data reveals
where these differences emanated from. For recall attempt
1, a free recall retrieval (as in FR-CTO & FR-FR

2647

conditions) elicited more correct information and fewer
confabulations than an initial CTO retrieval (CTO-FR). A
similar pattern of results emerged for retrieval 2. Where the
second retrieval attempt was a free recall (as in the CTO-FR
& FR-FR conditions), again more correct information and
fewer confabulations were elicited compared to a second
CTO retrieval (FR-CTO).
These results indicate that CTO, either as part of a
homogenous procedure or as an individual technique, does
not improve eyewitness memorial performance per se. We
found CTO not to be an effective method of facilitating
access to new memories, suggesting that previously
inaccessible items had not been accessed using this
technique. If this had been the case one would expect to see
enhanced memorial performance, but we did not. In some
respects this is surprising, since one might anticipate that the
effort of reversing temporal order of retrieval might lead to
more overlaps with the conditions experienced at encoding,
and it is known that effortful processing at encoding and
retrieval enhances recall (Dewhurst & Brandt, 2007). In the
current research, the additional effort of CTO did not
enhance retrieval.
The question arises as to why as part of an interview
procedure or when used in isolation, does a CTO retrieval
apparently reduce the amount of correct information elicited
and increase confabulations, irrespective of order of
presentation? Importantly, recovery after CTO retrieval
during free recall at the second attempt was not complete.
Some other interventions that alter natural retrieval
strategies, such as collaboration during retrieval of
information encoded individually (e.g., Finlay, Hitch &
Meudell, 2000), allow complete recovery once free recall by
individuals is allowed. This, combined with the increased
number of confabulations arising through use of the
technique, suggests that CTO is operating as a proactive
interference mechanism. It provides access to traces that
ought to be excluded from verbalization, but they are not,
Moreover, their verbalization continues to impact on
retrieval once the strategic demand of changing retrieval
order is removed.
Multiple trace theory (Bower, 1967) posits that a to-beremembered event is represented by a multiplicity of traces.
Therefore, essentially, retrieval is as a process of selecting
the appropriate traces (or targets) from a population of
potential targets (cf. Lansdale, 2005). Recently, it has been
suggested that a population of potential targets comprises
three subsets ‘C’, ‘E’ and ‘W’, each of which, once elicited
in a retrieval attempt, impacts in different ways upon
subsequent retrieval attempts (Lansdale & Baguley, 2008).
C traces are correct, E traces are erroneous, and W traces
(also referred to as null traces) are those which a participant
usually holds back as he/she knows them to be incorrect.
Lansdale & Baguely provide a compelling mathematical
model that demonstrates the consequences of varying the
relative proportions of C, E and W traces over repeated
retrieval trails. As the number of trials that elicit E and W
traces increases, it dilutes the relative population of C traces,

leading to predictable changes in retrieval efficacy over
trials.
Our data reveal that the CTO technique increased the
amount of confabulated (completely false) information
recalled. This result suggests that participants may be
verbalizing W traces rather than suppressing them as they
would under free recall. It may be that the cognitive effort
associated with recalling events in a reverse order impedes a
witness’s ability to exercise a report option (Goldsmith &
Koriat, 2007) over the W traces. In other words, when
sampling the population of available traces, if a witness is
directed to retrieve information in an unnatural manner, this
detracts from their ability to exercise control over false
information. As a consequence, the population of traces
becomes diluted, in this case with W traces. That freely
recalled retrieval performance does not display a similar
pattern of results serves to supports this further. During free
recall, participants are able to exercise control over the
information they report, uninfluenced by the interviewer and
any mnemonic techniques that may be utilized. Hence, W
traces can be held back.
Analysis of erroneous retrieval revealed no differences
across conditions in the current experiment. We suggest that
this too fits a population dilution model. Lansdale and
Baguley differentiate between E and W traces in terms of
the former being errors based on partial but inaccurate
recall, the latter being entirely fabricated. Presumably,
participants are unaware that an E trace is an error. If this is
the case they are unable to exercise a report option or to
censor them, so the mode of retrieval has no impact on their
frequency of occurrence.
Equally, our pattern of results is consistent with
predictions made by the CMR model of memory (Polyn et
al., 2008). If the probability of retrieval is simultaneously
affected by semantic, temporal, and source information,
then we would expect retrieval performance to be negatively
affected when one of these processes is disrupted. In this
study we disrupted temporal clustering by ‘forcing’ reverse
order retrieval. Considering retrieval performance as a
function of retrieval attempt, it can be seen (Tables 3 & 4)
that where temporal clustering is disrupted in the first
retrieval attempt (as in the CTO-FR condition), memorial
performance is significantly reduced. This is the case, not
only when measuring overall performance (Table 3; fewer
correct items and more confabulations) but also in a
reduction in script consistent (correct) recall. When CTO is
presented as the second retrieval method (FR-CTO) a
slightly different pattern of results emerges. CTO again
reduces the amount of correct information recalled, relative
to two trials of free recall, but does not increase errors or
reduce the amount of script consistent recall. It seems that
an initial free recall trial provides some protection against
the negative effects of CTO, perhaps because it increases
the relative proportion of C traces in memory, again a result
that seems consistent with the population dilution model of
Lansdale & Baguely (2008).

2648

Given the importance of witness information, this pattern
of results is concerning. The CTO technique is advocated by
the current investigative interview model in the UK, yet we
have found no clear evidence to support its inclusion as an
eyewitness retrieval mnemonic. Indeed, our findings suggest
that the technique, far from reducing errors of commission
and omission, appears to increase them. That its negative
effects are less serious if it is preceded by a free recall trial
is of some comfort. As is the fact that CTO is only one of a
number of techniques in cognitive interview provides some
degree of protection. Historically cognitive interview
research has tended to consider the efficacy of the procedure
as a homogenous technique. Such research has frequently
reported an increase in erroneous recall performance.
However, all too often this finding has been paid scant
attention, possibly viewed as an acceptable trade off in light
of the fact that the cognitive interview consistently out
performed retrieval interviews employed prior to its
implementation. Only latterly have researchers begun to
argue that each individual component should contribute
individually to the cognitive interview superiority effect
(e.g., Dando, Wilcock, & Milne, 2009; in press). Certainly,
in the current study, there is no positive evidence that it is of
value. Where the technique may prove of use is in
retrieving occasional items in witness memory that simply
cannot be accessed by other means. To assess this will
require a content analysis of the details of retrieval, to check
for qualitative differences in both the items retrieved and the
nature of errors and confabulations that arise under free
recall versus CTO. This analysis is in progress. It is clear,
however, that a simple assumption that changing witnesses’
retrieval strategy will have positive benefits, is erroneous.
Witnesses can be made to forget just as much as they can be
helped to remember.

References
Boon, J. & Noon, E. (1994). Changing perspectives in
cognitive interviewing. Psychology, Crime, & Law, 1, 5969.
Bower, G. (1967). A Multicomponent theory of a memory
trace. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 1, 230325.
Bower, G., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 335-359.
Dando, C. J., Wilcock, R. & Milne, R. (2009). The
cognitive interview: The efficacy of a modified mental
reinstatement of context procedure for frontline police
investigators. Applied Cognitive Psychology,23, 138-147.
Dando, C., Wilcock, R., Milne, R., & Henry, L. (in press).
An adapted Cognitive Interview procedure for frontline
police investigators. Psychology, Crime, & Law.
Davis, M. R., McMahon, M., & Greenwood. K. M. (2005).
The efficacy of mnemonic components of the cognitive
interview: Towards a shortened variant for time-critical
investigations. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, 75-93.
Dewhurst, S.A., & Brandt, K.R. (2007). Reinstating
effortful encoding operations at test enhances episodic

remembering. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60, 543-550.
Finlay, F., Hitch, G. J. & Meudell, P.R. (2000) Mutual
inhibition in collaborative recall: evidence for a retrievalbased account. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26 (6). pp. 1556-1557.
ISSN 0278-7393
Fisher, R. & Geiselman, R. (1992). Memory-enhancing
techniques for investigative Interviewing: The cognitive
interview. Springfield: Charles Thomas.
Goldsmith, M. & Koriat, A. (2007). The strategic regulation
of memory accuracy and informativeness. In A. Benjamin
and B. Ross (Eds.), Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, Vol. 48: Memory use as skilled cognition. San
Diego, CA: Elsevier. In Press.
Greenberg, M. S., Westcott, D. R., & Bailey, S. E. (1998).
When seeing is believing: The effect of scripts on
eyewitness memory. Law and Human Behavior, 22, 685694.
Holst, V. F. & Pezdeck, K. (1992). Scripts for typical crimes
and their effects on memory for eyewitness testimony.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 6, 573-587.
Kahana, M. J. (1996). Associative retrieval processes in free
recall. Memory & Cognition, 24, 103-109.
Lansdale, M. & Baguley, T. (2008). Dilution as a model of
long term forgetting. Psychological Review, 115, 864892.
Mandler, J. M. (1984). Stories, scripts, and scenes: Aspects
of schema theory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Memon, A., Cronin, O., Eaves, R., & Bull, R. (1996) An
empirical test of the mnemonic components of the
Cognitive Interview. In G.M. Davies, S. Lloyd-Bostock,
M. McMurran & C. Wilson (Eds.) Psychology, Law &
Criminal Justice. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Milne, R. & Bull, R. (2001). Investigative interviewing:
Psychology and practice. Chichester: John Wiley & Son.
Pezdeck, K., Wheatsone, T., Reynolds, K., Askari, N., &
Dougherty, T. (1989). Memory for real-world scenes: The
role of consistency with schema expectation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15, 587-595.
Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A
context maintenance and retrieval model of organization
processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 116, 129156.
Schank, R.C. (1999) Dynamic Memory Revisited, 2nd
Edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schank, R. C. & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding: An enquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Taylor, S. E. & Crocker, T. (1981). Schematic bases of
social information processing. In E. T. Higgins, C. P.
Herman, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.). Social cognition: The
Ontario symposium. Vol. 1. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Tuckley, M. R. & Brewer, N. (2003). How schemas affect
eyewitness memory over repeated retrieval attempts.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17, 785-800.

2649

