UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Error and expectation in language learning: An inquiry into the many curious incidents of
"mouses" in adult speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2bb8k6xg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dye, Meoldy
Ramscar, Michael

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Error and expectation in language learning:
The curious absence of "mouses" in adult speech
Michael Ramscar & Melody Dye
Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94305.
Abstract

1988). However, these factors have been largely
overlooked in discussions of children’s learning,
especially in relation to language. The extensive
literature asserting the lack of negative evidence to
children learning language (e.g., Chomsky, 1959;
Pinker, 1984, 2004; Marcus, 1993) either ignores
expectation and error-driven learning, or treats them
superficially at best. Expectation is usually dismissed as
a weak form of ‘indirect negative evidence’ that can
offer little to no assistance in the complex process of
language acquisition (Pinker, 2004). Here we show that
prediction-error provides an abundant source of
evidence in human learning, and in particular language
learning, by testing and confirming an intriguing
prediction that error-driven learning makes about
children’s plural over-regularization errors: namely,
that at an appropriate point in learning, the tendency of
children to over-regularize irregular plurals can be
reduced through exposure to regular plurals alone.

Although many learning theories make use of negative
evidence, it is often overlooked in the language-learning
literature, leading both to claims that learning simple aspects
of grammar is logically impossible and appeals to a universal
grammar. Here we investigate the ability of young children to
correct their tendency to over-regularize plural nouns. We
present an error-driven model of plural learning that makes a
surprising prediction: at an appropriate stage in learning,
children’s tendency to over-regularize irregular plurals can be
reduced through exposure to regular plurals alone. We
describe a simulation and a behavioral experiment showing
that, consistent with the model’s predictions of ‘U-shaped’
learning, memory testing on regular plurals led to significant
reductions in plural over-regularization in six-year-olds, while
increasing over-regularization in four-year-olds. Prediction
error appears to be a strong corrective source of evidence in
learning, suggesting that learning language may be far more
possible than is sometimes supposed.

Introduction

Prediction error and learning theory
Formal learning models are able to account for a wide
range of the effects associated with learning by
assuming that learning is driven by the discrepancy
between what is expected and what is actually observed
(error-driven learning). The learned predictive value of
cues produces expectations, and any difference in the
value of what is expected versus what is experienced
produces further learning. In the Rescorla-Wagner
(1972) model, for example, the change in associative
strength between a stimulus i and a response (or event) j
on trial n is defined as: 1

Gregory: “Is there any other point to which you would
wish to draw my attention?”
Holmes: “To the curious incident of the dog in the nighttime.”
Gregory: “The dog did nothing in the night-time.”
Holmes: “That was the curious incident.”
“Silver Blaze,” Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.

A racehorse vanishes on the eve of an important race,
its trainer murdered. Sherlock Holmes lights upon a
crucial piece of evidence: a dog on the premises has
remained silent throughout the time in question. The
fact that the dog did not bark – and thus, that an
expected event did not occur – proves an important clue
to the identity of the murderer. As the curious incident
of the dog in the nighttime reminds us, much can be
learned from discrepancies between what is expected
and what actually occurs.
In what follows, we show how in the ordinary course
of their lives, people use the discrepancy between what
they expect and what they actually experience as a vital
source of information in learning; and that often, as in
the case of Sherlock Holmes and The Silver Blaze, the
non-occurrence of expected events provides important
negative evidence. That people use such evidence is
only natural: expectation and prediction-error are
important components of animal learning (Rescorla,

ΔVijn =α i β j (λj – Vtotal)

(1)

Learning is governed by the value of (λj - VTOTAL) where
λj is the value of the predicted event and Vtotal is the
predictive value of a set of cues. In the ordinary course
of learning, the discrepancy between λj and Vtotal
reduces over repeated trials, producing a negatively
accelerated learning curve, and asymptotic learning.

1

n indexes the current trial. 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1 denotes the saliency of cue i, 0
≤ βj ≤ 1 denotes the learning rate of eventj, λj denotes the maximum
amount of associative strength that cuej can support, and Vtotal is the
sum of the associative strengths between all cuesj present on the
current trial and eventj.

485

What is often overlooked is what happens when a
predicted event does not occur. If a cue predicts
something that doesn’t follow, then λj will have a value
of zero for that trial. In this case the discrepancy (λj VTOTAL) will have a negative value, resulting in a
reduction in the associative strength between the cues
present on that trial and the absent feature j. For
example, in modeling learning in a dog being trained to
expect food when a bell is sounded, setting λj to 1 for
training trials where food is given, and 0 for later trials
when no food appears, allows for the characteristic
patterns of training and extinction to be modelled. This
means that latent learning about the relationship
between cues and events that are not actually present
occurs in these circumstances, and it is this process that
is a key aspect of learning.
Thus, in error-driven learning, cues compete with one
another for relevance, producing associative learning
patterns that can differ greatly from those that would
arise out of a record of the correlation between cues and
outcomes (Rescorla, 1988). There is evidence that this
kind of cue competition is operative at the neural level.
Increases and decreases in the firing rates of monkeys’
striatal dopamine neurons appear to track the degree to
which the outcome of training trials are under- or overpredicted (Hollerman & Schulz, 1998).

Possible languages are depicted as circles
corresponding to sets of word sequences, and four
logical possibilities for how a child’s hypothesis might
differ from adult language are given. In the first
possibility (a), the child’s hypothesis language, H, is
disjoint from the language to be acquired (the “target
language” - T). In terms of noun usage, on which we
focus here, this corresponds to the state of a child
learning English who cannot produce any well-formed
noun plurals (the child might say things like “the
mouses” but never “the mice.”). In (b), the sets H and T
intersect, corresponding to a child who has learned
some nouns correctly but others incorrectly (the child
uses nouns like “mice” alongside incorrect words like
“gooses”). In (c), H is a subset of T, which means that
the child has mastered usage of some but not all English
noun plurals and never uses forms that are not part of
English. Finally, in (d), H is a superset of T, meaning
that the child has mastered all English nouns but
nevertheless produces some forms that are not part of
the English language (i.e., the child says both “mouses”
and “mice” interchangeably).
Since the LPLA assumes that learners cannot recover
from erroneous inferences without corrective feedback,
and because children do not get the kind of feedback
required (Brown & Hanlon, 1970), it follows
accordingly that, children cannot acquire language
simply by attending to the input. (Indeed, the idea that
language is learned purely from experience is often
regarded as having been effectively disproved; see
Baker, 1979; Gold, 1967; Pinker, 1989)
However, the assumption that explicit negative
feedback is required if children are to correct errors is
entirely inconsistent with both the principles of errordriven learning described above, and evidence that
people do indeed make use of prediction-error in
learning (Ramscar, et al, in submission). Further,
Ramscar and Yarlett (2007) showed that general errordriven learning principles can be used to model the
patterns of children’s plural acquisition.
In the Ramscar and Yarlett model, plural items are
represented as semantic cues to phonological outcomes.
Each item is represented as an exemplar in memory,
and each exemplar comprises an associative link
between a semantic and a phonological component. For
example, the plural noun CARS is represented by a
couplet encoding the association between the general
semantics of cars, including their plurality, and the
phonological form /cars/. The model supposes that
over-regularization – children saying foots instead of
feet, for example – arises out of a failure to discriminate
the cues predicting individual plural forms from one
another. In early learning, the presence of any set of
multiple objects serves as a cue to plurals. This results
in the co-activation of regular plural forms when a child

Figure 1. Four logical situations a child might arrive at while
trying to “learn” a language (for the purposes of the example,
language learning is assumed to be a process in which the
child guesses the grammar that underlies that adult target
language). Each circle represents the set of sentences
constituting a language. “H” stands for the child’s
“hypothesized language”; “T” stands for the adult “target
language.” “+” indicates a grammatical sentence in the
language the child is trying to learn, and “-” represents an
ungrammatical sentence (Pinker, 1989).

Expectation in language learning
A good example of the considerations that have led to
the widespread belief that much of the conceptual
structure of language is innate (see e.g. Pinker, 1984) is
the “logical problem of language acquisition” (LPLA).
A classic statement of this is provided by Pinker (1984)
and is depicted in Figure 1. According to the LPLA,
children, in attempting to learn language, “hypothesize
the grammar of the adult language to be learned”
(strictly speaking, the child’s task is to guess the set of
grammatical sentences that comprise a language; Gold,
1967).

486

encounters the cues to an irregular form, with the high
frequency of regular forms giving rise to interference.
The model assumes that learning is driven by what
the child has heard, and what the child expects to hear
based on prior experience. Because regular and
irregular forms are learned at different rates (because of
their frequencies) and require different degrees of
discrimination (due to the amount of support or
competition experienced) the effects of competition in
the model vary depending upon the kind of plural being
produced and the current state of learning. As a result,
the model makes some unique predictions regarding
circumstances under which children’s tendency to overregularize plurals might be resolved. These are: (1) that
children should converge on the correct output if they
repeat plurals, including over-regularizations, because
although they predict the learned item on each trial,
early in learning, the representations of individual
forms are not sufficiently discriminated from most of
the high-frequency regular items to prevent
generalization; and (2) that the pattern of interference
will follow a ‘U-shape’ (i.e., the interference from highfrequency items will worsen before being resolved by
the discrimination of individual forms).
Experimental results confirmed these predictions
(Ramscar & Yarlett, 2007). In one study, children who
over-regularize helped a doll learn plural naming. Over
the course of several blocks of regular and irregular
items, older children converged on the correct forms of
irregular plurals (e.g., production of ‘childs’ decreased,
while ‘children’ increased), without any new input or
corrective feedback. Under the same conditions,
younger children’s over-regularization worsened,
consistent with ‘U-shaped’ learning. A similar pattern
of data was obtained when a semantic decision task was
interspersed between pre- and post- tests on irregular
plurals: older children who performed an old/new task
on pictures of plural items over-regularized less on the
post-test, while younger children over-regularized
more.
However, a very strong prediction of error-driven
learning was not tested in these studies: if item
discrimination is driven by prediction error as
described, as children’s representations of irregular
plurals improves, exposure to regular plurals alone
ought to lower of the rate at which children overregularize. The logic of this somewhat counter-intuitive
prediction is as follows: because regular nouns in
English are frequent (both in terms of the number of
regular plural noun types, and the overall number of
plural noun tokens that are regular), the majority of
plural forms cued by “plurality” will be plural forms
which resemble their singular forms, but which end in +
/S/. Since over-regularization is a failure to discriminate
the appropriate cues to individual items present, (i.e.,
generalization) – if children encounter the cues of to

regular plurals (e.g., a group of dogs), poor
discrimination will result in the prediction of irregulars.
The resultant prediction error will lead to children
learning to negatively associate regular cues with
irregular forms, which will increase the discrimination
of regulars and irregulars. This increased discrimination
of irregular plurals will in turn lead to a reduction in
over-regularization. Finally, although prediction errors
for irregular items are caused by the activation of the
cues for regular items, error frequency is a function of
how well the irregular items have been learned; this
depends on the extent to which a child has learned that
plurality cues irregular forms, which is in turn a
function of exposure to individual irregular items. It
follows then that early in development, when irregulars
are weakly learned, exposure to regular plurals will
generate little irregular prediction error. Meanwhile the
overall frequency of regulars will result in a steady
increase in the level of interference that produces overregularization, as new regular plurals are learned and
existing regulars strengthen their representations.
Simulation Experiment
To test this idea, we implemented a variant of the
Ramscar & Yarlett (2007) model. The model assumes
that plural items are represented as semantic cues to
phonological outcomes. In addition, over-regularization
is predicted to result from a failure in early learning to
weigh a sufficiently narrow semantic representation of
irregular plural items. Since a child might expect to
pluralize based on general plurality, or on the plurality
of specific items (Ramscar & Yarlett, 2007), for the
purposes of the current simulation, we represented this
in terms of two competing hypotheses, which were
reinforced whenever an irregular plural item was
presented. One hypothesis was item specific (e.g.,
plural mouse is the cue to mice), while the other was
more general (i.e., e.g., plurality is the cue to mice).
Simultaneously, we simulated the learning of regular
plurals. Due to the fact that regular plurals occur more
frequently, and because their singular and plural forms
overlap, we assumed that they offer more support to the
general plural semantic hypothesis than irregulars.
Irregular plurals offer more support to the item-specific
hypothesis.
Learning about the couplets was simulated using the
Rescorla-Wagner (1972) rule described above. In the
simulation, the learning rate, βj , for the semantic
hypotheses (cues) was set at a constant, and λj was set at
100% for the semantic-phonological couplets, which
included both regular and irregular plurals forms. To
simulate the high type and token frequency of regular
plurals, Vij for the regular plurals was learned with αi
set to a high value (i.e., in the Rescorla-Wagner model,
αi effectively serves as a separate learning rate for each

487

cuei) while Vij for the irregular plurals was learned with
αi set to a low value.2 This allowed training to be
simulated by alternately presenting the model with
regular and irregular items in training, to simulate a
child’s exposure to regular and irregular plurals at
different frequency levels.
To examine the effect of exposure to regular plurals
alone at different stages in learning, the presentation of
irregular plurals was withheld for 10 trials, the first of
these coming early in the model’s training, and the
second later in training, after the response to regular
plurals had asymptoted. Figure 2 shows the learning of
the two irregular hypotheses (general and specific) and
the general regular hypothesis.

unlearning of the multiple items⇒irregular cue. Early
in development, when irregulars are weakly learned,
exposure to regular plurals will generate less overall
irregular prediction error, and the overall frequency of
regulars will result in a steady increase in the level of
interference that produces over-regularization. Later in
development, exposure to regular plurals produces more
irregular prediction error, and interference no longer
increases. As a result, the model predicts that depending
on the overall prior exposure a child has had to plurals,
exposure to regular plurals alone can lead to opposite
effects (i.e., ‘U-shaped’ learning).

Figure 3. Interference and imitation levels over training.

Figure 2. Learning of the semantic cues to an irregular item
such as mice and the regular /S/. The periods in which no
irregular trials occured appear as horizontal lines on the plot
representing the multiple mouse items⇒ mice hypothesis.

As in Ramscar & Yarlett (2007) the likelihood of
over-regularization (i.e. failure to produce the learned
response) was modeled as a result of response
competition, caused by spreading activation to items in
memory that are activated by the semantics of the
situation but which correspond to different
phonological forms. This activation is modeled as a
function of the degree to which the competing
semantic-phonological couplets have been learned, the
strength of the semantic cue that co-activates them and
a spreading activation parameter S (Ramscar & Yarlett,
2007). Figure 3 shows the strength of this interference
signal across the training period, and Figure 4 shows
the effect this competition has on the likelihood that a
learned irregular response will be reproduced. In Fig. 4,
response propensity is calculated by subtracting the
value of the interference signal from the summed
associative value of the correct response (Ramscar &
Yarlett, 2007).
As can be seen from Figures 3 and 4, prediction
errors for irregular items are caused by the activation of
cues related to regular items, which results in the
2

Figure 4. Response propensity levels over training. Overregularization will be likely when this value is negative.

Human Experiment
We tested these predictions using a semantic old/new
task to expose children to regular plurals, and a testtrain-test paradigm to establish a baseline rate of overregularization for each child. This allowed us to
examine the effect of children’s exposure to regular
plurals has on later irregular plural production (see
Ramscar & Yarlett, 2007). Semantic priming (e.g.,
where priming the semantics of “doctor” yields shorter
response latencies in a lexical decision task on “nurse”;
Meyer and Schvaneveldt, 1971) indicates that
phonological and orthographic representations can be
activated by cueing their semantic features. The
Ramscar & Yarlett (2007) model assumes that until the

In the simulation: β j =0.3 α I regular=0.4; α I irregular=0.15.

488

representation of a phonological–semantic association
reaches asymptote, the activation of an association can
strengthen its representation (see Roediger & Karpicke,
2006). Thus explicitly priming the semantics of the
nouns, even in the absence of any overt naming
responses by the child, was expected to be sufficient to
produce errors in prediction and subsequent latent
learning. Furthermore, by not having children explicitly
name items, we aimed to reduce the effect perseveration
on spoken motor responses has in children’s
performance during a post-test. We expected that this
would allow for a better measure of their representation
of the items tested.
Participants
24 four and 23 six year old children living resident in
the vicinity of Palo Alto, California, and recruited from
a database of volunteers. The average ages were 4 years
and 7 months for the four year olds, and 6 years and 7
months for the six year olds.
Methods and materials
The children were randomly assigned to two groups,
both of which were pre-tested on plural production.3 In
the elicitation test the children were asked to help a
cookie monster puppet learn to name a series of six
irregular nouns, and six regular pairings of plural
nouns. The children sat with the experimenter and
named the nouns first from singular and then from
plural depictions that were presented on a laptop
computer.
In the experimental condition the children then
performed an old/new task in which they were asked to
tell a cookie monster whether or not they had seen
depictions similar to those they had named in the pretest. All depictions of the “old” items in training were
novel, which required children to make categorization
judgments to generate the correct answers. The children
were asked to help the cookie monster identify them
“By telling him, yes or no” to indicate whether they had
already seen these depictions or not. When an object
appeared, the experimenter asked the child to “Look at
those – did cookie monster see those before?” Children
who did not spontaneously respond were prompted,
“Did cookie see these? Yes? No?” If no response was
forthcoming, the experimenter proceeded to the next
item. Half of the presented items were new depictions
of the regular items in the pre-test and half were foils.
The children were thus tested on 12 new and 12 old

items per block. All of the items were presented as
depictions on a computer screen.
In the control condition, the children were shown 6
color slides after the pre-test, and then asked to tell the
cookie monster whether they had seen that particular
color before in an old/new task that contained an equal
number of foils. The colors were presented as blocks
filling the computer screen to avoid cuing any notion of
plurality. The total time to complete each was equal.
Both sets of children were then post-tested on exactly
the same set of depictions that were used in the pre-test.

Figure 5. Pre and post test performance by age and condition

Results
The results overwhelmingly supported our
predictions. The performance of the older children in
the experimental condition improved between pre-and
post test (t(64)=2.256, p<0.05) while the performance
of the younger children declined (t(66)=1.955, p<0.05).
There was little change in the performance of either age
group in the control condition (see Figure 5). A 2 (preto post- test) x 2 (age) x 2 (condition) repeated
measures ANOVA of the children’s plural production
revealed a significant interaction between age and preto post-test performance (F(1,43) = 8.32, p<0.01), and a
significant interaction between age, training type and
pre- to post- test performance (F(1,266) = 4.235,
p=.05).
General Discussion
In this experiment, we found that testing memory for
regular plurals significantly reduced the rates of plural
over-regularization in six-year-olds. Children learned
about irregular plurals, and improved their production
of them, even though none were present during training
trials. We feel that this result is as surprising as it is,
largely because of the lack of widespread understanding
of error-driven learning processes (see also Rescorla,
1988). Overwhelmingly, research into language

3

The irregular items were MOUSE-MICE, CHILDCHILDREN, SNOWMAN-SNOWMEN, GOOSE-GOOSE,
TOOTH-TEETH and FOOT-FEET, while the regular matches
were RAT, DOLL, COW, DUCK, EAR, and HAND.
Ramscar & Yarlett (2007) Experiment 1 revealed that while
children of these ages over-regularize these irregular plurals,
they have knowledge of their correct forms.

489

MacWhinney, B. (2004). A multiple process solution to
the logical problem of language acquisition. Journal
of Child Language, 31, 883–914
Marcus, G. F. (1993). Negative evidence in language
acquisition. Cognition, 46, 53–85
Meyer, D.E. and Schvaneveldt, R.W. (1971).
Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words: Evidence
of a dependence between retrieval operations. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 90, 227-234
Miller R.R., Barnet R.C. and Grahame N.J. (1995).
Assessment of the Rescorla-Wagner Model,
Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 363-386.
Pinker, S. (1984). Language learnability and language
development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press
Pinker, S. (2004) Clarifying the logical problem of
language acquisition. Journal of Child Language, 31,
949-953.
Quine, W.V. (1960) Word and Object, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Ramscar, M. & Yarlett, D. (2007) Linguistic selfcorrection in the absence of feedback: A new
approach to the logical problem of language
acquisition. Cognitive Science, 31, 927-960
Ramscar, M. Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., &
Thorpe, K. (in submission) The Feature-Label-Order
Effect In Symbolic Learning
Rescorla R.A. (1988). Pavlovian Conditioning: It’s Not
What You Think It Is, American Psychologist, 43(3),
151-160.
Rescorla R.A. and Wagner A.R. (1972). A Theory of
Pavlovian
Conditioning:
Variations
in
the
Effectiveness
of
Reinforcement
and
Nonreinforcement. In Black & Prokasy (Eds.),
Classical Conditioning II: Current Research and
Theory. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Roediger, H.L., & Karpicke, J.D. (2006).
Testenhanced learning: Taking memory tests improves
long-term retention. Psychological Science, 17, 249255
Rudy, J. W. (1974). Stimulus selection in animal
conditioning
and
paired-associate
learning:
Variations in the associative process. Journal of
Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 13, 282-296
Rumelhart D. E. & McClelland J. L (1986) On learning
past tenses of English verbs. In Rumelhart &
McClelland (eds) Parallel Distributed Processing: Vol
2: Psychological & Biological Models. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Siegel, S.G., & and Allan, L.G. (1996). The widespread
influence
of
the
Rescorla-Wagner
model,
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 3(3), 314-321
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Wittgenstein, L (1953). Philosophical Investigations
Oxford: Blackwell

learning has pre-occupied itself with the observable:
that is, with what a child hears or sees. Researchers
have variously touted “the lack of negative evidence” in
language learning as a constraint on theory (Marcus,
1993; Pinker, 2004), and much virtue is attributed to
models that learn from “positive evidence” alone. We
feel this is regrettable. There is good reason to believe
that error-driven learning describes the principal
mechanism by which people acquire information about
their environment (Miller, Barnet & Grahame, 1995;
Siegel & Allen, 1996; Ramscar & Yarlett, 2007;
Ramscar, et al, in submission). The basic principles of
error-driven learning are supported both by animal
(e.g., Kamin, 1969; Rescorla & Wagner, 1972) and
neurobiological models (e.g., Hollerman & Schultz,
1998; Barlow, 2001). In developing accounts of human
learning, error-driven learning ought to be primarily
considered when it comes to establishing conceptual
and theoretical constraints and default hypotheses.
Extrapolating from the findings presented here (see
also Ramscar & Yarlett, 2007; Ramscar et al, in
submission), it seems likely that the processes involved
in verbal learning – reducing prediction-error between
semantic cues in the world and linguistic forms – are
critical to the development of our use of language as an
abstract representational device in communication.
Understanding language in terms of learning may, in
the future, involve a reassessment of what human
communication involves, requiring and inspiring new
theories of language and its role in culture
(Wittgenstein, 1953; Quine, 1960; Tomasello, 1999). At
the very least, we would argue that by simply reversing
the trend of ignoring learning in human development,
we can and will reap many important scientific benefits.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by NSF
Grant Nos. 0547775 and 0624345 to Michael Ramscar
References
Baker, C. (1979). Syntactic theory and the projection
problem. Linguistic Inquiry, 10, 533–581
Barlow H. (2001). Redundancy reduction revisited,
Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 12, 241253
Brown, R., & Hanlon, C. (1970). Derivational
complexity and order of acquisition in child speech.
In J. R. Hayes (Ed.), Cognition and the development
of language. New York: Wiley.
Hollerman J.R., Schultz W. (1998) Dopamine neurons
report an error in the temporal prediction of reward
during learning. Nature Neuroscience, 1: 304-309.
Kamin L.J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention,
and conditioning. In: Campbell B, Church R (eds).
Punishment and Aversive Behaviour. AppletonCentury-Crofts: New York.

490

