UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Ethnicity Effects in Relative Pitch Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0nv9r2qr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hove, Michael
Krumhansl, Carol
Sutherland, Mary Elizabeth

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ethnicity Effects in Relative Pitch Learning
Michael J. Hove (mjh88@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, 211 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA

Mary Elizabeth Sutherland (mary.e.sutherland@mail.mcgill.ca)
Department of Neuropsychology, McGill University, 3801 rue University
Montreal, QC H3A 2B4 Canada

Carol L. Krumhansl (clk4@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, 211 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853 USA
Abstract
Higher rates of Absolute Pitch among East Asian musicians has
garnered considerable research interest for it position to uncover
relative contributions of genetic and environmental factors such
as musical training and tone-language knowledge. In three
studies with non-musicians (n=134) on learning Relative Pitch
(the relation between tones), we establish similar ethnicity
effects. East Asians consistently outperformed other participants
in relative pitch tasks regardless of tone-language knowledge; no
difference was observed in a ‘relative rhythm’ control task.
Results suggest genetic and environmental factors in identifying
musical intervals.
Keywords: Pitch perception, Relative pitch, ethnicity effects,
genetic differences.

Introduction
Phenotypic variation between ethnic groups in medical,
cognitive, and perceptual traits is receiving great scientific
interest, as it provides insight into understanding relative
genetic and environmental contributions. Musical pitch
processing varies between ethnicities. Absolute pitch (AP),
the rare ability to identify or produce a musical pitch
without a reference tone, is more common among East
Asians than non-Asians (e.g., Deutsch, Henthorn, Marvin,
& Xu, 2006; Gregersen, Kowalsky, Kohn, & Marvin, 2000).
This effect has prompted attention from geneticists and
cognitive neuroscientists primarily due to the interaction of
genetic factors and environmental factors, such as tonelanguage knowledge, style of musical training, a critical
learning period, and location of childhood.
Several studies provide evidence for a genetic component
in AP. Siblings of AP possessors were more likely to have
AP than siblings of non-AP possessors and this effect of
familial aggregation was strong even after controlling for
shared environmental factors (Baharloo et al., 1998).
Second, a bimodal distribution of pitch-naming skills
(participants tend to either have AP, or they do not) suggests
“the possibility that AP ability could be governed by the
influence of only one or a few genes” (Athos, et al., 2007).
In another study, rates of AP among U.S. music theory
students was only 12%, however the rate among East Asian
students (47.5%) was markedly higher compared to

Caucasian students (9%). Higher rates of AP were “present
among all the major ethnic subgroups — Japanese (26%
AP+), Korean (37% AP+), and Chinese (65% AP+)”
(Gregersen et al., 2000). This suggests a potential genetic
component, as higher rates among East Asians cannot
simply be attributed to cultural factors (the three cultures are
distinct) or tone-language experience (Zatorre, 2003).
However, note that Japanese and some Korean dialects are
considered pitch accent languages, in which pitch can carry
some lexical meaning (Ladd, 1996, Sohn, 1999).
Environmental factors contribute to AP. A comparison of
conservatory students in China and the U.S. showed much
higher rates of AP for the Chinese (~ 50%) than the nonAsians in the U.S. (~10%), leading the authors to argue that
early exposure to tone language can predispose individuals
to AP; however, they also acknowledge possible genetic
factors (Deutsch, Henthorn, Marvin & Xu, 2006). Deutsch
and colleagues (2004) proposed that if pitch carries meaning
in language (as in tone or pitch-accent languages), babies
will attend more to pitch cues and hence will be more likely
to develop AP. The location of childhood is another
potential factor in AP: a recent reanalysis of data from
Gregersen et al. (2000) contends that the observed East
Asian AP advantage appears only for individuals who grew
up in East Asia, potentially due to more tone or pitch accent
language exposure (Henthorn & Deutsch, 2007). However
in a reply to this reanalysis, Gregersen and colleagues
(2007) show that the effect could be driven by a music
training method that is much more common in Asia: AP
correlates with “fixed do” training, wherein each solfége
syllable is always associated with the same pitch, such that
do = C, re = D, etc. Finally, converging evidence also
indicates a critical period: adults with AP started music
lessons early (Baharloo et al. 1998; Profita & Bidder, 1988).
A multiplicity of environmental and genetic factors
appear to contribute to the emergence of AP. Gregersen
(2007) takes “ethnic differences” to “encompass all the
cultural, environmental and genetic differences that can be
found between the major population groups.” The relative
contributions of these factors remain contentious and elusive
due largely to the entanglement of genes and environment

2256

and the extreme rarity of AP (AP rates are estimated as low
as 1 in 10,000 in the general population; Profita & Bidder,
1988; Takeuchi & Hulse, 1993).
The skill explored in this paper is relative pitch (RP), the
ability to make pitch judgments about the relation between
pitches in musical intervals. AP and RP are distinctly
different skills, employing distinct brain processes (Zatorre,
Perry, Beckett, Westbury, & Evans, 1998). Research on AP
is relevant to RP, which has certain advantages for study.
RP is more common and trainable than AP, and is well
developed in almost all trained musicians. Learning to
identify musical intervals is a primary goal of ear training
methodologies, but little empirical work has been published.
Some evidence has emerged for both genetic and
environmental components in RP. Genetic factors in
musical pitch were observed in a twin-study: in a task
identifying melodies with a mistuned interval, performance
was more similar for identical twin pairs than for fraternal
twin pairs; heritability estimates of pitch recognition were
around .75 (Drayna, Manichaikul, de Lange, Snieder, &
Spector, 2001). Pitch processing differences also emerged as
a function of linguistic experience: tone-language speakers
were more accurate at identifying speech tones than nontone language speakers, but there was no difference between
groups for just-noticeable-difference threshold for pitch
(Bent, Bradlow, & Wright, 2006). Ethnicity effects in RP
have not yet been explored despite intimations in this
direction.
In the following three experiments, we investigated
relative pitch learning among East Asian and non-Asian
non-musicians in order to ascertain whether the observed
ethnicity effects in AP extend into RP. Working with nonmusicians is advantageous because it mitigates factors such
as type of training. In addition to ethnicity, participants
reported tone-language knowledge, musical training,
musical environment and primary language in the home, and
country of early childhood. Participants trained on various
ascending musical intervals and were subsequently tested on
interval recognition. Experiment 3 included an analogous
“relative rhythm” task to test for motivational or general
learning differences.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 assessed pitch interval recognition for East
Asian and non-Asian non-musicians after either active or
passive training. The experiment consisted of a brief
practice session, followed by approximately 25 minutes of
training, and an interval-recognition test.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-one
Cornell
undergraduates
participated for course credit (23 women, 8 men; 11 East
Asians, 20 non-Asians). The East Asian sample consisted of
8 Chinese, 2 Koreans, and 1 Filipino. Participants reported
their tone-language knowledge on a 1 to 5 scale (1 =
understanding but trouble speaking and 5 = fluency). Six
East Asians reported tone-language knowledge: two
reported 1s, two reported 3s, and two reported 5s.

Participants were unfamiliar with relative pitch naming
tasks. None were currently playing a musical instrument;
they had received no formal ear training and had 5 years or
less musical training (M = 2.9 yrs; non-Asians=2.5 yrs, East
Asians=3.6 yrs; this difference was non-significant and
musical training was included as a covariate).
Materials and Procedure The stimuli consisted of four
ascending melodic intervals: major second (M2), major
third (M3), perfect fourth (P4), and perfect fifth (P5). The
intervals began with one of two tones, C4 or F#4. For
example, the major second was played with the tones C4
and D4, or the tones F#4 and G#4. The two different
reference pitches (starting tones) were used to limit an
absolute pitch strategy, in which the absolute pitch height of
the second tone could be used to recognize the interval. All
pitch intervals consisted of MIDI tones produced via a
MAX/MSP program on a Macintosh G4 computer and
heard over AKG K141 headphones.
The experimenter first introduced the four different pitch
intervals (M2, M3, P4, P5) and explained that the distance
between the tones was important, not the absolute pitch
height. In order to introduce the task, participants completed
a short practice session identifying intervals generated by
the computer. All tones lasted 500 ms and were separated by
250 ms of silence. Participants registered responses by
mouse-clicking one of four boxes on the screen (labeled 2,
3, 4, and 5).
In the training phase, half the participants were randomly
assigned to ‘passive’ training and half to ‘active’ training. In
the ‘passive’ condition, they produced both the reference
pitch and the interval tone by mouse-clicking the same
button. In the ‘active’ condition, participants used a Roland
Handsonic drum machine to produce the tones; they placed
their right hand over five pads – the thumb played the
reference pitch and the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th fingers produced
the respective interval tone as indicated by the interval
number (2-5) on the screen. Within the active and passive
groups, half the participants heard only a piano timbre and
half heard only oboe timbre throughout training. The
training phase consisted of a total of 320 trials (4 intervals x
2 reference pitches x 40 repetitions).
The test phase consisted of 16 total intervals (4 intervals x
2 reference pitches x 2 timbres) presented 10 times each for
a total of 160 trials. Half the test trials were played in an
oboe timbre and half were played in a piano timbre;
however, the timbre manipulation yielded no differences or
interactions and will not be discussed further. The
experiment was self-paced and lasted approximately 1 hour.

Results and Discussion
Interval identification data were analyzed in a 2
(ethnicity: East Asian/non-Asian) x 2 (training method:
active/passive) between subjects analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA) with prior musical training as a covariate. A
main effect of ethnicity showed interval recognition was
more accurate for East Asians (M = 62.2%) than non-Asians
(M = 45.7%; means are adjusted for the years music
covariate), F(1, 26) = 7.9, p = .009. The effect of

2257

active/passive training was marginally significant, with
active training more effective than passive training, F(1, 26)
= 4.12, p = .053, although this effect was much smaller than
the ethnicity effect. There was no effect of prior musical
training (p = .14). The ethnicity x training interaction was
marginally significant, (p = .07), indicating that active
training seemed to be more helpful for the East Asian group
than the non-Asian group. The ethnicity effect was
unplanned, thus random assignment to active/passive
conditions did not take ethnicity into consideration: The
passive condition included 5 East Asians (52.3% correct)
and 11 non-Asians (41.1%), whereas active condition
included 6 East Asians (76.6%) and 9 non-Asians (48.4%).

is not limited to the more well-documented abilities to name
pitches in isolation, but to some more general advantage in
applying labels to musical pitches.
As to factors that might cause these differences to appear,
the present study shows an effect of ethnicity even for East
Asians who grew up in North America compared with nonAsians. An effect of ethnicity was found also for East
Asians who reported no understanding of tone languages
compared to non-Asians. A caveat here is that, although
these East Asians do not understand a tone language, they
may nonetheless have had greater exposure. Also, the small
number of East Asian participants makes comparisons
within this group inconclusive.

Experiment 2

Figure 1: Pitch recognition by group for Exp. 1 and 2.
The next analyses consider the effect of tone-language
experience. The performance of the East Asians participants
who could at least understand a tone language (M = 64.7%,
n = 6), did not differ from the East Asians with no tonelanguage experience (M = 66.3%, n = 5), t(9) = .12, p > .91.
However, within the group who understand a tone language,
identification performance tended to be highest among the
fluent speakers (proficiency level 5, M = 83.7%, n = 2;
proficiency level 3, M = 48.7%, n = 2; proficiency level 1,
M = 61.9%, n = 2). The very small numbers of participants
in these groups make these results inconclusive, however.
Finally, the East Asians with no tone-language experience
outperformed the non-Asians, t(23) = 2.8, p = .01. Thus,
ethnicity effects remain even when all participants do not
understand a tone language.
The final analyses tested the effect of location of early
childhood in the East Asian participants. The East Asians
who grew up in East Asia (M = 82.7%, n = 3) tended to
outperform the East Asians who grew up in North America
(M = 59.1%, n = 8), t(9) = 1.90, p = .09. The East Asians
who grew up in North America outperformed the nonAsians who grew up in North America (M = 44.3%, n = 20),
t(26)=2.2, p = .038. Thus, some effect of ethnicity remains
even when all participants spent their childhoods in North
America.
This first experiment found a substantial advantage for the
East Asians in learning to identify pitch intervals. This
suggests a link to the ethnicity effects in AP. If so, then it
would seem that the difference found between ethnic groups

Experiment 2 further examined the previously observed
ethnicity effect and potential effects of tone language on
melodic interval recognition. In order to assess the relative
contributions of tone language and ethnicity in pitch
recognition tasks, we compared the interval recognition
performance of three groups: Chinese, native tone-language
speakers
from
the
East
Asian
group
(Chinese/Japanese/Korean) previously showing pitch
perception advantages; Hmong, also native tone-language
speakers, but genetically distinct from that East Asian group
(Wen et al., 2004); and Caucasians. Experiment 2 was a
simplified version of Experiment 1. Stimuli consisted of
three intervals rather than four, no timbral differences, and
all participants trained in the active condition. Participants
were high school non-musicians.

Methods
Participants Participants were 38 unpaid volunteers (20
females, 18 males) from secondary schools in China,
Taiwan, and the United States. Three groups participated:
students in China and Taiwan, henceforth referred to as
“Chinese” (n = 10; mean age = 16.6 years); Caucasian
students in the U.S. (n = 14; mean age = 16.3 years); and
Hmong students in the U.S. (n = 14; mean age = 16.5 years).
The Hmong students were all native Hmong speakers (a
tone language). Half of the Hmong sample were born in the
U.S. and half were born in Thailand or Laos and immigrated
to the U.S. (five before age 5, two at age 10); this did not
affect performance. Participants were non-musicians with
three years or less of musical training (means for Caucasians
= 1.8 years, Hmong = .9 years, and Chinese = 1.2 years; ns)
and had no formal ear training.
Materials and Procedure Experiment 2 consisted of three
intervals from the pentatonic scale (M2, P4, P5) starting on
one of two reference pitches (C4 and F#4). To avoid
language labels, intervals were identified only by color: M2s
were red, P4s green, and P5s blue. Tone timbre was a MIDI
metallophone. The MIDI tones were presented via a
MAX/MSP program on a Mac G4 laptop over circumaural
headphones.
Participants were first briefed on the experimental
structure and the task of recognizing pitch intervals. The
Caucasians and Hmong students were instructed verbally

2258

from a script and the Chinese students received written
instructions translated into Chinese (back-translated to
English to ensure accuracy).
Participants briefly practiced the interval recognition task
and responded via one of three keys demarcated by
correspondingly colored stickers (a red sticker on the ‘T’
key (M2), green on the ‘Y’ key (P4), and blue on the ‘U’
key (P5)). The training phase consisted of 120 intervals (3
intervals x 2 reference pitches x 20 repetitions). A colored
square appeared on the screen indicating the to-be-produced
interval. Participants produced the intervals by first pressing
the space bar for the reference pitch, then the appropriate
colored key for the higher, interval tone. Following training,
participants performed the interval recognition test on the
trained-on intervals. The test was 96 trials for the Caucasian
and Hmong groups and reduced to 48 trials for the Chinese
group due to time limitations.1 The entire experiment lasted
approximately 25 minutes for the Caucasian and Hmong
groups and 20 minutes for the Chinese group.

Methods

Results and Discussion
A 3 (group: Chinese, Hmong, Caucasian) level betweensubjects ANCOVA with previous musical training as a
covariate revealed a highly significant group difference: the
Chinese (M = 72.0%) outperformed the Caucasians (M =
45.5%) and Hmong (M = 45.5%), F (2,34) = 18.85, p <
.001. There was no effect of previous musical training on
the interval recognition scores, F(1, 34) = 1.75, p = .20.
The Chinese performance advantage for non-musicians
in this relative pitch task parallels the previously established
advantage in AP rates for highly trained Chinese musicians.
Identical performance for Caucasian and the native tonelanguage speaking Hmong indicates that speaking a tone
language does not necessarily produce better pitch interval
recognition. The Chinese performance advantage is
consistent with ethnicity and possibly environmental
explanations for pitch perception advantages.

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 further investigated ethnicity effects in a
similar relative pitch learning task, and included an
analogous “relative rhythm” learning task (with time rather
than pitch intervals) in order to control for possible
motivational, memory, or general cognitive differences. For
example, relative pitch tasks involve context or the relation
between stimuli, and hence might favor the more contextsensitive East Asian cultures (e.g., Masuda & Nisbett,
2001). However, if groups performed differently in the pitch
task, but not the rhythm task, one can infer that those group
differences arose from differences in pitch processing,
rather than motivational or other general cognitive
differences.

Participants Sixty-five Cornell undergraduates participated
for course credit or $8/hr. Participants were non-musicians
with 3 years or less of musical training (M=1.2 years,
SD=1.0). There were three groups: Caucasian (n = 30;
musical training = .9 years); Chinese (n = 24; musical
training = 1.4); and Korean (n = 11; musical training = 1.5
years; ns difference between groups). Participants reported
their language experience on a 1 to 5 scale (1 =
understanding but trouble speaking and 5 = fluency). All
Chinese participants reported having tone-language
experience (M = 4.0; SD = 1.4); and all Korean participants
reported speaking Korean (M = 4.6; SD = .8). Primary
language spoken at home was also reported. An additional
thirteen participants participated in the experiment but were
excluded; one due to corrupted data and twelve due to
ethnicities that were not Caucasian, Chinese, or Korean.
Materials and Procedure The experiment consisted of two
tasks counterbalanced in order: a pitch-interval learning task
similar to Experiment 2 and an analogous rhythm-interval
learning task. In the rhythm-interval task, participants
learned to recognize different rhythmic patterns. The rhythm
stimuli consisted of three rhythms identified by color (red,
green, or blue) presented at one of two tempi (slow or fast),
to ensure that participants learned the relative time interval
and not the absolute times. The rhythms were presented in a
MIDI woodblock timbre and consisted of equally spaced
reference clicks (quarter notes) with an inter-onset interval
of 600 ms in the slow tempo and 450 ms in the fast tempo.
The three different rhythms resulted from inserting different
subdivision clicks. The subdivisions occurred: (1) halfway
between the reference clicks (a 1:1 subdivision); (2) twothirds after the first reference click (a 2:1 subdivision); or
(3) three-quarters after the reference click (a 3:1
subdivision); or in musical terms: (1) eighth note feel; (2)
triplet feel; or (3) sixteenth note feel. There were seven
clicks in each rhythmic interval: the first two served to set
the tempo, followed by two iterations of the rhythmic
interval.
The procedure for the rhythm and pitch portions were
identical: the intervals were defined by the experimenter,
followed by a short practice, a 96 trial training phase, and a
96 trial test. Each training phase lasted approximately 10
minutes. The color of the upcoming interval appeared on the
screen and a spacebar press started the interval. The pitchinterval stimuli were the same as Experiment 2 — three
intervals (M2, P4 or P5) and two reference pitches (C or
F#). However, each stimuli presentation consisted of five
tones rather than two to match the rhythm presentation. The
reference pitch was first played to establish pitch context
and was then followed by two repetitions of the interval. For
example, the presentation of an M2 (red) beginning on C4
would be C C D C D. The experiment was self-paced and
lasted approximately one hour.

1

This did not alter performance: analysis of the 96 trial tests for
the Hmong and Caucasian groups, revealed no differences (e.g.
fatigue effects) between the first 48 trials and second 48 trials.

2259

Results and Discussion
Average percent correct for the pitch and rhythm tasks
appears in Figure 2. Separate ANCOVAs on pitch and
rhythm interval recognition examined ethnicity with
previous musical training as a covariate. First, the pitch
data: ethnicity again had a significant effect on pitch interval
recognition. The Chinese (M = 71.1% correct) and Koreans
(M = 76.6%) outperformed the Caucasians (M = 59.6%),
(reported Ms with previous music covariate held at 1.2
years), F(2, 61) = 6.42, p = .003. There was no difference
between the Chinese and Korean groups, p > .3. Unlike
Experiments 1 and 2, previous musical training did have a
significant effect, F(1, 61) = 8.21, p < .01.
The rhythm data, in contrast, yielded no significant
difference between the Chinese (M = 67.5%), Korean (M =
66.1%), and Caucasian participants (M = 63.6%), F(2, 61) =
.5, p > .6; nor did the rhythm test show an effect of prior
musical training, p > .4. Since ethnicity differences between
East Asians and Caucasians emerged in the pitch task, but
not in the analogous rhythm task, we can more confidently
conclude that the observed differences in pitch recognition
reliably reflect differences in pitch recognition, rather than
spurious effects of motivation, strategy or other cognitive
differences.

Figure 2: Average percent correct for pitch and rhythm
portions for Caucasian, Chinese, and Korean participants.
Next, we examine the potential role of language on pitch
interval recognition. Within the East Asian sample, no
difference arose between the Chinese participants (all of
whom had tone language experience) and the Korean
participants (all Korean speakers). Some dialects of Korean
are pitch accent languages, but the majority of our
participants (and their parents) spoke standard South
Korean, which does not have pitch accents (Sohn, 1999),
thus the relatively high pitch performance for Koreans is not
driven by pitch accent language. Additionally, the degree of
tone-language fluency did not affect performance; within
the Chinese group, the 15 participants who rated themselves
as fluent (M = 67.2%) tended to score lower on the pitch test
than the 9 participants with non-fluent tone-language
experience (M = 80.4%), p = .07.

Finally, we observed no difference between the East
Asians who grew up in East Asia (M = 77.6%, n = 15) and
the East Asians who grew up in North America (M = 71.5%,
n = 20), p > .3. Nor did the primary language spoken in the
home have an effect, ps > .6.
Experiment 3 demonstrates an ethnicity effect in relative
pitch, but not relative rhythm identification. This effect
remains regardless of language experience.

General Discussion
The three studies reported here indicate an ethnicity effect
in relative pitch learning: the East Asian samples
(previously shown in other studies to possess higher rates of
absolute pitch) better identified musical pitch intervals.
Relative pitch performance was not affected by tonelanguage knowledge in any of the experiments. The amount
of musical training yielded an effect in Experiment 3, but
was not responsible for the observed ethnicity effects.
The observed ethnicity effects could be influenced, at
least in part, by genetic differences. Genetic effects have
previously been established in pitch perception abilities:
identical twin pairs performed more similarly than fraternal
twin pairs when identifying melodies with incorrect pitch
(Drayna et al., 2001); AP aggregates in families even after
controlling for shared environment (Baharloo et al., 1998);
and higher rates of AP in East Asian populations (e.g.
Chinese, Korean, and Japanese) at least suggest genetic
predispositions (Gregersen et al., 2000; Zatorre, 2003).
Dediu and Ladd (2007) recently proposed a link between
specific genes and tone language distribution; the population
frequencies of two derived haplotypes of the brain growth
and development genes, ASPM and Microcephalin,
correlate with whether that population speaks a tone
language (rs ~ .5). The haplotypes could affect subtle
organization of the cerebral cortex and lead to cognitive
biases such as in low-level pitch perception that facilitate
the acquisition of tone language. The authors propose that
such a cognitive bias is very small and would only manifest
itself in linguistic change over many generations.
The East Asian samples showing better pitch interval
recognition have derived ASPM and Microcephalin
frequencies consistent with the proposed cognitive bias
(Evans et al., 2005; Mekel-Brobov et al., 2005). However,
the Hmong (Miaozu) also have similar frequencies of these
derived haplotypes, but showed no relative pitch perception
advantage in our study. The lack of effect in the Hmong
could reflect complex gene-environment interactions or
could stem from uncontrolled factors. For example,
although the Hmong sample consisted of fluent tonelanguage speakers with no known cognitive or auditory
impairments, they were refugees; and refugees can have
elevated rates of PTSD and depression (Ehntholt & Yule,
2006), which could in turn affect auditory processing
(Metzger et al., 2002).
Another uncontrolled factor in the present study is
intelligence. Some might propose that enhanced relative
pitch identification in Asians could stem from the

2260

previously identified higher IQ scores in Asians (Dickens &
Flynn, 2006) combined with the positive correlation
between IQ and pitch discrimination (Acton & Schroeder,
2001). However, IQ is unlikely driving ethnicity effects here
as the Asian IQ advantage is very small, if it exists at all
(Flynn, 1991) and the correlation between IQ and pitch
discrimination is also weak (r ~ .3; Acton & Schroeder,
2001). Evidence indicates that IQ positively correlates with
temporal discrimination (Rammsayer & Brandler, 2007);
thus if relative pitch effects appeared due to IQ in
Experiment 3, concordant “relative rhythm” effects should
also appear, but did not.
In summary, we establish an ethnicity effect in relative
pitch identification in non-musicians that was previously
seen only in highly trained musicians with absolute pitch.
East Asians consistently outperformed others in relative
pitch identification, regardless of tone language knowledge.
This effect is consistent with genetic work on ASPM and
Microcephalin, and opens up many research questions
concerning the genetic and environmental contributions in
pitch interval identification.

Acknowledgements
We thank Joyce Rosenbaum and Salman Hafeez for
assistance in data collection.

References
Acton, G. S., & Schroeder, D. H. (2001). Sensory
discrimination as related to general intelligence.
Intelligence, 29, 263-271.
Athos, E. A., Levinson, B. Kistler, A., Zemansky, J.,
Bostrom, A., Freimer, N., & Gitschier, J. (2007).
Dichotomy and perceptual distortions in absolute pitch
ability. PNAS, 104, 14795-14800.
Baharloo, S., Johnston, P., Service, S., Gitschier, J., &
Freimer, N. (1998). Absolute Pitch: An approach for
identification of genetic and nongenetic components. The
American Journal of Human Genetics, 62, 224-231.
Bent, T., Bradlow, A. R. & Wright, B. A. (2006). The
influence of linguistic experience on the cognitive
processing of pitch in speech and nonspeech sounds. JEP:
HPP, 32, 97-103.
Dediu, D., & Ladd, R. (2007). Linguistic tone is related to
the population frequency of the adaptive haplogroups of two
brain size genes, ASPM and Microcephalin. PNAS, 104,
10944-10949.
Deutsch, D., Henthorn, T., & Dolson, M. (2004).
Absolute pitch, speech, and tone language: Some
experiments and a proposed framework. Music Perception,
21, 339-356.
Deutsch, D., Henthorn, T., Marvin, E., & Xu, H. S.
(2006). Absolute pitch among American and Chinese
conservatory students: Prevalence differences, and evidence
for a speech-related critical period. JASA, 119, 719-722.
Dickens, W. T., & Flynn, J. R. (2006). Black Americans
reduce the racial IQ gap: Evidence from standardization
samples. Psychological Science, 17, 913-920.

Drayna, D., Manichaikul, A., de Lange, M., Snieder, H.,
& Spector, T. (2001). Genetic correlates of musical pitch
recognition in humans. Science, 291, 1969-1972.
Ehntholt, K. A., & Yule, W. (2006). Practitioner review:
Assessment and treatment of refugee children and
adolescents who have experienced war-related trauma. J of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 1197-1210.
Evans, P. D., Gilbert S. L., Mekel-Bobrov N., Vallender
E. J., Anderson J. R., Tishkoff S. A., Hudson R. R., & Lahn,
B. H. (2005). Microcephalin, a gene regulating brain size,
continues to evolve adaptively in humans. Science, 309,
1717-1720.
Flynn, J. R. (1991). Asian Americans: Achievement
beyond IQ. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gregersen, P. K., Kowalsky, E., Kohn, N., & Marvin,
E.W. (2000). Early childhood music education and
predisposition to absolute pitch: Teasing apart genes and
environment. Am J of Hum Gen, 98, 280–282.
Gregersen P. K., Kowalsky E., & Li, W. (2007). Reply to
Henthorn and Deutsch. Am J of Med Gen, 143A, 104 – 105.
Henthorn, T., & Deutsch, D. (2007). Ethnicity versus
early environment. Am J Med Genet, 143, 102-103.
Ladd, D. R. (1996). Intonational phonology. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending
holistically versus analytically: Comparing the context
sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 922-934.
Mekel-Bobrov, N., Gilbert, S. L., Evans, P. D.,
Vallender, E. J., Anderson, J.R., Hudson, R. R., Tishkoff, S.
A., & Lahn, B.T. (2005). Ongoing adaptive evolution of
ASPM, a brain size determinant in Homo sapiens. Science,
309, 1720-1722
Metzger, L. J., Carson, M. A., Paulus, L. A., Lasko, N.
B., Paige, S. R., Pitman, R. K., & Orr, S. P. (2002). Eventrelated potentials to auditory stimuli in female Vietnam
nurse veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder.
Psychophysiology, 39, 49-63.
Profita, J., & Bidder, T. G. (1988). Perfect Pitch.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 29, 763-771.
Rammsayer, T. H., & Brandler, S. (2007). Performance
on temporal information processing as an index of general
intelligence. Intelligence, 35, 123-139.
Sohn, H-M. (1999). The Korean language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Takeuchi, A. H., & Hulse, S. H. (1993). Absolute pitch.
Psychological Bulletin, 113, 345-361.
Wen, B., Li, H., Lu, D., Song, X., Zhang, F., He, Y., et al.
(2004). Genetic evidence supports demic diffusion of Han
culture. Nature, 431, 302-305.
Zatorre, R. J. (2003). Absolute pitch: a paradigm for
understanding the influence of genes and development on
cognitive function. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 692-695.
Zatorre, R. J., Perry, D. W., Beckett, C. A., Westbury, C.
F., & Evans, A. C. (1998). Functional anatomy of musical
processing in listeners with absolute pitch and relative pitch.
PNAS, 95, 3172-3177.

2261

