UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence for a Verbally-Based Analytic Component to Insight Problem Solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g49w9xf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Ball, Linden
Stevens, Alexandra

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence for a Verbally-Based Analytic Component to Insight Problem Solving
Linden J. Ball (l.ball@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK

Alexandra Stevens (a.stevens@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YF UK
Abstract
Two accounts of insight problem solving dominate the current
literature: the ‘special-process’ theory (e.g., Bowden, JungBeeman, Fleck, & Kounios, 2005) which attributes insight to
implicit processes of spreading activation that are localised in
the right hemisphere, and the ‘business-as-usual’ theory (e.g.,
MacGregor, Ormerod, & Chronicle, 2001), which proposes
that both insight and non-insight problems draw on the same
analytic mechanisms, which are verbally-based and lefthemisphere localised. We report an experiment in which
participants tackled complex and simple insight tasks
(Compound Remote Associates) whilst engaging in
articulatory suppression (AS) or whilst thinking aloud (TA).
Accuracy and latency data indicate that insight problem
solving is hindered under AS requirements. Since AS should
not affect implicit spreading activation this finding is difficult
to reconcile with the special-process theory, although it would
be predicted by the business-as-usual theory since AS would
damage verbally-based problem analysis. The data also
indicate that TA has a facilitatory effect on solving complex
problems. Again, this seems explicable from the business-asusual perspective since TA can enhance analytic processing,
but is less easily accommodated by the special-process theory,
which claims that verbalisation should ‘overshadow’ insight.
Keywords: Insight problem solving; compound remote
associates; concurrent verbalisation; articulatory suppression.

Introduction
‘Insight’ during problem solving arises when an individual
who is stuck on a task and unable to make headway
suddenly breaks free of their unhelpful thoughts and is able
to find a solution (e.g., Kaplan & Simon, 1990). Such
insight problem solving appears to have several key
features. First, individuals, having spent time reflecting on
the problem, reach a point of impasse where they are unable
to move forwards to achieve a solution, perhaps because of
the continued application of misleading or mistaken
assumptions (Dominowski & Dallob, 1995). Second, the
insight into the solution seems to emerge suddenly – giving
rise to the so-called “Aha!” experience – rather than arising
as a result of incremental processes that bring people
progressively nearer to the solution (Metcalfe & Weibe,
1987; Smith & Kounios, 1996). Third, problem solvers find
it difficult to describe the processes that help them to
overcome the impasse, perhaps because of the suddenness
with which the solution arrives (e.g., Maier, 1931) or
because solution processes are simply non-reportable in
nature (e.g., Knoblich, Ohlsson, & Raney, 2001).

The Special-Process Theory of Insight
Although researchers have debated whether these three
characterising features of insight problem solving are
strictly necessary (e.g., Ohlsson, 1992, disputes the notion
that complete solutions suddenly become available), there is
no doubt that these features have informed the dominant
account of insight problem solving in the literature, the socalled ‘special-process’ theory (Bowden, Jung-Beeman,
Fleck, & Kounios, 2005). The special-process theory
embraces the idea that insight and non-insight problems
invoke different processing mechanisms. Indeed, the core
claim of the special-process theory is that insight is driven
by the operation of non-reportable processes that function at
an implicit, sub-conscious level in order to change the
current, unsuccessful representation of a problem into a new
representation that can lead to a solution. In this way the
special-process theory builds upon Ohlsson’s (1984, 1992)
‘representational-change’ account of insight, which suggests
three ways in which a problem’s representation may be
changed through implicit processes so as to enable solution
success: (1) elaboration – where new information about the
problem is added to the original representation; (2) reencoding – where the problem is reinterpreted in a different,
more successful way; and (3) constraint relaxation – where
self-imposed constraints are relaxed, allowing progress to be
made.
Several sources of evidence support the notion of
representational change in insight problem solving. For
example, insight problems which embody constraints that
are difficult to relax because of prior domain knowledge are
very hard to solve (e.g., Knoblich, Ohlsson, Haider, &
Rhenius, 1999; Knoblich, et al., 2001). Studies have also
attempted to clarify whether the thought processes that arise
before an insightful solution are conscious or unconscious.
Bowden and Jung-Beeman (1998) presented participants
with yet-to-be-solved problems requiring a single-word
solution. Participants were then presented with either the
solution word or an unrelated word. Bowden and JungBeeman found that participants read the solution word faster
than the unrelated word, suggesting that unconsciously
participants already knew the solution word before
becoming consciously aware of it (see also Siegler, 2000).
Recent neuroimaging research has examined claims for
insight problem solving differing from other types of
problem solving in terms of neurological activity. Bowden

1060

and Jung-Beeman (1998) suggest that to solve insight
problems the individual has to retrieve associations that are
‘indistinctly related’ to features of the presented task. They
propose that this type of processing occurs in the right
hemisphere, which is capable of coarse semantic coding
such as the weak activation of alternative problem
associations. In contrast, the left hemisphere is specialised
for fine semantic coding, which focuses activation on a
single problem interpretation. During insight, fine semantic
coding can cause misdirection by concentrating attention on
irrelevant problem components such that the solver in
unable to see past an initial interpretation to find a solution.
Bowden and Jung-Beeman (1998) tested this theory by
presenting to each visual field either solution words or
unrelated words for unsolved insight problems. Results
demonstrated a left visual field (right-hemisphere)
advantage for solution-words. Other neuroimaging studies
support the idea that insight problem solving involves
activation localised in the right anterior superior temporal
gyrus (Bowden et al., 2005). In addition, EEG recordings
have revealed a sudden burst of high frequency (gamma
band) neural activity in the same region immediately
preceding insight solutions. It seems that solvers change the
focus of their efforts just before insight, thereby allowing
previously non-reportable, right-hemisphere solutioninformation to emerge into consciousness (Bowden et al.,
2005).

The Business-as-Usual Theory of Insight
Notwithstanding the wide range of experimental and
cognitive neuroscience evidence supporting the specialprocess theory of insight, a number of theorists argue for a
contrary position. They claim that insight and non-insight
problems – whilst clearly differing in terms of key features
such as their tendency to induce an impasse state – are still
tackled and solved using equivalent cognitive mechanisms
(e.g., Weisberg, 2006). Those who adopt what Bowden et al.
(2005) refer to as this ‘business-as-usual’ approach
emphasise the role of strategies such as means-ends analysis
and hill-climbing (Newell & Simon, 1972) in leading to the
step-by-step attainment of insight solutions.
An example of the business-as-usual approach is the
‘progress-monitoring theory’ developed by MacGregor,
Ormerod, and Chronicle (2001; Chronicle, Ormerod, &
MacGregor, 2004). This theory proposes that solvers aim to
minimise the difference between their current ‘problem
state’ and the ‘goal state’ regardless of whether a problem is
an insight or non-insight task. Accordingly, insight is simply
the realisation that a goal state is not achievable with the
remaining available moves such that the solver must devise
new moves to obtain the solution (perhaps using knowledge
acquired during the previous solution attempt) rather than
forming a novel representation of the problem (as in the
representational-change account). According to progressmonitoring theory insight should arise whenever a newly
considered move or set of moves allows the solver to look
ahead from the current state to the goal state.

Rationale and Aims of the Experiment
As we noted earlier, the evidence supporting the specialprocess account of insight is compelling. Nevertheless, we
also see merit in the arguments of the business-as-usual
view. In particular, it seems likely that problem solvers will
at least initially try to tackle insight and non-insight tasks
using similar strategies since they are not presented to
participants pre-labelled as ‘insight’ or ‘non-insight’
problems. As such, we acknowledge that notions such as
progress monitoring and the application of analytic
strategies need to be given serious consideration in any
attempt to develop a comprehensive framework for
understanding insight. As Bowden et al. (2005) note, it may
well be the case that both special-process and business-asusual theories are correct, and that there are multiple ways
in which insight can be produced.
The experiment that we report aimed to inform the debate
as to whether insight problem solving relies primarily on
unconscious and non-reportable processes (the specialprocess view) as opposed to conscious and reportable
processes (the business-as-usual view). The insight tasks
that were used in the experiment were compound remote
associates or CRA problems that are patterned on items in
the Remote Associates Test (RAT) pioneered by Mednick
(1962). Each CRA involves presenting participants with
three words (e.g., ‘apple’, ‘family’, and ‘house’) and
requiring them to produce a solution word that can form a
well-known compound word when combined with each of
these three items. In this example the solution word ‘tree’
would form the following, familiar compounds: ‘apple-tree’,
‘family-tree’, and ‘tree-house’.
Although CRAs are not as complex as classic insight
problems, Bowden et al. (2005) argue that they nevertheless
exhibit the key features of insight tasks in as much as: (1)
participants are often misdirected in their initial efforts at
finding a solution such that they encounter an impasse state;
(2) participants frequently comment that they arrive at
solutions suddenly and have an Aha! experience; and (3)
participants typically find that they are unable to report how
they overcame the impasse in order to generate the correct
solution. In addition, CRAs have key advantages over
standard insight tasks in that they possess a single
unambiguous solution that can be generated in a relatively
short timeframe such that many problems can be attempted
in an experimental session. Furthermore, CRAs are highly
amenable to empirical study using time-based measures of
solution latencies that may be highly informative when
examining theories of insight. Our experiment capitalised on
these advantageous aspects of CRAs and involved obtaining
data on both solution latencies and solution frequencies.
In an attempt to inform the special-process versus
business-as-usual debate we set up an experiment involving
three within-participants conditions. The first was a control
condition where participants worked silently on the target
insight problems to provide a baseline measure of
performance. The second condition required participants to
engage in a concurrent ‘articulatory suppression’ (AS) task

1061

(i.e., repeating aloud a short number sequence). The third
condition involved a concurrent ‘thinking aloud’ (TA)
requirement, whereby participants verbalised all thoughts
passing through their minds. We also included a second
within-participants factor which entailed a problemcomplexity manipulation (i.e., half the presented problems
were relatively complex and half were relatively easy) since
it is possible that only the more challenging problems (i.e.,
ones that have a greater likelihood of inducing an impasse
state) would provide informative data relevant to
understanding the processes underpinning insight.
What might the two opposing insight theories predict in
relation to the secondary-task manipulation? First, we
examine predictions for the business-as-usual theory. In the
AS condition the repetition of a number sequence will draw
on the same phonological working-memory resources
necessary for fluent verbal analysis and active maintenance
of problem elements. This competition for verbal workingmemory resources should disrupt insight problem solving,
leading to longer decision latencies and potentially lower
success rates compared with the control condition. Such
disruption should be especially marked on the more
complex CRAs, which would require a broader search of the
problem space to find a correct word associate as well as
maintenance of information about multiple failed solution
attempts so as to avoid their repetition. In the TA condition
the requirement to provide a concurrent account of thinking
should be minimally disruptive according to the businessas-usual account since people are simply reporting verballybased information codes that would normally be heeded
during the solving of CRA problems (cf. Ericsson & Simon,
1993). It is even possible that thinking aloud could have a
beneficial effect on solution latencies and frequencies since
there is evidence that verbalisation can help solvers
maintain a focus on task goals and strategies (Chi, 2000).
Next we examine the predictions of the special-process
theory and show that they are essentially the converse of
those derived from the business-as-usual theory. In the AS
condition, the requirement to articulate a well-known
number sequence should not adversely affect the implicit,
non-reportable processes of spreading activation that are
assumed to arise in the right hemisphere in order to achieve
task success. As such, solution latencies and frequencies
should not be hindered to any significant degree in the AS
condition. Indeed, it is possible that AS may serve to
dampen down the fine semantic coding activity of the
verbally-oriented left hemisphere, thereby making it easier
for the products of gross semantic coding in the righthemisphere to shine through into consciousness, thereby
speeding up solutions and improving accuracy.
The TA condition is also intriguing from the specialprocess perspective. In particular, previous research has
found that thinking aloud during insight problem solving
can hinder successful performance, giving rise to a so-called
‘verbal overshadowing’ effect (Schooler, Ohlsson, &
Brooks, 1993). Verbal overshadowing of insight has been
claimed to arise because verbalisation directs attention

toward aspects of the problem that can easily be verbalised,
but which are inappropriate for finding solutions (Fleck &
Weisberg, 2004). At the same time, the implicit, nonverbalisable processes that promote insightful solutions are
neglected owing to the predominant need to maintain an
ongoing verbal report (Schooler et al., 1993). In sum, the
special-process theory predicts that TA verbalisation should
increase solution latencies and potentially reduce solution
frequencies. Such effects should be more marked on harder
CRAs (which are more likely to be associated with
impasses) than easier CRAs, which may be solved without
an impasse state being reached.

Method
Participants
An opportunity sample of 30 participants was recruited on a
volunteer basis from undergraduate students at Lancaster
University (15 males, 15 females; mean age = 34 years; SD
= 11.16 years). All participants were right handed and spoke
English as their first language.

Materials
Seventy-two compound remote associate (CRA) problems
were derived from the set of 144 developed by Bowden and
Jung-Beeman (2003). Using their normative solution-time
data we classed 36 problems as ‘easy’ (mean solution
latencies < 15 s) and 36 as ‘difficult’ (mean solution
latencies > 15 s). Pilot testing of these CRAs revealed that a
few words were unfamiliar to participants owing to the use
of American vocabulary. To overcome this, American
words were exchanged for the English equivalents (e.g.,
‘garbage’ was replaced with ‘rubbish’). Twelve easy and 12
difficult problems were allocated to each of the three
experimental conditions on a random basis. During the
experiment these problem sets were systematically rotated
across conditions so as to feature in each condition an equal
number of times. Problem-presentation order was
independently randomised for all participants. Five CRAs of
mixed difficulty were also selected from Bowden and JungBeeman (2003) as practice items. All CRAs were displayed
sequentially on a laptop PC and response latencies were
measured contingent on the participant pressing a space bar
prior to registering their solution.

Design
This experiment employed a 3 x 2 repeated-measures
design. The first factor was secondary-task condition with
three levels: control, articulatory suppression (AS), and
think aloud (TA). The second factor was problem
complexity with two levels: easy versus difficult. The
control condition required participants to solve the CRAs
silently without the imposition of a secondary task. The AS
condition required the continuous repetition of the sequence
‘1-2-3-4-5-6’ at a rate of 1 number per second, concurrent
with problem solving. The TA condition required

1062

participants to verbalise all thoughts, including tactics they
were employing, details of presented words they were
focusing on and information on words they were
considering
as
candidate
solutions.
Complete
counterbalancing of the secondary-task conditions was
carried out to control for order effects. The dependent
variables were response latencies (in seconds) and total
accuracy scores for complex and easy problems.

Procedure
Participants were given instructions that provided an
overview of the experimental conditions and task
requirements, including the importance of responding as
quickly and as accurately as possible (Note: If 30 s elapsed
during a trial then the problem was replaced with a blank
screen and the participant’s latency was scored as 30s for
that trial). The five practice problems were administered
before testing began so that participants could gain
familiarity with the experimental procedure. None of the
practice trials involved a secondary task. All trials began
with a central fixation cross presented on the screen,
followed by the three words of the CRA problem presented
simultaneously in a horizontal orientation, followed by the
appearance of a blank screen either after 30 s or after
participants had pressed the space bar to register their
solution. Response latencies were measured from problem
presentation to the point where the participant pressed the
space bar or when the trial timed out. After the solution had
been registered the participant pressed the space bar again to
initiate the next trial. If the participant could not produce a
solution they were instructed to move on to the next trial.
Participants in the control condition were required to solve
the problems without any secondary task. Participants in the
AS condition had to generate a solution whilst
simultaneously repeating the well-leaned number sequence.
Those in the TA condition had to provide a concurrent
verbal report of their problem solving behaviour. If
participants stopped verbalising (TA condition) or
articulating (AS condition) they were prompted to continue
after a couple of seconds.

Results
Solution Accuracy
Mean accuracy data (Table 1) were examined using a 2 x 3
repeated-measures ANOVA. This revealed a significant
main effect of secondary-task condition, F(2, 58) = 31.85
MSE = 1.84, p < .001, ηp2 = 0.52, with accuracy being
greater in the control and TA conditions relative to the AS
condition. There was also a significant main effect of
problem complexity, F(1, 29) = 6.37, MSE = 1.93, p = .017,
ηp2 = 0.18, with accuracy being greater with the easier
problems than with the complex problems. Finally, there
was a reliable condition by complexity interaction, F(2, 58)
= 20.97, MSE = 1.70, p < .001, ηp2 = 0.42.

Table 1: Mean accuracy data (maximum score per
condition = 12; SDs in parentheses).
Secondary-Task Condition
Control
TA
AS
Easy
10.33 (1.33)
8.73 (1.48)
8.13 (1.66)
Complex 8.37 (1.81)
9.97 (1.10)
7.00 (2.02)
We explored this interaction using simple main effects
analyses. The simple main effect of secondary-task
condition on the easy problems was significant, F(2, 58) =
17.57, p <.001. Bonferroni tests (α = .05) revealed that
accuracy was significantly greater in the control condition
(10.33) than in the TA condition (8.73) and AS condition
(8.13). These results indicate that secondary-task
requirements were disruptive to solution success with the
easy problems. The simple main effect of secondary-task
condition on complex problems was also significant, F(2,
58) = 34.14, p < .001. This time Bonferroni tests indicated a
different pattern of results, with accuracy in the TA
condition (9.97) and control condition (8.37) being
significantly greater than in the AS condition (7.00), and
with accuracy in the TA condition also being greater than in
the control condition. Thinking aloud thus enhances
performance with complex problems, but hinders
performance with easy problems; the AS requirement
hinders performance with both easy and complex problems.
The simple main effects analyses conducted to examine
the effect of problem complexity at each level of secondarytask condition confirmed this interpretation of the
interaction. The simple main effect of problem complexity
for the control condition was as expected: complex
problems showed less accurate performance (8.37) than
easy problems (10.33), F(1, 29) = 22.66, p < .001. The
simple main effect of problem complexity for the TA
condition was significant, F(1, 29) = 12.80, p = .001, with
complex problems actually being more accurate (9.97) than
easy problems (8.73). Finally, the simple main effect of
problem complexity for the AS condition was significant,
F(1, 29) = 11.24, p = .002, with easy problems being more
accurate (8.13) than complex problems (7.00).

Solution Latencies
Incorrect or non-existent responses were scored as taking
the maximum permissible time (30 s). Solution latencies for
all conditions (Table 2) approximated a normal distribution
(no skew values exceeded +/-1.5), therefore natural time
data were subjected to a 2 x 3 repeated-measures ANOVA.
This revealed a significant main effect of secondary-task
condition, F(2, 58) = 75.53, MSE = 7.81, p < .001, ηp2 =
0.72, with responses being fastest in the control and TA
conditions and slowest in the AS condition. There was a
significant main effect of problem complexity, F(1, 29) =
11.98, MSE = 6.69, p = .002, ηp2 = 0.29, with easy problems
being solved faster than complex problems. There was also
a reliable condition by complexity interaction, F(2, 58) =
38.13, MSE = 5.02, p < .001, ηp2 = 0.57.

1063

Table 2: Mean solution latencies in seconds (with SDs in
parentheses).
Secondary-Task Condition
Control
TA
AS
Easy
12.74 (3.14)
15.56 (3.05)
18.30 (2.79)
Complex 16.48 (3.19)
12.79 (3.43)
21.32 (2.49)
Simple main effects analyses were conducted to unpack
the interaction. The simple main effect of secondary-task
condition on the easy problems was significant, F(2, 58) =
37.42, p < .001. Bonferroni tests (α = .05) indicated that the
control condition (12.74) had reliably faster latencies than
the TA condition (15.56) and the AS condition (18.30), and
that the latencies in the TA condition were also faster than
the AS condition. The simple main effect of secondary-task
condition on the complex problems was also significant,
F(2, 58) = 82.75, p < .001, but this time Bonferroni tests
revealed that latencies in the TA condition were
significantly faster (12.79) than in the control condition
(16.48) and AS condition (21.32). In addition, latencies in
the control condition were significantly faster than in the AS
condition. In summary, these analyses parallel and extend
what was observed with the accuracy data. First, the TA
requirement does not disrupt performance with the complex
problems, and, in fact, enhances the speed of responding
relative to the other conditions. Second, the TA requirement
impacts negatively on response latencies for the easy
problems. Third, the slowest responding in all conditions is
associated with the AS requirement.
The final simple main effects analyses examined the
influence of problem complexity at each level of secondarytask condition and confirmed the previous interpretation of
the interaction. The simple main effect of problem
complexity for the control condition was as predicted, with
complex problems showing longer latencies (16.48) than
easy problems (12.74), F(1, 29) = 34.82, p < .001. The
simple main effect of problem complexity for the TA
condition was significant, F(1, 29) = 18.24, p < .001, with
easy problems (15.56) actually taking longer to solve than
complex problems (12.79). The simple main effect of
problem complexity for the AS condition was significant,
F(1, 29) = 31.52, p < .001, with complex problems (21.32)
taking longer to solve than easy problems (18.30).

General Discussion
The experiment was undertaken in an attempt to inform the
ongoing debate as to whether insight problem solving relies
primarily on implicit, unconscious and non-reportable
processes (the special-process view; e.g., Bowden et al.,
2005) as opposed to explicit, conscious and reportable
processes (the business-as-usual view; e.g., MacGregor et
al., 2001). We used a mix of complex and easy compound
remote associate tasks (CRAs) as our target insight
problems and manipulated the presence of a concurrent
secondary task: thinking aloud (TA) versus articulatory
suppression (AS) versus control. We predicted that the

resulting patterns of impaired and facilitated problemsolving performance arising from this secondary-task
manipulation would provide novel evidence to help arbitrate
between competing theories. Although our findings were
more subtle than we had anticipated, we argue below that
they seem broadly supportive of the business-as-usual
theory, and appear to be less readily explicable from the
special-process perspective.
We begin by assessing the results for the complex CRAs,
since our findings here concur very neatly with the
predictions that we derived from the business-as-usual
theory of insight. This theory would predict that the AS
requirement should hinder performance, since competition
between these verbally-based tasks for limited verbal
working-memory resources should disrupt the application of
conscious, analytic processes when tackling the CRAs. Our
findings showed that problem solving for the complex
CRAs was reliably slower and less accurate in the AS
condition than in all other conditions, as predicted. The
special-process theory has difficulty explaining these
findings since the AS requirement should have little impact
on the operation of unconscious, non-reportable processes
based around spreading activation of implicit associations.
In terms of the impact of the TA requirement on complex
problems, the business-as-usual theory would predict either
no detrimental affect on performance since people are
simply articulating the verbal codes that they are heeding
anyway, or perhaps some benefit to performance since
thinking aloud may help metacognitive strategies and the
maintenance of a clear task focus (Chi, 2000). The evidence
supports the notion of a facilitation effect, since problem
solving was both significantly faster and more accurate in
the TA condition than in all other conditions. A further,
striking observation was that under TA requirements
problem solving was, in fact, faster and more accurate for
the complex problems than for the easy problems. The
special-process theory would have considerable difficulty
accommodating the facilitatory impact of thinking aloud on
insight problem solving. This is because special-process
theorists embrace the idea that concurrent verbal reporting
should ‘overshadow’ insight by focusing attention on
ineffective reportable processes to the determinant of
effective, non-reportable processes (Schooler et al., 1993).
Turning to the easy CRAs the results indicated that
solution speed and accuracy were disrupted under both AS
and TA requirements. These findings can again be
accommodated by the business-as-usual theory as follows:
The easy problems are straightforward (i.e., control
performance was highly accurate and fast) such that they are
far less likely than the complex problems to induce a state of
impasse. Since these problems would normally be solved
easily then any form of secondary-task imposition – whether
AS or TA - will have a detrimental affect, slowing
performance and disrupting solution accuracy. In effect,
silent working would be the optimal way to solve these easy
problems as quickly and effectively as possible. We
acknowledge that this explanation is post hoc, but it does

1064

seem to have merit, with the essential point being that the
easy CRAs that we used may not, in fact, be insight
problems at all, just straightforward cued-recognition tasks
that are sensitive to any competing attentional demands. As
for the special-process theory, then the worse performance
under TA requirement with the easy CRAs could be taken
as evidence for verbal overshadowing, but it remains very
odd that verbal overshadowing was reversed with the
complex problems. In addition, the performance disruption
caused by AS on the easy CRAs does not seem to be
interpretable from this perspective.
Finally, we recognise that the evidence for thinking aloud
facilitating insight with complex CRAs seems difficult to
reconcile with findings in the literature indicating a strong
verbal-overshadowing effect on insight tasks (e.g., Schooler
et al., 1993). One possibility is that tasks that succumb to
verbal overshadowing are quite different to the verballybased CRAs used in the present case. For example, Schooler
et al.’s study used primarily visuo-spatial insight problems
that did not involve verbal components. Maybe insightful
solutions to such visuo-spatial tasks do indeed require the
application of non-reportable processes localised in the right
hemisphere that are sensitive to overshadowing through
concurrent TA verbalisation. We have recently explored this
issue (Ball, Cook, Gilhooly, & Gundry, 2009) and have
found good support for special-process predictions: TA
hindered insight on the visuo-spatial problems that we used
(as per the verbal-overshadowing hypothesis), whereas AS
significantly improved insight. This evidence supports
Bowden et al.’s (2005) proposal that the special-process and
business-as-usual accounts may both have a role to play in
explaining insight. We suggest that one theory may be better
able to accommodate processing phenomena seen with
verbal problems, whilst the other theory may more readily
explain findings associated with visuo-spatial problems.

References
Ball, L. J., Cook, R., & Gundry, N. (2009). Suppressing
verbal thinking improves insight problem solving with
visuo-spatial tasks. Unpublished manuscript, Lancaster
University, UK.
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (1998). Getting the
right idea: Semantic activation in the right hemisphere
may help solve insight problems. Psychological Science,
6, 435-440.
Bowden, E. M., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2003). Normative
data for 144 compound remote associate problems.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
35, 634-639.
Bowden, E. M., Jung-Beeman, M., Fleck, J., & Kounios, J.
(2005). New approaches to demystifying insight. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 322-328.
Chi, M. T. H. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The
dual processes of generating inferences and repairing
mental models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in
instructional psychology (pp. 161-238). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Chronicle, E. P., Ormerod, T. C., & MacGregor, J. N.
(2004). What makes an insight problem? The role of
heuristics, goal conception and solution recoding in
knowledge-lean problems. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 14-27.
Dominowski, R., & Dallob, P. (1995). Insight and problem
solving. In R. J. Sternberg & Davidson, J. (Eds.), The
nature of insight (pp. 33-62). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H.A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data (Revised edn.). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Fleck, J., & Weisberg, R. (2004). The use of verbal
protocols as data: An analysis of insight in the candle
problem. Memory & Cognition, 32, 990-1006.
Kaplan, C., & Simon, H. A. (1990). In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374-419.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 25, 15341555.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G. E. (2001). An eye
movement study of insight problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 29, 1000-1009.
MacGregor, J. N., Ormerod, T. C., & Chronicle, E. P.
(2001). Information-processing and insight: A process
model of performance on the nine-dot and related
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition, 27, 176-201.
Maier, N. R. F. (1931). Reasoning in humans: II. The
solution of a problem and its appearance in
consciousness. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 12,
181-194.
Metcalfe, J., & Weibe, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
non-insight problem solving. Memory & Cognition, 15,
238-246.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice hall.
Ohlsson, S. (1984). Restructuring revisited: II. An
information processing theory of restructuring and
insight. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25, 117129.
Ohlsson, S. (1992). Information processing explanations of
insight and related phenomena. In M. T. Keane & K. J.
Gilhooly (Eds.), Advances in the psychology of thinking
(pp. 1-44) London: Harvester- Wheatsheaf.
Siegler, R. S. (2000). Unconscious insights. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 79-83.
Schooler, J. W., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993).
Thoughts beyond words: When language overshadows
insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
122, 166-183.
Smith, R. W., & Kounios, J. (1996). Sudden insight: All or
none
processing
revealed
by
speed-accuracy
decomposition. Journal of Experimental Psychology;
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 22, 1443-1462.
Weisberg, R. W. (2006). Creativity. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

1065

