UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Executive control in analogical reasoning: Beyond interference resolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wv1f4jn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Chuderska, Anna
Chuderski, Adam

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Executive Control in Analogical Reasoning: Beyond Interference Resolution
Anna Chuderska (anna.chuderska@uj.edu.pl)
Adam Chuderski (achuders@apple.phils.uj.edu.pl)
Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University
al. Mickiewicza 3, 31-120 Krakow, Poland

Abstract
In recent studies, analogy-making has been shown to depend
on the ability to resist interference. In our large-sample correlational study we found that efficiency of analogical reasoning
is strongly related to measures of diverse executive control
functions, far beyond interference resolution. These functions
included interference resolution itself, but also: goal activation and application, inhibition of response tendency, and
controlled visual search. The results implicate that executive
control is an important factor for efficiency of analogical (and
probably for most of types of relational) reasoning and that
accounting for inter-individual differences in control and
reasoning may be important for assessing the psychological
plausibility of computational models of analogy-making.

Introduction
Analogy-making comprise high-level cognitive processes of
structuring two phenomena (analogs, e.g. objects, events,
ideas) by similar relations, even if they totally differ semantically or perceptually, and of inferring new goal-relevant
information about one phenomenon (target) from elements
of the second phenomenon (source) by means of finding out
the systematic relational correspondences between them.
Ability to reason by analogy is essential in face of any
novelty one needs to understand (e.g., in discovery) or to
produce (e.g., in problem solving). Since seminal structuremapping theory (Gentner, 1983) analogical reasoning processes have received much attention in cognitive science and
contributed to more general theories of relational reasoning.
The major postulate of these theories is that processing
relational representations is highly dependent on limited
working memory (WM) capacity. Relational complexity
theory quantifies this limit with the complexity of relations
– the number of interacting variables that must be processed
in parallel. The more variables have to be processed simultaneously, the higher task’s difficulty is and the less people
can solve it (Halford, Baker, McCredden, & Bain, 2005).
However, the more variables are active in WM, the bigger
challenge arises to integrate them according to a goal,
especially if they conflict across structural and semantic
constraints (e.g. Markman & Gentner, 1993). So, it seems
probable that even very capacious WM may be not enough
to successfully analogize. For example, LISA – artificial
neural network model (Hummel & Holyoak, 2003), which
dynamically binds roles (i.e., arguments) and fillers (i.e.,
arguments’ content) into relations by synchrony of firing
their distributed representations, contains an intrinsic capacity limit (phase set size), since only a finite number of such
role-filler bindings can oscillate asynchronously in one
processing cycle. Thus, the model must control which units

enter a current phase set and monitor its goal-progress. This
is realized by lateral inhibition between competing units and
by overall setup of relational representations, influencing
the way activation spreads. If these discriminatory functions
are weak, the model would be less efficient than its counterpart with the same phase-set size, but strong inhibition.
Thus, indispensible need to chose relational input and to
manage distraction make some researchers (e.g., Viskontas,
Morisson, Holyoak, Hummel, & Knowlton, 2004) believe
that the fundamental source of constraints on human relational reasoning comes from the effectiveness of executive
control over cognitive processing in WM during reasoning,
instead of a sole structural limit in storage capacity.
However, the role of executive functions in relational
reasoning only begins to be explored in detail.
Moreover, despite the fact that efficiency of representing
and manipulating relations is repeatedly differentiating
participants (into those who are and who are not able to
make the right analogy), there has been relatively little
curiosity for exploiting this fact for identifying cognitive
mechanisms underlying relational reasoning. Following
others, we believe that, instead of averaging individual or
group data, which leads to loosing important information,
careful examination of inter-individual variability in reasoning by linking it to other tangible measures of lower-level
cognitive abilities is a promising path for discerning cognitive mechanisms of reasoning (Lewandowsky & Heit, 2006).

Executive Control
Executive control (EC), also referred to as cognitive control,
may be defined as a set of cognitive processes that instead
of representing mental states directly, influence and organize such states in the context of some internal goal. Executive processes are especially involved in novel situations,
when arbitrary sequences of responses are to be emitted,
when great amount of planning is required, when errors are
likely and must be quickly corrected, and when dominant
but not relevant response tendencies need to be overcome.
Recent theories assume that EC is an emergent process
arising from dynamical interaction of many independent,
elementary control mechanisms (e.g., Braver, Gray, &
Burgess, 2007). A popular approach to EC is to identify
executive functions. A taxonomy proposed by Miyake,
Friedman, Emerson, Witzki, and Howerter (2000) includes
three such functions: updating of WM, inhibition of dominant responses, and shifting. Updating consists in continuous “refreshment” of WM contents by inserting some
stimuli to active memory while deleting others. Inhibition
deals with volitional stopping of dominant but taskirrelevant thought or response tendency. Mental set shifting
involves frequent alternating task-sets in WM. Other often

1758

postulated control functions, like random generation or
planning were reduced to one of three former functions in
confirmatory factor analyses. A function of dual-tasking,
which requires coordination of two simultaneous mental or
motor activities, could not be reduced to any function, and
Collette and Van der Linden (2002) suggested that it is an
independent ability. Some identified other executive functions: Duncan, Emslie, Williams, Johnson, & Freer (1996)
observed that the ability to use indirect cues in order to
activate and apply the proper goal was strongly decreased in
unintelligent people and in frontal patients, even if they
fully memorized and understood this goal.
However, the cited taxonomy to some extent reflects
similarity and differences between executive tasks and lacks
theoretical basis. Some authors posited that there are more
fundamental control mechanisms that underlie performance
in all previously postulated executive tasks. Kane and Engle
(2004) identified two elementary control mechanism. One is
active maintenance of a current goal or processing context
that biases processing relevant to this goal or context. The
other is monitoring and resolution of conflicts between
cognitive processes or response tendencies. In a neurobiologically oriented proposal, Braver et al. (2007) named
these two control faculties as proactive and reactive control.
The work on cognitive architectures like EPIC (Meyer &
Kieras, 1997) also suggests that the same set of control
mechanisms may be involved in qualitatively different
executive tasks. So, one important question is whether EC
effectiveness as measured by the most popular executive
tasks (WM updating, inhibition, interference resistance, task
switching, dual-task coordination, and goal application
tests) forms a set of diverse abilities or it results from the
effectiveness of more basic mechanisms underlying EC.

Executive Functions in Analogical Reasoning
Another question deals with the involvement of EC in
analogical reasoning. In their seminal study, Carpenter, Just,
and Shell (1990) computationally modeled the cognitive
processes needed in generic relational reasoning task - rule
induction in fluid intelligence test’s matrices (Raven’s
Progressive Matrices, RPM) - with two models that qualitatively differed in control ability instantiated in activating
and managing subgoals during reasoning process and in
coping with conflicts among multiple goals. Simpler version
of the model, which used standard processes believed necessary for solving easy and medium RPM, was able to reach
performance of an averagely intelligent human but failed to
solve correctly 33% of problems given. The version extended by productions for goal management and for resolving
conflicts among alternative goals solved all problems, thus
simulating the results of highly intelligent humans. Extra
WM capacity improved processing a bit, but it was not
sufficient to fully substitute the effects of increased EC.
Executive productions in the above model were, however,
slightly different from the current notion of EC. Recent
studies provided more direct evidence that efficiency of
relational reasoning is linked to EC. Gray, Chabris, and
Braver (2003) observed that brain activity in neural structures responsible for interference resolution, invoked by high-

interference condition of WM updating task, correlated with
performance on RPM. Rich evidence for links between
abstract reasoning tests and response inhibition and interference resolution was reviewed by Dempster and Corkill
(1999). It was also shown that relational mapping is worse
in a dual-task condition, especially if the concurrent task
itself involved EC (Morrison, Holyoak & Truong, 2001).
Moreover, if superficially similar objects are placed in
different relational roles in to-be-mapped structures, effecttive interference resolution seems necessary to overcome
observed relational mapping impediment (e.g. Markman &
Gentner, 1993). Cho, Holyoak, and Cannon (2007) manipulated the level of internal complexity and interference of an
analogical mapping task, demonstrating that young participants’ reaction times increased with relational complexity
and interference. Similar decreases in performance when
featural distraction occurred were observed in older adults
(Viskontas et al., 2004). However, in both studies subjects
compared analogy terms according to provided, not singlehandedly identified, relevant variables, what could have
potentially revealed other facets of EC. When Markman &
Gentner (1993) encouraged subjects to compare more
objects across analogs, it resulted in increased proportion of
relational responses, aiding selection of what should enter
structural alignment. Likewise, overriding initial mappings,
if they turn incorrect (Keane, 1997), might call not only for
inhibition, but also for goal-management mechanisms.
So far, correlational tests directly relating analogical
reasoning to diverse executive functions were not, to our
knowledge, administered. Most of previous experimental
research on EC in analogy-making focused on interference
resolution. Thus, the second question is whether significant
correlations between analogizing and different aspects of
EC beyond interference resolution can be observed and, if
so, which executive measures will be linked to the efficiency of reasoning and how strong would this correlation be.
The aim of our study is to test a large sample of participants on an analogical reasoning task and on a few EC
tasks, in order to look into common variance between EC
measures and to test which EC scores (taken as indices of
low-level processes) predict analogical reasoning score
(understood as the index of a higher-level, compound
process). This strategy may lead to identification of EC factors that most probably take part in analogical reasoning.

The Study
Two versions of paper-and-pencil Figural Analogy Test
designed in our lab (Orzechowski & Chuderski, unpublished
manuscript) were administered. They differ in relational
complexity of items contained. We used four typical tasks
tapping EC (Colette & Van der Linden, 2002): WM updating, response inhibition, shifting, and dual-tasking tests. We
also used three tasks that also seem to impose significant but
conceptually different requirements on EC: Duncan et al.’s
(1996) monitoring task involving goal activation and application, resistance-to-interference task, and controlled search
task. We used Raven’s Progressive Matrices Advanced
Version (60 min. time allowed) in order to check if our
analogy test is a valid test of relational reasoning.

1759

Method
Participants Participants in this study were 111 students
(age = 18-46 years, M = 22.7, S.D. = 3.5, 63 females) recruited from colleges in Łódź, Poland. All participants reported
no previous knowledge of the tasks used in the study. Each
participant was paid 40 PLN (~10 EUR) for participation.
Figural Analogies Test The FAT (abbr.) test consists of
two parts (versions), 24 items each, including figural
analogies in a form ‘A is to B as C is to X’, where A, B, and
C are types of figures, A is related to B according to one or
two (in the low relational complexity version of the test) or
three, four, or five (in the high complexity version) latent
rules (e.g., symmetry, rotation, change in size, color, thickness, number of objects, etc.), and X is an empty space. The
participant’s task was to chose one figure, out of four choice
alternatives, that related to figure C, as B related to A. A
sample test’s item is presented in Figure 1. Participants had
36 minutes to complete the former version of the test, and
then they had 45 minutes to complete the latter. The total
number of correct choices in each version of the test was
used as ANALOGY-LOW and -HIGH scores, respectively.

Figure 1: A sample item from Figural Analogy Test. The
correct answer is the choice alternative no. 4.
WM Updating A modified n-back task was adapted for the
study. In the task, a two-digit number (excluding palindromes, i.e. 11 & its multiplicities) was presented at random
in the center of the computer screen, for 2 s apiece (+ 0.5 s
for a mask). In each of six sessions, 16 out of 136 presented
stimuli were repeated randomly on 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-back
positions (i.e., four repetitions for each n value in one
session). The participants were instructed to update in
memory only the most recent numbers and to press a
response button only when recognizing a number repetition.
A black square presented after a repeated stimulus informed
participants that the stimulus was a target. A sound beep
indicated false alarm errors. The participants took one practice session before taking the test. Total number of omission
and false alarm errors was used as an UPDATING score.
Response Inhibition This task required inhibition of prepotent response and was analogous to stop-signal task (Logan
& Cowan, 1984). Subjects were required to categorize digits
into odd or even by pressing the proper of two but-tons. In a
training phase they had to categorize 30 stimuli, presented
randomly in the center of the computer screen. In an
experimental phase, participants were asked to continue
categorization for 186 stimuli (each presented for 3 s + 0.5 s

for a mask) with the same category-button associations,
except for 30 randomly chosen stimuli which appeared
surrounded by a border. In that case subjects were required
to emit opposite response. A total number of errors in the
‘border’ condition was taken as an INHIBITION score.
Task switching Alternating runs (Rogers & Monsell, 1995)
task was used. Fixed length sequence of three letters (from
set of eight possible letters) was presented randomly in the
center of the computer screen. Depending on presented cue,
one of two tasks should be performed. Task alternated
predictably from sequence to sequence. In one task, subjects
were to categorize stimuli into vowels or consonants, in the
other they were to press one button if a letter contained
angles (A, E, K, N) and another if it did not (C, O, S, U).
There were 144 stimuli presented in total, 3 s were given for
response in each trial. A difference (e.g., an error switch
cost) in a number of errors for the first letter in a sequence
(switch trial) and mean number of errors for the second and
third letter (repeat trials), was taken as a SHIFTING score.
Dual task coordination In each trial of this task (Chuderski
& Nęcka, in press) four random stimuli in the center of the
computer screen were presented for 4 s, composed in 2×2
matrix with two digits on one random diagonal and two
letters on the opposite one. Subjects were required to simultaneously compare the digits, checking if they both are odd
(if they were, a left button should be pressed with the left
hand), and the letters, checking if they both were identical
(if so, a right button should be pressed with the right hand).
There were four conditions: (1) ‘press nothing’ when one or
two digits were even and the letters differed, (2) ‘press the
left button’ – both digits were odd but the letters differed,
(3) ‘press the right button’ – one or two digits were even but
the letters were identical, and (4) ‘press both buttons’ – both
digits were odd and the letters were identical. Stimuli were
presented for 4 s plus 0.5 s for a mask. 80 trials of each
condition were presented (320 in total) at random. A total
number of errors was taken as a DUAL-TASKING score.
Goal monitoring We designed a version of Duncan et al.’s
(1996) task for monitoring goal change. We continuously
presented pairs of figures. The task consisted in categorization of a figure either on a left or on a right side into triangles or polygons. A symbol (a cue) presented between figures every several pairs determined which side is the relevant
one. The cue informed by either directly showing the side
(‘<’ or ‘>’ symbols) or by reminding the relevant side indirectly (‘=’ indicated ‘stay on the same side’, ‘+’ meant
‘change sides’). Subjects were expected to continuously monitor and apply the change of goal. A total number of errors
in indirect condition was taken as a GOAL CHANGE score.
Interference Resolution We used two task’s versions. In
flankers task, a triangle or a quadrangle was randomly
presented in the center of the computer screen. Each stimulus was to be categorized with left (for quadrangles) or right
(for triangles) mouse button press. Each stimulus was surrounded by six identical stimuli (so-called flankers), three on
its left and three on its right side. 120 seven-stimuli patterns

1760

were presented during the task, random 60 of them were
congruent (center stimulus was the same type of figure as
flankers) while 60 patterns were incongruent (center stimulus differed from flankers). In another task, the stimuli were
large letters (12 × 18 cm in size) falling under two categories (vowels: O, E, or U, or consonants: L, P, or H). Each
stimulus was composed of the matrix of 9 × 9 smaller letters
that could be congruent (i.e., from the same category as the
large letter) or incongruent (from the opposite category). 80
stimuli were presented, random half in the congruent and
remaining half in the incongruent conditions. The participants took one short practice session before each task. The
documented effect in both tasks is that RTs in the incongruent condition are longer than in the congruent one. Thus,
mean interference resistance cost in ms, measured with
difference in latencies in incongruent and congruent conditions, was taken as an INTERFERENCE score.
Visual Search A matrix of 324 (18 × 18) geometric figures
(each 1 × 1 cm in size) was presented for 3 min. Among exemplars of several figure categories, the matrix included 15
exemplars of a figure described as a target in the instruction
presented before presenting the matrix. The participants’
task was to position a cursor on each target stimulus and to
click a mouse button as quickly as possible. One practice
and three experimental sessions were administered. In each
session a different target was used. Mean latency in seconds
to click a target was used as a VISUAL SEARCH score. If a
participant did not manage to find all the targets in a
session, maximum value of 12 seconds (i.e., 3 minutes divided by 15 targets) was used as the score for that session.
Procedure The tests were administered in groups of 2 to 4
participants, on two consecutive days, in sessions lasting 5
hours each. Before each test participants were given written
instructions. During computerized tasks administered on PC
workstations each participant, with headphones on, was
accompanied by one experimenter. The tasks were given in
fixed order to minimize any impact on their intercorrelations. Two insight problem solving tests, described
elsewhere (Paulewicz, Chuderski, & Nęcka, 2007), and five
additional computerized tasks were also administered. One
of the tasks was almost identical to the updating task and
four remaining ones were unsuccessful, so we skip results
from these tasks in the presentation of following analyses.

Results
Two missing UPDATING scores were substituted with
means. Statistics for all scores are presented in Table 1. As
INHIBITION, DUAL-TASKING, and GOAL CHANGE
scores revealed Poisson distributions, in following analyses
we use their logaritmized values closer to normal distribution. Reliability of both versions of analogy test was high
(Cronbach αs = .76 and .78, respectively), and when α was
calculated for the whole analogy test, it was equal as RPM
reliability (.87 and .88, respectively). The easiest item of
Analogy Test was solved correctly by 97.3% participants,
while the most difficult item – by 18.9% of them (a chance

level is 25%). All scores indicate large individual variability
among participants, both in reasoning tests and in EC tasks.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for all scores.
Score
Min Max
M
SD
Skew
1.UPDATING
15
93 51.3 17.1
0.26
2.INHIBITION
0
19
4.1
3.7
1.54
3.SWITCHING
-2
16
2.8
3.4
1.23
4.DUAL-TASKING
0
97 17.0 14.1
2.36
5.GOAL CHANGE
0
46
6.5
9.2
1.95
6.INTERFERENCE
-73
346 33.9 70.9
2.50
7.VISUAL SEARCH
1.9 11.9
5.1
1.8
1.07
8.ANALOGY-LOW
7
24 18.5
3.8 -1.01
9.ANALOGY-HIGH
4
23 16.7
4.1 -0.69
10. ANALOGY
13
47 35.2
7.2 -0.81
11.RAVENS
10
36 25.0
6.1 -0.29
Correlations among scores are presented in Table 2
(scores from both versions of FAT were aggregated to one
score). FAT score highly correlated with RPM score, so the
former test is an apt measure of abstract relational reasoning. Analogy test significantly correlated with all postulated
measures of executive functioning. The highest predictor of
ANALOGY was Duncan’s goal monitoring task score.
Correlations between executive measures indicate significant source of common variance among five measures (1-5),
while distractor interference and visual search were not
much related to these tasks, probably due to their more
perceptual nature. An interesting question arises whether
statistical control over variance in one of the intercorrelated
tasks will influence correlations pattern between remaining
EC tasks’ scores and ANALOGY score.
Table 2: Correlational matrix between all scores.
Score
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1.UPDT.
1
2.INHB.
.41
1
3.SWCH.
.30 .28
1
4.DUAL
.31 .37 .27
1
5.GOAL
.48 .28 .38 .40
1
6.INRF.
.18 .05 .04 .17 .26
1
7.SRCH.
.10 .08 .06 .02 .09 .02
1
8.ANLG.
.42 .44 .33 .34 .56 .30 .25
1
9.RAVN.
.41 .36 .38 .29 .51 .30 .06 .76
Note: Abbreviations match names from Table 1. For simplicity,
we present absolute values of correlations between reasoning
test scores and EC scores (all these rs were negative).
Significant correlations at p < .05 level are printed in bold.
Values of r higher than .24 are significant at p < .01 level.

After controlling for GOAL CHANGE variable (which
yielded the strongest link to ANALOGY) the following
results (Table 3) were observed. From six EC scores which
intercorrelated previously, only some correlations with
INHIBITION variable remained significant.

1761

Table 3: Correlations after controlling for GOAL CHANGE
Score
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
1.UPDT.
2.INHB.
3.SWCH.
4.DUAL
6.INRF.
7.SRCH.
8.ANLG.
9.RAVN.

1
.32
.14
.15
.08
.16
.21
.22

1
.20
.30
.02
.11
.35
.26

1
.14
.07
.03
.15
.23

1
.08
.01
.15
.12

1
.04
.19
.21

1
.24
.01

1
.67

were highly correlated (r = .82). However, more parsimonious model had almost perfect fit (χ2 = 0.29, df = 1, p = .586,
χ2/df = 0.29, AGFI = .986, RMSEA = .010), with latent
factors being indistinguishable (r = 1.0). Although the latter
model, due to only two measures for each latent factor, most
probably overestimated the correlation value between both
abilities, it clearly supports two hypotheses stating that (1)
executive control significantly underlies analogical reasoning and that (2) executive control may be aptly captured by
measuring goal maintenance as well as response conflict
resolution, which seem to be two crucial EC mechanisms.

Note: The same convention as in Table 2 applies.

Discussion

In next analysis (see Table 4), we statistically controlled
for INHIBITION and GOAL CHANGE variables.

Presented results indicate that effectiveness of analogical
reasoning is highly inter-individually varied and significantly linked to most of executive functions. However,
contribution to variance in analogical reasoning by three of
functions (WM updating, switching, and dual-tasking) was
accounted for by two other, most highly correlated ones:
goal monitoring and application and response inhibition.
These results can be explained by virtue of Kane and
Engle’s (2004) and Braver et al.’s (2007) theories of dual
mechanisms of EC, postulating goal maintenance and
application as well as response conflict resolution as two
main processes underlying other EC functions. Duncan’s
task may be a relatively pure measure of the former mechanism while the stop-signal task may be a good measure of
the latter. Two executive functions that seem to control
peripheral rather than central processes, namely resistance
to interference and visual search, seem to be independent
from postulated mechanisms of EC and they are moderately
related to the effective processing of relations in the figural
test. They may instantiate general low-level interference
resolution and selection mechanisms which seem to be
critical in relational reasoning, proven to be strongly constrained by semantics. Scores in elementary tasks imposing
various control requirements but not imposing huge load on
WM capacity predicted almost half of variance in analogical
reasoning on figural material, proving that EC constraints
pose the important cognitive limit on relational reasoning
beyond WM storage limits.
Although our approach was correlational, and thus it does
not allow for drawing causal conclusions, in our opinion it
anyway constitutes a fruitful heuristic for further experimental and computational research on the nature of elementary mechanisms underlying the highly complex process of
relational (including analogical) reasoning.
Our research confirms intuitions that resource-demanding
relational integration (i.e., representing and manipulating
relations in WM), should not be treated uniformly, as it can
depend, next to WM capacity, on some conglomerate of
basic EC functions of proactive (reasoning goal’s monitoring & application) and reactive (inhibition of irrelevant
relational bindings not complying with a goal) control,
which may belong to functionally and computationally
distinct sets of abilities. The same applies to the interference
resolution, which might not only be about inhibition of distracting information in current WM content, but also pertain
to selection of what enters WM. Before being assessed on

Table 4: Correlational matrix after controlling for GOAL
CHANGE and INHIBITION variables.
Score
1
3
4
6
7
8
1.UPDT.
1
3.SWCH.
.08
1
4.DUAL
.06
.09
1
6.INRF.
.10
.06
.09
1
7.SRCH.
.14
.05
.02
.04
1
8.ANLG.
.10
.09
.05
.22
.30
1
9.RAVN.
.14
.19
.04
.22
.04
.64
Note: The same convention as in Table 2 applies.

Now, neither updating, switching, and dual-tasking scores
are significantly intercorrelated nor are they linked to analogical reasoning. Only two scores for perceptually oriented
executive tasks, interference resistance and visual search,
still significantly correlate with reasoning measure.
Correlational analyses suggest that in regression of analogical reasoning only part of EC scores may be significant
predictors of ANALOGY score. Results confirmed this
expectation. Only these scores entered a stepwise regression
model: GOAL CHANGE (β = -.34, p < .001), INHIBITION
(β = -.30, p < .001), VISUAL SEARCH (β = -.26, p < .001),
and INTERFERENCE (β = -.18, p < .02). The significant
predictors accounted for 46.8% of variance (corrected R2).
The model was significant, F(5, 105) = 20.34, p < .001.
Exploratory factor analysis revealed that all measures but
VISUAL SEARCH (loading = .01) were moderately loaded
by one higher-level factor (loadings ranged from .34 for
INTERFERENCE to .76 for GOAL CHANGE), which can
be interpreted as a general executive control ability. With
the use of confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) we tested if
the model including all executive measures explains data
better than a more parsimonious model including only two
measures: GOAL CHANGE and INHIBITION, which seem
to capture two postulated basic control mechanisms (i.e.,
goal maintenance and response conflict resolution, respectively) to the greatest extent. The former CFA model, which
included EC latent variable (loading all executive measures)
and analogy latent variable (loading two analogy scores),
had a very good fit (χ2 = 19.79, df = 19, p = .407, χ2/df =
1.04, AGFI = .926, RMSEA = .047). The latent variables

1762

relevancy to reasoning task, all representational elements (in
memory or in stimuli) potentially compete for processing,
especially if semantics can so easily blur structural patterns.
Thus, a general notion of interference resolution may pertain
to two specific mechanisms of choice: distractors’ inhibition
in WM and selection of relevant input for WM.

Summary and Future Directions
We attempted to connect the state of the art in research on
EC with the efforts to identify cognitive mechanisms of
relational reasoning. It seems that variability in analogical
reasoning is almost in half underlain by a set of functionally
distinct, but intercorrelated executive control functions,
which are far more specific than it is usually recognized in
analogical reasoning theory and research. Our initial, correlational study calls for more decisive experimental evidence
on how EC contribute to analogical reasoning. This research
should combine measuring of individual differences in EC
functions with experimental manipulation of their load in
relational reasoning task and it can bring precise tests of
plausibility of computational models of analogy-making.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by Polish Ministry of Science and
Higher Education (grant N106 2155 33, y. 2007-2010, to
E.Nęcka). Authors thank Radek Wójcik for conducting the
experiment and Borysław Paulewicz for statistical advice.

References
Braver, T. S., Gray, J. R., & Burgess, G. C. (2007).
Explaining the many varieties of working memory
variation: Dual mechanisms of cognitive control. In A. R.
A. Conway. C. Jarrold, M. J. Kane, A. Miyake, & J. N.
Towse, Variation in working memory (pp. 76-108).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carpenter, P. A., Just, M. A., & Shell, P. (1990). What one
intelligence test measures: A theoretical account of the
processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices test.
Psychological Review, 97, 404-431.
Cho, S., Holyoak, K.J., & Cannon, T.D. (2007). Analogical
reasoning in working memory: resources shared among
relational integration, interference resolution, and
maintenance. Memory and Cognition, 35, 1445-1455.
Chuderski, A., & Nęcka, E. (in press). Intelligence and
cognitive control. In A. Gruszka, G. Matthews, & B.
Szymura (Eds.), Handbook on individual differences in
cognition. New York: Springer Verlag
Collette, F., & Van der Linden, M. (2002). Brain imaging of
the central executive component of working memory.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 26, 105-125.
Dempster, F. N., & Corkill, A. J. (1999). Individual differences in susceptibility to interference and general
cognitive ability. Acta Psychologica, 101, 395-416.
Duncan, J., Emslie, H., Williams, P., Johnson, R., & Freer,
C. (1996). Intelligence and the frontal lobe: The organization of goal-directed behavior. Cognitive Psychology,
30, 257-303.

Engle, R. W., & Kane, M. J. (2004). Executive attention,
working memory capacity, and a two-factor theory of
cognitive control. In B. Ross (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation, 44, (pp. 145-199). New York,
NJ: Elsevier.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gray, J. R., Chabris, C. F., & Braver, T. S. (2003). Neural
mechanisms of general fluid intelligence. Nature
Neuroscience, 6, 316-322.
Halford, G. S., Baker, R., McCredden, J. E., & Bain, J. D.
(2005). How many variables can humans process?
Psychological Science, 16, 70-76.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Keane, M. T. (1997). What makes analogy difficult? The
effects of order and causal structure on analogical
mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 23, 946-967.
Logan, G. D. & Cowan, W. B. (1984). On the ability to
inhibit thought and action: A theory of an act of control.
Psychological Review, 91, 295-327.
Lewandowsky, S., & Heit, E. (2006). Some targets for
memory models. Journal of Memory and Language, 55,
441-446.
Markman, A., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Meyer D., Kieras D. (1997) A computational theory of
executive cognitive processes and multiple-task
performance. Part 1: Basic mechanisms. Psychological
Review, 104, 3-65.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H.,
& Howerter, A. (2000). The unity and diversity of
executive functions and their contributions to complex
„frontal lobe” tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive
Psychology, 41, 49-100.
Morrison, R. G, Holyoak, K. J., & Truong, B. (2001).
Working memory modularity in analogical reasoning. In
J. D. Moore, K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Third Annual Conference of Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 663-668). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Orzechowski, J., & Chuderski, A. (unpublished). TAO
Figural Analogy Test: Test & manual. Krakow: Institute
of Psychology, Jagiellonian University.
Paulewicz, B., Chuderski, A., & Nęcka, E. (2007). Insight
problem solving, fluid intelligence, and executive control:
A structural equation modeling approach. In S.Vosniadou,
D. Kayser, & A. Protopapas (Eds.), Proceedings of the
2nd European Cognitive Science Conference (pp. 586591). Hove: Laurence Erlbaum.
Rogers R. D., Monsell S. (1995). Costs of a predictable
switch between simple cognitive tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 124, 207-231.
Viskontas, I. V., Morrison, R. G., Holyoak, K. J., Hummel,
J. E., & Knowlton, B. J. (2004). Relational integration,
inhibition and analogical reasoning in older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 19, 581-591.

1763

