UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eye movement strategies in overall similarity and single-dimension sorting.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7cs2t3h0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Milton, Fraser
Wills, Andy

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eye movements in overall similarity and single-dimension sorting.
Fraser Milton (f.n.milton@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom

A.J. Wills (a.j.wills@exeter.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Exeter,
United Kingdom

Abstract
A free classification study is presented that uses eye-tracking
to better characterize the strategies that are employed in the
creation of overall similarity and single-dimension categories.
The number of fixations across the dimensions and the
proportion of dimensions fixated were significantly greater for
overall similarity sorters than for single-dimension sorters.
Single-dimension sorters generally fixated a single dimension
from the outset, a strategy in line with the principles of
SUSTAIN (Love, Medin, & Gureckis, 2004). The pattern of
eye movements is consistent with the idea that overall
similarity sorting can be a time consuming process that
involves greater perceptual processing of the stimuli than
single-dimension sorting.
Keywords:
free
classification;
family
resemblance;
unidimensional; eye tracking; match-to-standards.

Introduction
Categorization is a fundamental cognitive mechanism
that enables us to function effectively in our everyday
environment. However, in view of the immense number of
objects we encounter, this process must necessarily be
highly constrained. One reasonable assumption is that the
categories we prefer to create would reflect the underlying
structure of objects we encounter outside the laboratory.
Perhaps the most influential theory of natural categories is
the idea that they are organized around a “family
resemblance” (overall similarity) structure (e.g., Rosch &
Mervis, 1975), in which categories possess a number of
characteristic but not defining features. If an item has
enough features characteristic of a category it can be
considered a member of that category.
Previous work has shown that when people are asked to
free classify stimuli (i.e., categorize without feedback) they
find it far from natural to sort by overall similarity. In fact,
people have a strong tendency to classify on the basis of a
single dimension (e.g., Ahn & Medin, 1992; Medin et al.,
1987). Whilst manipulations of the method of stimulus
presentation (Regehr & Brooks, 1995), the level of spatial
integration of the stimuli (Milton & Wills, 2004), time
pressure (Milton, Longmore, & Wills, 2008), perceptual
difficulty (Milton & Wills, 2008), previous sort strategy
(Milton & Wills, 2009), category structure (Pothos &
Close, 2008), and background knowledge (Spalding &
Murphy, 1996) all influence the extent of family
resemblance sorting, such sorting is still far from

ubiquitous. It therefore appears important to better
understand the processes that are involved in different
classification strategies.
Traditionally, single-dimension and overall similarity
sorting are thought to be the result of different processes.
Single-dimension sorting is believed to be the result of the
analytic processing system which requires selective
attention and is a relatively effortful and deliberate process
whereby stimuli are broken down into their constituent
dimensions and categorization is determined on the basis of
a subset of these dimensions (E.E. Smith, Patalano, &
Jonides, 1998). In contrast, overall similarity sorting is the
result of a quick, automatic, non-analytic process, where
stimuli are processed as integral wholes (e.g., J.D. Smith &
Kemler Nelson, 1984). A number of studies have provided
support for this distinction (e.g., Kemler Nelson, 1984; J.D.
Smith & Kemler Nelson, 1984; Ward, 1983).
Recently, however, it has been proposed that overall
similarity sorting, as well as single-dimension sorting, can
be the result of analytic processes. Milton and Wills (2004)
argued that an alternative way to sort by overall similarity
may be for people to break the stimulus down into its
constituent dimensions and then integrate these dimensions
into a “majority-features” dimensional summation rule.
One prediction of this account is that overall similarity
sorting should take more time and require greater use of
working memory than single-dimension sorting due to the
greater complexity of the categorization rule. These
predictions have been supported by Milton et al. (2008) who
showed that the introduction of a concurrent task load
reduced overall similarity sorting and increased singledimension sorting. Similarly, they showed that a moderate
time constraint reduced overall similarity sorting and
increased single-dimension sorting. Such findings challenge
a non-analytic account of overall similarity sorting.
Eye-tracking is a technique that could further our
understanding of the approaches people employ to
spontaneously construct overall similarity and singledimension categories. To date, relatively few studies have
used eye-tracking to investigate categorization (though see
Kruschke, Kappenman, & Hetrick, 2005; Rehder &
Hoffman, 2005a, 2005b; Wills, Lavric, Croft, & Hodgson,
2007). One important study, however, is that by Rehder and
Hoffman (2005a), who used eye-tracking to study a version
of Shepard et al.’s (1961) six classic categorization
problems to provide evidence for the existence of multiple
systems of category learning. They showed that participants

1512

learned to fixate dimensions in an optimal manner – at the
end of learning, virtually all participants fixated only the
dimensions relevant to the solution. That is, the pattern of
eye movements was diagnostic of the dimensions
participants used to make categorization decisions. Rehder
and Hoffman (2005a) concluded that eye movements are
highly correlated to the cognitive processes involved in a
category learning task.
The present study used eye-tracking to investigate the
pattern of eye movements involved in overall similarity and
single-dimension sorting. This is, as far as we are aware, the
first study to use eye-tracking to investigate the processes of
free classification. As such, there is currently little
understanding regarding differences in the way stimuli are
actively perceived for overall similarity and singledimension sorting. The present study should therefore be
viewed as an interesting first-step in characterizing the
pattern of eye movements in free classification. We
predicted, based on the theory of Milton and Wills (2004),
that overall similarity sorting would involve greater
perceptual processing of the stimuli than single-dimension
sorting and result in a more even distribution of attention
across the stimulus dimensions. In contrast, singledimension sorting would involve greater selective attention
toward the chosen dimension.

Experiment
Method
Participants
31 undergraduates from Exeter University were recruited
to take part either for course credits or a small payment.
Apparatus
The categorization task was run using E-Prime on a Dell
PC with a 22-inch color monitor and a standard computer
keyboard. Participants sat approximately 0.5 meters away
from the screen.
The Eyelink II system (SR Research Ltd., Osgoode,
Canada) recorded movements in the right eye using a video
based eye-tracker with a head movement compensation
system connected to a Dell PC with a 17-inch TFT monitor.
Eye movements were sampled at a rate of 500HZ. Pupil
position was monitored via a miniature infrared CCD video
camera mounted on an adjustable headband. Participants
were asked to minimize head movements and this was
sufficient to obtain accurate gaze position recordings.
Stimuli
The stimuli took the same abstract stimulus structure
(shown in Table 1) as in Medin et al. (1987). The stimulus
set consisted of four binary-valued dimensions (D1-D4)
organized around two prototypical stimuli, each
representative of a category. These prototypes were
constructed by taking all the positive-valued dimensions for
one of the stimuli and all the zero-valued dimensions for the
other category. The remaining stimuli (one-aways) were
mild distortions of the two prototypes in that they had three

features characteristic of their category and one atypical
feature characteristic of the other category. The stimuli
(whose prototypes are shown in Figure 1) were the
perceptually simple, spatially separable artificial
“lampshades” used in Milton and Wills (2004), shown
previously to be amenable to both overall similarity and
single-dimensional sorting.
Table 1: Abstract stimulus structure

Note. D = dimension: 1 and 0 represent the values of each
dimension.

Figure 1: The two category prototypes.

Procedure
Participants were introduced to the stimuli by the
matching-pairs task developed by Milton and Wills (2004).
Two copies of each of the ten stimuli were spread out
randomly in an array. Participants had to match these twenty
stimuli into ten matching pairs correctly without feedback.
If participants made any mistakes, the pairs had to be
matched again. Next, the eye-tracker was fitted to
participants who were then calibrated.
The categorization task consisted of 6 blocks of 10
stimuli. In each block, all the stimuli in the set were
presented once in a random order. Before each block,
experimenter-controlled drift corrections were performed to
correct for drift in eye-movement position accuracy. These
drift corrections comprised a 2000ms message instructing
participants to fixate the cross in the middle of the screen,
followed by the fixation cross itself. The offset of this cross
was controlled by the experimenter and once the drift
correction had been performed by the eye-tracking software,
the first trial in the block began immediately.
Participants were asked to categorize the stimuli into two
groups in the way that seemed most natural. Participants
were informed that there was no one correct answer and that
the two groups did not have to be of equal sizes. The
method of stimulus presentation was a computer-based
version of Regehr and Brooks’s (1995) match-to-standards
procedure and similar to that used in Milton, Wills, &
Hodgson (2009). The category prototypes remained on the
screen throughout each block with Category A in the top left
portion and Category B in the top right portion of the
screen. Labels, sized 5cm wide and 1cm high, marked

1513

“Category A” and “Category B” were presented above their
respective prototypes. The target stimulus for each trial was
displayed in the lower middle portion of the screen. The
prototypes and the target stimuli were all 17cm wide and
6cm high. Each stimulus remained on the screen until a
response had been made (pressing either “c” or “m” on the
keyboard for categories A and B respectively). The screen
then went blank for 1000ms before the next trial began. At
the end of each block, participants were asked to describe
their sorting behavior in that block.
Eye movement analysis
Eye movements were viewed and analyzed offline using
the EyeLink Data Viewer software. The mean position,
duration and number of fixations in each stimulus “region of
interest” (ROI) on each trial were outputted from the
software for further statistical analysis. A rectangular ROI
was placed around each stimulus dimension. In total, there
were twelve ROIs: one around each of the four stimulus
dimensions of the target stimulus (henceforth known as the
target dimensions), and one around each of the four
dimensions of the two category prototypes. The number of
fixations and the dwell time (the total viewing time) for
each of these ROIs were calculated for each trial.
Sort type analysis
For each block, two sources of information were used to
classify the sort produced: the description the participant
used and the categories they constructed. The categories
these sorts were placed into were identical to those used in
Milton and Wills (2004). The different sort types are
summarized below.
An overall similarity sort has a structure identical to that
shown in Table 1. To receive this classification, the
prototypes, along with their derived one-aways, had to be
placed into separate categories without error. Sorts that
took this structure but which contained a solitary error were
classified as 1-away overall similarity sorts.
A single-dimensional sort is based on a single dimension
of the stimulus. It does not matter which dimension is used
as the basis of sorting, so long as all the positive values for
the chosen dimension were in one category and all the zero
values for that dimension were in the other category. If
participants made a single error in such a sort, it was
classified as a 1-away single-dimensional sort.
Participants had to not only produce a particular sort type
but also describe their sort as being based on that particular
strategy for it to be classified in that way. All sorts that did
not meet this criterion were classified as other sorts.
Results and Discussion
For each participant, the sort type for each block was
analyzed independently. Each sort was placed into one of
three categories: overall similarity, single-dimensional and
“other” (the overall similarity and single-dimensional
categories were combined with their respective 1-aways).
As in Milton and Wills (2004), there was a bias toward

overall similarity sorting for this particular stimulus set but
single-dimension sorting was sufficiently prevalent to
enable informative comparisons between the two strategies.
“Other” sorts were of low prevalence (although two
participants used an “other” strategy throughout) and are not
included in the following analyses.
Table 2: Sort type

In Table 2, sorts are classified on a block-by-block basis –
each sort is classified independently and placed into the
appropriate category. Whilst participants were generally
consistent in their sort strategy, some did not sort
consistently throughout the entire experiment. This means
that, under this particular classification measure, each block
must be treated independently of the others, which precludes
analysis of block effects which may provide valuable
information about the way overall similarity and singledimensional sorting changes over time. Therefore, as a
complement to the block-by-block analysis, participants
were also classified by their majority sort type, a measure
which permits analysis of block effects. In total, seventeen
participants were classified as overall similarity sorters and
eleven participants as single-dimensional sorters (two
participants who sorted by an “other” strategy throughout,
and one who sorted equally by overall similarity and singledimensionally were excluded from majority sort analyses).
Each figure presents the results for both the “by-block” (plot
symbols) and the “majority sort” classifications (lines). For
conciseness, the statistical analyses will only be presented
for the majority sort type classification. Analyses of the “byblock” data resulted in the same conclusions as the
“majority sort” data.

Figure 2: The mean response time on each trial for overall
similarity and single-dimensional sorters.

The mean response time for the two conditions is shown
in Figure 2. An ANOVA with one within-subject variable
(block, 6 levels) and one between-subject variable (sort
type, two levels) yielded a significant effect of sort type,

1514

F(1,26) = 27.770, p < .0001, with overall similarity sorters
taking longer on each response than single-dimensional
sorters. There was also a significant effect of block,
F(5,130) = 9.691, p < .0001 (the Greenhouse-Geisser
correction was applied here and subsequently where
appropriate), with response time decreasing across blocks.
There was no significant interaction between block and sort
type, F(5,130) = .486, p > .4.
The finding that overall similarity sorters take longer to
sort the stimuli is contrary to some previous work (e.g.,
Ward, 1983) but in line with the results of Milton et al.
(2008). The present study extends the findings of Milton et
al. (2008) by demonstrating that the effect generalizes to a
self-paced categorization procedure.
Target dimensions
The mean number of fixations on the target dimensions
across blocks by sort type is shown in Figure 3a. There was
a significant effect of sort type, F(1,26) = 28.873, p < .0001,
with overall similarity sorters fixating the target dimensions
to a greater extent than single-dimensional sorters. There
was no effect of block, F(5,130) = .341, p > .5, and no
interaction between block and sort type, F(5,130) = .723, p
> .5. Similar analyses were performed using the dwell time
measure and produced identical conclusions to the fixation
measure for this and subsequent analyses for which both
measures are applicable. For conciseness, dwell time
analyses are not reported here.
Figure 3b shows the mean number of target dimensions
fixated per trial across blocks by sort type. There was a
significant effect of sort type on the number of target
dimensions fixated, F(1,26) = 66.165, p < .0001, indicating
that overall similarity sorters fixated more of the target
dimensions than did single-dimension sorters. There was no
effect of block, F(5,130) = .486, p > .7, and no interaction
between block and sort type, F(5,130) = 1.608, p > .05.
Figure 3b indicates that participants who sorted singledimensionally generally fixated only one dimension from
the first block onwards. This suggests single-dimensional
sorters were disposed from the outset to a one-dimensional
solution, rather than fixating all the available information
before selecting a single-dimensional rule. Such a strategy is
in line with the spirit of models such as RULEX (Nosofsky,
Palmeri, & McKinley, 1994) and SUSTAIN (Love, Medin,
& Gureckis, 2004), which assume that people are generally
inclined to form single-dimension hypotheses.
The pattern of fixations for the overall similarity sorters
(Figure 3b) is in line with a dimensional summation account
of overall similarity sorting. If participants have perfect
knowledge of the category structure and fixate only where
necessary, the most efficient possible means of performing a
dimensional summation strategy is by fixating an average
2.4 of the target dimensions for each stimulus in a block
(assuming participants use a two-out-of-three majority
features rule). For instance, if participants use dimensions 1
and 2 from Table 1, the category membership of the top
three stimuli in each category can be established on the

basis of these two dimensions. The remaining four stimuli
require use of a third dimension to consistently sort by a
majority features rule. Fixating two dimensions on six of the
stimuli and three dimensions on the remaining four stimuli
gives an average 2.4 fixations on each stimulus per block. A
level of fixation below this figure would be highly
problematic to a dimensional summation account. One
sample t-tests (using the “by-block” measure) show that the
mean number of fixations for overall similarity sorters is
significantly above this figure for all six blocks (minimum t
= 3.46, all Ps < .005). The number of target dimensions
fixated is therefore in line with a dimensional summation
account of overall similarity sorting.

Figure 3: a) The mean number of fixations on the target
stimulus; b) the mean number of target dimensions fixated
on each trial.
An alternative analytic strategy of overall similarity
sorting is the single dimension-plus-exception rule (e.g.,
Ward & Scott, 1987), in which participants focus upon a
single dimension but will memorize stimuli that do not fit
this rule. If participants utilize all the information they
fixate, then the optimum number of fixations for a single
dimension-plus-exception strategy would be 1.6 for each
trial (1 dimension fixated on 8 stimuli and 4 dimensions
fixated on 2 stimuli). One sample t-tests (using the “byblock” measure) reveal that the level of fixations was
significantly greater than this figure for each block
(minimum t = 6.672; all Ps < .0001). Whilst one cannot rule
out the possibility that participants were fixating dimensions
that they did not incorporate into the decision process, the
pattern of fixations appear more in line with a dimensional
summation account of overall similarity sorting than a
single dimension-plus-exception strategy. Furthermore,
studies which have produced the most persuasive evidence
for a single dimension-plus-exception strategy have all

1515

employed a supervised learning procedure (e.g., Ward &
Scott, 1987), which provides trial-specific feedback that
clearly identifies the exceptions to an adopted single
dimension rule. In a free classification study, the challenges
faced by a participant adopting a single dimension-plusexception rule seem greater - they would have to identify for
themselves which stimuli were, on an overall similarity
basis, an exception to their self-generated single-dimension
rule.
In summary, these findings suggest a qualitative
difference in the way overall similarity and singledimension sorters process the stimuli. From the first block
onwards, overall similarity sorters focus on a larger
proportion of the available information than do singledimensional sorters. This suggests that differences in sort
strategy may be due to the way stimuli are actively
perceived rather than to different decisional mechanisms
operating on the same set of percepts.
Category Prototypes
Similar analyses to those reported for the target stimuli
were performed for the category prototypes. Figure 4a
shows the average number of fixations on a prototype
stimulus across blocks by sort type. There was a significant
effect of sort type, F(1,26) = 17.835, p < .0001, indicating
that overall similarity sorters fixated the prototypes to a
greater extent than did single-dimension sorters. There was
also a significant effect of block, F(5,130) = 3.524, p < .05,
showing that fixations to the category prototypes decreased
across blocks. The interaction between block and sort type
did not reach significance, F(5,130) = 1.272, p > .2.

Figure 4: a) The mean number of fixations on each prototype; b)
the mean number of dimensions fixated on each prototype.

Figure 4b shows the mean number of dimensions fixated
on each prototype for overall similarity and single-

dimensional sorters. There was a significant effect of sort
type, F(1,26) = 37.222, p < .0001, indicating that overall
similarity sorters fixated a greater number of the prototype
dimensions than did single-dimension sorters. There was
also a significant effect of block, F(5,130) = 3.897, p < .02,
showing that the number of prototype dimensions fixated
decreased across blocks. The interaction between block and
sort type was not significant, F(5,130) = 1.92, p > .1. These
results show that overall similarity sorters not only fixate the
prototypes to a greater extent but also fixate a larger number
of the prototype dimensions. These findings again indicate
that overall similarity sorting involves greater perceptual
processing of the stimuli than single-dimension sorting.
Taken together, the eye movements to the category
prototypes again indicate that overall similarity sorters
fixate more and process a greater proportion of the available
information than single-dimensional sorters.

General Discussion
The present study investigated the pattern of eye
movements associated with overall similarity and singledimension sorting. In line with the work of Milton et al.
(2008), in a self-paced free classification task, we found that
overall similarity sorters took significantly longer to classify
the stimuli than did single-dimension sorters. This is in line
with the idea that overall similarity sorting can be a more
time consuming process than single-dimension sorting
(Milton et al., 2008), but somewhat contrary to the findings
of Ward (1983) and J.D. Smith & Kemler Nelson (1984). A
more detailed discussion of the effect time has on free
sorting behavior can be found in Milton et al. (2008).
Additionally, overall similarity sorters fixated on the
target stimulus to a greater extent and fixated a greater
proportion of the target dimensions than did singledimension sorters. Corresponding results were found for the
category prototypes. This pattern of eye movements is
consistent with a dimensional summation account of overall
similarity sorting (Milton & Wills, 2004). That is,
participants selectively attend to each dimension in turn and
incorporate these dimensions into a majority features
decision rule.
Single-dimension sorters tended to fixate a singledimension from the outset, rather than fixating all the
available information before selecting a single-dimensional
rule, which is consistent with the assumption of models such
as SUSTAIN (Love et al., 2004) and RULEX (Nosofsky et
al., 1994). This finding is, however, somewhat surprising
given that Rehder & Hoffman (2005a) showed, in a
supervised categorization task, that participants who were
required to find a single-dimensional rule initially focused
on all of the dimensions before selectively attending to the
relevant dimension. This suggests that participants approach
supervised and unsupervised categorization tasks in a
different way. One reason for this may be that, in supervised
categorization, participants are initially unaware of the
correct rule and it appears adaptive to process more of the
dimensions to help the development of subsequent

1516

strategies. In contrast, in unsupervised categorization, there
is no correct rule so it is less useful to process information
not utilized in the chosen categorization strategy.
Taken together, these findings suggest a qualitative
difference in the way overall similarity and singledimensional sorters process the available information –
single-dimensional sorters process less information than
overall similarity sorters do. It also suggests that differences
in sort strategy may be due to the way stimuli are actively
perceived rather than to different decisional mechanisms
operating on the same set of percepts.
Whilst the use of spatially separable dimensions is
prevalent in previous categorization studies, it remains to be
seen how the current results generalize to more naturalistic
stimuli. Future work should explore the pattern of eye
movements to stimuli where the dimensions are integrated
into a more coherent unit. In addition, whilst this study
provides support for an analytic account of overall similarity
sorting, it remains to be seen whether the findings extend to
categorization under time pressure which has traditionally
been used to distinguish between different processes.
In conclusion, the present study, using a self-paced free
classification task, showed that overall similarity sorting is a
more time consuming process than single-dimension sorting
and involves greater perceptual processing of the stimuli.
These findings are in line with an analytical, dimensional
summation account of overall similarity sorting.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ESRC grants PTA-0302003-00287 and PTA-026-27-1256 awarded to the first
author, and ESRC grant RES-000-22-1779, and EC
Framework 6 project Grant 516542 (NEST) awarded to the
second author. We thank Gareth Croft, Tim Hodgson, and
Alice Welham for their assistance.

References
Ahn, W.. & Medin, D.L. (1992). A two-stage model of
category construction. Cogn. Sci, 16, 81-121.
Kemler Nelson, D.G. (1984). The effect of intention on
what concepts are acquired. J. Verb. Learn. Verb. Behav,
23, 734-759.
Kruschke, J.K., Kappenman, E.S., & Hetrick, W.P. (2005).
Eye gaze and individual differences consistent with
learned attention in associative blocking and highlighting.
J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn, 31, 830-845.
Love, B.C., Medin, D.L., & Gureckis, T.M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychol. Rev, 111, 309-332.
Medin, D.L., Wattenmaker, W.D. & Hampson, S.E. (1987).
Family resemblance, conceptual cohesiveness, and
category construction. Cognit. Psychol, 19, 242-279.
Milton, F.N. & Wills, A.J. (2004). The influence of
stimulus properties on category construction., J. Exp.
Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn, 30, 407-415.
Milton, F.N., & Wills, A.J. (2008). The influence of
perceptual difficulty on family resemblance sorting.

Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Milton, F.N., & Wills, A.J. (2009). Long-term persistence of
sort strategy in free classification. Acta Psychol, 130, 161167.
Milton, F. N., Longmore, C. A., & Wills, A. J. (2008).
Processes of overall similarity sorting in free
classification., J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform,
34, 676-692.
Milton, F.N., Wills, A.J., & Hodgson, T.L. (2009). The
neural basis of overall similarity and single-dimension
sorting. Neuroimage, 46, 319-326.
Nosofsky, R.M., Palmeri, T.J., & McKinley, S.C. (1994).
Rule-plus-exception model of classification learning.
Psychol. Rev, 101, 53-79.
Pothos, E. M. & Close, J. (2008). One or two dimensions
in spontaneous classification: A simplicity approach,
Cognition, 107, 581-602.
Regehr, G. & Brooks, L.R. (1995). Category organization
in free classification: The organizing effect of an array of
stimuli., J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn, 21, 347363.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A.B. (2005a). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognit. Psychol,
51, 1-41.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A.B. (2005b). Thirty-something
categorization results explained: Selective attention,
eyetracking, and models of category learning. J. Exp.
Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn, 31, 811-829.
Rosch, E. & Mervis, C.B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognit.
Psychol., 7, 573-605.
Shepard, R.N., Hovland, C.I., & Jenkins, H.M. (1961).
Learning and memorization of classifications, Psychol.
Monograph, 75, No.13(Whole No.517).
Smith, E.E., Patalano, A.L., & Jonides, J. (1998).
Alternative strategies of categorization. Cognition, 65,
167-196.
Smith, J.D. & Kemler Nelson, D.G. (1984). Overall
similarity in adults’ classification: The child in all of us.,
113, 137-159. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen, 113, 137-159.
Spalding, T.L., & Murphy, G.L. (1996). Effects of
background knowledge on category construction. J. Exp.
Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn, 22, 525-38.
SR Research Ltd. Eyelink II User Manual. Osgoode,
Canada.
Ward, T.B. (1983). Response tempo and separable-integral
responding: Evidence for an integral-to-separable
processing sequence in visual perception. J. Exp.
Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform,, 9, 103-112.
Ward, T.B. & Scott, J. (1987). Analytic and holistic modes
of learning family-resemblance concepts. Mem. Cogn,
15, 42-54.
Wills, A.J., Lavric, A., Croft, G.S., & Hodgson, T.L.
(2007). Predictive learning, prediction errors and
attention: Evidence from event-related potentials and eye
tracking. J. Cog. Neurosci, 19, 843-854.

1517

