UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Functional and neural dynamics of semantics for action

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6st5g72m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Van Elk, Michiel

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Functional and neural dynamics of semantics for action
Michiel van Elk (m.vanelk@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Keywords: action; semantics; objects

Much of our daily behaviour and many ordinary activities
are implicitly guided by semantic knowledge that enables us
to use objects in a meaningful way. However, as is the case
with many cognitive abilities, the complex processes
underlying our everyday actions (e.g. drinking coffee or
driving a car) are usually taken for granted and not given
much further thought (cf. van Elk, van Schie, Lindemann &
Bekkering, 2007). To better understand the nature of the
semantic representations that guide our actions, in a couple
of recent studies we addressed the following questions: (1)
what is the functional organization of semantics for action,
(2) how do we acquire novel action semantics, (3) how do
we flexibly select alternative semantic goals and (4) can we
obtain insight in the neural and temporal dynamics of
semantics for action.
First, in two recent studies it was found that
semantic knowledge for action is organized in a hierarchical
fashion around the prototypical goal- or end-locations at
which objects are typically directed (van Elk, van Schie &
Bekkering, 2008a; van Elk, van Schie & Bekkering,
JEP:HPP, in press). Moreover, it was found that the retrieval
of semantic knowledge is supported by the activation of
functional motor programs that are highly associated with
using the object (van Elk et al., in press). Interestingly,
when learning how to use a novel object a comparable
hierarchical organization was observed, which was strongly
guided by the object’s behaviourally meaningful action
effect (van Elk, Paulus, van Schie, Pfeiffer & Bekkering, in
revision).
However, in daily life we typically use objects in a
flexible fashion, depending on one’s current intentions and
desires. For example, although a toothbrush is typically used
to clean one’s teeth, occasionally one may use an old
toothbrush to clean one’s bicycle chain. In a recent study,
when subjects were instructed to use objects in an unusual
fashion (e.g. bring a cup towards the eye) it was found that
semantic representations could be temporarily overruled,
depending on one’s current action intentions (van Elk, van
Schie & Bekkering; 2009). These findings suggest that
semantic goal representations are selectively activated,
according to the action intention of the actor.
Finally, in two ERP studies, the neural and
temporal substrates of semantics for action were
investigated in more detail (van Elk, van Schie &
Bekkering, 2008b; van Elk, van Schie & Bekkering,
submitted). It was found that only the preparation of
meaningful actions (e.g. bringing a cup towards the mouth)
resulted in an N400 priming effect for words that were

congruent with the intended goal of the action (van Elk et
al., 2008b). Furthermore, the preparation of meaningful
actions was found accompanied by the retrieval of concrete
semantic information, reflected in a stronger N400
component for meaningful compared to meaningless actions
(van Elk et al.,. submitted). These findings suggest that
semantic knowledge is selectively retrieved, only when a
meaningful action is prepared.
In sum, the present studies provide new and
exciting insight in the nature and organization of semantic
knowledge for action and bring together different fields of
study, such as action, language, memory and development..

Acknowledgments
This talk will cover research completed in collaboration
with Hein van Schie and Harold Bekkering and supported
by VICI Grant 453-05-001 from the Dutch Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO).

References
van Elk, M., Paulus, M., van Schie, H.T., Pfeiffer, C. &
Bekkering, H. (in revision). The role of an object’s
meaningful action effects in the acquisition of novel
action semantics.
van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T. & Bekkering, H. (submitted).
N400 modulation reflects the retrieval of semantics
during the preparation of meaningful actions.
van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T. & Bekkering, H. (in press).
Semantic knowledge about objects is supported by
functional motor activation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance
van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T. & Bekkering, H. (2009).
Short-term action intentions overrule long-term semantic
knowledge. Cognition 111(1), 72-83
van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T. & Bekkering, H. (2008a).
Conceptual knowledge for understanding other’s actions
is organized primarily around action goals. Experimental
Brain Research 189(1), 99-107.
van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T. & Bekkering, H. (2008b).
Semantics in Action: An electrophysiological study on the
use of semantic knowledge for action. Journal of
Physiology – Paris (102), 95-100.
van Elk, M., van Schie, H.T., Lindemann, O. & Bekkering,
H. (2007) Using conceptual knowledge in action and
language. In: P. Haggard, Y. Rossetti & M. Kawato (ed.)
Attention and Performance XXII: Sensorimotor
foundations of higher cognition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

2450

