UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generics, prevalence, and default inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34r650hh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Glucksberg, Sam
Khemlani, Sangeet
Leslie, Sarah-Jane

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generics, prevalence, and default inferences
Sangeet Khemlani, Sarah-Jane Leslie, and Sam Glucksberg
{khemlani, sjleslie, samg}@princeton.edu
Departments of Psychology and Philosophy
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
Abstract

one gender (Leslie, 2007, 2008). We will refer to these types
of generics as ‘minority characteristic’ generics.
When a characteristic generic expresses a property that is
prevalent among members of the kind, it can be thought of
as expressing a principled connection in the sense of
Prasada and Dillingham (2006, 2009). Examples of such
principled characteristic generics include “tigers are
striped”, “ravens are black”, “dogs have tails” and so on. It
should be noted that such principled generics need not
express exceptionless universal generalizations, since, e.g.,
some tigers are albino and therefore lack stripes. For the
purpose of this paper, we will also identify a sub-kind of
these principled characteristic generics, namely those that
predicate properties that are true of all members of the kind
without exception. Examples of these generics include
“triangles have three sides” and “poodles are dogs”. We will
refer to these generics as ‘quasi-definitional’ generics.
Leslie’s second main category of generics includes those
that involve predicating properties that are particularly
striking, often potentially dangerous or damaging. When it
comes to such properties – the sorts of properties that one
would want to be forewarned about – very few members of
the kind must have the property in question for the generic
to be true. Consider, for example, “mosquitoes carry the
West Nile virus”, “sharks attack bathers”, “ticks carry Lyme
disease”, “pit bulls maul children” and so on. These are all
intuitively true generics, though it is only very few members
of the kind that ever exhibit such properties. One might,
however, wish to ‘err on the side of caution’ when it comes
to such properties, however, and so be disposed to
‘overgeneralize’ them.
When it comes to information that is neither characteristic
of the kind, nor particularly striking, then considerations of
prevalence play more of a role in determining the truth of a
generic. For example, generics such as “attics are dusty” and
“cars have radios” would not be true if only a minority of

We examine the extent to which people’s judgments about
whether a given member of a kind has a property are guided
by prevalence estimates alone, or whether their acceptance of
a generic generalization also impacts these judgments. Our
data are not accounted for by prevalence estimates alone:
acceptance of a generic disposes people to infer that, by
default, a given member of a kind has the relevant property.
Keywords: Generics; default inferences; non-monotonic
reasoning

Introduction
Generic sentences express generalizations, as in “ravens are
black”, “tigers are striped”, and “mosquitoes carry the West
Nile virus”. These generalizations have a number of
interesting features, for example, the generic “ducks lay
eggs” is true, while “ducks are female” is false, yet the only
ducks that ever lay eggs are the female ones. The generic
“ticks carry Lyme disease” is true, even though the
overwhelming majority of ticks do not carry the disease, yet
“Canadians are right handed” is false, despite the fact that
approximately 85% of Canadians are right handed.
Despite these complexities, generics are nonetheless a
common part of everyday speech. Leslie (2007, 2008) has
identified some features of these generalizations (see Table
1). The first concerns information that is characteristic of
the kind in question. This notion is closely related to
Prasada and Dillingham’s (2006, 2009) notion of a
principled connection, though it does not involve a
commitment to the property in question being prevalent
among members of the kind. Often, such characteristic
information is prevalent amongst members of the kind, but
this is not necessarily the case. Generics such as “ducks lay
eggs”, “pigs suckle their young”, “lions have manes” and so
on are examples of characteristic generics that are only true
of a minority of the kind, i.e. of only the mature members of

Table 1: Various types of generic generalizations
Truth Value of the Generic
Predication type
Example
True
Minority characteristic
Lions have manes
True
Principled
Dogs have tails
True
Quasi-definitional
Triangles have three sides
True
Striking
Pit bulls maul children
True
Majority
Cars have radios
False
High-prevalence True-as-Existentials
Canadians are right-handed
False
Low-prevalence True-as-Existentials
Rooms are round
False
False-as-existentials
Sharks have wings

443

attics was dusty or a minority of cars had radios. Leslie
terms such statements ‘majority’ generics for obvious
reasons. This category of generics/generalizations can be
mapped onto Prasada and Dillingham’s (2006, 2009)
category of statistical connections. We can thus identify a
number of different types of generics: characteristic
generics, including quasi-definitional, principled and
minority characteristics, striking property generics, and
majority generics.
There are examples of generics which are judged false,
however, despite the property being had by a majority of the
kind. For example, “books are paperbacks” and “Canadians
are right-handed” seem false, yet most members of the kind
have the properties in question. Leslie argues that such cases
arise when the exceptions to the generalization have equally
salient, concrete properties in place of the property being
generalized. In order to accept “books are paperbacks” and
“Canadians are right-handed” we have to ‘overlook’ the
hardcover books and the left-handed Canadians (see Leslie,
2007, 2008 for detailed discussion).
In what follows, we refer to such statements as ‘high
prevalence true-as-existentials’ or ‘high-prevalence TEs’, to
reflect the fact that the statements are accepted in existential
form (some Canadians are right-handed) but not in generic
form. It is also easy to identify ‘low-prevalence TEs’
statements, e.g. “rooms are round”, “dogs are blind”, and
“restaurants are Chinese restaurants”. We also make use of
statements which are false even in existential form, such as
“sharks have wings”. This latter class is referred as false-asexistential statements, or FEs (see Table 1 for a complete
taxonomy, along with examples).
Leslie’s classification, as stated, is concerned almost
exclusively with the circumstances under which generics are
accepted or rejected. In this paper, we seek to address a
related but different question: namely, how are people’s
inferences affected by their belief in a generic
generalization?
There is a body of work in AI and philosophical logic
(e.g. Asher & Morreau, 1991, 1995; Pelletier & Asher,
1997; McCarthy, 1986; Reiter, 1987, and others) that has
examined entailments involving generics, though much of it
is formal/theoretical rather than empirical (for some notable
exceptions to this trend, see Pelletier and Elio (1993) and
Elio and Pelletier (1996)). The theorists in this tradition
have also tended to focus on a restricted range of generics,
namely the principled characteristic generics described
above, with occasional inclusion of some majority generics.
Striking generics have been almost entirely neglected in this
literature.
Theorists in this tradition argue that minority
characteristic generics such as “ducks lay eggs” and “lions
have manes” are understood as implicitly restricted to the
relevant gender. We understand, for example, “ducks lay
eggs” to mean female ducks lay eggs (Pelletier & Asher,
1997; Asher & Morreau, 1995, and others). If this is how
these sentences are understood, then they could be absorbed

into the category of principled characteristics, since it’s
plausible that laying eggs is highly prevalent among female
ducks. However, Leslie (2007, 2008) argues that this
proposal faces philosophical and linguistic difficulties. An
interesting upshot of the experiment we report here is that it
provides empirical evidence against this view. The minority
characteristic generics express generalizations concerning
the entire kind, even though they are made true by only a
minority of the kind.
In a series of collaborative articles, Asher, Morreau, and
Pelletier incorporate insights from the AI literature into a
philosophically and linguistically sensitive treatment of
generics and their entailments (Asher & Morreau, 1991,
1995; Pelletier & Asher 1997). They discuss a number of
entailment patterns involving generics, including ‘defeasible
modus ponens’, exemplified by (1):
(1) Tigers have stripes
Tiggy is a tiger
Thus, Tiggy has stripes
They note that this argument, while not classically valid, is
nonetheless compelling, and argue that this is because
accepting a generic licenses one to infer that by default a
given member of the kind has the generalized property.
Their discussion, however, is more theoretical than
empirical, and focuses almost exclusively on arguments that
involve, in our terminology, principled characteristic
generics, as is the case with (1). In our study, we investigate
the extent to which people make such default inferences
when the relevant generic cannot be classified as a
principled characteristic generic. For example, will people
be inclined to draw such inferences as those illustrated by
(2) and (3)?
(2) Mosquitoes carry the West Nile virus
Buzzy is a mosquito
Thus, Buzzy carries the West Nile virus
(3) Ducks lay eggs
Quacky is a duck
So, Quacky lays eggs
We have previously investigated the conclusions people
are willing to draw when presented with syllogisms
involving generics (Khemlani et al., 2008, in preparation),
but here we will study people’s inferences outside of a
syllogistic context. In this way, our study constitutes a
strong test of the inferential power of generics. Our
participants were not presented with any generics
whatsoever; rather, they were simply told that an individual
was a member of a particular kind, for example,
Suppose you are told: Quacky is a duck
They were then asked to evaluate another non-generic
statement by drawing on their own world knowledge:
What do you think of the following statement:
Quacky lays eggs
The experiment asked participants to judge whether and
to what extent they were confident the above was true,
confident it was false, or could not tell. We were
particularly interested to learn whether these judgments

444

would be driven solely by people’s beliefs about how
prevalent the property is among members of the kind, or
whether acceptance of the implicit background generic
would have an impact on these inferences. If accepting a
generic does, indeed, dispose one to infer that, by default, a
given member of the kind has the property in question, then
we would expect people to endorse these inferences more
often when the implicit generic is true than when it is false.
If this is so, then estimates of prevalence will fall short of
explaining people’s patterns of inference.
To test this, we intermixed items for which the implicit
generic is false, yet the property in question is prevalent
among members of the kind – i.e. high-prevalent true-asexistentials (high-prevalence TEs). For example,
participants might be told “Joe is a Canadian” and asked to
evaluate “Joe is right-handed”. These items are particularly
interesting because the estimated prevalence of the property
among the kind is high (i.e. most Canadians are righthanded), even though the generic is false. This experiment
thus provides a direct test of the extent to which such
inferences are driven by prevalence, as opposed to the
background belief in the truth of the implicit generic. If the
truth of the generic was found to override the estimated
prevalence in guiding people’s judgments, this would
constitute very strong evidence for the power of the
inferential profile of generics.

Design and procedure. The experiment was composed of
two phases. In the main phase, participants completed the
problems described above, in which they were asked to
provide confidence ratings that an arbitrary member of a
category possessed a particular property. The eight types of
predication were distributed such that participants received
10 of each type except for 20 FE statements. The FE
statements were included as a manipulation check to see
whether participants were responding sensibly, and also
served as a way to balance the frequency of responses
across the ends of the rating scales. TE statements were
classified as high-prevalence or low-prevalence by the
prevalence estimates we had obtained in the norming study
mentioned above. Participants also received two practice
statements in the beginning of the study to familiarize
themselves with the response scale, and the problems were
presented in a different randomized order to each
participant.
To help assess the impact of accepting a generic on these
inferences, an auxiliary phase asked participants to judge
whether a particular statement in generic form was true or
false for the minority characteristic, striking, low-prevalence
TE, high-prevalence TE, and majority predications. (We
omitted the quasi-definitional, principled characteristics, and
FEs from this phase, since acceptance of the first two and
rejection of the third are at ceiling.) Accordingly,
participants in the main phase who were asked to judge how
confident they were that Buzzy carries malaria were asked
in the auxiliary phrase to agree or disagree with the generic,
“Mosquitoes carry malaria.” Half the participants received
the main phase first and the auxiliary second, and half
received the opposite order so as to determine whether
participants who agreed with the generic were more likely to
confer the property to an arbitrary member of the category.
Participants received 10 generics of each of the five types of
predication used in the auxiliary phase, and the generics
were embedded within a set of 27 true and 27 false filler
statements such as “eleven is a prime number” (true) and
“tea is a soft drink” (false). They were told that the
experiment tested general knowledge, and were instructed to
press a designated button if they agreed or disagreed with
each statement.

Method
Participants. 29 volunteers participated in the study
through the Internet, and were recruited through Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk system for human interface tasks. None
had any background in logic or computer science. They
completed the experiment online using an interface written
in Ajax. An independent sample of 17 online volunteers
provided prevalence estimates (i.e., what percentage of Xs
are Ys?) for each of the predication types that were used in
the main experiment. These data appear in Table 2, below.
Materials. The items in the main phase of the experiment
consisted of two statements: a statement about an
individual’s membership in a category (e.g., “Buzzy is a
mosquito”) and a statement about the property that the
member possessed (e.g., “Buzzy carries malaria”).
Participants were asked to judge their level of confidence in
the truth of that second statement. They registered their
answers by selecting from a 7-point Likert scale (3 = I’m
confident it’s true, 0 = I couldn’t possibly tell, -3 = I’m
confident it’s false). The statements concerning a property
possessed by the individual expressed one of the eight
different types of predication listed in Table 2. The last three
types of predication – the high and low prevalence TEs and
the FEs -- are all false in generic form, and so would allow
us to determine the role that the truth of the implicit generic
plays in these inferences. The names of the arbitrary
members were selected so as to reveal no other relevant
information in the context of the problem (e.g. for items in
which gender was relevant, care was taken to use only
gender-neutral names).

Results and discussion
Performance on the main phase of the experiment can be
analyzed by coding participants’ responses such that the
points of the Likert scale are mapped to numerical values.
Accordingly, when a participant was maximally confident
of the truth (or falsity) of an arbitrary predication, their
response was coded as +3 (or -3). In the context of the main
task, the numerical values of the Likert scale loosely
correspond to a measurement of inferential strength. That is,
people make an inference when they attribute a property to
an arbitrary member of a kind, and their level of confidence
should predict their willingness to make this inference.
Table 2 shows the mean inferential strength attributed to
various predications, along with their corresponding

445

prevalence estimates. Order of presentation had no effect,
and so these data were subjected to a one-way ANOVA,
which revealed that inferential strength varied significantly
by the different types of predication, F(7,196) = 217.79, p <
.0001, ηp2 = .88. Simple effects comparisons revealed that
inferential strengths for principled characteristic predicates
(M = 2.6) were not reliably larger than for quasi-definitional
predicates (M = 2.5), t(51.47), p = .35, d = .25; quasidefinitional predicates yielded reliably larger inferential
strengths than minority characteristic predicates (1.7),
t(52.39), p < .0001, d = 1.43; inferential strengths for

arbitrary members with a high degree of confidence.
Properties that are characteristic of the kind but nevertheless
are only possessed by one gender were also attributed to
arbitrary members with a high degree of confidence, as were
non-characteristic properties that hold for a majority of the
kind. Participants were more wary about attributing the
property to an arbitrary member of the kind when the
property was striking or true only in existential form, though
it is notable that the inferential strength of the striking
predications was the same as for the high prevalence TEs,
despite the much lower prevalence estimates for the striking
properties. The low prevalence TEs were more comparable
to the striking in terms of prevalence estimates, but were
accorded significantly lower inferential strength. Finally,
participants were confident that an arbitrary member of a
kind should not be attributed a property that holds for no
member of the kind.
Analysis of generic acceptance. Participants’ endorsement
of a generic statement may drive their tendency to attribute
a given property to an arbitrary member of a class. That is,
people who agree with the statement “ticks carry Lyme
disease” and subsequently learn that Jumpy is a tick may be
more likely to infer that Jumpy carries Lyme disease than
those who do not agree with the generic. The auxiliary
phase of the experiment offered insight into this issue by
presenting participants with generics corresponding to the
kinds and predicates they experienced in the main phase of
the experiment.
Participants agreed with minority characteristic generics
on 85% of the trials, majority generics on 80% of the trials,
and striking generics on 75% of the trials; these results
replicate earlier findings (Khemlani et al., 2007).
Participants agreed with high-prevalence and lowprevalence TEs on 43% and 20% of the trials respectively.
There was no effect of presentation order, and so these data
were subjected to a one-way ANOVA, which yielded a
main effect of predication type, F(4, 112) = 56.13, p <
.0001, ηp2 = .67.
To analyze whether participants’ endorsement of a
generic statement affected their tendency to attribute the
property to an arbitrary member of a kind, mean inferential
strengths can be separated by whether participants accepted
or rejected the generic statement. These data are
summarized in Table 3, and again the proportions of true
responses (i.e., +1, +2, or +3) are included in parentheses.
Pairwise comparisons between whether they agreed or
disagreed with a generic were conducted for each
predication type in the main phase. Note that very few

Table 2: Mean inferential strengths and corresponding
prevalence estimates for the different types of predication
(proportion of true responses in parentheses)
Prevalence
Predication type
Inferential Strength
Estimates
Principled
2.6
(97)
92
Quasi-definitional
Minority characteristic
Majority
Striking
High-prevalence TEs
Low-prevalence TEs

2.5
1.7
1.5
0.7
0.6
-0.3

(90)
(74)
(72)
(53)
(36)
(13)

*
*
*

92
64
70
33
60
17

False-as-existentials
-2.5
(4)
*
5
Note: Asterisks between measures of inferential strength indicate a
statistically significant difference in ratings between the two
predication types.

minority characteristic predicates were not reliably larger
than for majority predicates (M = 1.5), t(54.49), p = .45, d =
.20; inferential strengths for majority predicates were
significantly larger than for striking predicates (M = 0.7),
t(51.11), p < .005, d = .86; inferential strengths for striking
predicates were not reliably larger than high-prevalence TE
predicates (M = 0.6), t(44.77), p = .63, d = .13; inferential
strengths for high-prevalence TE predicates were reliably
larger than for low-prevalence TE predicates (M = -.29),
t(55.57), p < .0001, d = 1.37; and inferential strengths for
low-prevalence TE predicates were reliably larger than for
FE predicates (M = -2.53), t(51.64), p < .0001, d = 3.73.
With respect to the influence of estimated prevalence, it is
particularly informative that the inferential strength of
striking predicates was not significantly different than highprevalence TE predicates, while the estimated prevalences
of the predicates diverged markedly, t(18.72) = 6.09, p <
.0001, d = 2.22.
The table also presents (in parentheses) the proportion of
true responses, i.e., whenever a participant’s response was
+3, +2, or +1. True responses indicate how often
participants thought it was true that an arbitrary individual
possessed the property in question. For instance, the third
line of Table 2 shows that participants accepted statements
like “Quacky lay eggs” 74% of the time, upon being told
that Quacky is a duck.
These data suggest that principled properties and
properties that hold of a kind by definition were attributed to

Table 3: Mean inferential strengths separated by predication
types and by acceptance of the generic (proportion of true
responses in parentheses)
Predication type
Accepted generic
Rejected generic
Minority characteristic
2.0 (85)
-0.4 (23)
Majority
1.7 (78)
0.7 (47)
Striking
1.1 (65)
-0.6 (15)
High-prevalence TEs
1.0 (52)
0.3 (23)
Low-prevalence TEs
0.2 (21)
-0.4 (12)

446

participants disagreed with minority characteristic or
majority generics, and likewise participants tended not to
accept low-prevalence TE generics. Statistical comparisons
between agreement vs. disagreement of a generic for
minority characteristic, majority, and low-prevalence TEs
should thus be viewed critically (these proportions are
italicized in Table 3). Nevertheless, pairwise comparisons
yielded significant effects of generic agreement for all types
of predications, including minority characteristic, t(20.21) =
7.75, p < .0001, d = 2.51; majority, t(23.25) = 2.33, p < .05,
d = .77; striking, t(32.80) = 5.43, p < .0001, d = 1.64; highprevalence TE, t(37.83) = 4.81, p < .0001, d = 1.30; and
low-prevalence TE predications, t(27.48) = 2.37, p < .05, d
=.73.
These findings reinforce the idea that accepting the
generic has a substantial effect on these inferences. When
we separate the participants who accepted the generic from
those who did not, we find that the tendency to endorse the
inference in question becomes even greater. For example,
those participants who accepted a given striking generic
endorsed the attribution of the relevant property to a given
member of the kind 65% of the time – i.e., participants who
accepted “ticks carry Lyme disease” agreed with the claim
that Jumpy carries Lyme disease a stunning 65% of the
time.

majority predications, but these latter types of items were
accorded far more inferential power.
Finally, we wish to draw attention to an interesting and
telling aspect of our data. As we discussed in the
introduction, many theorists assume that minority
characteristic generics can be analyzed as generalizing over
only one gender, or some other comparable restriction. For
example, “Ducks lay eggs”, they argue, is really understood
to mean female ducks lay eggs (Pelletier and Asher, 1997;
Asher and Morreau 1991, 1995 and others). Our data here
constitute an empirical refutation of this popular line of
thought, even by the lights of the proponents of this view.
The idea here is simple. If people understand “ducks lay
eggs” to mean female ducks lay eggs – if that is how the
generic is understood and represented – then there should be
no temptation to conclude that an arbitrary duck lays eggs.
One would only judge that a given duck lays eggs to the
same (limited) extent that they would judge that a given
duck is female. The participants were decidedly not tempted
to judge that arbitrary animals belonged to a particular
gender to the extent they were tempted to judge that a given
duck lays eggs – we had included some such items,
including “ducks are female”, among our high prevalence
TEs in the present experiment. The responses to these
‘gender-ascribing’ TEs were, if anything, lower than the
overall responses to the high prevalence TEs in general. Yet
we found that people did not hesitate to conclude that a
given duck lays eggs, and similarly for the other minority
characteristics. This inferential disposition is explicable only
if one posits that people understand “ducks lay eggs” to be
an unrestricted generalization across the entire kind duck.
Indeed, Pelletier and Asher – who espoused a genderrestricted view – explicitly note that an experiment such as
ours would constitute a decisive test of this hypothesis.
They write:
One way to test this hypothesis [of genderrestriction] is to look at how speakers treat such
problematic generics as [ducks lay eggs] when they
exploit them in inferences. We have argued that an
inference like Defeasible Modus Ponens is
defeasibly valid and so should be part of a theory
of generics. But many speakers express reluctance
to draw even the defeasible conclusion that if Allie
is a duck and ducks lay eggs, then Allie lays eggs.
It would depend, they say, upon whether Allie is a
male or a female duck (Pelletier & Asher, 1997,
pp. 1166-1167).
We failed to find any such reluctance. Participants
overwhelmingly endorsed the relevant inferences. Based on
the minimal prompt that Quacky is a duck, participants who
accepted the generic “ducks lay eggs” agreed 83% of the
time that Quacky lays eggs. If generics have powerful
inferential profiles, and the generic “ducks lay eggs”
concerns duck-kind in general – and not just the female ones
– then we would predict exactly this result.
The study described here demonstrates that generics have
a powerful inferential profile which, to some extent, trumps

General discussion
This experiment offers a dramatic illustration of the
inferential power of generics. It is interesting to note that,
among the different types of predications that are true as
generics, prevalence estimates were a good predictor of the
extent to which participants endorsed the inference.
Similarly, among the types of predications that are false as
generics, prevalence estimates were again a good predictor.
However, if we consider all the predication types together –
without separating them out based on the truth/falsity of the
generic form – then prevalence falls short of explaining the
data. The striking predications produced a comparable
amount of inferences to the high-prevalence TEs, yet the
prevalence estimates for the striking predications were far
lower than those for the high-prevalence TEs. The high
prevalence TEs produced significantly fewer in the way of
inferences than the minority characteristics, yet the
prevalence estimates for the two were not reliably different.
Thus it seems that the truth of the implicit background
generic produced an inferential ‘boost’, above and beyond
the estimates of prevalence. This suggests that the
acceptance of a generic does indeed dispose people to infer
by default that a given instance has the relevant property.
It is telling to compare the inferential power of the
striking predications to those of the high-prevalence TEs.
Despite the very different prevalence estimates – 33%
versus 60% -- participants accorded these two types of
predications the same degree of inferential power. The
prevalence estimates for the high-prevalence TEs were more
comparable to those for the minority characteristic and

447

interpret generic assertions. In: Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.J., & Glucksberg, S. (2008).
Syllogistic reasoning with generic premises: The generic
overgeneralization effect. In: Proceedings of the 30th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.J., & Glucksberg, S. (in
preparation). Reasoning with generics.
Leslie, S.J. (2007). Generics and the structure of the mind.
Philosophical Perspectives, 21 (1).
Leslie, S.J. (2008). Generics: Cognition and acquisition.
Philosophical Review, 117 (1).
Leslie, S.J. (in press). The original sin of cognition: Fear,
prejudice, and generalization. The Journal of Philosophy.
Medin, D.L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (eds.)
Similarity and Analogical Reasoning. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
McCarthy, J. (1986). Applications of circumscription to
formalizing
commonsense
knowledge.
Artificial
Intelligence, 28.
Pelletier, F. & Asher, N. (1997). Generics and defaults. In J.
van Benthem and A. ter Meulen (eds.) Handbook of Logic
and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pelletier, F. & Elio, R. (1993) Human benchmarks on AI's
benchmark problems. In: Proceedings of the 15th
Congress of the Cognitive Science Society. Boulder, Co:
Cognitive Science Society.
Prasada, S. & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and
statistical connections in common sense conception.
Cognition, 99 (1).
Prasada, S. & Dillingham, E. (2009). Representation of
principled connections: A window onto the formal aspect
of common sense conception. Cognitive Science, 33.
Reiter, R. (1987). Nonmonotonic reasoning. In Annual
Review of Computer Science, ed. by J. F. Traub, N. J.
Nilsson, and B. J. Grosz. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews Inc.

estimates of prevalence in guiding people’s default
inferences. This is all the more remarkable because people’s
average prevalence estimates were already inflated relative
to the facts, at least for the striking and minority
characteristic predications.
One direction in which we plan to develop these findings
is to investigate the extent to which they may apply to social
categorization and stereotyping. Leslie (in press) argues that
some prejudiced generalizations, such as Muslims are
terrorists, may be cognitively similar to striking property
generalizations such as the socially innocuous ticks carry
Lyme disease. If this is so, then our results shed light on the
troubling inferential power of such judgments.

Acknowledgments
This study is based on work supported in part by a National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship awarded
to the first author. We thank Jeremy Boyd, Adele Goldberg,
Phil Johnson-Laird, Mark Johnston, Olivia Kang, and Lance
Rips for their many helpful discussions and suggestions.

References
Asher, N. & Morreau, M. (1991). Common sense
entailment: A modal theory of non-monotonic reasoning.
Proceedings of the 12th IJCAI, 387-392. San Mateo, CA:
Morgan Kaufman.
Asher, N. & Morreau, M. (1995). What some generic
sentences mean. In G. Carlson and F. J. Pelletier (eds.)
The generic book. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Elio, R. & Pelletier, F.J. (1996). On reasoning with default
rules and exceptions. In G.Cottrell (Ed.): Proceedings of
the 18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Khemlani, S., Leslie, S.J., Glucksberg, S., & RubioFernandez, P. (2007). Do ducks lay eggs? How people

448

