UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generic Abstraction in Design Creativity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vg2d3g2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dogan, Fehmi
Nersessian, Nancy

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generic Abstraction in Design Creativity
Fehmi Dogan (fehmidogan@iyte.edu.tr)
College of Architecture, Izmir Institute of Technology
Urla, TR-35430, Izmir, Turkey

Nancy J. Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332-0280

Abstract

Study of the Design Process

This study examines the role of generic abstraction in
architectural design, specifically how it facilitates design
exploration through formulation of a family of design
schemes. We maintain that exploration in design, as it is in
scientific discovery, is not solely based on serendipity, as
often claimed, but that designers often reason in ways that
strategically structure their explorations. We single out three
instances of structuring through ‘generic abstraction’ in the
case study of Staatsgalerie by Stirling.

The Staatsgalerie case study is based on an investigation of
archival materials from the Stirling Collection at the
Canadian Center for Architecture and correspondence with
the two junior members of the design team. The archival
materials, approximately 505 graphical materials such as
sketches and different types of drawings, plus textual
materials such as correspondence and minutes from
meetings, include all the available documents from the
design process.
The Staatsgalerie design process lasted for five months,
with August 30, 1977 as the deadline for the submissions.
The competition brief emphasized the urgency of restoring
the spatial and historical continuity of the urban fabric by
enhancing pedestrian movement. In response, the design
team configured a scheme that would accommodate the
public circulation through the building without disrupting
the integrity and wholeness of the Museum, while allowing
the public a close experience of the activities in the
Museum.
Starting the project, Stirling asked Ulrich Schaad and
Russell Bevington, his assistants, to start thinking about the
design and he would join the process later. As a starting
point, the assistants identified two precedents as sources of
ideas: their previous museum competition project for
Düsseldorf, the Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, and
the historical Temple of Fortuna (Schaad) 2 . In both
Kunstsammlung and Staatsgalerie projects, a pedestrian path
and a circular courtyard are the two significant elements of
the design. Inspired by the Temple of Fortuna, the architects
for the Staatsgalerie layered the building on a series of
terraces and used ramps to connect the different levels. The
transferred elements from the two precedents, i.e., terraces,
ramps, public path, and a central court, began as and
remained significant design elements throughout the design
process.
After these initial decisions, the design proceeded through
two coordinated explorations. First, the junior designers
produced a vast number of variations. Second, the senior
designer, Stirling, took these variations and produced
generic schemes with the idea of incorporating a public path

Keywords: abstraction; diagrammatic reasoning; design
cognition.

Design cognition studies emphasize the facilitating role of
sketches in the process of creative discovery (Goel, 1995;
Goldschmidt, 1991; Schön, 1992). These views describe the
discovery process almost exclusively either in terms of
‘serendipity’ (Suwa, Gero, & Purcell, 2000) or of piecemeal
evolution of design ideas through localized changes (Maher
& Tang, 2003). In the area of scientific discovery, however,
research shows that creative outcomes are often the
outcomes of processes of reasoning through extended
structured explorations (see, e.g., Nersessian, 2008). 1
Nersessian (1999, 2008), for instance, has shown how a
process of what she called reasoning via ‘generic
abstraction’ was central to the scientific discoveries of both
Maxwell and Faraday, and can be seen in the work of
numerous other scientists. In this paper, we argue that
generic abstraction, consisting of “selectively suppressing
information instantiated in representation so as to make
inferences that pertain only to the generic case” (Nersessian,
2008) could also be an exploration strategy to foster
creativity in architectural design.
We highlight the salient features of generic abstraction in
one particular case study: James Stirling’s Staatsgalerie
Museum extension project using cognitive-historical
analysis of archival records (Nersessian, 1995). In this
project, the abstraction processes were sustained through a
collaborative effort within a distributed cognitive system
(Hutchins, 1995) that consisted of one senior and two junior
designers, and representations in the form of sketches and
diagrams.

1
Of course, there are cases of serendipitous discovery in science as
well, as, e.g., discussed by Thagard (2002)

2

References to Schaad are personal communications (2002) unless
otherwise noted.

614

going through the building with a central court, as drawn in
the final competition submission (Figure 5.12).
The path, the first important theme of the design, was
worked out in numerous sketches. There are no schemes
without some sort of a path crossing the building. The shape
and configuration of this path, though, changed throughout
the exploration. The team considered two categories of
variations of the idea of path: paths with no turns and paths
with turns. The primary example of the first is the straight
path scheme (22 instances). The example for the second is a
zigzag path where the public circulation makes several turns
through the building (14 instances). There are two further
variations of each of these categories. The large curved path
(3 instances) is a variation of the scheme with no turns,
whereas the meandering path (13 instances) is a variation on
the zigzag path scheme. The final category comprises hybrid
schemes of straight paths and paths with turns (99
instances). An example of this category is a path that enters
the site directly, makes half a circle around the sculpture
courtyard, and then proceeds directly to the outside of the
site. Generally, the team tried to achieve a scheme where the
public would use the path as a shortcut and still enjoy the
building as much as possible. In the hybrid schemes, the
time spent is elongated and the general public is given a
chance of a momentary pause to experience the sculpture
court.
The second important theme in the design was the idea of
a centrally located sculpture court that would unify the
fragmented components. The court emerged early in the
design process, most likely in reference to the Düsseldorf
competition entry. There were only 13 schemes without a
court as opposed to 228 schemes with a court among all the
sketches investigated in detail. Once it emerged, the idea
was studied in several variations, which can be grouped in
six headings according to shape: triangle (2), rectangle (11),
square (13), ellipse (6), circle (195), and semi-circle (1).
The team considered numerous schemes. Neither the path
nor the court, however, was studied independently. The
trajectory of the path determined the shape of the court and
the shape of the court determined the configuration of the
path. In terms of the configuration of the path and court,
there are five categories, with their respective numbers of
occurrence: Path without a court (19), Path without
connection to court (17), Path tangent to the court (10), Path
intersecting the court (24), Path around the court (95).
In those schemes without a court, the path dissects the
building into disconnected fragments. In the schemes with a
court, the court is a central focal element. Where the court is
disconnected or tangent to the path, the building remains
somewhat fragmented. When the path enters the courtyard
diagonally, it is either the path or the court which is
dissected and their continuities disrupted.
Finally, in schemes where the path wraps around the
court, there is a compromise. Neither the path nor the court
is fragmented. The path retains its integrity while providing
enough exposure to the museum. When the section sketches
and the axonometric drawings are studied, we see two sub-

categories of this variation, of which one is the final
scheme. In the first sub-category the path wraps around the
courtyard yet it stays at a higher level, i.e., the path never
reaches down to the courtyard floor (Figure 1). In the final
scheme, the path proceeds downward to the floor of the
court along the curvilinear wall of the courtyard (Figure 2).
It is this scheme the team entered into the design
competition. In its new configuration, the court became a
place of pause for pedestrians, including non-museum goes
living in the neighborhood. This suggests a shift in the
conception of the court from being solely a central place for
the building to becoming a center of focus for both museum
visitors as well as the residents of the neighborhood using
the path.

Figure 1: A variation where path circles around the court. 3

Figure 2: A variation where path circles downwards.
All the important shifts during the design process,
including the emergence of the idea of court, appear to have
occurred through processes of abstraction. In these
abstractions, Stirling first conceived the path and court in
terms of their basics, then established a meaningful
connection between them, and finally, modified their
meaning to achieve a new satisfying scheme. In the
remainder of this paper we are going to illustrate three such
instances of generic abstraction.

Dynamics of generic abstraction
During the design process, communication among the team
members evolved mainly through sketches and diagrams
(Schaad). Wilford, Stirling’s office partner, describes this
3

All the drawings are from © James Stirling/Michael Wilford
Archive, Centre Canadien d'Architecture/Canadian Centre for
Architecture, Montréal unless otherwise specified. Reprinted with
permission.

615

collaboration in terms of successive stages. First, the brief or
the program document was placed on the desk of everyone
involved in the design. From then on, Wilford reports "a
wide ranging diagrammatic exercise [was] carried out to
establish all possible ways of configuring the building"
(Wilford, 1996, p. 14). The members of the team would
create photocopies of their sketches and Stirling would take
these as the basis of his own sketches. Stirling would work
on these alternative sketches to "select, edit, alter, add"
(ibid.). He would do this by "taking the A4 photocopied clip
and putting an A4 tracing paper on top and doodling"
(ibid.). Wilford characterizes Stirling's manipulation of
others' sketches as a process of simplification of the
complexity of the design situation. The drawings are
reduced to their basics and essentials, which Wilford
describes as “stripping away extraneous information… by
overlaying tracing paper on an under drawing and redrawing
it, often many times, until the scope and detail are paired
down as required” (Wilford, 1994, p. 5). According to
Schaad, through this processes Stirling gained mastery
which allowed him “to pick on ideas (drawn) and mould
them into the whole once a basic scheme had been
determined.”
The strategy of simplifying the exploration by way of
reducing the set of available design solutions was a
conscious effort on the part of the designers. Wilford states
that “the office was a searching factory; it was not a pickand-choose operation but an elaboration of an agreed-upon
set of ideas, a sequence of sketches rather than 25
alternatives” (Wilford, 1993).
The sketches are small, simple, and drawn on standard,
small size sketching papers. Their simplified form makes
them easier to study, to inspect, and to grasp the essentials.
Furthermore, there are usually a set of sketches on a page
making simultaneous comparisons more efficient.

bones as a square and a path with a court, which made it
easier for him to transfer only these generic elements and
their relationship to the Staatsgalerie competition project.
Second generic abstraction: Among the early sketches
of Staatsgalerie, there are several indicative of how the
schemes are compared through re-sketching by
superimposing papers or by tracing over the sketches. With
one such drawing (Figure 4), the team configured a generic
scheme regarding the nature of the path and the court.
III
level
II
level
I
level

Figure 4: The second generic abstraction with the three
levels of abstraction.
In this drawing, the superimposed lines show three phases
of abstraction on the idea of path: blue dashed lines, a red
dashed line, and a gray diagonal line. Here, two parallel
dashed blue lines at the entrance of the site and at the exit of
the site literally correspond to a path with a specific width.
The red dashed line superimposed on the blue line, however,
is more abstract and represents the movement and not a
particular path. This line abstracts the path to a circulation
line, representing the trajectory of the movement and the
turns along this trajectory. The third superimposed line, i.e.,
barely visible gray line crossing the circle, advances
abstraction one step further. Here the indication is not of
width or trajectory, but rather it denotes the architectural
notion of an abstract circulation axis passing through the
building.
The difference in the colors supports the claim that the
abstraction evolved in three phases from path to movement
to axis. Again, what is significant is the process of
abstraction which enabled Stirling to think in terms of the
generic issues concerning the path and its relation to the
court rather than the physical properties of the design.
Abstraction helped Stirling in thinking of the path in terms
of a linear movement and of the court in terms of a central
space located along the linear movement.

First generic abstraction: In the first instance of generic
abstraction, Stirling used abstraction to transfer architectural
components from the Düsseldorf competition project
(Figure 3a) to the Staatsgalerie project. In this early
schematic plan drawing (Figure 3b), which belongs to a set
of drawing schemes without a court, there is a generic
scheme drawn in red pen.

Third generic abstraction: A set of drawings by Stirling
(Figure 5), illustrates the processes of abstraction through
which Stirling conceived of an integrated generic scheme.
The set starts with a plan drawing showing the configuration
of the lecture hall, temporary exhibition space, and the court
(Figure 5.1). They are all lined up on a linear axis. In two
partial plan drawings, Stirling studied first the alignment of
the court in relation to the museum block. The court is
moved up and down within a vertical band (Figure 5.2,
Figure 5.3).

Figure 3 (a) Kunstsammlung; (b) First generic abstraction.
We know that the convention of the office was for only
Stirling to use a red pen to edit and comment on the
drawings of the other designers (Wilford, 1994). In Figure
3b, Stirling abstracted the Düsseldorf scheme to its bare

616

deliberately in their exploration. The designers devised
procedures that would facilitate the abstraction process. The
sketches were small so that they could easily be “inspected
by the eye.” They were on standard, semi-transparent sketch
paper, to facilitate comparison through superimposition.
Different types of lines in the renderings had specific
meanings within the group, making communication efficient
and the drawings less ambiguous. The basic line types
consisted of dashed lines indicating circulation; continuous
lines indicating spatial boundaries; axial lines, for spatial
configuration;

In the second complete plan drawing (Figure 5.4), Stirling
introduced an abstract diagonal axial line representative of
the public path going through the center of the sculpture
court. This shows an effort to integrate the path and the
court. In two small sections, Stirling sketched how the
integration would work between the different levels of the
upper terrace, the courtyard floor, and the lower terrace
(Figure 5.5, Figure 5.6).
In the third complete plan drawing (Figure 5.7), the
diagonal axial line becomes a dashed line, which intersects
with a vertical axial line. Here, the path and the court are
defined according to an integrated set of axial lines. The
vertical axial lines determine the positioning of the court
while the horizontal band indicates the horizontal
positioning of the court. Another important feature of this
drawing is the differentiation of line thickness for different
areas of the building complex. The interior contour lines of
the building are thickened as opposed to the outer contour
lines. This marks an emphasis on the in-between space
defined by the building blocks.
In the following three partial plan drawings, Stirling
studied this in-between space (Figure 5.8, Figure 5.9,
through Figure 5.10). In the third drawing of this series
(Figure 5.10), Stirling studied only the upper terrace floor of
the scheme. Here, the void, composed of terraces and the
courtyard, becomes both a constitutive element of the
scheme and also the core of the composition. This indicates
how the central court became a focal area in the overall
scheme when compared to the first plan drawing of this set
in which the court is only one of the three equal spatial
components of the scheme. Until now, each drawing
furthers the abstraction process. In the last drawing, Stirling
made a final complete drawing that is a re-configured
arrangement of the interior spaces (Figure 5.12). Over the
course of creating the drawings in the set, Stirling proceeded
from a relatively detailed drawing to more and more abstract
drawings and finally to a re-configured detailed scheme.
The abstractive processes enabled Stirling to distill the
detailed scheme to its basics, which in turn led to his
reconfiguration of the overall composition of the path, the
sculpture court, and the major spatial components.
Generic abstractions were produced by using
conventional abstract diagrammatic features, such as axial
lines, hatched vertical or horizontal zones, and
differentiation of line thicknesses. All the other drawings in
the entire collection of the archive, with the exception of the
diagram from the second instance of abstraction, lack such
abstract diagrammatic features.
In the first instance of abstraction, Stirling introduced the
notion of a central court in relation to a path. In the second,
he studied how the path and the court could relate to each
other. In the third, he qualified this relation by devising a
path that would accommodate both those who are passing
through the building and those who would like to pause.

5.5
5.2
5.1

5.6
5.3

5.4

5.7

5.10
5.9
5.8

5.12
5.11

Figure 5: Progressive abstraction in Stirling’s diagrams.
Published in A+U (1989).

and thicker lines for emphasizing spaces. The office also
limited the color range in their drawings. Black ink was
assigned to all designers, except the senior designer, who
used red ink, especially when trying to reduce sketches to
their "barebones". All of the above indicate a deliberate
effort to facilitate abstraction and exploration in a
collaborative design process.
The notion of a cognitive system is helpful for capturing
the structured collaboration during the Staatsgalerie project
(Hutchins 1995). The design progressed in a distributed
fashion, involving the generation, manipulation, and
propagation of representational states across media. Within
the cognitive system junior and senior designers, as well as
representations in the form of sketches and diagrams,
performed distinct functions. The senior designer was in
charge of leading the team by providing direction and
integrating the various ideas of junior designers. The syntax

Discussion
Stirling's design team made use of generic abstraction

617

Studies of scientific discovery, too, have shown the
importance of generic abstraction as a means of structured
exploration leading to creative outcomes. Nersessian (1999,
2008) proposes that generic abstraction facilitates building
mental models that embody commonalities across
seemingly dissimilar domains in scientific reasoning such
that inferences derived from the specific models used in an
exploration can be understood as applying to members of
classes of phenomena (Nersessian, 2008). As Nersessian
notes, taking an example from Bishop Berkeley, one cannot
imagine a triangle-in-general, but only a specific instance.
However, in making inferences about triangles in general,
we are able to suppress the specific lengths of the sides and
degrees of the angles of the specific instance. Similarly, in
design it is possible to infer or derive multiple variations
from a specific representation of a generic abstraction that
has wider applicability.
Further, research in other areas of cognitive science lends
support to our argument. Gattis and Holyoak's research on
graphs (1996), e.g., provides one explanation for why
abstraction could be important. They compared the
effectiveness of graphs that have a higher pictorial
correspondence with what is represented to graphs that
preserve the correspondence at a more abstract level. Their
results suggest that abstract representations of conceptually
important features have significant advantages for making
inferences. In Stirling's second case of abstraction (Figure
4), for instance, the progression from a relatively more
realistic representation of the path to a more abstract
representation of the idea of movement indicates an effort to
emphasize the conceptually important features and align the
attention of the design team on these.
An additional reason for the gradual abstraction of design
schemes might relate to the ease of manipulation of the
perceptual features of diagrams when they are simplified. In
the Staatsgalerie, once design ideas were abstracted and
associated with perceptual features of diagrams,
manipulation of their perceptual features could facilitate
manipulating features of a corresponding mental model,
enabling the designers to simulate potential pathways.
Through step-by-step abstraction Stirling could be
interpreted as not only reducing the details of the drawings
but also simulating a series of complex connected spaces.
This point is clearer in diagrams from third case of
abstraction. In this series Stirling abstracted elements of the
design one at a time, as if he were simulating each element
of the scheme at each stage of abstraction. Such piecemeal
abstraction is similar to the notion of piecemeal animation
of diagrams of complex mechanical systems, in which only
parts of the system are animated at any given time (Hegarty,
1995). Narayanan (1995) and Qin and Simon (1995) also
suggested that piecemeal manipulation of diagrams facilitate
making inferences from complex mental models.
Finally, Greeno (1989) offers direction for developing a
theoretical basis for understanding how manipulating
diagrams can serve to facilitate transformations of mental
models. He introduces a view of semantics in which

and semantics of representations were relatively
unambiguous to the members of the design team (cf. Goel,
1995). Axial lines, hatching, and dashed lines designated
specific abstractions. When these were in red they specified
a clear direction for the design exploration by the senior
designer.
On the one hand, the Staatsgalerie case study aligns with
accounts of design cognition that also emphasize the
centrality of sketches as the primary architectural
representations in the process of discovery (Goel, 1995;
Goldschmidt, 1991; Schön, 1992). On the other hand, it
provides an alternative to views that single out the
serendipity of discovery processes in design and the role of
sketches at the expense of ignoring the more structured
processes of discovery that are also evident in design.
Researchers in design studies emphasize the view that
designers often stumble upon new things while
manipulating sketches, and benefit from them
opportunistically (Cross, 2001; Cross & Cross, 1995). This
no doubt happens with both expert and novice designers,
however this fosters a view of designers as frantically
doodling in hopes of suddenly discovering satisfying
schemes. Our analysis highlights a process in which
discoveries do not stem from reinterpretations of already
existing visual marks in an unexpected manner (Suwa et al.,
2000) but stem from deliberate efforts to attain insight by
means of abstraction via drawing new generic diagrams
representing a class of design schemes.
The Staatsgalerie design team explored a vast number of
variations in the initial phases of design while they remained
committed to a family of design schemes, yet this was
neither an exhaustive search nor a linear search. It did not
need to be exhaustive because the variations generated by
the junior designers were occasionally summarized into
generic schemes by Stirling, and they generated further,
related variations.
The exploration was not linear because the team
considered several variations more or less at the same time,
which facilitated comparisons of different schemes. Some
sets of sketches for the Staatsgalerie project, for instance,
show a vast number of variations studied together. Others,
which show a detailed rendering of one variation, have
smaller sketches accompanying them, suggesting that the
designers
were
considering
related
variations
simultaneously and sometimes going back to a previous
variation. In other sketches, drawings and layers are
superimposed again suggesting an iterative rather than linear
exploration. The designers considered several different
schemes, compared them to each other, and sometimes
jumped back and forth between schemes.
Our case study illustrates a series of shifts in design
conception that occurred through progressive abstractions
that would be difficult to account for as serendipitous
discoveries. Although we cannot detail more cases here,
from our investigations this is not an atypical instance of
discovery in design (Dogan & Nersessian, 2005).

618

Gattis, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). Mapping conceptual to
spatial relations in visual reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology / Learning, Memory & Cognition, 22(1), 231-40.
Goel, V. (1995). Sketches of thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldschmidt, G. (1991). The dialectics of sketching.
Creativity Research Journal, 4(2), 123-143.
Greeno, J. G. (1989). Situations, mental models, and
generative knowledge. In D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky (Eds.),
Complex information processing: The impact of Herbert
A. Simon. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Hegarty, M. (1995). Mental animation: inferring motion from
static displays of mechanical systems. In B. Chandrasekaran,
J. Glasgow & N. H. Narayanan (Eds.), Diagrammatic
reasoning: cognitive and computational perspectives. Menlo
Park, CA; Cambridge, MA: AAAI Press; MIT Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Maher, L., & Tang, H.-H. (2003). Co-evolution as a
computational and cognitive model of design. Research in
Engineering Design, 14(1), 47-64.
Narayanan, N. H., Suwa, M., & Motoda, H. (1995).
Hypothesizing behaviors from device diagrams. In B.
Chandrasekaran, J. Glasgow & N. H. Narayanan (Eds.),
Diagrammatic reasoning: cognitive and computational
perspectives. Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge, MA: AAAI Press;
MIT Press.
Nersessian, N. (1995). Opening the black box: cognitive
science and history of science. Osiris, 10, 194-211.
Nersessian, N. (1999). Model-based reasoning in conceptual
change. In L. Magnani, N. J. Nersessian & P. Thagard
(Eds.), Model-based reasoning in scientific discovery (pp.
5-22). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Nersessian, N. (2008). Creating scientific concepts.
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Qin, Y., & Simon, H. (1995). Imagery and mental models in
problem solving. In B. Chandrasekaran, J. Glasgow & N.
H. Narayanan (Eds.), Diagrammatic reasoning: cognitive
and computational perspectives. Menlo Park, Calif.;
Cambridge, Mass.: AAAI Press; MIT Press.
Schön, D. (1992). Designing as reflective conversation with
the materials of a design situation. Research in
Engineering Design, 3, 131-147.
Suwa, M., Gero, J., & Purcell, T. (2000). Unexpected
discoveries and S-invention of design requirements:
important vehicles for a design process. Design Studies,
21(6), 539-567.
Thagard, P. (2002). Curing cancer? Patrick Lee's path to the
reovirus treatment. International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, 16(1), 79-93.
Wilford, M. (1993). Michael Wilford: a conversation in
London [interview]. Any, 1(2), 56-61.
Wilford, M. (1994). Introduction. In M. Wilford & T. Muirhead
(Eds.), James Stirling, Michael Wilford, and Associates: buildings
& projects, 1975-1992. London: Thames & Hudson.
Wilford, M. (1996). An evolving design philosophy and
working method. In M. Wilford & Royal Institute of
British Architects. (Eds.), Wilford, Stirling, Wilford.
London: Michael Wilford & Partners.

structured systems of symbolic notations are mapped to
structured systems of objects and events, and he suggested
that inferences are possible through manipulation of either
system. On his account, mental models are structured
systems of symbolic notations and correspond to structured
systems of objects and events in the form of physical
models. Any transformation in the physical model,
therefore, can create a corresponding transformation in the
mental model. The third abstraction in the Stirling case
provides evidence that through manipulating the physical
features of the diagram Stirling altered his corresponding
conceptualalization. Reasoning via generic abstraction
enabled the designer to think of the central court both as a
focal and stopping point along a trajectory of movement.

Conclusion
The design of the Staatsgalerie was a coordinated effort
among a team of designers. Ideas were exchanged through
simplifying and abstracting representations through resketching. These processes enabled the design team
members to identify the salient features of their schemes and
formulate them in generic diagrammatic representations.
Generic abstraction by means of diagrams facilitated
aligning and propagating design commitments in the
distributed collaboration.
The case illustrates a design process which evolved not
through serendipitous discoveries in sketches but through
generic abstractions and variations derived from these
abstractions. We identified three such instances of generic
abstraction in the case study: the first when the designer
transferred the main generic components of an earlier
project, the second and third when the senior designer
abstracted the main design issues from variations produced
by the junior designers. The generic design abstractions
defined a family of design schemes which helped the
designers remain committed to a set of designs. The
variations considered could in turn be compared to each
other for final decision making. Finally, the generic
abstractions in the form of diagrams potentially helped the
designers to mentally simulate different spatial components,
especially the trajectories of possible movements through
the physical space, which lead to the generation of a novel
design conceptualization. The findings and conclusions
from this study, however, needs to be further investigated in
other case studies and more controlled studies to see the
extent to which generic abstractions are used by designers.

References
Cross, N. (2001). Design cognition: results from protocols.
In C. M. Eastman, W. M. McCracken & W. C. Newstetter
(Eds.), Design knowing and learning: cognition in design
education. Amsterdam; New York: Elsevier Science B.V.
Cross, N., & Cross, A.C. (1995). Observations of teamwork
and social processes in design. Design Studies, 16, 143-70.
Dogan, F., & Nersessian, N. (2005). Design problem
solving with conceptual diagrams. Proceedings of the 27th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 600-6).

619

