UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Group Identity Salience in Sacred Value Based Cultural Conflict: An Examination of the
Hindu-Muslim Identities in the Kashmir and Babri Mosque Issues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/87h4g4q5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Medin, Douglas
Sachdeva, Sonya

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Group Identity Salience in Sacred Value Based Cultural Conflict: An Examination
of the Hindu-Muslim Identities in the Kashmir and Babri Mosque Issues
Sonya Sachdeva (s-sachdeva@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60025

Douglas L. Medin (medin@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60025

Abstract
The sacred values of a community are critical in understanding
cultural conflict. When an attempt is made to trade a sacred
value with a secular good, it evokes feelings of anger (tabootradeoff) but less so when that sacred value is traded off with
another sacred value (tragic). Previous work has shown that
participants who expressed sacred values for an issue were
more resistant to taboo than tragic peace deals. Our objective
in the present study was to extend these findings to conflicts
between Hindus and Muslims over Kashmir and the Babri
Mosque, the former more salient to Muslim identity and the
latter more salient to Hindu identity. While replicating the
previous interaction between sacred values and tradeoff type,
we also found a moderating role of how salient an issue was
for group identity. Only the participants for whom the issue
was salient showed the previous correlates of sacred values.

Keywords: Culture and cognition; sacred values; intergroup conflict.
The separation between the sacred and profane spheres of
life was first underlined by Émile Durkheim at the turn of
the 20th century. Although he mainly used the concept of
sacred values as the means through which religious
symbols and ultimately religion develop, the definition he
used for sacred values persists to this day. The sacred and
profane are the two spheres through which humans
navigate in their daily lives. The profane is countable,
measurable and routine whereas the sacred is sacred,
simply because it is none of those things. Durkheim defined
sacred as pertaining to that which is transcendental and
non-utilitarian (Durkheim, 1912/1995).
Recently, psychologists have transformed the mainly
philosophical and sociological concept of sacred values to a
functional psychological construct. Phillip Tetlock and his
colleagues (2000) developed the Sacred Value Protection
Model (SVPM). In this model, people want to protect their
sacred values from being corrupted by secular values. They
found that people feel severe distress when they are asked
to measure sacred values on a secular metric (e.g being
asked how much money one is willing to accept for one’s
child). This type of tradeoff, mixing the sacred with the
secular, is known as a taboo tradeoff. However, Tetlock et

al (2000) also found that if tradeoffs occur within the same
domain, such as a sacred value for another sacred value,
these types of tradeoffs are less offensive. Tradeoffs within
the sacred sphere are knows as tragic or symbolic.
Sacred values can also be a motivating factor between the
persistence of conflict between religious or ethnic groups.
Ginges, Atran, Medin and Shikaki (2007) extended the
research on the SVPM to understanding the IsraeliPalestinian dispute which is often discussed in sacred terms,
e.g. a fight to protect the holy land (Dumper, 2002). Ginges
et al (2007) presented three types of peace deals to members
of Hamas, Palestinian refugees, and Jewish Israeli settlers to
assess whether sacred values caused participants to be nonutilitarian in a field experiment. This type of experiment
allowed the SVPM to be applied to a real political dispute,
with participants who dealt with the repercussions of this
dispute on a daily level. In addition, peace deals were
constructed as to be extremely realistic, using some of the
same solutions, e.g., a two-state solution, which have been
proposed as permanents solutions to the dispute by
international agencies.
The three types of tradeoff deals in this study were taboo,
taboo + and tragic (symbolic). In the taboo deal, a two state
solution was presented, the taboo + deal included the twostate solution and offered money in addition to this solution
and the tragic deal offered the two state solution but a
symbolic concession (an apology or recognition of a sacred
right) in exchange. The researchers found that the taboo+
deals were more offensive to participants than the taboo+
deals but only to the participants for whom this issue was
sacred (deemed moral absolutists by the authors). Non-moral
absolutists showed exactly the reverse pattern and were less
offended by taboo+ deals than the basic taboo deals. In deals
where a symbolic concession was offered, moral absolutists
were less offended than when the basic taboo deal was
offered whereas no-moral absolutists were more
disapproving of a tragic than a taboo tradeoff.
Ginges et al’s (2007) work shows that the SVPM can be
used in real world situations to facilitate cultural
understanding. For example, an outsider brought in to help
heal the conflict might be insensitive to the sacred nature of a
particular issue by proposing what to him/her seems to be an
adequate compromise. But, as noted in the above work,
moral and non-moral absolutists have vastly different

3111

perspectives on what is an appropriate compromise. In the
present study, we extended this work to a different cultural
conflict that also appeared to us to be sacred in nature. The
goal of this study was to examine whether the salience of
an issue to a particular group was necessary to produce the
previously shown effects of having sacred values on
utilitarian thinking. Ledgerwood, Liviatan and Carnevale
(2007) have shown that the extent to which a material good
gains symbolic significance is related to how committed
one is to a group’s identity. For example, NYU students
who strongly identified with NYU identity placed higher
value on a historic townhouse on the campus than students
who identified weakly with NYU identity. Similarly, we
proposed that participants who claim to hold a sacred value
for an issue and also identify strongly with that issue would
show a different pattern of results than participants who
identify weakly with an issue even though both may claim
that the issue holds transcendental significance for them.

Present Study
The aim of this project is to study the sacred values
underlying and motivating two disputes between Hindu and
Muslim populations in northeastern India. One is the Babri
Mosque issue. This has been a relentlessly contentious
issue for over a century since both Hindus and Muslims
claim to have a sacred right to this land. Hindus believe this
land to be the birthplace of an especially influential sacred
deity, Ram. Muslims claim that the land is a mark of the
first Mughal emperor to conquer India, Babar. Although
local spats have been occurring in this region as early as the
1800s, the most serious bout of fighting occurred in
December of 1992 when thousands of Hindu
fundamentalists broke down all the security placed around
this site in 1990 and tore the Babri Mosque down,
essentially with their bare hands. This sparked off the worst
riots seen in India between Hindus and Muslims since the
partition. The overall death toll for these riots was in the
thousands - not including the retaliatory terrorist attacks
which simultaneously bombed 13 sites in Mumbai, India’s
financial capital in 1993 leaving hundred dead and
thousands injured.
The other issue we studied was the conflict over Kashmir.
This conflict began with the struggle for Muslim autonomy
in the newly independent India and newly created Pakistan.
India and Pakistan have fought three wars over this issue
with no clear resolution. The status quo is that India holds
approximately two-thirds of Kashmir while Pakistan holds
the rest. While seemingly a border dispute, in essence, this
is a clash of Hindu and Muslim ideologies (Rai, 2004).
These conflicts were selected to be differentially salient to
Hindu and Muslim populations with the Babri Mosque
issue to be more important for Hindu group identity and the
Kashmir issue for the Muslim group identity1. Our aim in
this project was to replicate the basic interaction between

sacred values and tradeoff type as per the SVPM. But,
additionally, we predicted that the interaction between sacred
values and taboo versus tragic trade-offs would be present
more strongly for participants whose group identity was
strongly linked with the issue being discussed.

Method
Participants Fifty-three participants were recruited door-todoor in the neighboring towns of Faizabad and Ayodhya in
Uttar Pradesh. Faizabad is a mainly Muslim town and
Ayodhya contains a predominantly Hindu population. The
sample collected from each town is representative of the
overall population. The participants ranged in age from 18 to
88 with 21 females in the sample. Approximately, 50 percent
of the sample was Muslim.
Materials & Design We constructed two scenarios to be
specifically salient to either a Hindu or a Muslim community
in this region. Each interview was conducted individually
and took approximately 45 minutes. Each participant was
presented with both scenarios (counterbalanced). And both
scenarios involved some sort of negotiation over a site that is
sacred to both Hindus and Muslims. All participants received
the same basic scenario but the specific deals varied by the
condition participants were assigned to as well as which
community the participant belonged to. This was necessary
because the party conferring either the money in the taboo+
condition or the apology in the tragic condition varied
depending on whether the participant was Hindu or Muslim.
Each scenario had three versions presented between-subjects
- the baseline tradeoff, a taboo tradeoff and a tragic tradeoff.
The three versions of the Babri Mosque scenario for the
Muslim participants are presented below.
Babri Mosque scenario:
Some members of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP)
demolished the Babri Masjid because they believed that the spot
commemorates the birthplace of Shriram. Since then, the VHP
has been trying to rebuild the temple that existed on this site.
Suppose the Supreme Court organized an agreement between
Muslims and Hindus. Under this agreement:

Taboo:
a) All India Babri Masjid Action Committee (AIBMAC) would
recognize that the Babri Masjid was built atop the ruins of Ram
Janmbhoomi. b) The site of the Babri Masjid would be split in
half, with one half for a temple to Ram and another as a
monument to the masjid. Taboo+:
c) In return, VHP will pay AIBMAC one crore (10 million)
rupees each year for 10 years.

Tragic:
c) In return, VHP will recognize the historic and legitimate right
of the Muslims to the Babri Masjid and will apologize for all the
wrongs done to Muslims.

The Kashmir scenario was parallel to the Babri Mosque
scenario. The base story is presented below.
Kashmir Scenario:
Imagine that the UN has gotten a deal together to resolve the
Indian-Pakistani conflict over Kashmir. Currently India controls
2/3 of the land while Pakistan holds the rest. Under this deal:

1

These issues were selected on the basis of prior focus testing
with a representative sample of 6 individuals

3112

After the deals were presented, we collected several
dependent variables. First, participants were asked whether
they approved or disapproved of the deal. Then they were
asked how likely they would be to vote for such a deal.
Participants also responded to whether they would feel
anger if such a deal was accepted by political leaders and if
rioting would ensue as a result of the deal’s acceptance.
Finally, participants’ sacred values for the two issues were
assessed using a measure similar to the one used by Ginges
et al (2007).

Results
We found that tragic tradeoffs were more acceptable than
taboo tradeoffs across all of our (F(1, 23) = 4.02, p = .05,
Table 1) dependent measures. This was true for Hindu and
Muslim participants for both the Babri Mosque and
Kashmir scenarios. However, this result only held for those
that met the criteria for having a sacred value for the issue.
Those that did not meet the criteria for having a sacred
value actually found the tragic tradeoffs less acceptable
than the taboo tradeoffs similar to the Ginges et al (2007)
findings.

This pattern was more clearly visible when looking at the
overall willingness to engage in any sort of tradeoffs for each
scenario, broken down by religion and sacred values. As
noted in Figure 1, Hindus with sacred values for the Babri
Mosque scenario were less likely to approve of any tradeoffs
than Hindus without sacred values but Muslims who claimed
to have sacred values were actually were more likely to
engage in tradeoff deals than Muslims without sacred values.
Similarly, for the Kashmir scenario, Muslims who held
sacred values for this issue were resistant to any kind of deal
involving their sacred value but Hindus claiming to hold the
land as sacred were more likely to engage in tradeoffs than
those not making such claims.

Table 1: Moral Absolutist Responses to Various DVs on
Taboo and Tragic tradeoff deals

Fig 1: Likeliness to Vote for any kind of tradeoff deal for
both scenarios broken down by participant religion and
sacred value

Discussion

In addition, this effect interacted with group membership.
In comparing across taboo+ and the baseline taboo deals,
we found that Hindu participants were more averse to a
taboo+ tradeoff than the others found for the Babri Mosque
scenario, designed to be more salient for the Hindu
community. However, Muslim participants seemed to be
more willing to concede the sacred value in a taboo+ deal
(F (1,23) = 3.07, p = .09). There was no difference in the
reported value attached to the sacred site. A similarly
suggestive pattern held for the Kashmir scenario which was
closely linked to Muslim group identity. In this scenario,
Hindu participants who claimed to have a sacred value for
this issue behaved no differently from the Hindu
participants who did not hold this issue as sacred. Both
approved of the taboo+ deal equally. However, Muslim
participants with a sacred value for this issue were a
significantly more disapproving of a taboo+ deal compared
with Muslim participants without a sacred value for the
Kashmir scenario (F(1,11) = 5.41, p<.05).

We found that Tragic or Symbolic tradeoffs were accepted
more than Taboo tradeoffs – especially among those with a
sacred value for the issue. These results mirrored the Ginges
et al (2007) findings. However, there was an interesting
dissociation between Hindu and Muslim participants in
responses to the taboo+ tradeoffs. In the Babri Mosque
scenario, Hindu participants for the most part were
vehemently disapproving of taboo + tradeoffs relative to
taboo tradeoffs but Muslim participants actually seemed to
prefer them. This suggests that Muslim participants were, in
fact, sensitive to changes in trade-off type counter to what
the SVPM predicts. Yet, in the Kashmir scenario, Muslim
participants with sacred values were less approving of any
trade-off deal than Muslim participants without sacred
values. In the Kashmir scenario, it was the Hindu
participants with sacred values who displayed more
utilitarian and instrumental thinking, violating the SVPM.
It appears from this work that there may be different degrees
of sacred values. The Kashmir issue resonates with the
Muslim identity which might even be more salient for most
Indian Muslim participants than their national identity.
Therefore Muslims in this region might feel stronger
attachment to this issue.
Anecdotally, while conducting these in-depth interviews, it
was difficult to even bring the scenario up to most Muslim
participants because the atmosphere in the room would
change as soon as the word “Kashmir” was mentioned.

3113

Similarly, with the Babri Mosque scenario, while it is
incredibly emotionally charged for both Hindu and Muslim
populations across India, there is a palpable difference in
the nature of each group values this sacred site. The Babri
Mosque scenario is deeply linked with a Hindu identity as
the birthplace of a deity but the Muslim identity mostly
became enmeshed with the Babri Mosque upon its
destruction and became more of an issue of honor.
So, looking at the role each of these conflicts plays in
structuring and organizing Hindu and Muslim identities, we
suggest that the very nature of these sacred spaces would be
different based on which group one identifies with. A
person might who claims to have a sacred value against
drunk driving may have a very different type of sacred
value than a mother who has lost her daughter to an
accident caused by driving under the influence of alcohol.
Having different sources of knowledge and different types
of experience is likely to change the cognitive corroborates
of sacred values and cause the types of dissociations we see
in this work between Hindu and Muslim moral absolutists.
Note that we are not arguing that participants who claimed
to have a sacred value, but did not show the requisite noninstrumental reasoning, are acting in a self-enhancing
manner. Although it is plausible that participants are
posturing to some extent (see Baron & Leshner, 2000), we
think that it is actually the structure of sacred values that
differ.
We are limited in this work to a large extent by the small
sample size. Owing to the sensitive nature of the study,
approximately 60% of participants refused to speak with us
out of apprehension. In addition, we had a hugely
disproportionate ratio of participants holding sacred values
to those not holding sacred values. Only 15% of the sample
did not have sacred values in the Babri Mosque scenario
and in the Kashmir scenario, only 10% did not claim to
hold a sacred value. Therefore, a lot of the more complex
interactions could not be computed.
The next phase of this project might be to specifically
address the role of group identity in the formation of
specific sacred values. By priming specific identities, such
as one’s religious or national identity, we might be able to
change participants’ receptiveness to various deals. We
might also try to bring in some factors like physical and
psychological proximity to the sacred site. Some of the
respondents had had their lives catastrophically altered by
this conflict whereas others had only been marginally
affected which would seem to influence psychological
proximity and therefore the saliency of the issues. Ideally,
a social network analysis of how the correlation between
sacred values and group identity disperses across a group
would be really beneficial in understanding this conflict. In

the small-scale cities of Faizabad and Ayodhya, people’s
social network still seems to be centered around residences
which meant that usually people of the same neighborhood
had similar beliefs. For example, a more fundamentalist
Muslim neighborhood was located near the city center and a
lot of the high-level officials handling the Muslim side of
this conflict resided in this area. The residents of this
neighborhood tended to feel similarly about this issue and
even provide a lot of the same talking points in support of
their convictions.
The formation of group identity and the subsequent
formation of sacred values seems to be strongly contingent
on one’s social interactions and a social network analysis
might be useful in discovering the global relations between
identity and sacred values.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by a grant from the
AFOSR MURI. We would like to thank Scott Atran, Jeremy
Ginges and Rumen Iliev for their continuous support. We
also would like to thank our various collaborators at Avadh
University in Faizabad and all of our participants in Ayodhya
and Faizabad who agreed to be a part of this study.

References
Baron, J. and Leshner, S. (2000). How serious are
expressions of protected values? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 6, 183 – 194.
Dumper, M. (2001). The Politics of Sacred Space: The Old
City of Jerusalem in the Middle East Conflict. Lynne
Rienner Publishers.
Durkheim, E. (1995) The Elementary Forms of Religious
Life. New York: The Free Press. (Original work published
1912)
Ginges, J., Atran, S., Medin, D. and Shikaki, K. (2007).
Sacred bounds on rational resolution of violent political
conflict. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104, 7357 – 7360.
Ledgerwood, A., Liviatan, I. and Carnevale, P. (2007).
Group-identity completion and the symbolic value of
property. Psychological Science, 18, 873-878.
Rai, M. (2004). Hindu Rulers, Muslim Subjects: Islam,
Rights, and the History of Kashmir. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Tetlock, P., Kristel, O., Elson, S., Green, M., Lerner, J.
(2000). The psychology of the unthinkable: Taboo tradeoffs, forbidden base rates, and heretical counterfactuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 853 –
870.

3114

