UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Happiness is an abstract word: The role of affect in abstract knowledge representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xz1b1d6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Andrews, Mark
Kousta, Stavroula-Thaleia
Vigliocco, Gabriella
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Happiness is… an Abstract Word
The role of affect in abstract knowledge representation
Stavroula-Thaleia Kousta (s.kousta@ucl.ac.uk)
Gabriella Vigliocco (g.vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
David P. Vinson d.vinson@ucl.ac.uk
Mark Andrews (m.andrews@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences
University College London, 26 Bedford Way, London, WC1H 0AP, UK

Abstract
Although the ability to communicate through language about
abstract concepts lies at the heart of what it means to be
human, our knowledge of how abstract word meanings are
represented and processed is extremely limited. In this paper
we show that neither of the two dominant accounts (dual
coding theory and the context availability model) put forward
in order to explain differences between concrete and abstract
words fully captures processing (and hence representational)
differences between the two types of word meaning. Using
lexical decision data, we show that this is, at least partly,
because in both accounts abstract words are considered to be
unrelated to experiential information. We show instead that
there is one type of experiential information, namely affective
information, which plays a crucial role in the processing and
representation of abstract concepts: affect explains a residual
advantage for abstract words, when variables such as
imageability and rated context availability are held constant.
We discuss our results with respect to embodied theories of
cognition and language representation.
Keywords: abstract words; semantics; emotional valence;
concreteness; imageability; semantic memory.

Introduction
Concreteness indexes a basic ontological distinction, dividing entities into two basic kinds: concrete entities, which
exist in space-time and are independent of human
minds/language, and abstract entities, which do not exist in
space-time but whose existence depends on human
minds/language (Hale, 1988). The ability to communicate
through language about abstract concepts, such as courage,
dignity, revenge, lies at the heart of what it means to be
human. However, up to now, research into semantic and
conceptual representation has focused almost exclusively on
how concrete word meanings and concepts are represented
and processed, to the exclusion of abstract meanings and
concepts. No theory of semantic or conceptual representation is complete without an explicit account of how abstract
knowledge is acquired, represented, and processed.
In this paper we present and assess a working hypothesis
of how the semantic system is organized with respect to the
distinction between concrete and abstract concepts, by
proposing that concrete and abstract semantic representations differ in terms of the types of information they bind:
sensory, motor, affective, and linguistic (how words are

distributed in texts and syntactic information; see Andrews,
Vigliocco, & Vinson, in press). The originality of our proposal lies in demonstrating that emotional content, a largely
neglected (in the semantic representation/processing literature) type of experiential information, crucially contributes
to the representation and processing of abstract concepts.
It has been demonstrated repeatedly, for example, using
lexical decision (e.g., James, 1975; Whaley, 1978; Rubin,
1980) and word naming tasks (de Groot, 1989;
Schwanenflugel and Stowe, 1989), that concrete words have
a cognitive advantage over abstract words—an advantage
that has been termed the ‘concreteness effect’.
Among the handful of proposals that have been put
forward to explain this effect, two have been particularly
influential: dual coding theory (Paivio, 1971; 1986; 2007)
and the context availability model (Schwanenflugel and
Shoben, 1983; Schwanenflugel, 1991). According to dual
coding theory, concrete words are represented in two
representationally distinct but functionally related systems:
a verbal, linguistic system and a non-verbal, imagistic
system. Abstract concepts, on the other hand, are primarily
or exclusively represented in the verbal system. The
cognitive advantage for words referring to concrete concepts
is attributed to the fact that they have access to information
from multiple systems. According to the context availability
model, both concrete and abstract concepts are represented
in a single verbal code and neither the representations nor
the processes that operate on these representations differ for
the two types of concepts. The argument here is that
comprehension relies on verbal context (either supplied by
the discourse or by the comprehender’s own semantic
memory) in order to be effective. Accessing the meaning of
a word involves accessing a network of associated semantic
information, and the advantage for concrete words arises
because they have stronger and denser associations with
contextual knowledge than abstract words. In both of these
accounts, concrete word representations are assumed to be
richer than abstract word representations (see also Plaut &
Shallice, 1993). These two proposals have guided research
on concrete/abstract semantics in the last fifteen years or so;
results, however, have been inconclusive (for imaging
studies, for example, see Sabsevitz, Medler, Seidenberg &
Binder, 2005).

1115

There is one commonality in these accounts: only
linguistic information contributes to the representation of
abstract words whereas experiential information is not part
of abstract semantic representations. Here, we propose an
alternative account of the representation of concrete and
abstract word meanings that draws on work on embodiment.
The main assumptions of this hypothesis are the following:
(1) Two classes of information contribute to the
representation of both concrete and abstract concepts:
experiential (sensory, motor, and affective) and linguistic
(verbal associations arising through co-occurrence patterns
and syntactic information).
(2) Experiential information is critical across domains
(concrete and abstract) for the learning (and grounding) of
semantic representation.
(3) Differences between concrete and abstract word
meanings as well as within each category (i.e., the category
of concrete words and the category of abstract words) arise
as a result of the proportion and exact type of experiential
and linguistic information they bind.
(4) The apparent dichotomy between concrete and abstract
word meanings arises due to a statistical preponderance of
sensorimotor information underlying concrete word meanings and a preponderance of affective and linguistic information underlying abstract word meanings. While sensorimotor information may be foundational for concrete word
meanings, affective and linguistic information may be foundational for abstract word meanings, both for their acquisition and their subsequent representation in the adult system.
Below, we first put dual-coding theory and the context
availability model to test and show that neither fully
explains processing differences between concrete and
abstract words. We then provide initial evidence in favor of
the role of affect in the processing of abstract words.

A Test of Dual-Coding and Context
Availability
In the concreteness literature, it is invariably assumed that
the psycholinguistic constructs of concreteness and
imageability tap into exactly the same underlying theoretical
construct, i.e., the ontological distinction between concrete,
and abstract, concepts. After all, when nothing else is taken
into account, imageability ratings explain 72% of the
variance in concreteness ratings. In fact, concreteness and
imageability ratings have been used interchangeably in most
of the recent literature in the field (e.g. Binder, Westbury,
McKiernan, Possing & Medler, 2005; Fliessbach, Weis,
Klaver, Elger, & Weber, 2006; Richardson, 2003;).
However, concreteness and imageability tap into, at least
partially, different aspects of semantic representations.
Looking at the ratings for more than 4,000 words in the
MRC Psycholinguistic Database, it is clear that whereas the
frequency distribution of concreteness ratings is bimodal,
with two distinct modes for abstract and concrete words (see
also Cartwright & Nickerson, 1979; Nelson & Schreiber,
1992), the distribution of imageability ratings is unimodal.
In other words, concreteness ratings capture the categorical

ontological distinction between concrete and abstract words
(and their underlying conceptual representations), while
imageability ratings index a graded property that is meant to
capture the differential association of words with sensory
(primarily visual) properties.
Within dual coding theory, imageability ratings by native
speakers have been used as an operationalization of the
contribution of the non-verbal imagistic system to the
representation of concrete word meanings. According to
current interpretations of the theory, differences in
perceived imageability exhaustively account for processing
differences between concrete and abstract words (Reilly and
Kean, 2007; Fliessbach, et al., 2006). However, on the basis
of the alternative embodied account that we have sketched
above, association with sensory attributes may be just one of
the dimensions along which concrete and abstract concepts
differ.
Context availability also strongly correlates with
concreteness ratings, but like imageability, it can be teased
apart. In out first experiment and follow-up regression
analyses, we controlled our materials for imageability and
context availability (in addition to a large number of other
sublexical and lexical factors). If either construct can
account for the processing differences between concrete and
abstract words, here we should not observe any difference
between concrete and abstract items.

Lexical Decision for Concrete and Abstract Words
Method
Participants. Fifty-eight native English speakers (32
female; mean age: 28.69 ± 9.96) participated and were paid
at a rate of £6 per hour. Three participants were replaced
because of a high number of timed-out responses in their
data.
Materials and design. Forty concrete (e.g., cousin, oak,
stomach) and 40 abstract (e.g., horror, beauty, paradise)
monomorphemic words were selected. The items were
matched pairwise on 12 lexical and sublexical variables:
familiarity, AoA, LogFrequency, number of letters, number
of phonemes, number of syllables, mean bigram frequency,
orthographic neighborhood, number of synsets and,
crucially imageability (for concrete words, average = 5; s.d.
= .42; for abstract words, average = 5.05, s.d. = .35) and
context availability (for concrete words, average = 5.68, s.d.
= .46; for abstract words, average = 5.66, s.d. = .52)1. The
average concreteness rating for the abstract items was 3.45
(s.d. = .40), and for the concrete items it was 5.52 (s.d. =
.44). We also selected 40 concrete and 40 abstract words
matched with the experimental items in terms of
concreteness to serve as the basis for creating the
pseudowords for the experiment. We created pseudowords
by altering a single letter in one of these words.
1

Normative data was taken from the MRC database (Coltheart,
1981), CELEX (Baayen et al., 1993); Bristol Age of Acquisition
Norms (Stadthagen-Gonzales & Davis, 2006). Context availability
ratings were collected in our laboratory on a 1-7 scale using the
same instructions as in Schwanenflugel et al., (1989).

1116

Procedure. Participants were tested individually. Each
trial began with a fixation cross presented in the middle of
the screen for 400 milliseconds, followed by presentation of
the string for 2000 milliseconds or until a response was
given (whichever was earlier).
Results and Discussion
Reaction Times. We excluded from analysis all responses
faster than 200 milliseconds and slower than 2000
milliseconds (0.84% of the data). For two concrete words,
accuracy rates did not differ from chance. We excluded
these items from further analysis as well as their paired
abstract items. We also removed outliers (reaction times 2.5
standard deviations above the mean per condition for each
participant (2.04% of the data).
Abstract words were recognized as words faster than
concrete words (Mabstract=568ms, sd=88; Mconcrete=590ms,
sd=99). This difference was significant both by participants
(F1(1, 57)=23.32, p<.001) and by items (F2(1, 37)=5.44,
p<.05).
Accuracy. There was a numerical advantage for abstract
over concrete words (Mabstract=96.59%; Mconcrete
=95.48%), but the effect was not statistically reliable (F1(1,
57)=3.166, p=.08; F2<1).
Thus, when imageability and context availability are held
constant, an ‘abstractness effect’ emerges, such that
speakers are faster in recognizing abstract rather than
concrete words. These results go against both the dualcoding as well as the context availability views as they
predict no difference in RTs if imageability and context
availability ratings are matched across concrete and abstract
words. Next, we confirm these novel findings in a
regression analysis of lexical decision RT data for 903
words from the English Lexicon Project (Balota et al.,
2007).

context availability had a significant facilitatory effect on
latencies (F(1,863) = 8.72, p < .01; F(1, 863) = 10.30, p <
.01, respectively), concreteness had a significant inhibitory
effect (F(1,863) = 5.51, p < .05)—final model R2 = 71.70%.
Plots of the partial effects of these predictors appear in
Figure 1.2
Accuracy rates. All three variables of interest predicted
probability of a correct response in the same direction as
before (imageability χ2 = 12.82, df=1, p < .001; context
availability: χ2 = 105.13 df=1, p < .001; concreteness: χ2 =
21.08, df=1, p < .001;)—see Figure 1 for the partial effects.

Regression Analysis for 903 Words

Thus, this regression analysis provides converging evidence
to our experiment showing that when imageability and
context availability are partialled out, abstract words are
processed faster than concrete words.

For the reaction time analyses, we logarithmically
transformed the by-item mean reaction times and then fitted
an ordinary least squares linear regression model on the
transformed data. For the accuracy analysis, we used
maximum likelihood estimation models. In this analysis,
normative data comes from Clark and Paivio (2004).
Latencies. In this and all subsequent regression analyses,
the procedure is as follows: we first fit a model including all
the predictors (lexical and sublexical), using restricted cubic
splines (Harrell, 2001) to model nonlinear relationships
between individual predictors and the dependent variable,
and then take out outliers (following the procedure in
Baayen et al., 2006). We then refit the model and use a
bootstrap validation procedure (Harrell, 2001) to determine
to what extent our model overfits the data. We include a fast
backward elimination algorithm in the validation procedure,
to eliminate non-explanatory variables. We then refit the
model, excluding non-explanatory variables. The results we
report are from this final refitted model.
3.10% of the data were removed as outliers. Model
optimism was very low (0.29%). Although imageability and

Figure 1. Plots of the partial effects of Concreteness,
Context Availability, and Imageability. Dashed lines
indicate 95% confidence intervals. The effects are adjusted
to the median of all other continuous predictors and to class
ambiguous words.

The Role of Affect
In the introduction, we presented a working hypothesis
according to which experiential information is central to the
representation of both concrete and abstract words, the
difference being that concrete and abstract words' meanings
are statistically associated to a greater extent with different
types of experiential information: while sensorimotor
information is foundational for concrete word meanings,
2
The zero-order correlation between concreteness and latency is
negative, while in the analyses above we find a positive slope for
concreteness. Cases in which the coefficient reverse in sign have
been associated with the phenomenon of enhancement (e.g.,
Friedman & Wall, 2005). Here, we assume that the positive
coefficient for concreteness in this model represents the direct
effect of concreteness when the indirect effect (mediated by
imageability) is held constant (further details available upon
request).

1117

affective information may be foundational for abstract word
meanings. To provide support for this hypothesis, in this
section, we first provide evidence that indeed abstract words
are more affectively loaded than concrete words and that the
more affectively loaded a word is, the more imageable it
will be (regardless of its concreteness). Then, we carry out
another large-scale regression analysis, in which we show
that the faster latencies for abstract words are due to their
higher association with affective information.

Concreteness, Imageability, and Valence
We first wanted to establish that abstract words are indeed
more emotionally valenced than concrete words. The
ANEW database (Bradley & Lang, 1999) contains valence
ratings for 1,040 words. Although this is a large database,
for only a small subset of the normed words are there
concreteness and imageability ratings (N=354). As
described in Kousta et al. (submitted), we collected valence
norms for 1,200 words for which other psycholinguistic
norms are available following exactly the same procedure as
ANEW. Fifty of the words were also items in ANEW—we
obtained ratings for these words from each of our
participants. Because the correlation between our ratings
and the ANEW ratings for these words was very high
(r=.95), with similar means and standard deviations, we
merged the two databases. For a group of 1,757 words for
which valence, concreteness, and imageability norms were
available from the MRC Psycholinguistic Database, we
carried out a regression analysis in which we used
imageability and valence as predictors of concreteness
ratings. We found that, even after the effect of imageability
is held constant, valence is a significant predictor of
concreteness ratings (F(2, 1753) = 231.23, p < .001;
nonlinear F(1, 1753) = 460.36, p < .001—see Figure 2): the
more valenced a word is the more abstract it tends to be
(positive words being more abstract than negative words);
conversely, the more neutral a word is the more concrete it
tends to be. We have therefore confirmed the intuition that
there is a greater association between abstractness and
valence.

This finding is important in demonstrating that abstract
words do indeed have a ‘privileged’ link with at least one
type of experiential information.
We also wanted to determine the extent to which
imageability ratings might be predicted by valence,
conducting a similar analysis with valence and concreteness
as predictors of imageability and found that the more
emotionally valenced a word is, the higher its imageability
rating—neutral words are less imageable (F(2, 1753) =
192.58, p < .001; nonlinear F(1,1753) = 361.42, p < .001—
see Figure 2).

Does emotion explain the ‘abstractness effect’?
In order to determine whether valence is implicated in the
abstractness effect, we carried out another set of regression
analyses on lexical decision data for 1,458 words from the
English Lexicon Project, for which concreteness,
imageability, familiarity, and age of acquisition norms were
available. This was the same set of words we used in Kousta
et al. (submitted), where we investigated the effects of
valence (as well as arousal) on lexical decision latencies and
accuracy rates. We carried out two sets of analyses: one in
which all the lexical and sublexical variables above were
included but not valence, and one in which valence was
added as a predictor. For reaction times, when valence was
not included in the model, both concreteness and
imageability were significant predictors of lexical decision
reaction times (concreteness: F (1, 1406) = 6.28, p < .05;
imageability: F(1, 1406) = 4.15, p < .05). In the model with
valence added, we found that valence was a significant
predictor of latencies (F(2, 1404) = 4.20, p < .05;
Nonlinear: F (1,1404) = 7.95, p < .01; Figure 3 shows the
partial effect of this variable), predicting inhibition for
neutral words and facilitation for emotional words, the
facilitation being greater for positive than negative words.
Figure 3. Plot of the partial effect of valence on lexical
decision latencies. Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence
intervals.

Figure 2. Plots of the partial effect of valence (1=negative;
9=positive; 5=neutral) as a predictor of concreteness (left)
and imageability (right) ratings. Dashed lines indicate 95%
confidence intervals.

Neither concreteness nor imageability were significant
predictors of latencies in this model, however (concreteness:
F(1, 1404) = 1.26, n.s.; imageability F(1, 1404) = 0.85,
n.s.). We have therefore found that emotion mediates both
the concreteness and the imageability latency effects.
However, the effects of both concreteness and imageability

1118

survive in the accuracy analyses (concreteness: χ2 = 15.91, p
< .001; imageability: χ2 = 9.36, p < .001), even when
valence is entered as a predictor (χ2 = 6.23, p < .05;
nonlinear χ2=5.54, p<.05). This means that, although
emotion is obviously playing an important role in semantic
representation, experiential information (affective, sensorial
or motoric) does not exhaust the dimensions along which
concrete and abstract words differ. We return to this point in
the general discussion.

General Discussion
In this paper we have shown that neither dual coding
theory nor the context availability hypothesis can fully
explain processing, and hence representational, differences
between concrete and abstract words, and that once
constructs derived from these two accounts (i.e.,
imageability and context availability) are held constant,
there is a residual advantage for abstract words—an
abstractness effect.
It is important to point out here that the abstractness effect
we reported should be evaluated within the context of the
concreteness effect: zero-order correlations between
concreteness and behavioural measures reveal an advantage
for concrete words. However, what may have created
confusion in previous work is the attempt to specify a single
process or type of information as responsible for differences
between the two types of word meanings. Here instead we
adopted a working hypothesis according to which concrete
and abstract words differ along a number of dimensions,
including differential recruitment of sensory, motoric,
affective, and linguistic information. According to such an
approach, the dimensions along which concrete and abstract
words differ may not always point to an advantage for
concrete words.
Traditionally, abstract word meanings and the conceptual
features they bind have been assumed to be acquired and
represented exclusively by way of properties of the
linguistic system. Although the contribution of language to
learning semantic representations is undeniable, its
exclusive role in learning and representing abstract
meanings has been questioned by embodied theories of
meaning, especially through work in cognitive linguistics
(e.g., Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Gibbs, 2006) and more
recently perceptual symbol systems theory (Barsalou, 1999).
In a proposal akin to ours, Barsalou and Wiemer-Hastings
(2005) suggest that abstract concepts and word meanings
are grounded in introspective states (mental and affective).
In an exploratory study, Barsalou and Wiemer-Hastings
asked speakers to generate features for words varying in
concreteness (3 highly abstract words: truth; freedom; and
invention; 3 highly concrete words: bird, car, and sofa; 3
intermediate words: cooking, farming, and carpeting). They
found that abstract meanings focus on introspective content
(as well as social and event content, and less centrally
content about physical settings). However, beyond this
feature generation task, there is no evidence in support of
the proposal that such states underlie the representation of

abstract concepts. Here we provide for the first time crucial
evidence in support of the proposal that one type of
experiential information, emotion, plays a crucial role in
semantic representation and processing with respect to the
abstract/concrete distinction. We have shown that this type
of experiential information is more associated with abstract
rather than concrete word meanings and predicts an
advantage for abstract over concrete words. Moreover, we
provide some evidence in support of the proposal that
emotion may play a crucial role in the acquisition of abstract
word meanings: words denoting emotional states are
acquired early in linguistic development and provide one
perhaps critical example of how a word may refer to the
inner rather than the outer world.
Although we have shown that emotion plays an important
role in the processing of especially abstract words, it does
not seem to be the end of the story. Even when the effect of
valence was removed, there was still an advantage for
abstract over concrete words in accuracy rates. Despite the
fact that in all accounts of the representation of abstract
words it is proposed that linguistic information plays the
most important role in their acquisition and subsequent
representation, there is very little work that explicitly
addresses the role of language in the acquisition and
representation of abstract word meanings specifically, as
compared to concrete word meanings. We believe that a full
characterization of the properties of abstract and concrete
word meanings is not possible without clarifying exactly
what role linguistic information plays in their acquisition
and representation.
In summary, the results we report cast doubt on what we
thought we knew about concrete and abstract lexical
concepts: several different types of information are involved
in explaining what makes a word concrete or abstract—not
all of these types of information predict an advantage for
concrete words, however. Abstract words have up to now
been viewed in terms of what they lack rather than what
they actually are, and as a result, our knowledge of their
content and organization is severely limited. The work we
have presented here makes an important step towards
identifying what abstract meanings might consist in and
bolster the hypothesis that experiential information is
crucially involved in their representation, just as it is
involved in the representation of concrete concepts.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a EU (FP6-2004-NESTPATH) grant (#028714) to Gabriella Vigliocco and by an
ESRC grant (RES620286001) to the Deafness, Cognition,
and Language Research Centre (DCAL).

References
Andrews, M., Vigliocco, G., & Vinson, D. (in press).
Integrating experiential and distributional data to learn
semantic representations. Psychological Review.

1119

Baayen, R.H., Piepenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM] (Linguistic Data
Consortium, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA).
Baayen, R.H., Feldman, L.B. & Schreuder, R. (2006).
Morphological influences on the recognition of
monosyllabic monomorphemic words. Journal of
Memory and Language, 55, 290-313.
Balota, D.A., Yap, M.J., Cortese, M.J., Hutchison, K.I.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., et al (2007). The English Lexicon
Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445-459.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Barsalou, L.W. & Wiemer-Hastings, K. (2005). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R.A. Zwaan,
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thinking. (pp. 129-163).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Binder, J.R., Westbury, C.F., McKiernan, K.A., Possing,
E.T., & Medler, D.A. (2005). Distinct brain systems for
processing concrete and abstract words. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 905-917.
Bradley, M.M., & Lang, P.J. (1999). Affective norms for
English words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual and
affective ratings. Technical report C-1, Gainesville, FL.
The Center for Research in Psychophysiology,
University of Florida.
Cartwright, D.S. & Nickerson, C.A.(1979). An empirical
thesaurus: Meaning norms for ninety common words.
The Modern Language Journal, 63, 442-447.
Clark, JM & Paivio, A (2004) Extensions of the Paivio,
Yuille, and Madigan (1968) norms. Behavior Research
Methods, 36, 371-383.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A,
497-505.
de Groot, A.M.B. (1989). Representational aspects of word
imageability and word frequency as assessed through
word association. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 15, 824-845.
Fliessbach, K., Weis, S., Klaver, P., Elger, C.E., & Weber,
B. (2006). The effect of word concreteness on
recognition memory. NeuroImage, 32, 1413-1421.
Gibbs, R.W. (2006). Metaphor interpretation as embodied
simulation. Mind and Language, 21, 434-458.
Giesbrecht, B., Camblin, C.C., & Swaab, T.Y. (2004).
Separable effects of semantic priming and imageability
on word processing in human cortex. Cerebral Cortex,
14, 521-529.
Hale, S.C. (1988). Spacetime and the abstract/concrete
distinction. Philosophical Studies, 53, 85-102.
Harrell, F.E. (2001). Regression modeling strategies with
applications to linear models, logistic regression and
survival analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag.
James, C.T. (1975). The role of semantic information in
lexical decisions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 104, 130-136.

Kousta, S-T., Vinson D.P. & Vigliocco, G. (submitted).
Emotion words, regardless of polarity, have a processing
advantage over neutral words.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999) Philosophy in the flesh:
the embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
New York: Basic Books.
Nelson, D.L. & Schreiber, T.A. (1992). Word concreteness
and word structure as independent determinants of
recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 237-260.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding
approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding
theoretical approach. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Plaut, D.C. & Shallice, T. (1993). Deep dyslexia: A case
study of connectionist neuropsychology. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 10, 377-500.
Reilly, J. & Kean, J. (2007). Formal distinctiveness of highand low-imageability nouns: Analyses and theoretical
implications. Cognitive Science, 31, 1-12.
Richardson, J. (2003). Dual coding versus relational
processing in memory for concrete and abstract words.
European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 15, 481509.
Rubin, D.C. (1980). 51 properties of 125 words: A unit
analysis of verbal behaviour. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 736-755.
Sabsevitz, D.S., Medler, D.A., Seidenberg, M., & Binder,
J.R. (2005). Modulation of the semantic system by word
imageability. NeuroImage 27, 188-200.
Schwanenflugel, P. (1991). Why are abstract concepts hard
to understand? In P. Schwanenflugel (Ed.), The
psychology of word meanings (pp. 223–250). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Schwanenflugel, P.J. & Shoben, E.J. (1983). Differential
context effects in the comprehension of abstract and
concrete verbal materials. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 9, 82102.
Schwanenflugel, P.J. & Stowe, R.W. (1989). Context
availability and the processing of abstract and concrete
words in sentences. Reading Research Quarterly, 24,
114-126.
Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H. & Davis, C.J. (2006). The Bristol
Norms for Age of Acquisition, Imageability, and
Familiarity. Behavior Research Methods 28, 598-605.
Whaley, C.P. (1978). Word-nonword classification times.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17,
143-154.

1120

