UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Authority-Related Epistemological Beliefs and Salience of Source Information Influence
the Evaluation of Web Search Results – An Eye Tracking Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56h0q5g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gerjets, Peter
Kammerer, Yvonne
Scheiter, Katharina
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Authority-Related Epistemological Beliefs and Salience of Source Information
Influence the Evaluation of Web Search Results – An Eye Tracking Study
Yvonne Kammerer (y.kammerer@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Evelin Wollny (e.wollny@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
Abstract

Evaluating topicality and information quality
during web search

In this study we examined how authority-related
epistemological beliefs (AREBs) affect the evaluation of web
search results presented by a search engine. Moreover, we
investigated whether increasing the salience of source
information on a search engine result page fosters students’
evaluation processes, and whether the salience of source
information moderates the effects of AREBs. Thirty
university students participated in a web search experiment
addressing a controversial search topic. Participants either
used a standard Google search result list or an augmented
search result list additionally containing source categories for
each search result. Eye movements and mouse clicks were
captured during information search. The results showed that
the effects of participants’ AREBs on their gaze behavior
were moderated by the salience of source information.
Furthermore, salience of source information affected
participants’ selection behavior, such that with additionally
presented source categories they were more likely to select
search results linked to web portals.
Keywords: web search; epistemological beliefs; search
engines; evaluation processes; interface design; eye tracking;
HCI

Introduction
In recent years, the World Wide Web (WWW) has evolved
into one of the most important public sources for sciencerelated contents offering convenient and rapid access to vast
amounts of information. Particularly for domains of
personal concern such as medicine and healthcare using the
web has achieved great popularity. At the same time,
however, the web imposes new challenges onto searchers
due to its high complexity and heterogeneity of information.
Search engines help to find information on the web, but
searchers are still required to evaluate and select search
results for further inspection of corresponding websites.
Thus, search result descriptions displayed on search engine
result pages (SERPs) play a critical role in guiding search
processes as searchers rely on their evaluations of these
descriptions to decide whether to visit the web pages they
represent or not.

In cognitive science, a central approach used to explain and
predict search result selection as well as other types of web
search behavior is the Information Foraging Theory (Pirolli
& Card, 1999). The theory assumes that the selection of
hyperlinks (e.g., from a SERP), is determined by their so
called “information scent”. Information scent is defined as
the semantic similarity between a cognitive representation
of the current information needs and an external
representation of cues on a display (e.g., keywords in the
title, abstract, or URL of a search result). The stronger the
semantic overlap between the cues contained in a particular
search result and the user’s information needs (i.e., the
stronger the topical fit), the stronger is the information scent
of the search result. The information scent of a particular
search result determines its likelihood for being selected.
Thus, according to Information Foraging Theory, search
result selection is mostly guided by evaluating the topicality
of web information.
In line with this theory, thinking-aloud data from web
search experiments on science-related topics revealed that
university students strongly focus on the topical fit (i.e.,
connection to the task) when evaluating search results
returned by a search engine (e.g., Google). Evaluation
criteria beyond topicality with regard to the quality of
information (e.g, credibility, trustworthiness, reliability, or
accuracy) were uttered rather seldom (Brand-Gruwel, van
Meeuven, & van Gog, 2008; Gerjets, Kammerer, & Werner,
subm.).
Although these findings are in line with the Information
Foraging Theory, they are nevertheless rather astonishing if
one takes into account that anyone can publish any
information on the web. As a result, the web is characterized
by a high heterogeneity of information sources, varying not
only with regard to topical fit, but also with regard to
authority and credibility. For instance, when it comes to
information on complex and contradictory scientific topics,
not only scientific and other institutions, but also journalists,
companies, and laypeople can act as information providers.

2158

Contrary to traditional information sources like printed
publications, there is hardly any quality assurance on the
web. As a consequence quality of web information can vary
enormously depending on the authority of the information
source, with scientific websites usually providing the most
credible and commercial websites the least credible
information.
In this paper, we address two potential reasons for the
dominance of topicality-related evaluation criteria and the
neglect of information quality: First, the lack of qualityrelated evaluation processes during web search might go
back to deficits on the side of the searchers with regard to
their epistemological beliefs. Second, the interface design of
SERPs might lead to a neglect of information quality
because quality-related source information is usually not
displayed in a salient way. Both explanations will be further
elaborated in the subsequent sections.

Authority-related epistemological beliefs
In order to evaluate the quality of web information searchers
need to consider how credible a source of information is,
how certain and consistent with other sources the
information itself is, and how strongly the information
might be influenced by the interests of the information
provider. According to Hofer (2004) this kind of reasoning
is closely connected to a person’s epistemological beliefs
(EBs), that is, to one’s personal beliefs about the nature of
knowledge and knowing. More precisely, with regard to
evaluating a source of information the sophistication of
one’s beliefs in epistemic authorities (cf. Schommer, 1990)
seems to be important. This dimension of EBs, in the
remainder of this paper referred to as AREBs (authorityrelated epistemological beliefs), focuses on beliefs about the
validity of the source of knowledge. It ranges from naïve
beliefs that all knowledge is provided by an omniscient
authority and should not be questioned (authority believers)
to sophisticated beliefs that knowledge can be derived
through one’s own reasoning processes (authority
disbelievers). Accordingly, we expect that searchers’
AREBs influence their information evaluation during web
search. For example, searchers who consider the publishers
of web information to be epistemic authorities might see no
need to critically evaluate the source of information.
In line with this reasoning, not only AREBs, but EBs in
general have been shown to affect information seeking
behavior during web search. In a thinking-aloud study with
students searching the web for information on a scientific
topic, Hofer (2004) found that students expressing naïve
EBs (knowledge is absolute and unchanging and provided
by authorities) conducted the search task in a brief and
perfunctory way, without pursuing additional sources or
reflecting on the credibility and accuracy of the sources they
inspected. On the other hand, students with more
sophisticated EBs (knowledge is relative, contextual and
changing, and derived by reason) were more likely to
actively seek for more recent sources and to pursue
informed strategies for searching.

Similarly, the results of an interview study by Whitmire
(2003) on undergraduate students’ web information seeking
behavior in a class project showed that students’ EBs
affected their search techniques, their ability to recognize
authority, and their evaluation of the information itself.
Whereas students with more sophisticated EBs used a
variety of search techniques, students with more naïve EBs
did not. Moreover, students with more sophisticated EBs
considered themselves more capable of critiquing and
evaluating the information that they encountered during the
search process. Furthermore, they did not reject conflicting
information during document collection and they were more
capable to differentiate between highly authoritative sources
and rather obscure ones.
Recently, Mason and Ariasi (2008) showed by using eye
movements as indicators for visual attention and cognitive
processing, that depending on their EBs university students
visually attended to different parts of a web page and
visually inspected different kind of web pages with varying
intensity. However, this type of more fine grained studies
focusing on the impact of EBs on specific cognitive
processes during the evaluation of search results or the
information extraction from web pages have been conducted
only very rarely up to now.
Based on studies reported in this section we assume that
in particular searchers’ AREBs will influence their
cognitive processes and their respective gaze behavior
during the inspection and evaluation of SERPs. As there is
no research on the impact of EBs on the evaluation of search
results displayed on SERPs yet, this issue will be addressed
in the present study.

Quality-related source information
Search result descriptions used in standard search
environments like Google are mostly confined to topical
information, whereas quality-related source information is
sparse and non-salient. Thus, the interface design of
standard search engines might not provide sufficient
affordances for users to spontaneously engage in qualityoriented evaluation processes when selecting search results
during web search for further inspection. It can be assumed
that providing additional quality-related source information
on SERPs might enable searchers to evaluate the quality and
trustworthiness of the corresponding web pages more
accurately. However, so far there are only a few empirical
studies that have investigated how quality-related
information affects the evaluation of search results.
With regard to the online news service Google News,
Sundar, Knobloch-Westerwick, and Hastall (2007) could
show that the availability of quality-related cues for news
item (i.e., information on the source and the recency of a
story, and on the number of related articles) affects the
subjective evaluation of news leads. These results are
related to our research questions because there are several
similarities between news reading and searching for
complex science-related information

2159

Ivory, Yu, and Gronemyer (2004) enhanced the Google
search engine interface with additional quality-related cues
for each search result indicating the number of graphical
ads, the number of words, and the estimated quality of the
corresponding web page. They used simple fact-finding
tasks to demonstrate that adding this type of quality-related
cues improved participants’ ability to select appropriate
search results. From their pattern of results it can be
assumed that for more complex information search tasks,
quality-related cues might even have a greater impact.
This assumption is supported by findings from Rose, Orr,
and Kantamneni (2007) who conducted a series of
experiments with rather complex search scenarios in which
searchers had to answer questions about the quality of
search results on the basis of search result descriptions.
Search result descriptions were experimentally manipulated
to make sure that they differed with regard to specific
attributes (e.g., length, text choppiness, and cues indicating
a source category). The most interesting finding with regard
to the present paper was that providing cues about the
source category of a web page (e.g., a corporate homepage
or a blog), influenced whether searchers trusted the
information on the web pages.
In sum, the results of these studies indicate that
augmenting SERPs in a way that not only topical
information but also cues about the quality of information is
included might provide substantial affordances for searchers
to engage in quality-related evaluation processes. In the
present study we will investigate how additional cues about
the source of web information will influence the evaluation
of web search results and how the availability of these cues
might moderate the effects of searchers’ AREBs on
evaluation processes.

Research Questions
In this study we assume that two factors influence whether
users engage in quality-related evaluations of search results
presented by a search engine. First, searchers’
epistemological prerequisites with regard to their view about
the nature of knowledge and knowing, and second, the
provision of quality-related source information by means of
cues integrated in the interface design of a SERP.
Hence, we examined three research questions: (1) Do
searchers’ AREBs affect their evaluation of search results
on SERPs? (2) Does the salience of quality-related source
information affect searchers’ evaluation processes on
SERPs (3) Does the salience of quality-related source
information moderate the relationship between searchers’
AREBs and their evaluation of search results on SERPs?

to be very promising because it allows reconstructing every
search result that was looked at and that has been evaluated
– independent from its selection or rejection (cf. Brumby &
Howes, 2008). In contrast to previous studies, we avoided
explicit questions about the perceived quality and
trustworthiness by means of questionnaires or interviews
because these methods are prone to create artifacts (cf.
Gerjets et al., subm.).

Method
Participants and Design. Thirty participants (12 male, 18
female; mean age 25.90 years, SD = 3.58) from different
majors at the University of Tuebingen, Germany,
participated in this experiment for either course credit or
payment. Participants had normal or corrected to normal
vision.
As a first independent variable participants' AREBs were
assessed and used as a continuous factor (see “Measures”
for details), with the continuum ranging from authority
disbelievers (participants strongly believing that knowledge
can be derived through one’s own reasoning processes;
sophisticated EBs) to authority believers (participants
strongly believing that knowledge it provided by authority
and should not be questioned; naïve EBs).
As a second independent variable the Source Salience on
the SERPs was experimentally manipulated. In the Low
Source Salience condition, standard Google search result
descriptions were used displaying only a title, an abstract,
and a URL for each search result with search terms printed
in bold as topical cues (see Figure 1a). In the High Source
Salience condition, the salience of source information was
increased, such that in addition to the URL of each search
result, source category cues were presented in bold green
that indicated to which of five different source categories a
search result belongs (“Science/Institutions”, “Portals/Advisors”, “Journalism/TV”, “Readers’Comments”, and “Shops/
Companies”). Additionally, search terms were not printed in
bold to decrease topical salience (see Figure 1b).
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the two
Source Salience conditions.
a)

b)

Experiment
In order to investigate participants’ evaluation processes on
SERPS, we tracked participants’ eye movements to gain
detailed insights into their cognitive processing (cf. Rayner,
1998) and we used log files to record their consequent
search result selections. Beyond logging overt interactions
with the search interface, eye tracking methodology seems

2160

source
category cues

Figure 1: a) standard SERP with Low Source Salience
and b) augmented SERP with High Source Salience.

Task and Materials Participants were presented with a
fictitious request from an overweight friend, who asks for
advice because she wants to loose weight by changing her
diet. Participants were asked to conduct a 20 minutes web
research to make an informed decision between low fat and
low carb diets in order to recommend one of the two diets.
For their web research about this controversially
discussed topic, participants were provided with three
prearranged Google-like SERPs with ten search results each
retrieved for the search terms “low fat”, “low carb”, and
“low carb + low fat”. Participants could access 30 web
pages corresponding to the list of search results. The
collection of search results and web pages for each of the
three SERPs reflected the given heterogeneity of
information sources available online. All three SERPs
included web sites provided by scientific and other
institutions (e.g., universities), web advisors and portals
(e.g., medical or health portals), journalists (e.g., online
magazines), laypeople (e.g., forums or blogs), and industry
and companies (e.g., online shops for nutrition or
pharmaceutics). Note that the different source types were
balanced across all positions of the SERPs.
For the High Source Salience condition each of the search
results was assigned to one of the five source categories.
Measures. To assess the independent factor AREBs a
translated and revised version of the Omniscient Autority
scale of the Epistemic Beliefs Inventory (EBI; Schraw,
Dunkle & Bendixen, 1995) was used, comprising 4 items
which had to be rated on 5-point scales (5 = highly agree).
A sample item is “People who question authority are trouble
makers.”
As dependent variables we assessed participants’ gaze
behavior and selection behavior.
For the analysis of participants’ gaze behavior (recorded
with a Tobii 1750 remote eye tracker) so-called areas of
interest (AOIs) were defined manually on the 30 search
results. AOIs are precisely specified areas of an object, in
our case a search result on a SERP, for which eye tracking
parameters are aggregated. Each of the search result
descriptions (including title, abstract, and URL) was defined
as a single polygonal AOI (Search Result-AOI). Identical
Search Result-AOIs were used for the two Source Salience
conditions. For the High Source Salience condition,
additional rectangular AOIs were defined on each of the 30
source category cues (Category-AOIs).
As a first dependent variable the mean total dwell time (in
milliseconds) on Search Result-AOIs belonging to one of
the five categories was measured by dividing the total time
for which participants inspected the search result
descriptions of a source category by the number of search
results available in this category. In addition, for the High
Source Salience condition the mean total dwell time on the
Category-AOIs was assessed.
For the analysis of participants’ selection behavior, i.e.
participants’ mouse clicks on search result links in order to
access a webpage, we analyzed the selected search results

with regard to what source category they belonged to by
dividing the sum of selected search results of a source
category by the total number of selected search results.
Procedure Participants were tested in individual sessions of
approximately 1 hour. Before starting with the web search
experiment participants were asked to fill in a computerbased questionnaire to assess control variables and AREBs.
Subsequently, participants received instructions about the
web search experiment and were calibrated on the eye
tracking system. Then, they underwent a training task
(equivalently constructed as the subsequent main task) for
approximately three minutes to get acquainted with the web
search environment. After the training task, participants
were given the instruction for the main task including the
fictitious request of their friend. Eye movements, screen
recordings, and mouse clicks were captured during the
entire 20 minutes task performance. Subsequent to the
search task participants were required to decide which of the
two diet methods they would recommend to their friend.
However, only process measures during web search were
analyzed to address our research questions.

Results
Gaze behavior measures with regard to Search Result-AOIs
and selection behavior measures were analyzed by means of
MANCOVAs with an interaction term with Source Salience
as a fixed factor and AREBs as a continuous factor.
Dependent variables were grouped according to the five
source categories of the search results. To determine the
direction of interaction effects correlations were computed.
With regard to participants’ gaze behavior the overall
MANCOVA showed a significant main effect for Source
Salience (Pillai’s Trace = .42, F(5, 22) = 3.15, p = .03) and
a significant interaction between Source Salience and
AREBs (Pillai’s Trace = .40, F(5, 22) = 2.88, p = .04) on
mean total dwell time on Search Result-AOIs. There was no
main effect for AREBs (F(5, 22) = 1.67, ns).
In univariate analyses, the multivariate main effect of
Source Salience could be traced back to search results
belonging to the source category “Shops/Companies”
(Pillai’s Trace = .14, F(1, 26) = 4.10, p = .05). Participants
in the High Source Salience condition with a mean total
dwell time of M = 1.46 seconds (SE = 0.23) per search result
paid less attention to search result descriptions labeled with
“Shops/Companies” than participants in the Low Source
Salience condition (M = 2.12, SE = 0.23). The multivariate
interaction effect was corroborated univariately for search
results of all but one source category (“Portals/Advisors”:
F(1, 26) = 4.97, p = .04; “Journalism/TV”: F(1, 26) = 4.27,
p = .05; “Readers’ Comments”: F (1, 26) = 12.37, p < .01;
“Shops/Companies”: F(1, 26) = 10.64, p < .01; not for
“Science/Institutions”).
For High Source Salience correlation results revealed a
significant negative association between AREBs and mean
total dwell time for the three source categories
“Portals/Advisors” (r = -.61, p = .02), “Journalism/TV” (r =

2161

-.61, p = .02), and “Readers’ Comments” (r = -.58, p = .02).
Thus, when additional source categories were presented, the
more sophisticated participants’ AREBs were, the longer
were their mean total dwell times on the search result
descriptions belonging to these categories. No correlation
was revealed for “Shops/Companies” search results. In
contrast, for Low Source Salience correlation results
showed significant positive correlations between AREBs
and mean total dwell time for search results of the
categories “Readers’ Comments” (r = .56, p = .03) and
“Shops/Companies” (r = .57, p = .03). No correlations were
revealed for search results of the other three categories.
Figure 2 shows these interaction effects between Source
Salience and AREBs for the different source categories.
Additionally, we analyzed the correlation between
participants’ mean total dwell time on Category-AOIs and
their AREBs. Correlation results revealed a significant
negative correlation for three of the five source categories,
namely for “Portals/Advisors” (r = -.62, p = .01),
“Journalism/TV” (r = -.53, p = .04), and “Readers’
Comments” (r = -.54, p = .04). Thus, the more sophisticated
participants’ AREBs were, the longer were their mean total
dwell times on the source category cues presented.
With regard to participants’ selection behavior an overall
MANCOVA revealed no significant main effect of Source
Salience on the category distribution of selected search
results (F(5, 22) = 1.27, ns), nor did it show a significant
main effect for AREBs or a significant interaction between
Source Salience and AREBs (both Fs < 1).
Nonetheless, a univariate main effect of Source Salience
was obtained for the portion of selected search results
belonging to the category “Portals/Advisors” (F(1, 26) =
4.20, p = .05). In the High Source Salience condition
significantly more of the search results participants selected
belonged to this source category (High Source Salience: M
= 32.91%, SE = 2.63; Low Source Salience: M = 25.22%,
SE = 2.68). Overall, during the 20 minutes web search
participants clicked on M = 13.67 search results in the High
Source Salience condition and on M = 13.60 in the Low
Source Salience condition, whereas they visually inspected
nearly all search results (M = 27.73 and M = 28.20).
Portals and Advisors

The purpose of the reported study was to investigate the
effects of searchers’ AREBs and of the salience of qualityrelated source information on SERPs on searchers’
evaluation of search results during web research on a
controversial topic. Furthermore, we examined, whether the
salience of source information moderates the relationship
between searchers’ AREBs and their evaluation processes
with regard to search results on SERPs. Evaluation
processes on SERPs were analyzed in terms of gaze and
selection behavior.
With respect to AREBs no main effects on searchers’
gaze and selection behavior were obtained.
With respect to the salience of source information the
gaze data revealed that searchers with additionally presented
source category cues paid less attention to search result
descriptions linked to commercial web pages. It seems that
there is no need for searchers to further inspect these search
result
descriptions
as
the
source
category
“Shops/Companies” immediately indicates that the
corresponding web pages might not be suitable for a
science-related information search. Furthermore, concerning
participants’ selection behavior the findings show that
searchers with additionally presented source cues were more
likely to select search results belonging to the category
“Portals/Advisors”, that is, search results linked to medical
and health portals. Web pages from this type of source
might have been expected to contain important information
for participants’ web research. Additionally, the term
“advisors” itself might have prompted participants to select
these search results with the expectation to receive an advice
concerning their search task on the corresponding web page.
Moreover, complex interaction effects were found
between AREBs and salience of source information
concerning gaze behavior, with differences in the mean total
dwell times for authority believers and disbelievers
depending on source salience and the type of search result.
Gaze behavior on SERPs with high source salience. On
SERPS with additionally presented cues that indicate the
source category, the sophistication of participants’ AREBs

Readers' Comments
6,0

4,0

3,0

2,0

r = -.61*

1,0

0,0

Shops and Companies

- - - - - Low Source Salience

6,0

-------- High Source Salience

r = .56*

5,0

4,0

3,0

2,0

r = -.58*

1,0

0,0

1
authority
disbelievers

2

3

AREBs

4

5
authority
believers

mean total dwell time (in sec)

- - - - - Low Source Salience
-------- High Source Salience

mean total dwell time (in sec)

mean total dwell time (in sec)

5,0

Discussion

- - - - - Low Source Salience
-------- High Source Salience

5,0

r = .57*

4,0

3,0

2,0

1,0

0,0

1
authority
disbelievers

2

3

AREBs

4

5
authority
believers

1
authority
disbelievers

2

3

AREBs

4

5
authority
believers

Figure 2: Significant interactions between AREBs and Source Salience on mean total dwell time on search result descriptions
belonging to the categories “Portals/Advisors” (left), “Readers’ Comments” (middle), and “Shops/Companies” (right).
Note: Interaction pattern for “Journalism/TV” is identical to the visualization of “Portals/Advisors”.

2162

was associated with a more thorough inspection of those
source category cues and search result descriptions that
belonged
to
the
categories
“Portals/Advisors”,
“Journalism/TV”, and “Readers’ Comments”. Interestingly,
particularly these three category labels do not provide clear
indications about the quality of corresponding web pages.
Thus, authority disbelievers seem to focus their attention on
source categories where they might be inclined to analyze
the trustworthiness of the source by themselves. Authority
believers, on the other hand, do not focus their attention on
these ambiguous categories.
Gaze behavior on SERPs with low source salience. On
standard SERPs, for search results belonging to the three
source categories “Science/Institutions”, “Portals/Advisors”,
and “Journalism/TV” no relation between AREBs and gaze
behavior was found. However, for the other two categories
“Readers’ Comments” and “Shops/Companies”, that is,
search results linked to forums or blogs and commercial
websites, participants inspected the search result
descriptions the shorter, the more sophisticated their AREBs
were. A possible explanation is that authority disbelievers
might be able to identify such search results as being of
rather low quality by having only a quick look on the search
result descriptions (e.g., the URLs).

Conclusion
Summarizing the results of this study, searchers visually
inspected different kind of search results with varying
intensity depending both on their AREBs and on the
salience of source information. An increased salience of
source information on SERPs stimulated authority
disbelievers to engage in evaluation processes with regard to
more ambiguous search results in terms of the
trustworthiness of the source. This supports the assumption
that both sophisticated AREBs and SERPs containing
quality-related source information are important factors for
adequate quality-related evaluation processes on SERPs.
Log file analysis revealed a rather simple relationship
between the salience of source information and the selection
of specific search results, namely that portals were selected
more often on SERPs with source category cues. Portals
seem to be a good choice given their good trade off between
reliable information on the one hand and comprehensible
information on the other hand. Beyond that, eye tracking
analyses revealed complex interaction effects between
AREBs and the interface design of SERPs on searchers’
visual inspections of search results. Hence, in order to gain
more detailed insights into searchers evaluation processes,
eye tracking proved to be the method of choice.
In summary, AREBs seems to play an important role for
evaluation processes on SERPs depending on the source
information included in the search results. Furthermore,
redesigning the interface of SERPs by additionally
providing quality-related source information seems to have
an impact on searchers’ selection behavior. However,
further research is needed in order to shed light on the

complex interplay between AREBs and salience of source
information.

References
Brand-Gruwel, S., Van Meeuwen, L., & Van Gog, T.
(2008). The use of evaluation criteria when searching the
WWW: An eye-tracking study. Proceedings EARLI
Special Interest Group Text and Graphics: Exploiting the
opportunities - Learning with textual, graphical, and
multimodal representations, 34-37. Tilburg, NL.
Brumby, D. P., & Howes, A. (2008). Strategies for guiding
interactive search: An empirical investigation into the
consequences of label relevance for assessment and
selection. Human-Computer Interaction, 23, 1-46.
Gerjets, P., Kammerer, Y. & Werner, B. (subm.).
Methodological issues in investigating metacognitive
evaluation processes during web search. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Hofer, B. K. (2004). Epistemological understanding as a
metacognitive process: Thinking aloud during online
searching. Educational Psychologist, 39, 43-55.
Ivory, M. Y., Yu, S., & Gronemyer, K. (2004). Search result
exploration: A preliminary study of blind and sighted
users’ decision making and performance. In CHI '04
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, New York, NY, 1453-1456.
Mason, L., & Ariasi, N. (2008, September). Critical
thinking during web searching: Tracking students’
evaluation of sources and information through eye
movements and allocation of visual attention. Paper
presented at the first meeting of the Research Network
"Use of (external) representations in mathematical and
scientific reasoning and problem solving: Analysis and
improvement". Leuven, Belgium.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1999). Information Foraging.
Psychological Review, 106, 643-675.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Rose, D. E., Orr, D., & Kantamneni, R. G. P. (2007).
Summary attributes and perceived search quality. In
Proceedings of the 2007 International Conference on the
World Wide Web 2007, 1201-1202.
Schommer, M. (1990). Effects of beliefs about the nature of
knowledge on comprehension. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82, 498-504.
Schraw, G., Dunkle, M. E., & Bendixen, L. (1995).
Cognitive processes in well-defined and ill-defined
problem solving. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 523538.
Sundar, S. S., Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Hastall, M. R.
(2007). News cues: Information scent and cognitive
heuristics. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 58, 366-378.
Whitmire, E. (2003). Epistemological beliefs and the
information-seeking behavior of undergraduates. Library
& Information Science Research, 25, 127-142.

2163

