UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to Convey Perceptual Skills by Displaying Experts’ Gaze Data

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7xv25501

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dorr, Michael
Gerjets, Peter
Jarodzka, Halszka
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How to Convey Perceptual Skills by Displaying Experts’ Gaze Data
Halszka Jarodzka (h.jarodzka@iwm-kmrc.de), Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de),
and Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Tamara van Gog (tamara.vangog@ou.nl)
Open University of the Netherlands, P.O.Box 2960, 6401 DL Heerlen, the Netherlands

Michael Dorr (dorr@inb.uni-luebeck.de)
Institute for Neuro- and Bioinformatics, University of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Luebeck, Germany
Abstract

transience imposes high cognitive demands onto learners
(Lowe, 1999). Hence, the fact that complex tasks often
involve the interpretation of stimuli that are both visually
rich and dynamic may cause serious complications for their
processing. The question arises how experts compared to
novices are able to cope with these demands when
processing the information required for task performance.

Complex tasks with a visually rich and dynamic component,
like classifying locomotion patterns in moving, colorful fish,
require the acquisition not only of conceptual but also of
perceptual skills. In a previous study expertise differences
were examined on a performance and process level by means
of eye tracking and verbal protocols. It revealed that experts
attended more to relevant aspects of the stimulus compared to
novices and used knowledge-based shortcuts for classifying
the locomotion patterns. The current study examined a
method to convey perceptual skills of a didactically behaving
expert to novices by means of showing them a display of the
expert’s gaze data recorded while he performed the task.
Results show that this type of modeling example influences
visual attention and enhances performance.

Expertise Effects in Processing Complex Stimuli

Keywords: eye tracking; expertise; modeling; gaze display

Complex tasks with a dynamic and visually rich component
require not only the acquisition of conceptual but also of
perceptual skills. This paper presents studies on fostering
perceptual skills in novices by displaying to them how an
expert distributes his visual attention while performing such
a task. First, an in-depth task analysis will be made by
discussing the properties of complex visual tasks and
expertise differences in performing such tasks, with a focus
on a previous study by the authors (Jarodzka, Scheiter,
Gerjets, & Van Gog, 2009). Then, an empirical study is
reported were the possibilities of training the respective
skills by means of modeling examples were investigated.

Complex Tasks with a Dynamic, Visual Component
Complex Tasks (Van Merriënboer, 1997), like computer
programming or statistical analyses, are composed of subskills that all need to be used and coordinated
simultaneously. In order to achieve a certain level of
expertise, Van Merriënboer suggests that instruction should
be based on authentic, complex learning tasks, to train
learners to apply and coordinate the necessary sub-skills.
In addition, many complex tasks, like the interpretation of
weather maps (Canham & Hegarty, 2009) or x-rays
(Lesgold et al., 1988), involve dealing with visually rich
displays. In particular, these tasks require users to observe
and interpret transient information, which rapidly changes
over time (e.g., aircraft control panels; Ellis, 1986). This

Common methods for assessing skill differences in experts
and novices involve recording verbal reports and eye
movements during task performance. In processing complex
stimuli, novices attend to saliency rather than to those
aspects that are relevant for task performance (Lowe, 1999).
On the other hand, people with a higher level of expertise
are able to process complex stimuli more efficiently by
quickly focusing their visual attention onto the relevant
aspects of the task while ignoring potentially salient, but
irrelevant information (e.g., Canham & Hegarty, 2009;
Jarodzka et al., 2009; Lesgold et al., 1988; Lowe, 1999).
Lesgold and colleagues (1988) termed this ability of experts
‘perceptual knowledge’. To conclude, the (perceptual)
processing of complex stimuli does not only depend on the
mere saliency of its single features, but also on the cognitive
background of the observer (Henderson, 2007).
Expertise Differences in Classifying Fish Locomotion.
While most of the previously mentioned studies have
provided important insights on expertise differences when
accomplishing complex visual tasks, only the study by
Jardozka et al. (2009) investigated them in perceptual
processes (i.e., eye movements) on dynamic stimuli.
Moreover, the investigation of visually rich, but static
stimuli has been conducted on a coarse level using single
basic eye tracking parameters (e.g., number of fixations).
However, performing a complex task is not necessarily well
reflected in these single parameters, because the skills
required are likely to be composed of multiple sub-skills
that are better described by sequences of steps. Thus, for the
study of complex dynamic skills, expertise differences
should be investigated at a more sophisticated level
including sequence analyses to get a better insight into the
task and the skills required (Jarodzka et al., 2009).

2920

Both in the previous study by Jarodzka et al. (2009) and in
the study reported in this paper, expertise differences were
investigated for the description of locomotion patterns of
fish swimming. This task was chosen, because it is dynamic
and has a visual rich component, thus, perceptual strategies
are very likely to play a crucial role in task performance.
Participants in the previous study were experts, that is,
professors, or PhDs, and novices, that is, biology freshmen,
who had basic knowledge of fish anatomy, terminology and
locomotion pattern, but had very little if any experience
with classifying different locomotion patterns. Participants
watched videos of swimming fish, for which they had to
describe the locomotion pattern afterwards.
The results indicated that, not surprisingly, novices were
slow and inaccurate in their performance, while experts
were more accurate and accomplished the task faster.
Furthermore, the eye movements of the participants were
tracked, while they watched the videos. This measure was
meant to provide further insight into the perceptual
processes underlying the performance of this task. Analyses
of the eye tracking data revealed that novices attended more
to irrelevant parts of the videos compared to experts.
Moreover, participants’ gaze paths were compared
according to the sequence in which they attended to relevant
and irrelevant parts of the stimulus. A sequence analysis
based on the Levenshtein distance showed that experts’ gaze
paths were more heterogeneous than those of novices. That
is, the experts seemed to deploy a variety of different task
approaches, whereas the novices choose rather similar
approaches to the task. The differences in perceptual
approaches between experts might be due to the fact that not
only years of experience in a domain, but also the quality of
this experience is important (Ericsson & Lehmann, 1996).
Hence, different learning histories may result in different
task approaches (Medin, Lynch, Coley, & Atran, 1997).
Moreover, participants watched the video with their own
eye movements superimposed on it after task performance,
and verbalized the thoughts they had during their first
viewing (Van Gog, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Witte, 2005).
This measure gave insight into the conceptual processes
underlying the performance of this task. Results showed that
novices described few areas of the stimulus, whereas experts
verbalized many task relevant areas. Furthermore, experts
expressed their thoughts predominantly by using many
technical terms.
Moreover, results showed that experts used knowledgebased shortcuts to classify the locomotion patterns. That is,
compared to novices they more often attended to features
required for classifying the fish itself (and not for its
locomotion pattern), which then allowed them to retrieve
knowledge on its locomotion pattern. For novices, this type
of knowledge-based shortcut was not available, so they
needed to rely on attempts to identify locomotion-relevant
features directly. This effect was found on a conceptual
level (indicated by verbal reports) as well as on a perceptual
level (indicated by eye movements).

Training Skills to Process Complex Stimuli
The study of Jarodzka et al. (2009) yielded important
conclusions with regard to the main research question
underlying the current study, namely whether and how an
expert’s perceptual skills can be conveyed to novices. Those
conclusions refer to the kind of knowledge novices lack, the
possibilities of conveying different aspects of this
knowledge, and design issues of the instructional material.
Unsurprisingly, novices were shown to have deficiencies
with regard to conceptual knowledge, as indicated by their
slow and inaccurate task performance. More interestingly,
novices attended to irrelevant features, and described too
few areas relevant for the locomotion; thus they lack
perceptual skills for which they need support.
The question arises of how to convey this required
knowledge to novices. Many instructional materials directly
or indirectly convey expert knowledge to learners (Feldon,
2007). A method that has proven to be effective is
demonstrating to a novice how an expert performs a task,
while the expert gives access to the processes s/he conducts
while solving a problem. Hence, the expert’s behavior
serves as a model for the novice (cf. modeling in cognitive
apprenticeship approach; Collins, Brown, & Newman,
1989). Depending on the task different behaviors need to be
modeled. If a novice wants to learn a practical domain like
crafts it will be necessary that the expert’s actual behavior is
shown to the learner. However, some tasks, like solving a
mathematical equation require mainly cognitive processes,
since the actual behavior that is the writing down of the
solution is not the crucial process that needs to be modeled.
In order to convey the knowledge needed to perform the
current task, modeling examples were chosen, since they
have shown to be highly effective for instruction (Atkinson,
Renkl, Derry, & Wortham, 2000). Here novices are shown a
worked-out expert solution procedure often including the
explanation of how and why a certain solution step is
performed (Van Merriënboer, 1997). However, modeling
examples have proven to be effective for conveying
conceptual aspects of expertise. However, as already
mentioned, expert performance in the tasks of interest often
also comprises perceptual skills. Thus, an important
question is whether these perceptual aspects of expertise,
that is, top-down processing of stimuli, could also be
conveyed to novices. There are no proven methods available
so far to convey perceptual knowledge. Verbalizations are
only partly useful, because experts do not always have
conscious access to where they are looking, that is, this can
be a result of implicit knowledge (cf. Chi, 2006).
As mentioned earlier, instructional modeling is
characterized by the idea to grant novices access to the
crucial processes conducted by an expert. While this idea
has so far been applied only to skills that can either be
verbalized or observed in overt behavior, we propose that it
can also be applied to perceptual skills. In particular, it is
suggested that novices can be trained at a perceptual level
by displaying to them an expert’s distribution of visual
attention (i.e., the eye movements) while s/he is performing

2921

a task. By doing so, the novices’ attention may be guided
towards relevant perceptual information during the study of
worked examples (Van Gog, Jarodzka, Scheiter, Gerjets, &
Paas, 2008). The current study aims at investigating the
effects of this new modeling example method, namely,
displaying an expert’s gaze, on novice learners’
performance and perception.
With regard to the question of how to design such a gaze
display, further conclusions can be drawn from the previous
study by Jarodzka et al. (2009). Since, experts have been
shown to use shortcuts, the question is how to influence eye
movements of experts, so they will forgo them. A hint
towards the answer is a study of Richardson and Dale
(2005). They investigated the relationship between eye
movements, speech production, and speech comprehension.
They found that if a speaker is asked to describe a simple
scene, s/he will fixate the objects in the order in which they
are mentioned, around 900 ms before naming them. Based
on these results it was decided to have the expert first watch
an unknown scene before describing it in a second step.
Another design issue concerns the question of whether
the gaze display should be based on an average generated
from multiple experts’ eye movement recordings or whether
the processes of only one carefully chosen expert should be
shown to novices. As the previous study showed, experts
were rather heterogeneous in terms of the task approaches
they chose (cf. Medin, 1997), thus, it seems advisable to use
the process data of only one carefully chosen expert for
modeling purposes. How this expert was chosen is
described in the Methods section of the experiment that is
outlined in the reminder of the paper. This experiment was
conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of the instructional
modeling approach by comparing a condition with worked
examples only (control group) to a condition that consisted
of both, worked examples to convey mainly conceptual
knowledge as well as gaze displays to train perceptual skills.
Although there is hardly any research on the
effectiveness of gaze displays for conveying perceptual
skills, some findings are reported that hint towards the
effectiveness of displaying expert’s gazes. Richardson and
Dale (2005) found that the strength of relationship between
a speaker’s and a listener’s eye movements predicts speech
comprehension of the listener. That is, the better the
listener’s eye movements matched those of the speaker
during describing a scene, the better s/he was able to
understand what the speaker was talking about. The authors
conclude that this might be an indication that the listener is
using visuospatial information to cognitively structure the
information in the same way as the speaker. Accordingly, if
displaying expert’s gazes could make a novice follow
experts’ eye movements, the novice should can be expected
to have a better understanding of the experts‘ verbalizations.

should differ in terms of their perceptual processes.
Participants receiving the gaze display should attend faster
to task relevant aspects of the stimulus (i.e., the time spent
on the stimulus until attending to the relevant AOIs for the
first time should be shorter) and maintain their attention for
a longer time there (i.e., the total dwell time on the relevant
AOIs should be longer), compared to the control group.

Experiment
Method
Participants and Design. 51 students of the University of
Tuebingen, five of whom had to be excluded due to poor
eye tracking data quality and outlier analyses (M=23.02
years, SD=3.30; 32 female and 14 male), were randomly
assigned to one of two groups: (1) worked example only
(control group, CG; n=24), (2) worked example including
gaze display (GD; n =22). Participants had no prior
knowledge of the task.
Task and Material. The stimulus materials consisted of
four digital videos in an audio video interleave format, sized
360*480 pixel (corresponding to 3.74*4.98 inches)
depicting single swimming fish, each deploying a different
locomotion pattern. Each video included a spoken
description from an expert of the corresponding locomotion
pattern, which was the same for both conditions. The visual
presentation of the videos differed across conditions in the
following manner. The CG watched unaltered videos.
Participants in the GD condition received perceptual
guidance based on the eye movements of the expert. The
raw eye movement were preprocessed, because the eye
position as measured by the eye tracker hardly ever stays
constant from one sample to the next; the fixational
instability of the oculomotor system, minor head
movements, and noise in the camera system of the eye
tracker all contribute to the effect that the measured eye
position exhibits a substantial jitter around the true eye
position. In order to reduce this jitter, raw gaze data was
filtered with a temporal Gaussian lowpass filter with a
support of 200 ms and a standard deviation of 42 ms. In the
Gaze Replay condition, a solid yellow dot (with an RGB
value 255, 255, 0) of radius 16 pixels was placed at the
position of the first (temporally filtered) gaze sample for
each video frame (fig. 1). The dot size was small enough
that it did not occlude relevant information permanently.

Hypotheses
Differences are hypothesized concerning the perceptual
aspects of task performance in that the gaze display group
will outperform the control group. Moreover, both groups

2922

Figure 1: Screen shot of an instructional video with GD.

The used model is an expert in terms of fish locomotion,
since he is a professor of marine zoology. Furthermore, the
model is an expert in terms of instruction, since he has lots
of teaching experience on fish locomotion behavior at a
University level as well as a diving instructor. Thus, the
model knows from experience where problems for novices
occur. Moreover, the model was instructed to behave in a
didactical manner by shifting his focus away from the
content to the learner. This was done according to Jucks
Schulte-Löbbert, and Bromme (2007) by self-assessment
questions (e.g., “It is important that the student knows what
each term means.”)
Measures. Performance was assessed by means of a free
description of the locomotion pattern after having watched
each of the four testing videos. The construction and scoring
of the performance measures was derived from a task
analysis. To describe a locomotion pattern, the following
guidelines should be applied (Lindsey, 1978). First, it has to
be decided which part of the body is used to produce
propulsion. This can be either the body itself or the fins.
Hence, the free descriptions were scored according to
naming correctly all crucial parts, resulting in a maximum
of four points. Second, it has to be decided how this part
moves. This can be either in an undulating (i.e., wavelike)
or an oscillating (i.e., paddle like) way. Accordingly, the
free descriptions were scored according to describing
correctly the movement of the respective body part,
resulting in a maximum of four points. Both aspects were
assumed to assess perceptual knowledge, for which we had
assumed the training group to outperform the control group.
Moreover, two perceptual process measures from eye
tracking recordings were obtained while learners studied the
testing videos, namely, the time already spent on a stimulus
before a locomotion-relevant AOI of the stimulus was
attended to for the first time and the overall time spent on
the relevant AOI of the stimulus.
Procedure. The experiment was run in individual sessions
of approx. 60 minutes. It began with a questionnaire on
prior knowledge and demographic data. Then, participants
were given the technical term for the locomotion pattern
followed by the corresponding learning video. This
procedure was repeated for four locomotion patterns.
The testing phase started by adjusting the eye tracking
system to the individual features of the participant based on
a nine-point calibration, which was repeated before each
new testing video. Before watching the videos, participants
received the following instruction: “While watching the
video, please look carefully at the way the fish swims.
Subsequent to watching the video, you will have to describe
the fish’s locomotion pattern.” Then, a fixation cross
appeared for two seconds followed by the testing video,
which lasted four seconds. Participants watched the video
while their eye movements were recorded. After having
watched the video, participants were asked to describe the
locomotion pattern of the depicted fish verbally. The verbal

data were recorded by Camtasia 3.0 software using a
standard microphone attached to the stimulus PC. Eye
movements and verbal data were recorded with a Tobii 1750
remote eye tracking system (www.tobii.com). This
procedure was repeated for all four testing videos.

Results
Gaze Data. The gaze data analyses are based on raw data,
because smooth pursuit is very likely to occur while
watching dynamic displays, but no algorithms for detecting
it are available in current eye tracking software so far. Eye
tracking data were logarithmized for further analyses. An
ANOVA was conducted for each gaze measure with the
factor gaze display (with vs. without). First, both groups
differed in the time spent on the stimulus before inspecting
the relevant areas of the stimulus for the first time (F(1,
44)=6.73, p=.01). That is, participants in the control group
took more time in milliseconds until they first looked at the
relevant part of the stimulus than the group with gaze
display (CG: M =741.91 ms, SD=331.98; GD: M=547.39
ms, SD=140.66). Second, both groups differed in the overall
time spent on the relevant areas of the stimulus (F (1,
44)=4.48, p=.04). That is, participants in the group with
gaze display spent more time in milliseconds looking at the
relevant parts of the stimulus than the control group (CG:
M =529.57 ms, S D =354.91; GD: M =692.27 ms, SD
=313.89). Figure 2 presents the gaze data.
800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
CG

GD

Figure 2: Time in ms until attending to relevant AOIs (dark
grey) and dwell time spent on relevant AOIs (light grey) .
Performance Data. An ANOVA was conducted for each
performance measure with the factor gaze display (with vs.
without). Contrary to our expectations both groups did not
differ in being able to identify the body part relevant to the
locomotion pattern. Both groups were quite good in this
respect by naming over three of four times the correct body
part (CG: M =3.27, S D =0.82; GD: M =3.34, SD=0.54).
However, the groups differed significantly in interpreting
this observation, when describing how this body part moves
(F(1, 44)=5.60, p=.02), that is, the group with gaze display
outperformed the control group (CG: M=1.46, SD=1.10;
GR: M=2.18, SD=0.95). Figure 3 presents the performance
data.

2923

4

3,5

3

2,5

2

1,5

1

0,5

0
CG

DG

Figure 3: Number of identified body parts relevant to the
movement (dark grey) and number of correctly described
ways of movement (light grey) for both groups.

Discussion
The current study revealed that a modeling example based
on displaying an expert’s gazes to novices was successful in
training aspects involved in accomplishing complex tasks
with a rich visual component. At a process level, eye
tracking analyses revealed that perceptual skills were
enhanced through the training. First, participants, who
received a gaze display, took less time until they attended to
the relevant parts of the stimulus for the first time compared
to the control group. Second, the gaze display group spent
more time on the relevant areas of the stimulus. With regard
to performance data, it could be shown that participants
were quite good at the first step of the task performance,
that is, finding out what the relevant aspects of the stimulus
are (i.e., what are the crucial body parts for the locomotion
pattern?). Both groups named the correct relevant area over
three out of four times. Thus, it is not surprising that both
groups did not differ in this performance aspect. The main
difference between the trained and the control group
occurred in the second step of the task performance, namely
in observing and interpreting the perceived relevant area
(i.e., how does the crucial body part move?). Participants
with gaze display could interpret the perceived area more
often correctly than the control group.
In sum, solving the first step of this task, namely
perceiving the relevant out of the irrelevant areas of the
stimulus seems to be feasible after a short verbal description
of an expert. However, solving the second step of this task,
which is the ability to interpret these relevant areas is related
to the ability to perceive the relevant areas more quickly and
to inspect them for a longer time. This perceptual skill is
supported by gaze display. It is yet unclear, whether the
perceptual skill facilitates the first step and thus leaves time
and resources to solve the second or whether the perceptual
skill facilitates the second step itself. A limitation of these
results is that they examine the effect of a gaze display only
in a short run. Further research should investigate, whether
this effect still holds in longitudinal terms.
The study reported here showed that two issues are
crucial when modeling experts’ behavior. First, the task

needs to be analyzed in detail. This can be done by
comparing experts and novices while performing the task. A
method that has proven to be appropriate to access the
concept-based part of the task performance are verbal
reports. However, some tasks require additionally
perceptual skills. In order to get a better insight into
perceptual processes of a task performance, eye tracking has
proven to be the method of choice. The combination of both
measures gives a good insight into the deficiencies of
novices’ task performance.
Second, the kind of the modeling should be chosen
according to the results of this task analysis. A common
problem is that experts perform a task using shortcuts.
However, modeling shortcuts to people lacking the
knowledge underlying these shortcuts is useless. Thus,
experts should be instructed to behave in a more
“didactical” manner. One possibility to achieve this is
presented in the current study, where the expert’s focus was
manipulated successfully from a content to a recipient focus.
Still, it has to be noted that although shortcuts are undesired
for modeling purposes to novices, they are critical skill at a
higher level of expertise. Thus, for training intermediates, it
might be a benefit to present expert’s shortcuts instead of
omitting them. Furthermore, the task analysis should reveal
at what level the behavior of novices should be modeled.
Some tasks require sophisticated perceptual skills. The
current study showed a way to successfully model these
perceptual skills and thereby enhance task performance.
Gaze display fosters the skill to perceive the relevant out of
the irrelevant information more quickly and longer. This
skill is related to a better performance in interpreting the
perceived area. Another question that further research
should address is whether incorporating the strategies of
several experts would be beneficial. This could be done by
presenting multiple examples, each presenting the same
problem but with a different solution strategy, since the
presentation of multiple examples has been shown to be
beneficial for learning (Atkinson et al., 2000).
Moreover, the results of these studies provide important
implications for learning scenarios, where gaze data cannot
be applied easily so far (e.g., traditional classroom). The
first study showed that for tasks with a complex and visually
rich component, learners have deficiencies on a perceptual
level. The second study showed that those deficiencies can
be overcome by successful attention guidance. Thus, an
instructor that teaches such a kind of task (like marine
biology) should emphasize perceptual task aspects in a
teaching unit and explicitly guide the attention of the
learners’ to the relevant parts of the display.
However, there are indications that the effectiveness of
gaze displays in examples may depend on the type of task or
domain as well as the way the gaze is displayed. In another
study on gaze displays in examples on procedural problemsolving tasks (Van Gog et al., 2008), it was found that the
combination of gaze display and verbal explanations had
detrimental effects on problem-solving performance on the
test compared to either gaze display and verbal

2924

explanations, verbal explanations only, or behavior
modeling only. The gaze data were assumed to
communicate information on the problem-solving strategy.
However, this problem-solving relies much less on
perceptual skills than the task used here, and hence, the eye
movement data may have required too much interpretation
on the part of the learner. Thus, the effect of a gaze display
should be even stronger in a domain that relies even more
on perceptual skills, like medical diagnoses. Second, the
display of the expert’s eye movements in the Van Gog et al.
(2008) study was implemented with the eye tracker
software. This means that the eye movements were
displayed as a dot that enlarged or contracted to reflect
changes in fixation duration. This might have had the effect
that the eye movements themselves attract attention because
of this movement, whereas the attention should be directed
at the task feature the fixation is targeted at. Moreover, other
types of gaze displays should be investigated in the future.
A more sophisticated, spotlight-like display of eye
movements is to blurr out non-attended information and
leave the attended areas unaltered (Dorr, Vig, Gegenfurtner,
Martinetz, & Barth, 2008). This kind of gaze display might
model the eye movements of the learner in a non-intrusive
way by guiding them away from irrelevant to relevant parts.
Whether the type of task or the nature of the gaze display is
the more important determinant of success of including eye
movements in examples, is a question for future research.
In sum, a carefully prepared gaze display is a promising
method to enhance performance in complex tasks with a
visually rich and dynamic component. Still, this method
should be investigated under conditions, where the
perception and its interpretation are more complex in order
to assess its full potential.

Acknowledgments
The current study is part of a larger research project funded
by the Leibniz-Gemeinschaft (funding period: 2007-2009).
During the realization of this work Tamara van Gog was
supported by a grant from the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO Veni Grant 451-08-003).

References
Atkinson, R.K., Derry, S.J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D.
(2000). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of
Educational Research, 70, 181-214.
Canham, M., & Hegarty, M. (2009). Effects of knowledge
and display design on comprehension of complex
graphics.
Learning
and
Instruction.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2009.02.014
Chi, M. T. H. (2006). Two approaches to the study of
experts’ characteristics. In K. A. Ericsson, N. Charness,
R. R. Hoffman & P. J. Feltovich (Eds.), The cambridge
handbook of expertise and expert performance (pp. 2130). New York; NY: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S. & Newman, S. E. (1989).
Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of reading,

writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),
Knowing, learning, and instruction (pp. 453-494).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dorr, M., Vig, E., Gegenfurtner, K. R., Martinetz, T., &
Barth, E. (2008). Eye movement modelling and gaze
guidance. Fourth International Workshop on HumanComputer Conversation.
Ellis, S. R. (1986). Statistical dependency in visual
scanning. Human Factors, 28, 421-438.
Ericsson, K. A., & Lehmann, A. C. (1996). Expert and
exceptional performance: Evidence of maximal
adaptation to task constraints. Annual Review of
Psychology, 47, 273-305.
Feldon, D.F. (2007). The implications of research on
expertise for curriculum and pedagogy. Educational
Psychology Review, 19, 91-110.
Henderson, J.M. (2007). Regarding scenes. C u r r e n t
Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 219-222.
Jarodzka, H., Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Van Gog, T.
(2009). In the eyes of the beholder: How experts and
novices interpret dynamic stimuli. Learning and
Instruction. doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2009.02.019.
Jucks, R., Schulte-Löbbert, P., & Bromme, R. (2007).
Supporting experts’ written knowledge communication
through reflective prompts on the use of specialist
concepts. Journal of Psychology, 215, 237-247.
Lesgold, A., Rubinson, H., Feltovich, P., Glaser, R.,
Klopfer, D., & Wang, Y. (1988). Expertise in a complex
skill: Diagnosing x-ray pictures. In M. T. H. Chi, R.
Glaser, & M. Farr (Eds.), The nature of expertise (pp.
311-342). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lindsey, C. C. (1978). Form, function, and locomotory
habits in fish. Fish Physiology, 7, 1-88.
Lowe, R.K. (1999). Extracting information from an
animation during complex visual learning. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 225-244.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S.
(1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree experts:
Do all roads lead to Rome? Cognitive Psychology, 32, 4996.
Richardson, D. C. & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to
understand: The coupling between speakers’ and
listeners’ eye movements and its relationship to discourse
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 1045-1060.
Van Gog, T., Paas, F., Van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Witte,
P. (2005). Uncovering the problem-solving process: Cued
retrospective reporting versus concurrent and
retrospective reporting. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 11, 237-244.
Van Gog, T., Jarodzka, H., Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., & Paas,
F. (2009). Attention guidance during example study via
the model’s eye movements. Computers in Human
Behavior, 25, 785-791.
Van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (1997). Training complex
cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design
model for technical training. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Educational Technology Publications.

2925

