UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How strong emotions influence reasoning: effects of spider phobia on a conditional
inference task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1nj5t694

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hamburger, Kai
Jung, Luzie
Wranke, Chrisitna

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How strong emotions influence reasoning: effects of spider phobia on a conditional
inference task
Christina Wranke (Christina.Wranke@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10F
D-35394 Giessen, Germany

Luzie Jung (Luzie.Jung@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10F
D-35394 Giessen, Germany

Kai Hamburger (Kai.Hamburger@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10F
D-35394 Giessen, Germany

phobia relevant topics, since this content frightens them?
Or, are they even better in performing those tasks due to a
more emotional understanding of phobia relevant emotions
and implications? In the following we focus on a) studies
which reported that emotions can facilitate reasoning
performance and b) studies which found an impeding effect
of emotions on reasoning.

Abstract
In recent years there has been a growing interest to investigate
how emotions affect logical reasoning. There is evidence that
emotional states and emotional task contents could impede
performance on logical reasoning problems. The aim of our
research was to investigate how strong emotions –occurring
due to spider phobia– affect logical reasoning. Therefore,
spider phobics and non-phobics completed a conditional
inference task with different types of content: spider phobia
relevant, negative, and neutral problems were presented. The
results showed that spider phobics performed worst on phobia
relevant problems compared to neutral and negative
inferences. Thus, processing anxiety relevant topics may elicit
a fear response resulting in a decrease of cognitive resources
which might be responsible for the impaired reasoning
performance.

Emotions facilitate reasoning: The mood
congruency effect
Mood congruency effects are quite numerous in the
literature, e.g., in terms of memory phenomena (e.g., Bower,
1981; Teasdale & Russell, 1983; Fiedler, Nickel,
Muehlfriedel, & Unkelbach, 2001; Knight, Maines, &
Robinson, 2002). Teasdale and Russell (1983) for instance
reported that participants in elated mood recalled more
positive words previously learned within a word list than
participants in depressed mood. The opposite accounts for
negative toned words: this type of word was better recalled
by the depressed compared to the elated participants.
Furthermore, a link between mood and the material that has
to be processed was also realized by Blanchette, Richards,
Melnyk, and Lavda (2007) and Chang and Wilson (2004) in
terms of logical reasoning tasks. Blanchette and colleagues
(Blanchette et al., 2007) carried out a study in which
participants who actually experienced strong emotions
(following terrorist attacks) reasoned about neutral, general
emotionally, and emotionally syllogisms related to
terrorism. Thus, they created a link between the emotional
state arising from the terrorist attacks and the reasoning
material which is related to terrorism. In this study the
participants differed in their level of exposure to the terrorist
attacks. Participants who were most directly affected by the
events showed higher levels of emotions and were most
accurate on reasoning tasks which were directly linked to
their particular emotions, namely reasoning problems
containing terroristic issues. The authors argued that the
increased reasoning performance is due to the specific
connection between experienced emotions and the related,

Keywords: spider phobia; emotions; logical reasoning;
inference task.

Introduction
The interaction between emotions and cognition has
recently attracted increased interest (e.g., Bäuml &
Kuhbandner, 2007; Perlstein, Elbert, & Stenger, 2002;
Storbeck & Clore, 2005). Although recent studies explored
how emotions affect reasoning, there is still the necessity to
further address this topic. While some researchers referred
to a facilitatory effect of emotions on reasoning (e.g., Chang
& Wilson, 2004; Johnson-Laird, Mancini, & Gangemi,
2006), others described the detrimental aspect of emotional
states (e.g., Oaksford, Morris, Grainger, & Williams, 1996;
Wranke, Hamburger, & Knauff, 2009). Thus, our intention
is to systematically investigate the influence of strong
emotional states on reasoning. Therefore, we investigated
how anxiety disorders affect reasoning since those disorders
have strong emotional components. More precisely, we
were interested in the performance of spider phobics on
logical reasoning tasks with spider phobia relevant,
negative, and neutral contents compared to the performance
pattern of a control group (non-phobic). Is it more difficult
for spider phobics to solve reasoning tasks containing

532

very specific and consequential reasoning problems. In the
study of Chang and Wilson (2004) also a connection
between experienced emotions and the semantic content of
reasoning problems is present. After recalling an
autobiographical situation like being cheated or receiving
altruistic benefit, participants solved two Wason selection
tasks (WSTs) based on cheater or altruist detection. Priming
effects based on similarity between recalled situations and
semantic task content were found for the cheater detection
WST, but not for the altruistic detection WST. While best
performance on the cheater detection problem was obtained
for the group which recalled a situation of being cheated, the
altruism detection problem was worst performed by the
group who recalled a situation receiving an altruistic act.
Thus, the authors argued against a domain-general
facilitatory effect in terms of congruency between
experienced emotions and semantic content of reasoning
tasks. However, enhanced vigilance for subsequent cheating
could result from experiencing a situation of being cheated.
Thus, recollection of such a situation could help when
reasoning about a semantically congruent problem which
can be referred to as a facilitatory or priming effect. But,
this effect does not seem to be available for the recollection
of a situation receiving altruistic benefit when reasoning
about a semantically congruent task because the authors
“[…] did not expect facilitation of altruism detection after
content-relevant recollection, because it seems unlikely that
being a beneficiary of altruism increases the utility of
vigilance for subsequent altruism in the same way that being
a victim of cheating increases the utility of vigilance for
subsequent cheating” (Chang & Wilson, 2004, p.269).
While Chang and Wilson (2004) demonstrated a priming
effect on a non-clinical sample, Johnson-Laird et al. (2006)
showed that psychological illness can lead to better
reasoning as well. Their “hyper-emotion theory of
psychological illness” consists of five principles, one of
which postulates that individuals suffering from
psychological illness focus on their emotions and
contemplate about them and their causes (Johnson-Laird et
al., 2006). As a result, they reason better about content
which was related to their illness. Johnson-Laird and
colleagues could show that individuals with a tendency to
obsessive-compulsive disorder reasoned more accurately
compared to a control group, but only when the reasoning
material was related to their illness. The same reasoning
pattern was revealed for individuals with a tendency to
depression. Therefore, due to the focus on emotions and the
situations causing them, patients become experts on illness
relevant topics which determine the enhanced reasoning
performance for those matters.
In summary, these studies have depicted that emotions do
not generally impair cognitive abilities like reasoning but
can sometimes facilitate them when reasoning about
emotion related and individually meaningful situations.

Emotions impede reasoning: Demand of working
memory resources
While the previous studies showed an enhancement in
reasoning due to mood congruency, other investigations
revealed that emotions might rather decrease reasoning
performance. Oaksford et al. (1996) for instance carried out
a study in which participants were put into positive or
negative mood, respectively. Those participants provided
less logically correct answers on the WST compared to a
control group. In a second experiment the authors showed
that a concurrent working memory task impeded reasoning
performance on the WST similar to the results obtained with
positive or negative mood. Thus, the depletion of working
memory resources- in terms of both experiencing emotional
mood and performing a task in parallel which depletes such
resources- was due to the decreased reasoning performance.
Especially the central executive resources were required
since participants in positive mood (not in negative mood)
performed less accurately on the Tower of London, a task
referring to central executive components which Oaksford
and colleagues carried out in a third experiment. Thus,
mainly positive mood impaired reasoning due to an
increased demand of central executive components.
Thereupon, fewer resources seemed to be available to
perform the reasoning task. Oaksford et al. (1996) discussed
this assumption in line with the “suppression theory”. This
hypothesis postulates that mood already binds working
memory capacity. Since the experience of positive or
negative mood facilitates the recall of stimuli from longterm memory which are congruent with individuals’ mood,
this could take up working memory resources. As a result,
fewer resources are left for other cognitive tasks like logical
reasoning. Supporting evidence concerning the restriction of
working memory capacity was also provided in terms of
anxiety and depression (Channon & Baker, 1994;
Derakshan & Eysenck, 1998). In addition, Wranke et al.
(2009) investigated the influence of positive and negative
mood on reasoning. Participants’ mood was altered by
giving an excellent (success group), pour (failure group), or
on average (neutral group) feedback about their
performance on a manipulated intelligence test.
Subsequently, participants completed a set of conditional
inference tasks either in a WST paradigm or in an argument
task. The emotional value of the inference problems was
varied as well. In this regard, a link between experienced
mood (based on success and failure, respectively) and the
content of the reasoning material (success and failure
situations) was established. In addition to positively and
negatively toned problems, inferences with neutral content
were presented. Results showed that mood impeded
reasoning performance. The participants in a negative mood
performed worse than the participants in a positive mood,
but both groups were outperformed by participants in a
neutral mood. There was no interaction between mood of
the reasoner and the content of the problem, and therefore
no facilitatory effect due to mood congruency could be
observed. Consequentially, the authors argued that mood

533

might result in a pre-load of cognitive resources and thus
has a devastating effect on logical reasoning performance.
While Oaksford et al. (1996) and Wranke et al. (2009)
investigated the influence of emotional states on reasoning,
Blanchette and colleagues were interested in how an
emotional content of reasoning material affects performance
(Blanchette & Richards, 2004; Blanchette, 2006).
Participants solved a conditional inference task (argument
task) based on statements with neutral and emotional
content. The emotional statements were either actual
emotional statements or statements with originally neutral
words which were manipulated pertaining to their emotional
content via classical conditioning: prior to the reasoning
phase of the experiment an originally neutral word, like
sandwich, was paired with emotional images of the
International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Center for the
Study of Emotion and Attention, 1995). For both types of
emotional statements higher error rates were reported in
comparison to neutral ones. As a possible explanation the
authors referred to the demanding nature of working
memory resources when processing emotional content so
that less capacity is available for reasoning. In a nutshell,
the studies reported in the previous paragraph showed the
detrimental effect of emotions on reasoning due to a need
for working memory resources.
Our current aim was to shed light on the debate about the
role of strong emotions on reasoning. Thus, we wanted to
specify whether strong emotions due to spider phobia may
be helpful or not when the reasoning material mirrors the
own pathological state. Therefore, we first carried out a pilot
study to evaluate the emotionality and phobic relevance of
the task contents which will be described in the following
section.

Second, please rate whether you believe the sentences could
be of relevance for a person with spider phobia with ‘Yes’
or ‘No’.”
Statement presentation was randomized across participants.
The testing was self-paced and took place in the class room.
Results We computed descriptive statistics in order to find
four statements per content category (spider phobia relevant,
negative, neutral), being the most representative ones.
Therefore, we chose only those spider phobia relevant
statements which were close to the value “3” on the rating
scale representing the most neutral point. This was
important to rule out that spider phobia relevant statements
were associated with negative valence since non-phobics
should not rate them as negative. Likewise, for the neutral
statements we chose only those rated as most neutral (close
to the value “3”) whereas the selected four negative
statements were rated most negative (close to the value “1”).
Within the four spider phobia relevant statements no
difference in the emotional valence could be observed
(ANOVA, F(1.713,42.837)=.129; p>.05; decimals for
degrees of freedom result from Greenhouse-Geisser values).
Similarly,
neither
the
four
neutral
(ANOVA,
F(2.262,56.540)=1.978; p>.05) nor the four negative
sentences (ANOVA, F(3,75)=1.097; p>.05) differed in the
rated emotionality. The means of the emotionality rating
were computed for the three different content categories
(spider phobia relevant, negative, neutral) based on the
respective four selected statements and were compared in
another ANOVA which revealed significant differences
between them (F(2,50)=62.934; p<.001). Post hoc paired ttests found that negative statements (M=1.67; SE=.14) were
rated as more negative than neutral (M=3.47; SE=.12)
(t(25)=9.145; p<.001) and spider phobia relevant ones
(M=2.93; SE=.09) (t(25)=-8.31; p<.001). Furthermore,
neutral statements were rated as more neutral than spider
phobia relevant statements (t(25)=3.85; p=.001).
Besides the emotionality rating of the sentences
participants had to quote whether or not a statement is
phobic relevant. Overall, the four selected spider phobia
relevant items were rated with 92.31% as phobic relevant.
The four neutral statements obtained a phobic relevance
rating of 2.88% while the selected negative statements were
rated as phobic relevant with 19.23%. These 12 selected
statements were used for the conditional inference task
presented in the main study since they fulfilled the
previously described requirements.

Pilot study
Methods
Subjects 26 non-phobic students from the University of
Giessen volunteered in the evaluation study (mean age:
M=21.27 years; range 19-38 years; 20 female, 6 male).
Materials, Design and Procedure The statements used in
the main study were taken from a pool of 48 ‘if, then’
statements (16 spider phobia relevant, 16 negative, 16
neutral statements). All statements were presented in
German language and contained an equal number of
syllables. These statements had to be rated for emotionality
and phobic relevance. Participants were given a booklet
including all 48 sentences which had to be rated according
to the following instruction (translated from German):

Main study
Methods

“Please read through the following sentences carefully and
attentively. First, please rate each sentence concerning how
it emotionally affects you. For this, please use the following
scale:

Subjects 9 spider phobic students (mean age: M=22.33
years; range 20-26 years; 7 female, 2 male) and 7 nonphobic control students (mean age: M=22.86 years; range
20-26 years; 7 female) participated in the experiment. They
were recruited via announcements in newspapers and at the
campus. Participants were selected from a larger sample by

very negative 1 – 2 – 3 – 4 – 5 very positive
O
O
O
O
O

534

means of scores on the Spider Phobia Questionnaire (SPQ;
Klorman, Weerts, Hastings, Melamed, & Lang, 1974). SPQscores of spider fearful students (M=20.22; SE=.878) were
significantly higher than those of the non-fearful control
students (M=2.00; SE=.873) (t(14)=-14.459; p<.001). Each
subject received 5 Euros or a course credit for participation.
Moreover, we controlled for participants being no
psychology students (thus, no pre-experience with logical
reasoning tasks) and all were native German speakers.
Materials and Design We carried out a conditional
reasoning task in form of an argument task. An argument
task is composed of a first premise, a second premise, and a
conclusion (three-term series). The first premise consists of
an ‘if p, then q’ statement that posits q to be true if p is true.
The second premise refers to the truth of the antecedent (‘if’
part) or the consequent (‘then’ part). The participants` task
is to decide whether the conclusion logically follows from
the two given premises. In this regard, two inferences are
valid and two are invalid. Valid inferences are modus
ponens (MP; ‘if p, then q, and p is true, then q is true’) and
modus tollens (MT; ‘if p, then q, and q is false, then p is
false’), whereas the two invalid inferences are affirmation of
consequent (AC; ‘if p, then q, and q is true, then p is true’)
and denial of antecedent (DA; ‘if p, then q, and p is false,
then q is false’). From each of the 12 statements acquired by
the pilot study (four with spider phobia relevant, four with
negative and four with neutral contents), a set of MP, MT,
AC and DA inferences was generated resulting in a total of
48 problems. The presentation of the 48 three-term
problems was randomized across participants. Examples of
the statements are presented in Table 1.

the keyboard participants responded whether the conclusion
was valid or not. Prior to the experiment two practice trials
were presented to familiarize participants with the procedure
but no feedback was given.

Results
We wanted to investigate whether spider phobic relevant
reasoning task contents were worse or even better
performed by spider phobics compared to the reasoning
pattern of a control group. Thus, error rates of the argument
task were compared using an ANOVA with the betweensubject factor group (spider fearful students, non-fearful
students) and the two within-subject factors content (spider
phobia relevant, negative, neutral) and type of reasoning
(MP, MT, AC, DA). We obtained a significant interaction
between the content and the group factor (F(2,28)=6.807;
p<.01). A post hoc paired t-test revealed that spider phobics
performed significantly worse for inference problems with
spider phobia relevant content (43.06%; SE= 4.47%)
compared to negative ones (34.72%; SE=5.01%)
(t(8)=2.667; p<.05). Furthermore, phobia relevant problems
were more error prone than neutral ones (36.81%; 4.71%)
but marginally failed to reach significance (t(8)=2.268;
p=.053). The reasoning error pattern of the non-phobics was
contrary to those of the spider phobics. Non-phobics made
significantly more errors for inferences with negative
content (M=33.93%; SE=6.38%) compared to spider phobia
relevant (28.57%; 7.20%) (t(6)=-2.521; p<.05) and neutral
problems (22.32%; 7.33%) (t(6)=-3.653; p<.05). This
interaction pattern between the groups and the task content
of the argument task is visualized in Figure 1.
In addition to this interaction we obtained a significant
main
effect
for
the
type
of
reasoning
(F(1.244,17.409)=14.532; p=.001). Post hoc paired t-tests
revealed a significant difference in error rates for MP
compared to MT (t(15)=-2.796; p<.05), AC (t(15)=-4.832;
p<.001), and DA inferences (t(15)=-6.128; p<.001).
Furthermore, significant differences were found between
MT and AC (t(15)=-2.475; p<.05) as well as between MT
and DA (t(15)=-3.31; p<.01). Overall, the fewest errors
were made with MP inferences (M=5.73%; SE=2.37%),
followed by MT (M=19.79%; SE=6.22%), AC (M=51.04%;
SE=8.77%) and DA (M=58.85%; SE=8.14%).
The content factor was also significant (F(2,28)=4.645;
p<.05). Further paired t-tests showed that error rates for
spider phobia relevant problems (M=36.72%; SE=4.30%)
were significantly more error prone than neutral ones
(M=30.47%; SE=4.41%) (t(15)=2.928; p=.01). However,
this was due to worse performance of spider phobics on
phobia relevant contents (see the above interaction between
the group and content factor).
Moreover, a significant interaction was found between the
content
and
type
of
reasoning
factor
(F(3.193,44.699)=3.721; p<.05). Post hoc paired t-tests
revealed that for DA inferences significantly less errors
were made with neutral (M=50.00%; SE=8.85%) compared
to spider phobia relevant contents (M=67.25%; SE=8.85%)

Table 1: Examples of statements with different contents.
Type of
content
Spider phobia
relevant
Negativ
Neutral

Example of statement
When a person sees a toy spider then the
person is scared witless.
When a person is anorexic then the person
has to be force-fed.
When a person is craftsman then the
person has served an apprenticeship.

Procedure All participants were tested individually in a
quiet room at the Psychology Department of the University
of Giessen. At the beginning participants filled out the SPQ.
Afterwards the logical reasoning tasks had to be solved.
These argument tasks were presented on a computer screen
using the SuperLab 4.0 software (Cedrus Corporation, San
Pedro, CA) which encoded participants` responses and
decision times. A self-paced design was used. Each premise
and the conclusion were presented one at a time. By
pressing the spacebar participants proceeded from one to the
next. While both premises were presented in black letters
the conclusion was presented in red. The task required to
evaluate whether the conclusion necessarily followed from
the two premises. By pressing a “Yes” key or a “No” key on

535

(t(15)=2.905; p<.05). For AC inferences we observed
significant differences between neutral (M=39.00%;
SE=9.95%) and spider phobia relevant problems
(M=56.25%; SE=8.975%) (t(15)=2.905; p<.05) as well as
between neutral and negative problems (M=57.75%;
SE=8.75%) (t(15)=-3.503; p<.01).
Besides the error rate analysis we also computed an
ANOVA based on decision time with the between-subject
factor group (spider fearful students, non-fearful students)
and the two within-subject factors content (spider phobia
relevant, negative, neutral) and type of reasoning (MP, MT,
AC, DA). The results did not reveal an interaction between
the content and the group factor. However, this ANOVA
obtained a significant main effect for the type of reasoning
factor (F(3,42)=8.583; p<.001). Post hoc t-tests showed that
MP inferences were much faster solved than MT (t(15)=2.871; p<.05), AC (t(15)=-4.356; p=.001), and DA problems
(t(15)=-4.423; p<.001).

not lead to more accurate reasoning on topics that are
related to the own emotional anxiety state. This might be
due to the different symptoms of psychological disorders of
a major depression and specific phobias including spider
phobia. Spider phobics show a pronounced tendency to
avoid the phobic object and show an intense fear response
during exposure (American Psychiatric Association, 1994).
Thus, contrary to patients with a major depression they do
not tend to confront themselves in their thoughts with illness
relevant matters which might involve that spider phobics are
no expert reasoners on phobia related topics. Hence, spider
phobics did not reason more accurate on inference problems
containing spider phobia contents. In fact, they even showed
worst performance on those problems compared to negative
and neutral ones. Thus, the results suggest that illness
related tasks impair reasoning for anxiety patients. These
results support the suppression theory (Oaksford et al.,
1996): processing phobia relevant material comprised the
confrontation with the phobic object which causes fear. This
yields a strong emotional response resulting in a pre-load of
working memory resources. This restriction of cognitive
capacity might be responsible for the less logically correct
performance of spider phobics on phobia relevant problem
contents. The worst performance on such problems is not
due to a premature decision pattern –resulting from
avoidance behavior, lower attention, or lack of motivation–
since the decision times did not differ across the spider
phobic and the non-phobic group. Hence, it seems plausible
that anxiety limits cognitive resources and determines the
bad performance on phobia relevant problems. Furthermore,
there are studies in the literature describing that trait anxiety
interrupts working memory functions (MacLeod &
Donnellan, 1993) and in particular those of the central
executive (Eysenck, 1985). In similar fashion, Eysenck and
Calvo (1992) assumed that state anxiety is related to worries
which load processing and storage capacities of the working
memory. Thus, the detrimental effects of state anxiety are
more pronounced in tasks demanding working memory
capacity, especially of the central executive and the
articulatory loop. In fact, these two systems are associated
with logical reasoning performance (e.g., Gilhooly, Logie,
& Wynn, 2002; Klauer, Stegmaier, & Meiser, 1997).
Moreover, there is evidence that spider phobia could
change reasoning patterns. De Jong, Mayer, and van den
Hout (1997) showed that spider phobics tend to rely on a
danger-confirming reasoning strategy while solving phobia
relevant WSTs. The authors argued that the mere perception
of threat leads to this reasoning pattern which may maintain
the specific phobia.
While spider phobics performed worst on phobia relevant
problems in our study, non-phobics revealed worst
performance on problems with negative content. These
results are in line with Blanchette and Richards (2004) and
Blanchette (2006). It is possible that processing negative
toned material demands cognitive capacity leading to the
impaired reasoning since “emotional contents may prime a

Figure 1: Error rates (%) and standard errors (SE) for the
non-phobics and spider phobics in the conditional reasoning
task.

Discussion
The aim of our study was to investigate whether strong
emotions due to an anxiety disorder enhance or impede
performance when reasoning about inference problems with
illness relevant topics. Our results showed that spider
phobics performed worst on the argument tasks with spider
phobia relevant contents. Although Johnson-Laird et al.
(2006) referred to an increased reasoning performance of
patients with a tendency toward obsessive-compulsive or
depressive behavior for illness-related material, our results
did not support this assumption. This might be due to the
extent of being an expert on a special topic. While JohnsonLaird and colleagues described that “[…] as a result of
prolonged rumination, patients become expert reasoners
about those matters pertaining to their illness” (JohnsonLaird et al., 2006, p. 836), suffering from spider phobia does

536

number of associations that load working memory”
(Blanchette, 2006, p.1123).
Overall, AC and DA inferences with spider phobia
relevant and negative content were more error prone.
Similar results were also obtained by Blanchette and
Richards (2004). The authors argued that this error pattern
might result from a misinterpretation of emotional problems
as biconditionals. At present, we would like to retain this
assumption, but such effects should be examined carefully
in the future.
In summary, this research showed that reasoning tasks
with phobia relevant topics can impede performance of
spider phobics. Thus, the perceived connection with the own
anxiety and the anxiety related problems can hinder to
reason accurately. Contrary, non-phobics did not reason
worst on spider phobia relevant inferences since those
problems represent individually meaningful and emotion
eliciting contents in particular for spider phobics but not for
non-phobics.

Derakshan, N., & Eysenck, M.W. (1998). Working memory
capacity in high trait-anxious and repressor groups.
Cognition and Emotion, 12, 697-713.
Eysenck, M.W. (1985). Anxiety and cognitive-task
performance. Personality and Individual Differences, 6,
579-586.
Fiedler, K., Nickel, S., Muehlfriedel, T., & Unkelbach, C.
(2001). Is mood congruency an effect of genuine memory
or response bias? Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 37, 201-214.
Gilhooly, K.J., Logie, R.H., & Wynn, V.E. (2002).
Syllogistic Reasoning Tasks and Working Memory:
Evidence from Sequential Presentation of Premises.
Current
Psychology:
Developmental,
Learning,
Personality, Social, 21, 111-120.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Mancini, F., & Gangemi, A. (2006). A
hyper-emotion theory of psychological illnesses.
Psychological Review, 113, 822-841.
Klauer, K.C., Stegmaier, R., & Meiser, T. (1997). Working
memory involvement in propositional and spatial
reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 9-47.
Klorman, R., Weerts, T., Hastings, J., Melamed, B., &
Lang, P. (1974). Psychometric description of some fearspecific questionnaires. Behavior Research, 5, 401-409.
Knight, B.G., Maines, M.L., & Robinson, G.S. (2002). The
effects of sad mood on memory in older adults: A test of
the mood congruence effect. Psychology and Aging, 17,
653-661.
MacLeod, C., & Donnellan, A.M. (1993). Individual
differences in anxiety and the restriction of working
memory capacity. Personality and Individual Differences,
15, 163-173.
Oaksford, M., Morris, F., Grainger, B., & Williams, J.M.G.
(1996). Mood, reasoning, and central executive processes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 22, 476-492.
Perlstein, W.M., Elbert, T., & Stenger, V.A. (2002).
Dissociation in human prefrontal cortex of affective
influences on working memory-related activity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99,
1736-1741.
Storbeck, J., & Clore, G.L. (2005). With sadness comes
accuracy; with happiness, false memory - Mood and the
false memory effect. Psychological Science, 16, 785-791.
Teasdale, J.D., & Russell, M.L. (1983). Differential effects
of induced mood on the recall of positive, negative and
neutral words. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 22,
163-171.
Wranke, C., Hamburger, K., & Knauff, M. (2009).
Emotions can be a nuisance in logical reasoning. In
preparation.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the German Science
Foundation (Graduate Program ‘Neural representation and
action control – NeuroAct’ 885/2).

References
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th edition.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Bäuml, K.-H., & Kuhbandner, C. (2007). Remembering can
cause forgetting- but not in negative moods.
Psychological Science, 18, 111-115.
Blanchette, I. (2006). The effect of emotion on
interpretation and logic in a conditional reasoning task.
Memory & Cognition, 34, 1112-1125.
Blanchette, I., & Richards, A. (2004). Reasoning about
emotional and neutral materials: Is logic affected by
emotion? Psychological Science, 15, 745-752.
Blanchette, I., Richards, A., Melnyk, L., & Lavda, A.
(2007). Reasoning about emotional contents following
shocking terrorist attacks: A tale of three cities. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 13, 47-56.
Bower, G.H. (1981). Mood and memory. American
Psychologist, 36, 129-148.
Center for the Study of Emotion and Attention. (1995). The
International Affective Picture System. Gainesville:
University of Florida.
Chang, A., & Wilson, M. (2004). Recalling emotional
experiences affects performance on reasoning problems.
Evolution and Human Behavior, 25, 267-276.
Channon, S., & Baker, J. (1994). Reasoning strategies in
depression: Effects of depressed mood on a syllogism
task. Personality and Individual Differences, 17, 707-711.
de Jong, P.J., Mayer, B., & van den Hout, M. (1997).
Conditional reasoning and phobic fear: Evidence for a
fear-confirming reasoning pattern. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 35, 507-516.

537

