UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Imaging Brain Regions with Susceptibility-induced Signal Losses using Gradient and Spin
Echo Techniques

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xz8c2t1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Miyapuram, Krishna
Osterbauer, Robert
Schultz, Wolfram
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Imaging Brain Regions with Susceptibility-induced Signal Losses using Gradient
and Spin Echo Techniques
Krishna P. Miyapuram (krishna.miyapuram@unilever.com)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, CB2 3DY, U.K.
Unilever R & D, 120, Olivier van Noortlan, Vlaardingen, 3133 AT, The Netherlands

Philippe N. Tobler (pnt21@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, U.K.

Wolfram Schultz (ws234@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, U.K.

Robert Osterbauer (robert@fmrib.ox.ac.uk)
FMRIB Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK

Christian Schwarzbauer (christian.schwarzbauer@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk)
MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, 15 Chaucer Road, Cambridge, CB2 7EF, U.K.

Abstract
Most fMRI studies use gradient-echo (GE) echo planar
imaging (EPI) technique for acquiring blood-oxygenation
level-dependent signals. Signal losses occur in the GE-EPI
due to macroscopic field gradients occurring at air-tissue
boundaries such as the orbitofrontal cortex. The spin-echo
(SE) EPI is preferentially sensitized to smaller vessels and is
considerably more robust against signal dropouts at air-tissue
interfaces. We used double echo EPI pulse sequence with
simultaneous acquisition of gradient-echo (GE) and Spinecho (SE) signal on a 3T Siemens Magnetom Trio Scanner. A
custom-built fMRI compatible olfactometer was used to
deliver two appetitive and two aversive odours. In an eventrelated experiment design, the colour of the fixation cue (red
or green) prompted participants to breathe-out and breathe-in
the odour delivered for 2sec followed by intensity or
pleasantness ratings on a visual analog scale. Brain activation
was assessed at the onset of breathe-in cue and thresholded
maps (p<0.005) were combined for the four subjects and two
odours within each valence to depict the number of
comparisons (out of a total of 8) that survived the threshold
criterion. The results suggest that SE acquisitions might
particularly be suitable for studies that focus on frontal,
temporal and striatal regions, while the GE acquisitions might
be suitable for studies focussing on parietal and occipital
regions.
Keywords: orbitofrontal cortex; olfactory; fMRI; Echo
planar imaging; spin echo; dropouts; susceptibility.

Introduction
FMRI studies generally use the gradient-echo echo-planar
imaging (EPI) technique, which is susceptible to artefacts
near the air-tissue boundaries such as the orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC) and medial temporal lobe. OFC and amygdala
are among the key structures involved in reward processing.
Optimisation of fMRI signal in these regions would be

necessary in order to understand the neural systems
involved in reward processing.
The human orbitofrontal cortex occupies the ventral
surface of the frontal part of the brain. It receives inputs
from the five classic sensory modalities: gustatory,
olfactory, somatosensory, auditory and visual. It also has
reciprocal connections with the amygdala, cingulate cortex,
insula, hippocampus, and striatum. There is evidence of
direct ascending and descending pathways to dopaminergic
cell groups (see Kringelbach and Rolls, 2004). Hence,
anatomically the OFC is uniquely placed to integrate
sensory information to modulate behaviour and has been
implicated in emotional processing. A meta-analysis of
neuroimaging studies by Kringelbach and Rolls (2004) has
revealed a medial-lateral distinction, which has been
proposed in monitoring rewards and evaluating
punishments, respectively (see also review by Elliot et al.,
2000). Further, Kringelbach and Rolls (2004) found a
posterior-anterior trend in activations by more primary and
abstract rewards, respectively. The amygdala is found in the
medial part of the anterior temporal lobe. Amygdala has
long been known implicated to play a role in negative
emotions, such as fear and aversive stimuli. However, more
recent studies suggest that amygdala is involved in
processing appetitive as well as aversive stimuli (see review
by Murray, 2007). Using human neuroimaging, Gottfried et
al., (2003) have demonstrated that the OFC and the
amygdala are crucial for maintaining the current value of a
reward. Schoenbaum et al. (2003) show that following
lesions of the basolateral amygdala, the cue selective
neurons in the orbitofrontal cortex were more sensory
driven and less sensitive to the motivational value of the
outcome. Using two patients with focal bilateral amygdala
lesions, Hampton et al. (2007) demonstrate that in a reversal
learning task, the activity in the ventromedial prefrontal

218

cortex was significantly reduced. This reduction could not
be explained by behavioural differences as Hampton et al.
compared the trials with correct choice in patients and
controls. These previous studies indicate a critical role for
the amygdala in establishing representations of reward
expectation in the prefrontal cortex, which in turn may be
used to guide behavioural choice.
Neuroimaging studies using BOLD fMRI pose a
particular challenge in identifying activations, particularly
in the regions nearby air-tissue interface such as the
orbitofrontal cortex and the parts of the temporal lobe.
Functional MRI techniques such as the echo-planar imaging
allow measurement of activations using microscopic
changes in magnetic susceptibility incurring from blood
flow and oxygenation changes (blood oxygenation leveldependent BOLD signal) arising from neural activity. Static
macroscopic susceptibility effects near air-tissue interfaces
causes artefacts that attenuate the MRI signal causing
dropout in these regions. Ojemann et al. (1997) quantified
these signal losses, primarily localized in the medial
orbitofrontal and the inferior lateral temporal lobe. Larger
artefacts were produced by increased echo time (TE).
Various methods have been suggested for optimising the
signal in the orbitofrontal cortex (see review by Kringelbach
and Rolls, 2004). Deichmann et al. (2003) have suggested
reduction of in-plane susceptibility gradients by using a
tilted slice orientation and through-plane susceptibility
gradients would be partly compensated by using a
preparation gradient pulse. This technique was applied by
Gottfried et al. (2002) for fMRI study of olfaction.
Application of a correction gradient would only be
practically possible to optimise signal across a limited
region. Using a coronal slicing direction aligns the slices
perpendicular to the predominant direction of the
susceptibility induced field gradients. Hence, coronal slicing
direction is recommended rather than the more commonly
used axial slicing direction. However, more number of
slices would be required for whole brain coverage in the
coronal direction, thus increasing the acquisition time (TR).
Shimming is a technique to make the magnetic field more
uniform. Active shimming uses shim coils, while passive
shimming uses a small magnetic material to compensate for
field inhomogeneity. Cusack et al. (2005) observed
increased sensitivity in the OFC in a reward-punishment
task. Osterbauer et al. (2006) observed significantly stronger
activation in the OFC using a visual-olfactory fMRI
paradigm. However, using a mouth-shim resulted in
increased subject movements, frequent swallowing and
tactile stimulation of the tongue. Hence, the passive
shimming should be used only for studies targeting
specifically the regions affected by susceptibility gradients.
For cognitive studies with focus on these regions, it is
desirable that alternative fMRI techniques are used (such as
those mentioned above) for compensating the susceptibilityinduced dropouts. We used double echo EPI pulse sequence
with simultaneous acquisition of gradient echo (GE) and
Spin echo (SE) signal. The use of spin-echo sequences for

reducing susceptibility-induced dropouts is discussed in the
next section. This technique required twice the acquisition
time (TR), but offered the flexibility to compare activations
obtained by the more common GE with those by the SE
EPI.

Spin-Echo Sequences for Reducing
Susceptibility Artefacts
Most fMRI studies use gradient-echo (GE) echo planar
imaging (EPI) technique for acquiring blood-oxygenation
level-dependent (BOLD) signals. In general, this technique
is more sensitive to changes in the BOLD contrast than the
spin-echo (SE) EPI. Signal losses occur in the GE-EPI due
to macroscopic field gradients occurring at air-tissue
interfaces. The SE-EPI is preferentially sensitized to smaller
vessels and is considerably more robust against signal
dropouts at air-tissue interfaces. Bandettini et al. (1994)
have compared motor cortex activation using GE and SE
EPI at 1.5 Tesla. They found that the BOLD contrast ratio
for GE sequence was about twice that of the SE sequence.
However, the SE sequences may provide a good alternative
to GE-EPI for functional activation studies due to the
reduced susceptibility artefacts. The SE technique would
provide a better spatial resolution due to its sensitivity to
small vessels.
Norris et al. (2002) tested brain activations obtained using
SE EPI at 3 Tesla during a stroop colour-word matching
task. They found activations in all regions described
previously using GE-EPI in the same task. Additionally,
they found activation in the frontopolar and ventral
frontomedian cortices. They conclude that SE-EPI is
sufficient for studies that require higher degree of spatial
localization (specificity) or able to detect activation in
regions affected by susceptibility gradients (sensitivity).
Parkes et al. (2005) compared the point-spread function of
the BOLD response for GE and SE acquisitions at 3 Tesla.
They used rotating wind-mill stimuli and found that the
contrast to noise ratio was reduced by a factor of 3 in the SE
technique compared with the GE technique suggesting
lower sensitivity to BOLD changes in the SE technique.
However, they find 13% reduction in the spatial extent of
the BOLD response. Thus, SE technique is less sensitive to
the presence of deoxyhaemoglobin in the draining veins that
may be distant from the actual site of the neuronal activity.
This could implicate a greater spatial resolution for fMRI
studies using SE technique.
Hulvershorn et al. (2005) investigated spatial and
temporal variations in GE and SE fMRI at 3 Tesla to a brief
visual stimulus. They found that SE BOLD contrast has a
smaller peak haemodynamic activation time (i.e. reaches its
maximum amplitude more quickly) than the GE acquisition.
The BOLD changes in response to increased neuronal
activity occur earlier in the microvasculature and then
propagate in to the venous compartment. Their results
suggest that the SE-EPI offers superior localization to the
site of activation at 3 Tesla, signifying improved spatial
sensitivity.

219

Schmidt et al. (2005) compared GE and SE-EPI using a
double-echo sequence at 3 Tesla during visual perception of
faces. They found similar activations using both SE and GE
sequences with smaller spatial extent and significantly
reduced activation in the SE sequences. While the SE
sequence significantly restored the signal in orbitofrontal
cortex, a susceptibility-prone region, there was no
significant activation detected in this region. Schmidt et al.
conclude that using optimised GE sequences that reduce
susceptibility artefacts (e.g. low echo time, TE) are
sufficient to detect activations in regions such as
orbitofrontal cortex. Their conclusion is opposite to that by
Norris et al. (2002) study in which only the SE sequence
was acquired.
Recently, Schwarzbauer et al. (2005) have reported that
the SE fMRI overcomes susceptibility-induced signal losses
in the inferior temporal lobe that is particularly relevant for
studies of semantic processing. Using transient hypercapnia
(breathing carbogen – 5% CO2 95% O2) as a global
stimulus, Schwarzbauer et al. (2006) have compared the GE
and SE data. They calculated a differential activation index
based on the number of subjects showing significant
activation. They found that SE was superior to the GE
acquisition in the orbitofrontal cortex, olfactory cortex,
gyrus rectus and temporal poles. They suggest that SE-EPI
as a choice for cognitive studies that involve regions
affected by magnetic field inhomogeneities, albeit with a
lower sensitivity in the SE data due to the lack of
contribution from static dephasing effects.

Using olfactory stimuli
Previous neuroimaging studies have demonstrated robust
activations of the amygdala and caudal OFC in olfactory
processing. Gottfried et al. (2002a, b) tested the effects of
odour valence by pairing neutral faces with pleasant,
neutral, and unpleasant odours with 50% probability. While
bilateral amygdala was activated by all odours regardless of
valence, the activations in the posterior orbitofrontal cortex
was segregated into medial and lateral segments for pleasant
and unpleasant odours, respectively (Gottfried et al., 2002a).
Further, neural responses common to both appetitive and
aversive learning in rostral and caudal OFC and appetitive
learning responses were observed in the nucleus accumbens
and amygdala (Gottfried at al. 2002b). Anderson et al.
(2003) dissociated intensity from valence of odours,
demonstrating the role of amygdala in intensity and that of
the OFC in valence of odours. Winston et al. (2005) have
demonstrated that the amygdala exhibits an intensity x
valence interaction in olfactory processing. These previous
neuroimaging studies suggest that olfactory stimuli would
be more appropriate for investigating the activation in
susceptibility induced dropout regions.

Experimental procedures
The experiment used a hybrid blocked-event design. 4 trials
constituted one mini-block in which two odours were
delivered. A total of four odours were used with two odours

for each valence (appetitive and aversive). The appetitive
odours were geranium (250µl) and a fragrance (200 µl)
(Unilever Research, Port Sunlight, UK) and the aversive
odours were rubber (300 µl) and body odour (100 µl)
(described in Dematte et al., 2007). All the odours were
diluted in 40 ml dipropylene glycol solvent (Quest
International, Ashford, England). The two odours within
each valence category were matched for pleasantness and
intensity ratings. Using two odours allowed us to overcome
the habituation effects due to repeated presentation of
odours over trials during the course of the experiment.

Figure – 1: Schematic diagram of olfactometer
The odours and a custom-built fMRI compatible
olfactometer were provided by Robert Osterbauer, FMRIB
centre, University of Oxford. The olfactometer consists of 8
computer-controlled valves that direct a stream of medical
air (5 l/min) from a G-cylinder into one of the eight
different lines of Teflon tubing. These lines are in turn
connected to a nebuliser that uses the air stream to change
the dissolved odorants into small particles. The outlets of
each nebuliser are connected to a mixing chamber that
combines the medical air stream with the odorised air.
Participants held the tubes at a comfortable position away
from their nose by their left hand with supporting cushion
padding. A nasal mask was not used to avoid any odour left
over from previous trials. A parallel port interface was used
for computer controlled triggering of the eight solenoid
valves to switch ON / OFF a particular odour.
A fixation ‘+’ sign appeared at the centre of the screen for
a Poisson distributed random inter-trial interval with mean 3
seconds. The fixation turned to red alerting the participants
to breathe-out. After 1 second, the fixation turned green
alerting the subjects to breathe-in. The red and green
contingencies with breathe-out and breathe-in were
counterbalanced across subjects. The odour was delivered to
the subject for 2 seconds. The subjects then rated the odour
for either pleasantness or intensity on a scale of -10 (very
unpleasant / very weak) to +10 (very pleasant / very strong).
The value of 0 was displayed at the middle of the scale as
Neutral.

220

The data is presented from four participants who took part
in the study. Participants had been pre-screened to exclude
prior histories of neurological or psychiatric illness and gave
informed consent. We conducted this pilot study on a 3
Tesla Siemens magnetom Trio Scanner. The research
protocol was approved by the Cambridgeshire Local
Research Ethics Committee, U.K.
Functional images using the double echo Gradient and
spin echo acquisitions was performed on a 3 Tesla Siemens
magnetom Trio Scanner. The imaging parameters were 22
slices of thickness 3 mm, slice gap 1mm, inter-scan interval
of 3 sec and TE 30 ms. The in-plane resolution was 3.5 mm
x 3.5 mm and the matrix size 64 x64. Images were analysed
using SPM5 with the preprocessing steps of realignment,
normalization to EPI template and smoothing with an
isometric Gaussian filter with 8mm FWHM. Statistical
analysis modelling the events at the onset of breathe-in cue
convolved with the canonical HRF and its temporal and
dispersion derivatives. The activation to appetitive and
aversive odours was obtained using linear contrasts.

Echo (SE) acquisitions, the results are focussed on the
sensitivity of these two acquisitions.

Results
The average pleasantness ratings (mean±SEM) on a scale of
-10 to +10 for the two appetitive odours were 3.16±0.93
and 3.34±0.92 and for the two aversive odours were 2.31±1.11 and -2.75±1.31. The intensity ratings
(mean±SEM) on a scale of -10 to +10 for the two appetitive
odours were -0.77±0.71 and 0.39±1.35 and for the two
aversive odours were 0.11±1.41 and -0.18±1.18. These
ratings indicate that the valence of odours were
distinguishable based on their pleasantness ratings but not
by the intensity ratings. Further, there is less differentiation
of ratings between the two odours for each valence.

Figure - 2: Average pleasantness (top) and intensity
(bottom) ratings for the odour stimuli
Brain activation was assessed at the onset of breathe-in
cue for the four types of odours. Activation images were
thresholded at p<0.005, uncorrected for multiple
comparisons. These thresholded maps were combined for
the four subjects and two odours within each valence to
depict the number of comparisons (out of a total of 8) that
survived the threshold criterion. A sensitivity measure was
calculated as the average number of voxels activated for the
appetitive and aversive odours. The number of voxels
activated per brain area was calculated using the labels
obtained from Talairach Daemon software (Lancaster et al.,
2000) for all suprathreshold voxels. As the aim of this pilot
study was to compare the Gradient-Echo (GE) and Spin-

Figure – 3: Activations for appetitive odours for gradient
echo (hot) and spin echo (cool) acquisitions. The colorscale
indicates the number of subjects (4) x number of odours (2)
The GE acquisition had better sensitivity in the anterior
cerebellum while the SE acquisition had better sensitivity in
the posterior cerebellum (Figures 3 and 4 z = -40 to -16).
The SE acquisition had better sensitivity in the anterior
cingulate (z = 20 to 32, cool map), while the GE acquisition
had better sensitivity in the cingulate gyrus and posterior
cingulate (z = 24 to 36 hot map) and parahippocampal gyrus
(z = -16 to -8 hot map). The SE acquisition particular
seemed to have better sensitivity in the striatum (z = 8 to 12
cool map) and the inferior, medial frontal gyri (z > -12 cool
map). The GE acquisition, on the other hand, had better
sensitivity in the middle frontal and precentral gyri (z > 20
hot map). The SE sequence had greater sensitivity in the
superior temporal gyrus (z = -28 to -24 cool map) , while
GE detected sub-gyral activations in the frontal and
temporal lobes (z = 16 to 24 hot map). The GE acquisition
had a definite advantage in inferior parietal (z > 20 hot map)
and middle occipital regions (z = -8 to 20 hot map). These
results suggest that SE acquisitions might particularly be
suitable for studies that focus on frontal, temporal and
striatal regions, while the GE acquisitions might be suitable
for studies focussing on parietal and occipital regions.

221

the maximum T-value of the two acquisitions. However,
this can lead to inconsistencies in interpretation of linearly
opposite T-contrasts (for example) in that a conclusion
cannot be derived whether to declare a brain area as being
activated or not. Establishment of validity of using the SE
acquisitions and algorithms to integrate the results with GE
acquisition needs to devised.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Wellcome Trust and the
MRC-Wellcome Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience
Institute (BCNI). KPM is supported by Cambridge Nehru
Scholarship and Overseas Research Students Award
Scheme, UK.

References

Figure – 4: Activations for aversive odours for gradient echo
(hot) and spin echo (cool) acquisitions. The colorscale
indicates the number of subjects (4) x number of odours (2)
This study attempted to resolve the apparent dilemma of
the utility of SE sequences. In contrast to the usual group
analysis (fixed or random effects), a completely different
approach was used to measure the sensitivity of the different
activations based on counting the number of suprathreshold
activations to ensure that the differences between the two
acquisitions can be clearly characterized. The SE
acquisitions might particularly be suitable for studies that
focus on frontal, temporal and striatal regions, while the GE
acquisitions might be suitable for studies focussing on
parietal and occipital regions.

Future directions
The advantage of using the double-echo acquisitions is that
both the regularly acquired GE and the susceptibility
insensitive SE are obtained with the compromise in
temporal resolution requiring twice the repetition time (TR).
The GE and SE acquisitions are pre-processed and analysed
separately and the results are qualitatively compared. The
difficulty with quantitatively comparing the two acquistions
together is two-fold. Firstly, the comparison in drop out
regions cannot be made as no signal is available in the GE
sequences. This problem can be overcome by using an
explicit mask obtained from the analysis of SE sequences to
analyze the GE sequence data. Secondly, the sensitivity of
the two sequences vastly differs depending on the brain
region. Hence, a quantitative comparison between GE and
SE sequences needs them to be weighted appropriately
based on their sensitivity measures. One approach to
combine the data from the two acquisitions would be to pick

Anderson, A., Christoff, K., Stappen, I., Panitz, D.,
Ghahremani, D., Glover, G., Gabrieli, J., and Sobel, N.
(2003). Dissociated neural representations of intensity and
valence in human olfaction. Nat. Neurosci., 6:196–202.
Bandettini, P.A. (1994). Magnetic resonance imaging of
human brain activation using endogenous susceptibility
contrast, PhD Thesis, Medical College of Wisconsin.
Cusack, R., Russell, B., Cox, S., De Panfilis, C.,
Schwarzbauer, C., and Ansorge, R. (2005). An evaluation
of the use of passive shimming to improve frontal
sensitivity in fMRI. Neuroimage, 24:82–91.
Deichmann, R., Gottfried, J., Hutton, C., and Turner, R.
(2003). Optimized EPI for fMRI studies of the
orbitofrontal cortex. Neuroimage, 19:430–441.
Dematt`e, M., Osterbauer, R., and Spence, C. (2007).
Olfactory cues modulate facial attractiveness. Chem.
Senses, 32:603–610.
Elliott, R., Dolan, R., and Frith, C. (2000). Dissociable
functions in the medial and lateral orbitofrontal cortex:
evidence from human neuroimaging studies. Cereb.
Cortex, 10:308–317.
Gottfried, J., Deichmann, R., Winston, J., and Dolan, R.
(2002a). Functional heterogeneity in human olfactory
cortex: an eventrelated functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. J. Neurosci., 22:10819– 10828.
Gottfried, J., O’Doherty, J., and Dolan, R. (2002b).
Appetitive and aversive olfactory learning in humans
studied using eventrelated functional magnetic resonance
imaging. J. Neurosci., 22:10829–10837.
Gottfried, J., O’Doherty, J., and Dolan, R. (2003).
Encoding predictive reward value in human amygdala and
orbitofrontal cortex. Science, 301:1104–1107.
Hampton, A., Adolphs, R., Tyszka, M., and O’Doherty, J.
(2007). Contributions of the amygdala to reward
expectancy and choice signals in human prefrontal cortex.
Neuron, 55:545–555.
Hulvershorn, J., Bloy, L., Gualtieri, E., Leigh, J., and Elliott,
M. (2005). Spatial sensitivity and temporal response of
spin echo and gradient echo bold contrast at 3 T using
peak hemodynamic activation time. Neuroimage, 24:216–
223.

222

Kringelbach, M. and Rolls, E. (2004). The functional
neuroanatomy of the human orbitofrontal cortex: evidence
from neuroimaging and neuropsychology. Prog.
Neurobiol., 72:341–372.
Murray, E. (2007). The amygdala, reward and emotion.
Trends Cogn. Sci. (Regul. Ed.), 11:489–497.
Norris, D., Zysset, S., Mildner, T., and Wiggins, C. (2002).
An investigation of the value of spin-echo-based fMRI
using a Stroop colorword matching task and EPI at 3 T.
Neuroimage, 15:719–726.
Ogawa, S., Lee, T., Kay, A., and Tank, D. (1990). Brain
magnetic resonance imaging with contrast dependent on
blood oxygenation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
87:9868–9872.
Ogawa, S., Tank, D., Menon, R., Ellermann, J., Kim, S.,
Merkle, H., and Ugurbil, K. (1992). Intrinsic signal
changes accompanying sensory stimulation: functional
brain mapping with magnetic resonance imaging. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 89:5951–5955.

(2002). Automated anatomical labeling of activations in
SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the
MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage, 15, 1:27389.
Winston, J., Gottfried, J., Kilner, J., and Dolan, R. (2005).
Integrated neural representations of odor intensity and
affective valence in human amygdala. J. Neurosci.,
25:8903–8907.

Ojemann, J., Akbudak, E., Snyder, A., McKinstry, R.,
Raichle, M., and Conturo, T. (1997). Anatomic
localization and quantitative analysis of gradient
refocused echo-planar fMRI susceptibility artifacts.
Neuroimage, 6:156–167.
Osterbauer, R., Matthews, P., Jenkinson, M., Beckmann,
C., Hansen, P., and Calvert, G. (2005). Color of scents:
chromatic stimuli modulate odor responses in the human
brain. J. Neurophysiol., 93:3434–3441.
Osterbauer, R., Wilson, J., Calvert, G., and Jezzard, P.
(2006). Physical and physiological consequences of
passive intra-oral shimming. Neuroimage, 29:245–253.
Parkes, L., Schwarzbach, J., Bouts, A., Deckers, R., Pullens,
P., Kerskens, C., and Norris, D. (2005). Quantifying the
spatial resolution of the gradient echo and spin echo
BOLD response at 3 Tesla. Magn Reson Med, 54:1465–
1472.
Rorden, C, Brett, M (2000). Stereotaxic display of brain
lesions. Behav Neurol, 12, 4:191-200.
Schmidt, C., Boesiger, P., and Ishai, A. (2005). Comparison
of fMRI activation as measured with gradient- and spinecho EPI during visual perception. Neuroimage, 26:852–
859.
Schoenbaum, G, Setlow, B, Saddoris, MP, Gallagher, M
(2003). Encoding predicted outcome and acquired value
in orbitofrontal cortex during cue sampling depends upon
input from basolateral amygdala. Neuron, 39:855-67.
Schwarzbauer, C., Raposo, A. & Tyler, L.K. (2005). Spinecho fMRI overcomes susceptibility-induced signal losses
in the inferior temporal lobes. NeuroImage, 26 (S1): 802.
Schwarzbauer C., Mildner T., Heinke W., Zysset S.,
Deichmann R., Brett M., Davis M.H. (2006). Spin-echo
EPI – The method of choice for fMRI of brain regions
affected by magnetic field inhomogeneities? Human
Brain Mapping, Abstract No: 1049.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N, Landeau, B, Papathanassiou, D,
Crivello, F, Etard, O, Delcroix, N, Mazoyer, B, Joliot, M

223

