UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Learning of Word Order

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4c41p1bd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Rebuschat, Patrick
Williams, John

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Learning of Word Order
Patrick Rebuschat (pr277@cam.ac.uk)
Research Centre for English & Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge,
9 West Road, Cambridge CB3 9DP, United Kingdom

John N. Williams (jnw12@cam.ac.uk)
Research Centre for English & Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge,
9 West Road, Cambridge CB3 9DP, United Kingdom

an experiment that investigated whether adults can acquire
the syntactic structure of a novel language without intending
to and without awareness of what they have learned. The
experiment constitutes an example of how the theoretical
concepts and the methodological framework provided by
implicit learning research can be applied to the investigation
of natural language acquisition.1

Abstract
Language acquisition is frequently characterized as a process
where learning proceeds implicitly, i.e. incidentally and in
absence of awareness of what was learned. This article reports
the results of an experiment that investigated whether adults
can acquire the syntactic structure of a novel language
implicitly. Experimental subjects were trained on a semiartificial grammar under incidental learning conditions, and
then tested to determine whether learning took place and to
assess whether learning resulted in unconscious knowledge.
The results indicate that adults are able to acquire syntactic
knowledge of a new language under incidental learning
conditions, while processing sentences for meaning, without
the benefit of corrective feedback and after a relatively brief
exposure period. The results also show that learners are able
to transfer knowledge to stimuli with the same underlying
structure but new surface features. The measures of awareness
further suggest that subjects were aware of having acquired
knowledge, but that they were unaware of the nature of this
knowledge. The experiment thus provides evidence for the
implicit learning of natural language syntax.

On measuring awareness
It is generally accepted that the knowledge acquired during
standard Artificial Grammar Learning (AGL) experiments is
the result of an incidental learning process. However, the
question of whether this knowledge is actually “implicit” is
highly controversial (Berry, 1996). The case for
unconscious learning depends on both our definition of
awareness and on the validity of tests used to assess
unaware learning. In this study, knowledge was assumed
unconscious if participants were unaware of what they have
learned, i.e. implicit learning was defined in terms of the
product of learning rather than the properties of the learning
process. Proposals for measuring awareness in this sense
include subjective measures, such as verbal reports and
confidence ratings, as well as objective measures, where
performance on a direct test (e.g., free generation) is
compared to performance on an indirect test (e.g., serial
reaction time). The present experiment employed subjective
measures to determine whether adults could acquire nonnative syntax without becoming aware of the knowledge
they have acquired.

Keywords: Implicit learning; Artificial Grammar Learning;
syntax; language acquisition; intuition; subjective measures.

Introduction
How humans derive information from the environment
implicitly, i.e. without the intention to learn and in absence
of awareness of what was learned, is one of the central
questions within the cognitive sciences. The process of
implicit learning is assumed to underlie the human ability to
extract knowledge from complex, rule-governed stimulus
domains and, as such, appears to be an elementary and
ubiquitous process of human cognition. Everyday life offers
many examples of implicit learning. Language acquisition,
socialization, music perception and many other learning
episodes are widely thought to proceed in an implicit
fashion.
Despite the widespread recognition that language
acquisition constitutes a prime example of implicit learning
(e.g., Cleeremans, Destrebecqz, & Boyer, 1998; Frensch &
Rünger, 2003; Reber, 1967; Perruchet, 2008; St. John &
Shanks, 1997; Winter & Reber, 1994), relatively little effort
has been made, within linguistics or experimental
psychology, to investigate natural language acquisition
within the theoretical framework provided by implicit
learning research. The present article reports the results of

Subjective measures Dienes (2004, 2008) has advocated
the use of subjective measures in order to assess whether the
knowledge acquired during AGL tasks is conscious or
1

The research literature on language acquisition abounds with
studies that employ AGs in order to investigate the basic processes
underlying natural language acquisition (Gómez & Gerken, 2000).
However, in contrast to implicit learning research, these studies
generally do not integrate measures of awareness. This is, of
course, in part explained by the fact that infants are incapable to
verbally report, indicate confidence levels, or perform on fragment
completion tasks. However, many of the experiments conducted,
for example, within the statistical learning tradition (see Gómez,
2007, and Saffran, 2003, for overviews) employ children or adults
as subjects, which means that basic measures of awareness could
be administered. Usually, lack of awareness is assumed but not
empirically assessed.

425

times.” Likewise, judgment knowledge is only conscious if
there is a corresponding higher-order thought (e.g., “I
{know/think/believe, etc.} that MRVXX has the same
structure as the training sequences.”) The guessing and the
zero correlation criteria measure the conscious or
unconscious status of judgment knowledge, not structural
knowledge.
Dienes & Scott (2005) assume that conscious structural
knowledge leads to conscious judgment knowledge.
However, if structural knowledge is unconscious, judgment
knowledge could still be either conscious or unconscious.
This explains why, in the case of natural language, people
can be very confident in their grammaticality decisions
without knowing why. Here, structural (linguistic)
knowledge is unconscious while (metalinguistic) judgment
knowledge is conscious. The phenomenology in this case is
that of intuition, i.e. knowing that a judgment is correct but
not knowing why. If, on the other hand, structural and
judgment knowledge are unconscious, the phenomenology
is that of guessing. In both cases the structural knowledge
acquired during training is unconscious. Dienes and Scott
proposed that in AGL experiments the conscious status of
both structural and judgment knowledge can be assessed
concurrently by adding source attributions to the confidence
ratings in the testing phase. That is, in addition to asking
subjects how confident they were in their grammaticality
judgments, one also prompts them to report the basis (or
source) of their judgments. The following experiment
exemplifies how subjective measures can be employed to
investigate whether adults are able to acquire the syntactic
structure of a new language without awareness.

unconscious. One way of dissociating conscious and
unconscious processes is to collect confidence ratings (e.g.,
Dienes, Altmann, Kwan, & Goode, 1995; Kunimoto, Miller,
& Pashler, 2001). In AGL, for example, subjects can be
asked to report, for each grammaticality judgment, how
confident they were in their decision. Dienes et al. (1995)
suggested two ways in which confidence rating data could
serve as an index of unconscious knowledge. Firstly,
knowledge can be considered unconscious if subjects
believe to be guessing when their classification performance
is, in fact, significantly above chance. Dienes et al. called
this the guessing criterion. Secondly, knowledge is
unconscious if subjects‟ confidence is unrelated to their
accuracy. This criterion, introduced by Chan (1992), was
labeled zero correlation criterion by Dienes et al. Several
studies have shown that performance on standard AGL tasks
can result in unconscious knowledge according to these
criteria (e.g., Dienes et al., 1995; Dienes & Longuet
Higgins, 2004).
Structural knowledge and judgment knowledge A
criticism that can be leveled at the use of confidence ratings
concerns the type of knowledge that is assessed by this
measure. Consider the case of natural language acquisition
(Dienes, 2008). As mentioned above, language acquisition
is considered a prime example of implicit learning. All
cognitively unimpaired adults are able to discern
grammatical sentences of their native language from
ungrammatical ones, even though they are unable to report
the underlying rule-system. However, if asked how
confident they are in their grammaticality decisions, most
native speakers will report high confidence levels, as in:
“„John bought an apple in the supermarket.‟ is a
grammatical sentence and I am 100% confident in my
decision, but I do not know what the rules are or why I am
right.” Since in these cases accuracy and confidence will be
highly correlated, does this mean that language acquisition
is not an implicit learning process after all? Probably not.
Dienes (2004, 2008; Dienes & Scott, 2005) proposed a
convincing explanation for this phenomenon, based on
Rosenthal‟s (1986, 2005) Higher-Order Thought Theory.
Dienes suggested that, when subjects are exposed to letter
sequences in an AGL experiment, they learn about the
structure of the sequences. This structural knowledge can
consist, for example, of knowledge of whole exemplars,
knowledge of fragments or knowledge of rules (e.g., “A
letter sequence can start with an M or a V.”) In the testing
phase, subjects use their structural knowledge to construct a
different type of knowledge, namely whether the test items
shared the same underlying structure as the training items
(e.g. “MRVXX has the same structure as the training
sequences.”). Dienes labeled this judgment knowledge. Both
forms of knowledge can be conscious or unconscious. For
example, a structural representation such as “An R can be
repeated several times.” is only conscious if it is explicitly
represented, i.e. if there is a higher-order thought such as “I
{know/think/believe, etc.} that an R can repeated several

Method
Participants
Thirty native speakers of English (22 women and 8 men,
mean age = 24.3 years) were recruited to take part in this
experiment and evenly distributed into experimental and
control conditions. The majority of participants (28) were
university students at the time of the experiment. None had
a background in German or any other V2-language.

Stimuli
A semi-artificial grammar, consisting of English words and
German syntax, was used to generate the stimulus material
for this experiment (see also Rebuschat & Williams, 2006).
In creating the stimuli, English declarative sentences were
rearranged in accordance with German syntax as in the
examples below (1-3). In comparison to the finite-state
grammars commonly employed in AGL research, this
system has the advantage that (i) the grammatical
complexity of natural languages is maintained and (ii)
semantic information is present.
(1) Simple sentence (one-clause construction)
a. English: Yesterday John bought the newspaper in
the supermarket.

426

b.
c.

German: Gestern kaufte John die Zeitung im
Supermarkt.
Stimulus: Yesterday bought John the newspaper in
the supermarket.

Table 1: Descriptions of the verb placement rules.
Examples are given in parentheses.
Rule
V2

(2) Complex sentence (two-clause construction; sequence:
main-subordinate)
a. English: Last year Susan visited Melbourne
because her daughter lived in Australia.
b. German: Letztes Jahr besuchte Susan Melbourne,
weil ihre Tochter in Australien lebte.
c. Stimulus: Last year visited Susan Melbourne
because her daughter in Australia lived.

V1

Description (Example)
Finite verb placed in second phrasal position
of main clauses that are not preceded by a
subordinate clause
(In the evening ate Rose excellent dessert at a
restaurant.)
Finite verb placed in first position in main
clauses that are preceded by a subordinate
clause
(Since his teacher criticism voiced, put Chris
more effort into his homework.)
Finite verb placed in final position in all
subordinate clauses.
(George repeated today that the movers his
furniture scratched.)

(3) Complex sentence (two-clause construction; sequence:
VF
subordinate-main)
a. English: Since his parents needed groceries, David
purchased everything necessary.
a. German: Weil seine Eltern Lebensmittel brauchten,
kaufte David alles Notwendige ein.
b. Stimulus: Since his parents groceries needed,
Training set The training set consisted of 120 sentences
purchased David everything necessary.
and was subdivided into 60 plausible constructions and 60
implausible ones. That is, half of the sentences were
As is evident from the examples, the elements within
syntactically correct but expressed semantically implausible
phrase boundaries were left intact, while the specific
propositions. Plausible and implausible items were designed
ordering of the phrases was altered. In (1), for example, the
so that participants would have to process the entire auditory
verb phrase (VP) was moved from third position in the
string before being able to judge its plausibility. In most
phrasal sequence to second. In (2), the VP of the main
instances, the final phrase of the sentence would reveal
clause was moved to second position while the VP of the
whether the sentence was plausible or not, and participants
subordinate clause was placed in final position. Finally, in
had to process the entire string until reaching their
(3) the VP of the subordinate clause was moved to final
judgment.
position, whereas the VP of the main clause was shifted to
In order to train the experimental group, 40 sentences
first position.
were created for each verb placement rule. All sentences
The linguistic focus in this experiment was on three rules
were in the past tense. The sentences below are examples of
that determine the placement of VPs in the semi-artificial
plausible and implausible constructions (4-5).
language. These rules, which are partially based on German
syntax, stated that, depending on the type of clause (main
(4) Plausible constructions
vs. subordinate) and the type of clause sequence (maina. Chris entertained today his colleagues with an
subordinate vs. subordinate-main), finite verbs had to be
interesting performance.
placed either in first, second or final position in terms of the
b. George repeated today that his students about their
phrasal sequence. Table 1 illustrates the three rules in
classes cared.
question.
c. Since his teacher criticism voiced, put Chris more
Rules V2 and V1 both applied to main clauses. They
effort into his homework.
differed in that the former rule applied to main clauses that
were not preceded by a subordinate clause and the latter to
(5) Implausible constructions
main clauses were preceded by a subordinate clause. In
a. ? Rose abandoned in the evening her cats on planet
contrast, rule VF only applied to subordinate clauses,
Venus.
irrespectively of whether a main clause preceded or
b. ? Kate confessed today that her horse the corridor
followed.
murdered.
A total of 180 sentences were drafted for this experiment.
c. ? After his wife a thief surprised, communicated
The sentences were read out by a male native speaker of
George with the police banana.
British English, digitally recorded on a Sony Mini-Disc
player (MZ-R700) and subsequently edited with sound
Testing set The testing set consisted of 60 new sentences
processing software (Audacity, version 1.2.4). The stimulus
and was subdivided into 30 grammatical and 30
sentences were divided into a training and a testing set.
ungrammatical items. The grammatical sentences followed
the same syntactic patterns as the training sentences (V2,
V2-VF, VF-V1). The ungrammatical templates were similar

427

to the grammatical ones with the exception that the position
of the VP was incorrect (*V1, *V3, *V4, *VF, *VF-V2,
*V1-VF). Several restrictions applied to the lexicon of the
testing set. With the exception of a limited number of
function words, no words were repeated from the training
set, making the test analogous to the transfer paradigm in
AGL research (Reber, 1969). No verb was repeated from the
training set.
A frequency analysis of the testing set indicated that the
average sentence length was 11.1 words per sentence for
grammatical items and 11.6 for ungrammatical items. There
was no significant difference between training and testing
sets with regard to sentence length, F(1, 193) = .922, p >
.05, i.e. sentence length was not a reliable cue to
grammaticality in the testing phase.

run on a Dell PC (Windows XP) and delivered via Cedrus
SuperLab Pro (version 2.0).
At the end of the experiment, all participants were given a
debriefing questionnaire which prompted them to verbalize
any rule or regularity they might have noticed during the
course of the experiment. Finally, the questionnaire also
asked participants to supply their name, age, gender,
nationality, occupation and linguistic background.

Results
Performance on the grammaticality judgment task served as
the measure of learning. Awareness was measured by means
of verbal reports, confidence ratings and source attributions
(Dienes & Scott, 2005).

Grammaticality judgments

Procedure

The analysis of the grammaticality judgments showed that
the experimental group classified 61.6% (SD = 8.3%) of the
test items correctly and the control group 42.9% (SD =
5.1%). The difference between the two groups was
significant, t(27) = 7.289, p < .001. Further analysis showed
that the experimental group performed significantly above
chance on this task, t(13) = 5.150, p < .001, while the
controls scored significantly below chance, t(14) = -5.361, p
< .001. That is, the training phase produced a clear learning
effect in the experimental group.
Further analysis showed that the experimental group
endorsed 71% (SD = 13.5%) of all grammatical sentences
and 47% (SD = 19.7%) of all ungrammatical ones, t(13) =
5.294, p < .0005. The control group only endorsed 36.4%
(SD = 30.3%) of grammatical sentences and 51% (SD =
28.4%) of ungrammatical ones, t(14) = -5.268, p < .0005.
The difference between experimental and control subjects
on grammatical items was significant, F(1, 27) = 14.824, p
< .001, i.e. the experimental group was significantly more
likely to correctly endorse grammatical strings. The
difference between groups on ungrammatical strings was
not significant, however, F(1, 27) = .125, p > .05. That is,
the classification performance of the experimental groups
was largely driven by the correct endorsement of
grammatical items.

Experimental participants were trained on the semi-artificial
grammar under incidental learning conditions by means of
elicited imitations and plausibility judgments. Specifically,
the training task required participants to listen to the training
set on an item-by-item basis, to repeat each sentence after a
delayed prompt (1,500 ms), and to judge whether the
statement made was semantically plausible or not. The
experiment began with a short practice session to familiarize
participants with the training task. This consisted of four
practice sentences which were not repeated in the actual
training phase. No mention was made that the scrambling
followed the word order rules of a natural language. The
training sentences were presented to each participant in
random order. The entire training phase took, on average, 40
minutes to complete. Controls did not receive any training.
After training, experimental participants were informed
that the word order in the previous sentences was not
arbitrary but that it followed a “complex system” instead.
They were then instructed to listen to 60 new scrambled
sentences, only half of which would follow the same rulesystem as the sequences they had just been exposed to.
Those sentences that did obey the rules should be endorsed
as “grammatical” and those that did not rejected as
“ungrammatical.” For each test sentence, participants were
required to decide on its grammaticality, to report how
confident they were in their judgment (guess, somewhat
confident, very confident), and to indicate what the basis of
their judgment was (guess, intuition, memory, rule
knowledge). In the case of the control group, participants
were merely told that they would listen to 60 scrambled
sentences and asked to judge whether or not a sentence was
grammatical. Participants were given no feedback regarding
the accuracy of their grammaticality decisions.
The test sentences were presented to each participant in
random order. The testing phase began with a short practice
session to familiarize the participants with the new task.
This consisted of four practice trials which were not
repeated in the actual testing set. The entire testing phase
took approximately 15 minutes to complete. All tasks were

Confidence ratings
The following analyses only report the results of the
experimental group. In terms of proportion, experimental
participants tended to select the option “somewhat
confident” most frequently (54%), followed by “very
confident” (34%) and the “guess” option least frequently
(12%). In terms of accuracy, the analysis indicated that
experimental participants were most accurate when
reporting to be very confident in their decisions (65%) and
slightly less accurate when reporting to be somewhat
confident (60%). Accuracy was lowest for those
grammaticality decisions in which subjects had no
confidence whatsoever (53%). Experimental participants
scored significantly above chance when reporting to be
somewhat confident and very confident, p < .05. When

428

participants reported to be guessing, performance was
indistinguishable from chance. The guessing criterion for
unconscious judgment knowledge was thus not satisfied.
The Chan-difference score (Dienes et al., 1995) was
computed in order to establish whether learning in the
experimental group was implicit by the zero correlation
criterion.
The average confidence for correct
grammaticality decisions was 6.1 (SD = 1.6) and the
average confidence for incorrect decisions was 5.6 (SD =
1.7), i.e. experimental participants were more confident in
correct decisions than in incorrect ones. The difference (0.5)
was significant, t(13) = 2.310, p < .05. That is, there was
conscious judgment knowledge according to the zero
correlation criterion. Participants were partially aware that
they had acquired some knowledge during the training
phase.

with the same underlying structure but new surface features,
which suggests that an abstract representation has been
derived from the original training sentences.
Although a clear learning effect was observed, the results
also showed that learning was somewhat limited. For
example, closer analysis of the grammaticality judgments
showed that performance was largely driven by the abovechance endorsement of grammatical items. Experimental
participants endorsed 71% of all grammatical sentences but
also 47% of ungrammatical ones, which indicates that their
classifications could have been partially based on memory
for previously encountered patterns. If a test stimulus
matched a training pattern, as was the case with the
grammatical test sequences, subjects were likely to endorse
it. However, when a test stimulus did not resemble a
training pattern, subjects had to rely on guessing.
The fact that classification performance was not
categorical, but probabilistic, in nature further suggests that
subjects did not acquire linguistic rules. The acquisition of
the rule-system employed to generate the stimuli would
have resulted in the capacity of distinguishing grammatical
and ungrammatical strings categorically. In this experiment,
for example, subjects should have been able to endorse or
reject a sentence purely on the basis of the placement of the
verb: if the VP occupied the appropriate position, a sentence
should have been endorsed; if it did not, the sentence should
have been rejected. This would have resulted in high
endorsement rates for grammatical stimuli and low
endorsement rates for ungrammatical stimuli. The analysis
of the grammaticality judgments in this experiment showed
that this was not the case. When participants believed their
classifications to be based on rule knowledge, this did not
correspond to the word order rules of the semi-artificial
grammar. The analysis of the verbal reports further supports
this view.
Several reasons might explain why there was limited
learning in this experiment. Firstly, subjects might simply
have received an insufficient amount of exposure for
learning to take place. The training phase consisted of 120
sentences conforming to the semi-artificial grammar and
lasted approximately 40 minutes. Although some AGL
experiments report learning effects after considerably
briefer exposure periods, it is likely that subjects in natural
language experiments require additional exposure. In
contrast to AGL subjects, participants in this experiment
possessed a rule-system that might have interfered with the
grammar to be acquired. Considering the persistence of
native language transfer errors in second language
acquisition, it seems natural that prolonged stimulus
exposure might be required. Secondly, participants‟
metalinguistic knowledge might have distracted their
attention from relevant verb placement cues. The preexisting knowledge of categories such as “subject”, “verb”
and “object” might aid acquisition by increasing the
likelihood that subjects will notice these elements in the
input. On the other hand, it might also distract them from
paying attention to linguistic notions which they do not have

Source attributions
In terms of proportion, experimental participants most
frequently believed their classification decisions to be based
on rule knowledge (43%), followed by intuition (32%) and
memory (15%). The guess category was selected least
frequently (10%). In terms of accuracy, experimental
participants scored highest when reporting to use rule
knowledge (65%) to guide their decisions, followed by the
intuition (59%) and memory (57%) categories. Subjects
were least accurate when basing decisions on guesses
(56%). Participants performed significantly above chance
when basing their decisions on rule knowledge, p < .001, or
on intuition, p < .05. The latter suggests that participants
acquired at least some unconscious structural knowledge.

Verbal reports
The analysis of the verbal reports showed that, while most
participants in this experiment were able to verbalize
knowledge, there were no verbalizations that were relevant
to the rules of the semi-artificial grammar. No subject was
able to provide descriptions of the verb placement rules
employed to generate the stimulus material or to provide
correct examples of grammatical sentences. The analysis of
the verbal reports further suggests that participants focused
exclusively on the ordering of words within clauses,
disregarding important cues such as clause type and clause
sequence. This might be taken as an indication that
participants did not pay attention to phrasal arrangements
above the clause-level. Despite the fact that subjects were
conscious of some knowledge, the analysis of the verbal
reports suggests that subjects were largely unaware of the
rules that determine the placement of VPs.

Discussion
The results of the experiment indicate that adult learners are
able to acquire new syntactic knowledge under incidental
learning conditions, while processing sentences for
meaning, without the benefit of corrective feedback and
after a relatively brief exposure period. The results also
show that learners are able to transfer knowledge to stimuli

429

as readily available (such as clause type). It could also be
that categories such as clause type or clause sequence are
simply not perceived to be relevant elements of grammar
and hence not noticed. It would be interesting to determine
whether children without knowledge of linguistic
terminology would perform differently on the experimental
tasks.
In terms of awareness, the experiment provided evidence
for the implicit learning of natural language structure. The
analysis of confidence ratings and source attributions
showed that, while subjects were aware of having acquired
knowledge, they were at least partially unaware of what
knowledge they had acquired. When attributing
grammaticality judgments to intuition, subjects performed
significantly above chance, i.e. they had acquired
unconscious structural knowledge. At the same time, it is
important to highlight that experimental subjects were
significantly more accurate when reporting higher levels of
confidence and when basing their decisions on explicit
categories (memory and rule). Conscious but, judging from
the debriefings, unverbalizable knowledge was clearly
linked to improved performance in the grammaticality
judgment task. The experiment thus mirrored the process of
language acquisition outside the lab.
As far as methodology is concerned, the experiment
further confirms that the sole reliance on verbal reports is
clearly inadequate in order to assess awareness. The analysis
of the verbal reports showed that participants were unable to
verbally describe the rules of the semi-artificial system,
which would have supported the erroneous assumption that
there was no conscious knowledge in the experimental
group. The fact that subjects developed conscious judgment
knowledge would have gone unnoticed. The combined use
of confidence ratings and source attributions appears to be a
promising method for assessing awareness in language
acquisition research.

bias. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11(9), 25-45.
Dienes, Z. (2008). Subjective measures of unconscious
knowledge. Progress in Brain Research, 168, 49-64.
Dienes, Z., & Longuet-Higgins, C. (2004). Can musical
transformations be implicitly learned? Cognitive Science,
28(4), 531-558.
Dienes, Z., & Scott, R. (2005). Measuring unconscious
knowledge: distinguishing structural knowledge and
judgment knowledge. Psychological Research, 69(5-6),
338-351.
Dienes, Z., Altmann, G., Kwan, L., & Goode, A. (1995).
Unconscious knowledge of artificial grammars is applied
strategically. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(5), 1322-1338.
Frensch, P. A., & Rünger, D. (2003). Implicit learning.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12(1), 1318.
Gómez, R. L. (2007). Statistical learning in infant language
development. In M. G. Gaskell (Ed.), The Oxford
Handbook of Psycholinguistics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gómez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (2000). Infant artificial
language learning and language acquisition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 4(5), 178-186.
Kunimoto, C., Miller, J., & Pashler, H. (2001). Confidence
and accuracy of near-threshold discrimiation responses.
Consciousness and Cognition, 10, 294-340.
Perruchet, P. (2008). Implicit learning. In H.L. Roediger, III
(Ed.), Cognitive psychology of memory. Vol. 2 of
Learning and memory : A comprehensive reference, 4
vols. (J.Byrne, Editor) (p.597-621). Oxford : Elsevier.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial grammars.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 6, 317327.
Reber, A. S. (1969). Transfer of syntactic structure in
synthetic languages. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
81, 115-119.
Rebuschat, P., & Williams, J. N. (2006). Dissociating
implicit and explicit learning of natural language syntax.
In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
2594). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rosenthal, D. M. (1986). Two concepts of consciousness.
Philosophical Studies, 49(3), 329-359.
Rosenthal, D. M. (2005). Consciousness and mind. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Saffran, J. R. (2003). Statistical language learning:
Mechanisms and constraints. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 12, 110-114.
St. John, M. F., & Shanks, D. R. (1997). Implicit learning
from an information-processing standpoint. In D. C. Berry
(Ed.), How implicit is implicit learning? (pp. 162-194).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Winter, B., & Reber, A. S. (1994). Implicit learning and the
acquisition of natural languages. In N. C. Ellis (Ed.),
Implicit and explicit learning of languages (pp. 115-145).
London: Academic Press.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Zoltán Dienes, Brechtje
Post and four anonymous CogSci reviewers for their
extensive comments.

References
Berry, D. C. (1996). How implicit is implicit learning? In G.
Underwood (Ed.), Implicit cognition (pp. 203-225).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bloom, P. (2001). Précis of How Children Learn the
Meanings of Words. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24,
1095-1103.
Chan, C. (1992). Implicit cognitive processes: Theoretical
issues and applications in computer systems design.
Unpublished DPhil thesis, University of Oxford.
Cleeremans, A., Destrebecqz, A., & Boyer, M. (1998).
Implicit learning: News from the front. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2(10), 406-416.
Dienes, Z. (2004). Assumptions of subjective measures of
unconscious mental states: Higher order thoughts and

430

