UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Learning Deficits in Autism: A Neurocomputational Account

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/86h2698g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kriete, Trent
Noelle, David

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Learning Deficits in Autism: A Neurocomputational Account
Trent Kriete & David C. Noelle (tkriete,dnoelle@ucmerced.edu)
Program in Cognitive Science, University of California, Merced, 5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract

in PFC/DA interactions can account for patterns of executive dysfunction in autism (Kriete & Noelle, 2005, 2006) and
how the same neural deficits can explain stimulus overselectivity in people with autism along with the associated difficulties in generalizing learned skills to novel contexts (Kriete & Noelle, 2008). In this paper, we present a neurocomputational model of implicit learning performance in people
with autism, demonstrating that abnormal PFC/DA interactions can explain the observations in this domain, as well.
Implicit learning is learning that occurs without any awareness of the specific knowledge acquired during the process.
Researchers have suggested that people with autism have a
core deficit in their ability to implicitly learn about the inherent relationships that exist between objects and situations
in the world (Mostofsky, Goldberg, & Landa, 2000; Klinger,
Klinger, & Pohlig, 2006). Klinger et al. argue that impaired
implicit learning results in difficulties in recognizing the relationships that exist across experiences, likely leading to problems forming general knowledge about categories of items
and types of situations. Difficulties in generalizing learned
knowledge to new situations are commonly observed in people with autism, and these difficulties frequently act as a central obstacle to the development of behaviors needed for autonomy and independent living. Thus, a precise characterization of the mechanisms responsible for these generalization
deficits would be very valuable to any effort to design ways
to mitigate these serious issues in people with autism.
In this paper, we first describe our general computational
account of PFC/DA interactions, and we review our previous
work, showing that abnormalities in these neural systems can
account for the patterns of executive dysfunction and stimulus
overselectivity observed in autism. We then review a common
paradigm for assessing implicit learning, the Serial Response
Time Task (SRTT), and we revisit experimental results that
make use of this task to demonstrate impairments in implicit
learning in people with autism. A neurocomputational model
of healthy performance on the SRTT is then described, and
the results of introducing a PFC/DA deficit into this model
are reported. The model results are fit to both healthy and
autistic SRTT performance data appearing in the literature,
demonstrating the ability of a PFC/DA interaction abnormality to account for the lack of implicit learning in autism. We
close with a general discussion.

Experiments using the Serial Response Time Task (SRTT)
have suggested that implicit learning is impaired in people with
autism. Implicit learning is learning that occurs without explicit awareness of the knowledge being acquired. Researchers
have suggested that poor implicit learning could be a major
factor in other profound learning difficulties exhibited by people with autism. In this report, we use a neurocomputational
model of the SRTT to show that disturbed interactions between
the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) system and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) may underlie the implicit learning problems observed in autism. This model is shown to fit reaction time data
from the literature for both individuals with autism and normally developing controls. This work expands on a previous
body of research showing that abnormal DA/PFC interactions
can account for a disparate collection of autistic behavioral
patterns, suggesting that a common neurological mechanism
might produce executive dysfunction, stimulus overselectivity,
and impaired implicit learning in this population.
Keywords: Autism; Implicit Learning; Serial Response Time
Task (SRTT); Prefrontal Cortex (PFC); Dopamine (DA)

Introduction
Autism is a complex developmental disorder characterized
by deficits across physical, social, and cognitive domains.
Cognitive difficulties are found in tasks assessing executive
function, “mind reading” abilities, integration of information, attention, and generalizing learned abilities to novel
contexts (Hughes, Russell, & Robbins, 1994; Baron-Cohen,
Leslie, & Frith, 1985; Frith, 1989). In addition, physical motor abnormalities, an increased prevalence of seizure
disorders, motor stereotypies, and repetitive behaviors often accompany the diagnosis (Rinehart, Bradshaw, Brereton, & Tonge, 2001; Tuchman & Rapin, 2002). Complicating matters further, people with autism often possess
“islets” of spared cognitive functioning in some areas, including visiospatial tasks such as the embedded figures test
and Weschler’s block design task (Shah & Frith, 1983). Indeed, the diversity and variance of the traits of autism has
led to a recent proposal to abandon any attempt to find a single “monolithic” cause underlying all aspects of the disorder (Happe, Ronald, & Plomin, 2006).
While we are sympathetic to the notion that all behavioral
aspects of autism are unlikely to have a single common neurological cause, our previous explorations of computational
models of the prefrontal cortex (PFC), and its interactions
with the mesolimbic dopamine (DA) system, have suggested
that a disparate collection of behavioral patterns observed in
autism might stem from a common deficit in these neural systems. We propose that abnormal PFC/DA interactions may
underlie multiple aspects of this disorder, providing a neuroscientific account of how these aspects are related. Our
previous computational work has demonstrated how deficits

Previous Work
Our proposal is that deficits in the mesolimbic dopamine
(DA) system and/or abnormalities in how dopamine modulates the prefrontal cortex (PFC) can account for the behavioral profiles of people with autism across a diverse range of

899

task domains. Thus, we suggest that some behavioral deficits
that have previously been seen as stemming from separate
psychological mechanisms might have a common neurological cause. Our strategy for demonstrating the feasibility of
this proposal is to show that a broad array of state-of-the-art
neurocomputational models of healthy human performance
all exhibit autistic patterns of responding when they are minimally modified to reflect a failure of DA to properly modulate PFC. In this section, we review our general theory of
the functional role played by PFC/DA interactions, as well
as our previous modeling demonstrations involving executive
dysfunction and stimulus overselectivity in autism.

been found to carry reward prediction information critical for
learning associations between behaviors and reward (Montague, Dayan, & Sejnowski, 1996), and the DA projections to
PFC have been viewed as a likely neural implementation of
the gating signal needed to flexibly adjust the control state of
PFC (Braver & Cohen, 2000).
Under this account, DA interactions with PFC drive the
flexible updating of control. Inflexibility arises when these
interactions are disturbed, frequently resulting in PFC perseverating on control representations that are no longer appropriate. This insight, along with evidence of DA abnormalities
in autism, has led us to investigate the degree to which the perturbation of DA/PFC interactions naturally leads to patterns
of behavior observed in people with autism. Our previous
computational modeling work has shown that this mechanism
is sufficient to explain various aspects of executive dysfunction and stimulus overselectivity in autism (Kriete & Noelle,
2005, 2006, 2008).

Interactions Between DA & PFC
We share an account of PFC function that was initially developed primarily to explain the role of PFC in cognitive control and cognitive flexibility (Cohen, Dunbar, & McClelland,
1990; Braver & Cohen, 2000; Rougier, Noelle, Braver, Cohen, & O’Reilly, 2005). Cognitive control is the ability to
guide behavior according to explicit goals or rules, especially
when doing so is in conflict with more automatic or prepotent
tendencies. Cognitive flexibility describes the ability to appropriately adapt cognitive control in response to shifting task
contingencies. The PFC has been broadly implicated in cognitive control and cognitive flexibility. In our models, the PFC
supports cognitive control by actively maintaining abstract
rule-like representations that provide top-down modulation
of more posterior brain areas, modifying the regular behavior of these posterior pathways so as to overcome their usual
automatic patterns of responding (Cohen et al., 1990). Biologically, the active maintenance of frontal control representations is supported by dense patterns of recurrent excitation
in the PFC, as well as intrinsic maintenance currents. Computational models of these neural circuits have shown that the
active maintenance of control representations and the flexible adaptation of control are at odds, with the mechanisms
that maintain PFC representations, and protect them from distracting inputs, acting as an obstacle to the rapid updating of
PFC contents in response to shifting contingencies. Thus, in
order to achieve cognitive flexibility, a separate mechanism is
needed to rapidly update the actively maintained PFC control
state in a task-appropriate manner.
A useful analogy for this flexible updating mechanism is
that of a “gate” in a fenced enclosure. When cognitive control must be strong, the gate is closed, keeping out distracting
inputs that might compromise the needed PFC control signals. When the current control state is no longer appropriate, the gate opens, allowing the old control state to escape
and allowing a new control representation to enter the PFC
via its inputs. In order for the PFC to maintain situationappropriate control as contingencies change, a neural mechanism is needed that can learn to adaptively open and close the
gate on PFC in a task-appropriate manner. Some researchers
have suggested that the mesolimbic dopamine system may
play a central role in learning to control this gate (Braver &
Cohen, 2000; O’Reilly & Frank, 2006). Dopamine cells have

Executive Dysfunction
People with autism are impaired across a broad range of cognitive tasks that have been associated with executive control
processes. Indeed, the Executive Dysfunction (ED) theory of
autism seeks to explain many of the behavioral patterns exhibited by these individuals in terms of a failure of executive
control over behavior (Hughes et al., 1994).
There is extensive evidence that the prefrontal cortex plays
an important role in executive control. Along with the central
claim of ED, this suggests that the root cause of many autistic behavioral patterns may lie in abnormalities in this region
of the brain. This view of ED suggests that the irregular development of prefrontal cortex may underlie the patterns of
cognitive performance seen in autism.
A more detailed examination of autistic behavior reveals
that not all forms of executive processing are impaired, however. A perplexing aspect of the executive profile demonstrated by people with autism is that cognitive flexibility has
been shown to be impaired while fundamental cognitive control remains robust and relatively unaffected. A classic measure of cognitive control is the Stroop task (Stroop, 1935), and
a common measure of cognitive flexibility is performance on
the Wisconsin Card Sort Test (WCST) (Berg, 1948). Persons
with autism have been shown to exhibit poor WCST performance, but they exhibit no more interference on the Stroop
task than healthy controls (Ozonoff & Jensen, 1999). This
dichotomy challenges the notion that autistic behavior is the
result of a global impairment of executive processes, perhaps
mediated by frontal abnormalities.
One clear way to resolve this issue is to posit separate
mechanism for cognitive control and the flexible adaptation
of control. In people with autism, the ability to actively maintain information and influence behavior, the PFC, is intact.
However, the ability to flexibly adapt control, mediated via
the DA system, is impaired.
In order to demonstrate the viability of this account of
executive dysfunction in autism, we made use of an exist-

900

ing neurocomputational model of PFC/DA interactions that
had been shown to fit the performance of both healthy and
frontally damaged humans on both the Stroop and WCST
tasks (Rougier et al., 2005). Simply weakening the influence
of DA on PFC in this computational model was sufficient to
both qualitatively and quantitatively capture autistic performance on both Stroop and WCST (Kriete & Noelle, 2005,
2006). More specifically, reducing the gating effect of the DA
signal selectively impaired the ability of the system to update
the contents of the PFC, which is vital for the WCST. However, there was no effect on the ability of the PFC to influence
more posterior brain areas and assist overcoming prepotent
responses during the Stroop task. This computational modeling result suggested that executive deficits in autism may be
mediated by weakened PFC/DA interactions.

or possibly even irrelevant, subset of features present in the
stimulus. Poor generalization was exhibited by these networks, due to these abnormal cortical representations. In the
model, the inability to flexibly update PFC increased the likelihood that the only environmental associations learned involved spurious correlations (i.e., idiosyncratic features of the
training environment), with other, more broadly relevant, features escaping the attention of the network. Subsequent dependence on such spurious correlations crippled generalization performance. The model’s behavior was favorably compared to previously reported laboratory data involving people
with autism and healthy controls. This finding provides an additional example of how a common neurological deficit, dysfunctional PFC/DA interactions, can help to bridge theoretical gaps across behavioral domains within autism research.

Stimulus Overselectivity

The Serial Response Time Task (SRTT)

Stimulus overselectivity is said to occur when an overly restricted set of features of the environment come to drive behavior. While some associations between environmental features and appropriate action are acquired, many reliable cues
to action are not learned. This phenomenon was first documented in the early 1970s in people with autism (Lovaas,
Schreibman, Koegel, & Rehm, 1971). Overselective behavior
in people with autism has been seen as a plausible explanation
for the problems many individuals with autism exhibit when
they are expected to generalize learned behaviors to novel situations. In such situations, restricted, often irrelevant, portions of the environment become tightly coupled with the performance of the desired behavior. If this restricted portion of
the environment is not consistently available to the individual,
generalization to new settings will suffer. For example, an individual with autism might successfully learn to order a meal
from a simulated cashier in a laboratory but fail to generalize the required actions to situations that fail to possess some
key feature, like a particular item of furniture or idiosyncratic
word usage on the part of the cashier. This inability to appropriately generalize learned skills is a major focus of many
behavioral intervention techniques.
In Kriete & Noelle (2008) we presented a computational
account of how overselective representations can develop in
more posterior brain areas when the PFC is unable to flexibly update its contents, due to inappropriate DA modulation.
We used a relatively simple Leabra (O’Reilly & Munakata,
2000) neural network model of conditioning that included a
modulation of the stimulus-response mapping based on the
contents of a layer of simulated PFC neurons. In this case,
the control signals actively maintained in PFC encoded executive attention, selectively highlighting specific aspects of
the current stimulus. With healthy PFC/DA interactions, the
PFC contents flexibly switched from one aspect of the current stimulus to another, allowing the network to learn about
all relevant aspects of the stimulus. When the PFC was unable to flexibly and appropriately update its contents, however, representations in cortical areas downstream from the
PFC developed so as to be dominated by an overly restricted,

In addition to executive dysfunction and stimulus overselectivity, is it plausible that abnormal PFC/DA interactions can
also account for the deficits in implicit learning observed in
people with autism? We address this question by investigating the effects of PFC/DA dysfunction on the performance of
a psychological test commonly used to assess implicit learning abilities: the Serial Response Time Task (SRTT).
In a common version of this task, participants are presented
with four buttons, with exactly one button illuminated at any
one time. Participants are asked to simply press the currently illuminated button as quickly and accurately as possible. Once a button is depressed, a new button is illuminated, prompting the participant to press the new button, and
this sequence of cued button presses continues for a block of
80 responses, with an experimental session consisting of five
of these blocks. The illumination order of the buttons is the
key manipulation of the SRTT. During the first and the final
(fifth) block the order in which the buttons are illuminated is
random. However, during blocks 2, 3, and 4 there is a hidden
pattern in the responses that are required. This hidden structure is apparently detected by many healthy participants, as
there is a significant reduction in the reaction time required
to press the correct button across blocks 2, 3, and 4. Importantly, this reduction in reaction time does not occur during
the randomized first and fifth blocks. The common interpretation of these results is that learned knowledge of the hidden
sequential pattern allows participants to better “anticipate”
which button will be illuminated next, allowing them to prepare this upcoming action and, thereby, speed their response.
Knowledge of the hidden structure is seen as “implicit”, however, as most participants claim no explicit knowledge of the
sequential pattern (Cleeremans & McClelland, 1991).
People with autism, however, do not show marked improvement during the intermediate blocks of the SRTT, providing support to the claim that autism impairs implicit learning abilities (Mostofsky et al., 2000). While this result is interesting in its own right, we do not yet have an understanding
of the biological mechanism(s) behind this deficit.

901

Some insight might be gained from the neuropsychological
literature involving the SRTT. Specifically, deficits in tasks
assessing implicit learning have been linked to damage to the
cerebellum. This is intriguing, as there is ample evidence of
cerebellar abnormalities in people with autism (Courchesne
et al., 1994). However, other tasks traditionally associated
with the cerebellum, such as judgment of timing, show no
differences between people with autism and normally developing controls (Mostofsky et al., 2000). Recently, evidence
has emerged suggesting that PFC and the basal ganglia may
be important players in implicit learning as well (Matsumoto,
Hanakawa, Maki, Graybiel, & Kimura, 1999; Pascual-Leone,
Wassermann, Grafman, & Hallett, 2004). It is this latter
connection that we will pursue, here, using an established
computational model of the SRTT to investigate the possibility that PFC/DA abnormalities may give rise to the implicit
learning problems observed in people with autism.

Figure 1: Network Diagram of SRTT Model

Modeling Implicit Learning

formation to modulate the prediction of the next button. The
main difference between our previous PFC models and this
SRTT model involves the timing with which the contents are
updated. In our previous models, the PFC was updated in a
dynamic fashion, based on learned task contingencies. In this
model, the context layer is updated with each new input presentation. Thus, the SRN context layer is analogous to the
PFC in our previous models, with the updating “gate” forced
to open with each new input, as previously suggested by other
researchers (O’Reilly & Frank, 2006).
It is important to note that, in order to capture the relevant sequential information, the SRN must update the context
layer in a fast and appropriate manner. This flexible updating
of contextual information is precisely the cognitive mechanism we hypothesize to be suspect in people with autism. By
restricting the ability of the SRN to update the context layer,
mirroring the PFC updating failures that arise with weakened
PFC/DA interactions in our other models, we expect to capture the performance of people with autism.
We made small modifications to a previous implementation of the Cleermans SRTT model which uses the biologically grounded Leabra framework, reducing the original implementation’s 10-unit inputs and outputs to only 4, to capture
the structure of the 4-button SRTT (O’Reilly & Munakata,
2000). The resulting network is shown in Figure 1. In this
model, an Input Layer represents the four distinct buttons.
The Hidden Layer learns the prediction mapping and provides
a modeled abstraction of posterior brain systems. A Response
Layer encodes the prediction output of the network. Additionally, a Context Layer provides a top-down influence on
processing within the Hidden Layer, reflecting role of PFC.
In order to model the performance of people with autism,
we restricted the probability of successfully updating the
Context Layer (PFC) upon each input presentation. Normally, the Context Layer is updated with each input, but our
autism model only updated the layer with some fixed probability which was less than one. This is analogous to reducing

Seminal work on modeling healthy SRTT performance has
been conducted by Cleeremans et al. (1991). In these neurocomputational models, a simulated neural circuit is presented with an input that encodes the currently illuminated
button, and the output of this circuit is read as the system’s
expectation for the next button to be illuminated. This input to output mapping is mediated by a collection of hidden units, and synaptic learning methods are used to improve
this mapping with experience. Importantly, these networks
also include a “context layer” of neural units which can learn
to actively maintain information about the history of previously presented inputs, allowing the model to base its predictions on more than the currently illuminated button. The
activation levels of the neural units in the context layer are
set to be “copies” of the hidden unit activation levels whenever a new input is presented, making the Cleeremans model
of SRTT performance essentially a simple recurrent network
(SRN) (Elman, 1990) trained to predict the next button press.
The schematic network architecture is shown in Figure 1.
This model has provided good fits to healthy human performance on the SRTT (Cleeremans & McClelland, 1991).
Since the sequential structure in the intermediate blocks
of the SRTT is often complex, the information provided by
the context layer is vital for the success of the model. Importantly, the context layer in this model plays an identical
functional role to the PFC in other models, actively maintaining information that can be used to modulate an input-output
mapping. In our previous executive dysfunction model,
the PFC maintained information about the currently relevant
stimulus dimension (e.g., “focus on the ink color” in Stroop
or “sort cards based on shape” in WCST), so as to modulate
performance. In our stimulus overselectivity model, the PFC
maintained information about the current stimulus feature to
receive executive attention, modulating how the stimulus was
processed. In this model, the context layer maintains information about the preceding button presses, allowing that in-

902

the efficacy of the DA-based gating signal to the PFC. Restricting the updating of the PFC in this manner makes the
temporally extended information normally contained within
this layer much less reliable, making the learning of complex
sequential structures much more difficult for the network.
The measure of interest in the SRTT is the response time
of the participants throughout the training blocks. In order to compare model performance to human reaction times,
Cleeremans et al. (1991) translated network outputs into a
probability distribution over the four buttons using a Luce
choice ratio (Luce, 1963) and then linearly scaled the error
between this prediction distribution and the actual outcome
(i.e., the next button illuminated) to produce a modeled response time. This procedure assumes that there is a linear
increase in response time with prediction error. We used this
method, as well, introducing three free parameters for fitting
the model to data: a linear scaling parameter from error to
milliseconds, a base response time (when error is zero) for
the healthy model, and a base response time for the autism
model. Note that different base response times were used for
the normally developing and autism cases in order to capture
the difficulty people with autism regularly exhibit when initiating movements (Rinehart et al., 2001).

Figure 2: Scaled Model Results & Human Behavioral Data
from Mostofsky et al. (2000)
A repeated measures ANOVA was conducted on blocks
1, 2, 3, and 4 of the model results, and a significant Group
by Block interaction (F(3, 97) = 62.007; p < 0.000001) was
detected. From these results we can conclude that the networks simulating autistic performance demonstrated significantly less learning over the crucial training blocks of 2,
3, and 4, as compared to the networks allowed to properly
update their PFC-like Context Layers. Thus, clear implicit
learning deficits were present in the autism model.

Results
Network simulations were repeated 100 times in each of the
experimental conditions, with initial synaptic weights randomized for each repetition. Average performance results for
each block were compared to previously reported response
time data for both people with autism and normally developing controls (Mostofsky et al., 2000). A grid search was performed over the possible probabilities of updating the Context Layer, testing probabilities from 0.0 to 1.0 in steps of
0.1, with the three linear scaling parameters optimized to reduce sum-squared deviation from the human response time
data. The updating probability, and associated scaling parameters, that produced the lowest sum-squared deviation from
the human data was identified as the best fit model.
The simulation results match human performance both
qualitatively and quantitatively, providing evidence that impairments in PFC updating can result in implicit learning
deficits like those seen in people with autism. When the
healthy network is restricted to perfectly update its Context
Layer (i.e., with probability one), the corresponding best-fit
probability for the autism network is 0.5, with an SSE of
652.1 The corresponding scaling parameter from error to reaction time is 261.4, the healthy base time is 458.6 msec, and
the autism base time is 534.5 msec. The resulting modeled
reaction times, along with human data, is shown in Figure 2.

Discussion & Conclusion
The breadth of behavioral and neurological abnormalities discovered in people with autism is almost staggering. Using
computational models, constrained by our existing knowledge of biology, is a relatively untapped resource for exploring the neurological underpinnings of autism. Utilizing these
tools in our investigations has provided us with insights into
how a single neurological mechanism — the improper updating of the PFC caused by disrupted interactions with the
mesolimbic DA system — can account for behavior across a
variety of previously unrelated domains of autistic behavior.
The modeling results presented in this report suggest that,
in people with autism, implicit learning deficits may be driven
largely by abnormalities in DA/PFC interactions, causing inflexibility in the updating of contextual information. Without the proper updating of contextual information, it is essentially impossible to properly integrate temporally separated pieces of information, such as the order of items in a
sequence. Thus, our computational account highlights how
PFC/DA dysfunction can lead to problems with information
integration. This is particularly interesting, since one prominent behavioral theory of autism, Weak Central Coherence,
posits that deficits in integrating contextual information lay at
the core of this disorder (Happe, 1999). It is a major point of
our future research to investigate whether abnormal PFC/DA
interactions can account for the various other behavioral patterns currently cited as evidence of weak central coherence.

1 If the healthy network is allowed to update imperfectly, as well
as the autism network, the best fit arises when the healthy network
updates with 0.6 probability and the autism network updates with
0.2 probability, producing an SSE of 549. Unfortunately, since the
variance of the human data was not reported in Mostofsky et al.
(2000), we cannot assess if these parameters are reliably better at
fitting the human data than the 1.0/0.5 case.

903

Acknowledgments

7th international conference on development and learning.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lovaas, O., Schreibman, L., Koegel, R., & Rehm, R. (1971).
Selective responding by autistic children to multiple sensory input. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 77(3), 211–
222.
Luce, R. D. (1963). Detection and recognition. In R. D. Luce,
R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), (pp. 103–189). New
York: Wiley.
Matsumoto, N., Hanakawa, T., Maki, S., Graybiel, A. M., &
Kimura, M. (1999, August 1). Nigrostriatal dopamine system in learning to perform sequential motor tasks in a predictive manner. Journal of Neurophysiology, 82(2), 978–
998.
Montague, P. R., Dayan, P., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1996). A
framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems based on
predictive hebbian learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 16,
1936–1947.
Mostofsky, S. H., Goldberg, M. C., & Landa, R. J. (2000).
Evidence for a deficit in procedural learning in children and
adolescents with autism: Implications for cerebellar contribution. Journal of International Neuropsychological Society, 6, 752–759.
O’Reilly, R. C., & Frank, M. J. (2006). Making working
memory work: A computational model of learning in the
frontal cortex and basal ganglia. Neural Computation, 18,
283–328.
O’Reilly, R. C., & Munakata, Y. (2000). Computational explorations in cognitive neuroscience: Understanding the
mind by simulating the brain. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Ozonoff, S., & Jensen, J. (1999). Specific executive function
profiles in three neurodevelopmental disorders. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 29(2), 171–177.
Pascual-Leone, A., Wassermann, E. M., Grafman, J., & Hallett, M. (2004). The role of the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex in implicit procedural learning. Experimental Brain
Research, 107(3), 479–485.
Rinehart, N. J., Bradshaw, J. L., Brereton, A. V., & Tonge,
B. J. (2001). Movement preparation in high-functioning
autism and asperger disorder: A serial choice reaction time
task involving motor reprogramming. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 31, 79–88.
Rougier, N. P., Noelle, D. C., Braver, T. S., Cohen, J. D.,
& O’Reilly, R. C. (2005). Prefrontal cortex and flexible
cognitive control: Rules without symbols. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 102(20), 7738–7343.
Shah, A., & Frith, U. (1983). An islet of ability in autistic
children: a research note. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 24(4), 613–620.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 28, 643–
662.
Tuchman, R., & Rapin, I. (2002). Epilepsy in autism. Lancet
Neurology, 1, 352–358.

The authors extend thanks to the members of the Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory at the University
of California, Merced at to three anonymous reviewers.

References
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does the
autistic child have a theory of mind. Cognition, 21, 37–46.
Berg, E. A. (1948). A simple objective test for measuring
flexibility in thinking. Journal of General Psychology, 39,
15–22.
Braver, T. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2000). On the control of control: The role of dopamine in regulating prefrontal function
and working memory. In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.),
Control of cognitive processes: Attention and performance
XVIII (pp. 713–737). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cleeremans, A., & McClelland, J. L. (1991). Learning the
structure of event sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 120(3), 235–253.
Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). On the
control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed processing model of the stroop effect. Psychological Review,
97(3), 332–361.
Courchesne, E., Townsend, J., Akshoomoff, N. A., Saitoh, O.,
Yeung-Courchesne, R., Lincoln, A., et al. (1994). Impairment in shifting attention in autistic and cerebellar patients.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 108(1), 848–865.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14, 179–211.
Frith, U. (1989). Autism: Explaining the enigma. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Happe, F. (1999). Autism: Cognitive deficit or cognitive
style? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(6), 216–222.
Happe, F., Ronald, A., & Plomin, R. (2006). Time to give up
on a single explanation for autism. Nature Neuroscience,
9(10), 1218–1220.
Hughes, C., Russell, J., & Robbins, T. W. (1994). Evidence
for executive dysfunction in autism. Neuropsychologia,
32(4), 477–492.
Klinger, L. G., Klinger, M. R., & Pohlig, R. A. (2006). Implicit learning impairments in autism spectrum disorders:
Implications for treatment. In J. M. Perez, P. M. Gonzalez, M. L. Comi, & C. Nieto (Eds.), New developments in
autism. London: Jessica Kinglsey.
Kriete, T., & Noelle, D. C. (2005). Impaired cognitiv flexibility and intact cognitive control in autism: A computational cognitive neuroscience approach. In Proceedings of
the 27th annual conference of the cognitive science society
(pp. 1190–1195). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kriete, T., & Noelle, D. C. (2006). Dopamine and the development of executive dysfunction in autism. In Proceedings of the 5th international conference on development
and learning. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kriete, T., & Noelle, D. C. (2008). Modeling the development of overselectivity in austism. In Proceedings of the

904

