UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Differences in the Processing of Complex Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5b86f8xk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hachmann, Wibke
Konieczny, Lars
Muller, Daniel

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Differences in the Processing of Complex Sentences
Wibke Hachmann (wibke@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Daniel Müller (daniel@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, Friedrichstr. 50
79098 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
To investigate the relationship of functions that underlie the
processing of complex sentences, we conducted a self-pacedreading experiment on single and multiple center embedded
subject- and object-extracted relative clauses, accompanied by
three tests to measure individual differences. Our data suggest
that inhibition and executive functions are better predictors
for individual differences in sentence processing than working
memory capacity.
Keywords: individual difference; sentence processing;
executive functions; working memory; inhibition.

Introduction
According to a prominent view, individual differences in
linguistic performance can be attributed to differences in
working memory capacity (Gibson, 1998; Just & Carpenter,
1992). A widely accepted way of assessing the individual
verbal working memory capacity is the reading span test of
Daneman and Carpenter (1980) or a variant thereof. It is
designed to tap processing capacity and memory span
likewise, but has been subject to debates, first of all
concerning the construct validity and second because of
weak retest-reliability (Mendelsohn, 2002). The lack of
relatedness to well established measures of working
memory like digit or word span lead to very diverse
interpretations of the results. „Given that the reading span
task is the standard task in sentence processing for
measuring working memory, these failures to find
correlations with other working memory tasks pose serious
questions about what specifically the reading span task is
measuring” (ibid., p. 28).
A further objection is proposed by Baddeley (1996), who
notes that the reading span test is unable to distinguish
memory capacity from the use of different processing
strategies and the ability to dissolve interferences.
In contrast to capacity-based approaches, the correlation
of reading span and processing performance can
alternatively be explained by individual differences in
experience with language (MacDonald & Christiansen,
2002), or by variation in executive functions such as
inhibition (Gernsbacher & Faust, 1991; Mendelsohn, 2002).
Good candidates to disentangle these issues and to gain
further insight into the underlying processing mechanisms
are center-embedded relative clauses:

(1) The reporter that the senator attacked admitted the
error.
(2) The reporter that attacked the senator admitted the
error.
Object-extracted relative clauses (ORC, 2) are more difficult
to read than subject-extracted relative clauses (SRC, 1), and
relative-clause type has been shown to interact with reading
span (Just & Carpenter, 1992). These effects have been
replicated several times in different languages, and thus
provide a good field for evaluating the predictability of
different measures of individual differences and their
interaction with sentence complexity.
Another advantage is that there exist several elaborated
attempts to explain these effects, varying in their claims as
to which mechanisms are mainly responsible for the
differences in processing complexity.

Capacity and experience
Based on Just and Carpenter’s (1992) single resource
assumption, Gibson proposed the dependency locality
theory (DLT) as a detailed metric for estimating incremental
processing difficulty. There are two crucial factors in this
metric: (i) storage of pending predictions, and (ii)
integration: the costs of integrating dependent elements
across intermediate discourse referents, rising with the
number of new discourse referents between the depending
elements. According to this model, storage and integration
draw on the same resource, and individuals differ with
respect to its capacity. According to DLT, center embedding
should increase both memory and integration cost during
and shortly after the embedded clause. Since in English,
there are more referents to be crossed in ORCs than in SRCs
when the verb has to be integrated with its arguments, DLT
correctly predicts the empirically observable differences in
processing speed.
MacDonald and Christiansen (2002) on the other hand
assume language processing as shaped by the individual’s
experience with language and base their theory on
connectionist modeling. Thus, processing is highly sensitive
to the distributional properties of the linguistic input. They
reinterpreted the difference in performance on SRCs and
ORCs as a function of frequency and regularity of linguistic
forms: subject-extracted relative clauses are easier than
object relative clauses because they display the regular S-VO word order, in contrast to the unusual O-V-S word order

309

in ORCs. Under this perspective, the concept of a capacitylimited working memory resource is superfluous. Linguistic
proficiency and the processes of language comprehension
are a result of the interaction of statistical learning and
processing mechanisms of the system with the properties of
its input. So any measure of individual differences would
only capture a result of this learning process, namely
something that presents itself like a larger working memory,
but could in fact be a very different way of processing.

Inhibition and sentence complexity
The ability to effectively inhibit strong prepotent answers
and cope with interferences is also claimed to be crucial for
correctly interpreting ambiguous expressions (Gernsbacher
& Faust, 1991; Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Jonides, Smith,
Marshuetz & Koeppe, 1998; Lustig, May & Hasher, 2001;
May, Zacks, Hasher & Multhaup 1999; Mendelsohn, 2002).
According to Baddeley’s (1996) model of working memory,
inhibition is a function of the central executive: Anytime a
slave system, e.g. the phonological loop, is overloaded, the
central executive takes over. Thus, linguistic performance is
not only affected by the verbal working memory system, but
influenced by numerous functions of cognitive processing,
like switching, inhibition and the capacity to timeshare as
well as selective attention.
As these functions, notably inhibition, influence language
processing during ambiguity resolution and the
understanding of complex sentences (Gernsbacher & Faust,
1991; Mendelsohn, 2002, Roberts, Hager & Heron 1994), it
seems worthwhile to assume that a complex interaction of
the above mentioned functions contributes to individual
differences.
Our aim in this paper is (a) to gain further insights in the
underlying mechanisms responsible for processing
complexity, (b) to further investigate the role of inhibition
as a general factor affecting syntactic processing and (c) to
evaluate instruments that allow to access the various aspects
of individual differences.
To address these issues, we conducted a self-pacedreading study with embedded sentences and measured
individual differences with three different instruments. In
the reading experiment, sentence complexity was
manipulated by the type of the relative clause (SRC vs.
ORC), as well as the type of embedding (simple, vs. double
center embeddings, vs. double right attachments).
The reading experiment was accompanied by two
behavioral tests and a questionnaire: (i) the verbal sorting
test (Mendelsohn, 2002) designed to measure verbal
inhibition skill, (ii) a version of the reading span test and
(iii) a detailed questionnaire about reading habits.
We explored the correlations of reading times as
reflecting the different dimensions of sentence complexity
with the outcomes of the groupings provided by the
different tests.

If inhibition is a crucial mechanism for language
processing in general, the ability to inhibit conflicting
linguistic material should predict performance on center
embedded relative clauses. Since the reading span test could
be interpreted as tapping several working memory processes
or linguistic experience, it might not be sensitive to specific
individual abilities that are crucial for language processing.
We hypothesized that the VST would be a better predictor
for the performance on center embeddings because it
measures a more specific individual function.
Correspondingly, if inhibition behavior or reading span are
functions of exposure to language, they should correlate
with the reading experience reported by subjects.2

Experiment and Tests
Verbal Sorting Test
In order to obtain a test that can measure inhibition in verbal
processing behavior, Mendelsohn (2002) constructed a
Verbal Sorting Test (VST) based on the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test (WCST). In the WCST, subjects are supposed
to sort cards either by color, shape or by number of objects.
After some time, the experimenter changes the sorting rule.
Patients who suffer from dysexecutive syndrome have
difficulties to switch to a new rule, so they make mistakes of
repetition, so-called perseverative errors. In the computer
based version of the VST of Mendelsohn, subjects were
supposed to sort virtual cards by semantic category, word
class or number of syllables.
In her study, the VST was a better predictor of
performance in an ambiguity resolution task than the Waters
and Caplan (1996) version of the reading span test.
Mendelsohn argues that subjects had to process verbal
material under constant ambiguity and still switch retrieval
plans, while they had to actively suppress the familiar
sorting rule.
We translated the Verbal Sorting Test into German and
ran a pilot study with 7 participants. They rated items for
plausibility in each sorting category. See Table 1Table 1 for
a summary of categories and sorting rules.3 The categories
we used were the same as in Mendelsohn (2002). For
semantic categories we used machine, animal and plant, for
syntactic category noun, verb and adjective and for number
of syllables words of two, three and four syllables. Each
word had to fit one category of each of the three rules,
leading to 27 combinations (3 rules x 9 categories).

2

This method of self reports provides a rather vague measure,
though.
3
The table shows one set of words per combination. The
experiment used two sets and each word appeared three times.

310

To add two words for each combination, we extracted the 54
most suitable target words out of a total of 270 after rating.5
Three of the words with the highest scores for all categories
formed the sorting references, meaning that those cards are
visible throughout the experiment and represent the
categories where the targets are supposed to be sorted to.
They were:
Generator (generator, machine, noun, four syllables),
anpflanzen (to plant, plant, verb, three syllables), and
haarig (hairy, animal, adjective, two syllables).

2 welken

plant

4 Artischocke

2 streicheln

verb

4 Antilope
3 erlegen

noun

2 Rübe
3 Kartoffel

3 absterben

2 Motor
3 Teleskop
4 Druckerpresse
2 schalten

verb

3 Elefant

machine

noun

2 Katze

3 einrasten

4 kompostieren

4 reparieren

2 bissig

2 blättrig

2 künstlich

3 amphibisch
4 angriffslustig

3 faserig
4 knollenförmig

adj.

4 galoppieren
adj.

verb
adj.

animal

noun

Table 1: VST target examples for each combination

3 digital
4 automatisch

Reference words and the order of targets were held
constant throughout the experiment. For a total of nine rules,
targets were used three times and randomized into a fixed
order to never appear with the same neighbors or with the
same rule again.
Reading Span Test For the reading span test, we used the
computerized German version conducted by Hacker,
Handrick and Veres (2004), reproducing the procedure of
the Daneman and Carpenter (1980) reading span test. Items
were split into two lists to provide a set for retesting.
Reading Questionnaire All participants filled out a
questionnaire about their reading habits. We asked for the
amount of time spent reading and writing per day.
Mendelsohn (2002) reported a correlation of VST
measures and early reading habits. This suggests that
reading experience in childhood is more important for later
efficiency in language processing than more recent reading
habits. Second, it is unclear whether and to what degree
everyday verbal communication is relevant for the
processing of written language. To account for these
arguments, we split our questions into early, middle and
recent reading hours and into written and spoken language
accordingly (see Table 2222). In the second part of the
questionnaire subjects were asked at what age they started
reading and when they became fluent.
5
Items were rated for their suitability for each of the three rules
and categories separately and chosen when they got only one
unambiguous score for one category from all raters.

Table 2: Sample questionnaire on reading habits.
I. Reading practice per day
hours; minutes now (last half of a year):
reading
listening
writing
speaking
hours; minutes youth (from puberty to majority):
reading
listening
writing
speaking
hours; minutes childhood (until puberty):
reading
listening
writing
speaking
Experimental materials and design We used 20 sentences
of the self-paced reading experiment of Konieczny (2005).
They were constructed in a 3x2 design with the factors
clause type – SRC (1-3a) vs. ORC (1-3b) and embedding
(simple center embedding – 1ab – vs. double center SC/RC
embedding – 2ab – vs. right branching SC/RC – 3ab).
Single center, double center and double right embeddings
(1,2,3) were combined with either subject- or object relative
clauses (a, b) as shown in the pattern below (1a-3b). The
experiment was presented together with 100 filler sentences
that consisted of other syntactic structures. Items were
randomized in a latin square to show only one condition per
sentence and all conditions in equal frequency across
subjects.
1a) The producer who visited the actor, laughed and cheered.
1b) The producer who the actor visited, laughed and cheered.
2a) Georg’s report, that the producer, who visited the actor,
laughed and cheered, fascinated Nicole.
2b) Georg’s report, that the producer, who the actor visited,
laughed and cheered, fascinated Nicole.
3a) Georg reported that the producer, who visited the actor,
laughed and cheered, and Nicole was fascinated.
3b) Georg reported that the producer, who the actor visited,
laughed and cheered, and Nicole was fascinated.

Procedure
Participants completed the self-paced reading experiment
first and then they filled out the questionnaire. The two tests
were administered at the end in varying sequence. The
experiment and both tests were presented on a 1.6 Ghz
Pentium M Laptop running Windows XP. The reading span
test was set up with the software of Hacker et al. (2004) and
the VST was scripted in DMDX.7 The whole experiment

7
Version 3.2.4.0; by Jonathan und Kenneth Forster (2002),
Institut of Psychology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona,
USA

311

took 75 minutes. The experiment was implemented in
Linger (Rhode, 2001)8
The experiment started with an introduction, then
participants completed a test run with six test items.
Sentences were displayed in a single word non-cumulative
self-paced reading paradigm with moving window over
hyphens indicating the length of words. Every next word
was uncovered by pressing the space key. 25% of the
sentences were followed by a forced choice comprehension
question about a detail in the sentence, to assure that
participants read carefully. Key press latencies of the space
key were recorded as dependent variable.

made a rule change rather unpredictable. The VST took 12
minutes to complete.

VST Three white circles with the reference words were
displayed in equal distance from a black dot in the middle of
the screen. Clicking on the dot uncovered the next target
word in another white circle of about 8.8cm diameter. The
task demanded that participants clicked on one of the
references to indicate where the target card should be sorted
to. Contrary to a test-run, the rule was not provided but
participants received feedback about whether they were
correct.
Figure 1 shows the display screen after a trial during
feedback presentation.

Participants

Figure 1: VST display during feedback presentation.
With three possible rules in the beginning it takes three
clicks to infer the correct rule. Then they went on sorting
until they could infer from the feedback that the rule had
changed. The rules changed in a fixed order after 10 correct
successive trials or after 18 trials of the same rule, which

8
Version 2.94 from Rohde, D. (2007): Linger. A flexible
platform for language processing experiments. Online:
http://tedlab.mit.edu/~dr/Linger (April 27th, 2009).

Reading Span Test The procedure was the same as
described in Hacker, Handrick and Veres (2004).
Participants read sentences of average 12 words length in
blocks of two to eight sentences. After reading one block,
they had to recall the last word of each sentence in correct
order, and in addition they had to write down some key
words of the sentences. This test took 15 to 20 minutes,
depending on the highest block size the participant was able
to remember correctly.

35 participants took part in the experiment either for course
credits or for a compensation. Two data sets had to be
excluded because one participant was no native speaker of
German and the other had technical problems, leaving 33
subjects with a mean age of 23.9 years (SD=3.1 years), 16
of which were females.

Results
VST All trials except the first rule and the first two trials
after each rule change were registered as counted trials. 9
Any mistake that would have been correct under the
previous rule was counted as perseverative error. For each
participant perseverative errors were set in proportion to all
counted trials and yielded the individual measure proportion
perseverative. There was an average of 95.32 counted trials
per experiment, 10% of which had wrong answers. Half of
these total errors where perseverative errors, which yielded
a proportion of 5% (SD=4.1). Mean reaction times (rt) on
wrong
answers
(rt=2686.83,
SD=1198.23)
were
significantly slower than the average counted trials
(rt=2078.36, SD=567.00, t-test: t=-5.390, p<.00001).
In addition, we collected mouse hovering times over any
of the virtual cards during the test. The proportion of
hovering over perseverative words to all hovering times
over word circles formed the proportion of perseverative
hovering times. The individual VST score was formed by
the combined measure of proportion of perseverative
hovering times and proportion perseverative. Average
hovering times where 561.40ms (SD=243.09), while those
above perseverative references where longer and more
variable (689.704ms, SD=342.293). The proportion of
perseverative hovering times made 44.5% (SD=15.1) and
the measure combined perseverative was 49.5 (SD=15.3) on
average. Data sets were split by the 33rd and 66th quantile
of the combined measures into three groups of 16
participants respectively. Good inhibitors had combined
perseverative scores of 0 – 41.3, medium of 41.4 to 51.2 and
poor performers had scores of 51.3 and above.
9

Rules never repeated directly, so any new rule could be
derived with maximally two clicks.

312

VST error variables did not correlate with any of the other
test measures. However, reaction times in the VST
correlated positively with the years it took the respective
participant to learn how to read (r²=.306, p<.05) and
negatively with communication hours per day (r²=-.296,
p<.05). This means that subjects who reported much
communication in their everyday lives and a short
acquisition period until they could read fluently had fast
reaction times in the VST.

As can be seen in Figure 2Figure 22, subjects needed most
time for double embeddings and read right attachments as
fast as single embeddings at the end of the relative clause
(V1). This effect switches to a sentence type effect with
longer reading times on the main verb (V2) in object
relative clauses irrespective of embedding, mainly because
the right attached ORCs are read much slower on V2.
160

Reading Span Test Scores were computed according to
Hacker et al. (2004). Any block in which participants
remembered all last words and the sentence content
correctly yielded one point. Points were then matched by
percentiles to an individual reading span as provided by
Hacker et al. (2004). Span groups were built using the least
difference in group size as in the VST, contrary to the
grouping by span size reported in Hacker et al. (2004).11
Since the granularity of this measure did not allow for equal
group sizes in this sample, span scores were split so that the
largest number of participants fell into the mid span group.
Spans 1.5 to 2.1 had 8 participants, 2.5 to 3.1 had 15 and
span scores 3.5 to 4.8 had 10 accordingly.
Reading Questionnaire The variables used were age of
acquisition, reading (reading hours at present per day) and
communication (speaking and hearing hours of the present
collapsed).
Reading habit was correlated with reading times on V1 of
embedding: communication correlated negatively with
reading times on SRCs in the single embedding condition
(r²=-.466, p<.01) and with those in ORCs in double
embedding (r²=-.557, p<.01). Reading correlated negatively
with ORCs in single embedding (r²=-.490, p<.01) and
reading span correlated positively with SRCs in double
embedding (r²=.453, p<.01). Though the groups of reading
habits did not gain further results, single measures of
reading, communication and age of acquisition proved to be
worthwhile variables for further research.
Experimental results We computed residual reading times
as the difference between actual reading times and the
expected value from a linear regression predicting reading
time by word-length. Residual reading times on the verbs of
the main clause (V2) as well as the subordinate clause (V1)
were entered as dependent measures into a general linear
model (GLM, MANOVA) with the fixed conditions
embedding and sentence type. There was a significant main
effect of embedding on V1 (F(2)=4.006, p<0.02), and a main
effect of sentence type on V2 (F(1)=7.451, p<0.01), but no
interactions (all p>0.3).

11

Hacker et al. grouped high spans by scores above 4, which
would leave us with 3 subjects in the highest group.

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
V1
single, SRS
double, SRS
right, SRS

V2
single, ORS
double, ORS
right, ORS

Figure 2: Residual reading times (ms) on V1 (main effect:
embedding) and V2 (main effect: sentence type).
To compute results of group differences in reading times
we added the group variables as fixed conditions into
several linear models. Adding VST groups showed a
significant three-way interaction of V1 with both effects on
embedding and sentence type (F(4)=2.804, p<.05). Reading
span interacted with embedding (F(4)=3.292, p<.05).
High proficient inhibitors showed both main effects,
while the effect was modulated by a switch within the right
attachments. In this group, right attached ORCs were read
slower on V2, but not on V1. The group who made many
perseverative errors showed high reaction times on V2 of
right attached sentences.
Reading span groups differed in their sensitivity to
embedding, so that only mid span readers were less prone to
having long reading times on double embedded sentences.
The lowest span group had the longest reaction times on
double embedded ORCs.

Discussion
The results show that the ability to correctly sort words into
categories and switch between rules predicted behavior in
reading and understanding embedded SRCs and ORCs. The
three-way interaction of the VST with embedding and
clause type supports the hypothesis that the VST is sensitive
to individual differences of various processing components.

313

The reading span test interacted with both main effects, but
yielded a two-way interaction only with center embedding.
These data suggest that the VST is a broader measure of
individual differences than the reading span test and that
more specific functions than variation in one central
resource capacity underlie individual differences. Reading
span, meanwhile, still proved useful to predict embedding
effects.
The results of the experiment on embedding support the
hypothesis that center embedded clauses are more difficult
to process than right attachments. The missing effect of
clause type on the first verb makes a notable difference to
this hypothesis, because at V1 subjects should integrate the
missing verb arguments that had to be held active during the
ORC. Instead, they seem to have longer reading times at V2
after the clause boundary of ORCs. This effect can be
mainly attributed to right attached relative clauses, where
reading times increase markedly from V1 to V2. The main
clause in the beginning might give rise to anticipate a
regular subject clause structure in the first subordinate
complement sentence, for example: “Daniel erzählte, dass
der Professor den Studenten begrüßte.” (*Daniel told, that
the professor the student received.), which interferes with
the relative clause that follows instead.

Conclusion
These results emphasize the importance of executive
functions in accounting for inter-individual differences in
language processing, counting in center embedding as well
as sentence type. They represent a model for a group of
mechanisms that interact in many aspects that requires high
level cognitive processes and that still need further research
to be firmly understood.

Acknowledgments
This work was granted by the German Research
Foundation (DFG, grant KO 1932/3-1) We thank Sascha
Wolfer and Peter Baumann for ceaseless help with data
management and anonymous reviewers for their fruitful
comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the central executive.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:
Human
Experimental Psychology, 49A, 15-28.
Caplan, D., & Waters, G. S. (1999). Verbal working
memory and sentence comprehension. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 22, 77 - 94.
Carpenter, P. A., Miyake, A., & Just, M. A. (1995).
Language comprehension: Sentence and discourse
processing. Annual Review of Psychology, 46, 91-100.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450-466.

Gernsbacher, M. A., & Faust, M. E. (1991). The mechanism
of suppression: A component of general comprehension
skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 17 (2), 245-262.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: locality of
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68, 1-76.
Hacker, W., Handrick, S., & Veres, T. (1996).
Lesespannentest. Manuscript at the University of
Dresden.
Jonides, J., Smith, E. E., Marshuetz, C., & Koeppe, R. A.
(1998). Inhibition in verbal working memory revealed by
brain activation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the USA, 95 (pp. 8410–8413). Washington:
PNAS
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual differences in working
memory. Psychological Review, 99 (1), 122-149.
King, J., & Just, M. A. (1991). Individual differences in
syntactic processing: The Role of Working Memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 580-602.
Konieczny, L. (2000). Locality and parsing complexity.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 29 (6), 627-645.
Konieczny, L. (2005). Storage, integration, and anticipation
effects during sentence processing. Talk at the 14th
conference of the European Society for Cognitive
Psychology (ESCoP). Leiden, 02. 09. 2005.
Lustig, C., May, C. P., & Hasher, L. (2001). Working
memory span and the role of proactive interference.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130 (2),
199-207.
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (2002).
Reassessing working memory: Comment on Just and
Carpenter (1992) and Waters and Caplan (1996).
Psychological Review, 109 (1), 35-54.
May, C. P., Zacks, R. T., Hasher, L., & Multhaup, K. S.
(1999). Inhibition in the processing of garden-path
sentences. Psychology and Aging, 14, 304-313.
Mendelsohn, A. A. (2002). Individual Differences in
Ambiguity Resolution: Working Memory and Inhibition.
Dissertation presented at Northeastern University Boston,
Massachusetts.
Roberts, R. J., Hager, L. D., & Heron, C. (1994). Prefrontal
cognitive processing: Working memory and inhibition in
the antisaccade task. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 123 (4), 374-393.
Rummer, R. (1996). Kognitive Beanspruchung beim
Sprechen. Weinheim: Beltz.
Waters, G. S., & Caplan, D. (1996). The capacity theory of
sentence comprehension: Critique of Just and Carpenter
(1992). Psychological Review, 103 (4), 761-772.
Zacks, R. M., & Hasher, L. (1988). Capacity theory and the
processing of interferences. In L. L. Light, & D. M.
Burke, Language, Memory, and Aging. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

314

