UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual Variation in Students’ Mind-body Ontologies, An Explorative Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/15h4m4mf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hakala, Tero
Lappi, Otto
Rusanen, Anna-Mari

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual Variation in Students’ Mind-body Ontologies, An Explorative Study
Otto Lappi (otto.lappi@helsinki.fi)
Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, PO BOX 9
00014, University of Helsinki, FINLAND

Anna-Mari Rusanen (anna-mari.rusanen@helsinki.fi)
Department of Philosophy, PO BOX 9
00014, University of Helsinki, FINLAND

Tero Hakala (tero@haka.la)
Cognitive Science, Department of Psychology, PO BOX 9
00014, University of Helsinki, FINLAND

after which materialism has become the dominant or
“culturally accepted” philosophical and scientific ontology.
When students enter university education in philosophy
and cognitive science, they already hold (more or less deeply) views about the mind and its place in nature. Students at
all levels (primary, secondary and tertiary) spontaneously
develop their own philosophical theories and conceptions
about the world, including metaphysical and ontological
intuitions about the nature of mind (Stanovich, 1989).
Characterization of the variation in this cognitive ecology
landscape, which the scientific ideas must find their niche
in, is of both practical and theoretical interest.
We are interested in the naturally occurring variation in
student conceptions, not just whether their world view can
be categorized as “materialist” or “dualist”. One ought to
study these ontological beliefs of lay people in a way that is
loyal to their own, in our experience sometimes quite
original, ontological conceptualizations. An important
methodological upshot from this is that the ontologies
students may choose from should not be wholly defined a
priori or based on an analysis of the content matter to be
acquired – e.g. scales and a typology based on the various
philosophical theories discussed in current academic
philosophy of mind. Instead they should be allowed to
emerge from the data itself. The student conceptions should
be represented and compared on their own terms. For this
purpose, we used combined explorative quantitative and
qualitative methods, based on a geometric representation of
the students in a “conceptual space” based on their
responses.

Abstract
This paper reports on work in progress on student conceptions
regarding the relation of the mind and matter. Explorative
methods of data analysis and visualization were applied to
uncover patterns of variation in student conceptions at the
upper secondary and university undergraduate level. Our
finding is that there is variety in commonsense ontological
commitments and conceptualizations regarding the mind and
the body going beyond the traditional division between
materialistic and dualistic ontologies. We suggest that the
variety is partially based on the fact that – at least when
viewed from the perspective of a well-defined scientific or
philosophical theory – many commonsense intuitions are not
conceptually very well organized.
Keywords: Philosophical intuitions; higher education.

Introduction
In the 1640s, René Descartes claimed that one would
continue to exist, even if it turned out that one’s sensory
experience was an illusion created by an evil deity. Cogito
ergo sum. My thinking is ontologically sufficient for my
existence. What follows from this, for Descartes, is that the
mind and the physical body are genuinely different. Our
bodies are entities distinct from ourselves. We can doubt the
existence of our bodies, but we cannot doubt the existence
of our selves, and we can without logical contradiction
imagine ourselves to exist without our body existing, and
vice versa.
It has been claimed that people are common-sense Cartesian dualists (Bloom, 2004). It has been also argued that
“people universally think of human consciousness as separate from the physical realm” (Bloom, 2006, p.211) and how
“Just about everyone believes, for instance, that when our
bodies die, we will survive – perhaps going to heaven, entering another body, or coming to occupy some spirit world”
(Bloom, 2006, p.211).
On the other hand, “just about everybody” does not include most scientist or philosophers of today. It used to
include just about everybody, even among the scientific
community right up to the beginning of twentieth century,

Combining hierarchical cluster analysis and Selforganizing maps
The self -organizing map (Kohonen, 1999; Vesanto et al.,
2000) is an artificial neural network that uses an
unsupervised
learning
algorithm
to
represent
multidimensional data using a small number of elements
(nodes or prototypes). Since no a priori classification of the
input is required to train the map, the method is useful for
exploratory data mining and visualization. This is in line

679

with the ideal of letting the pattern of student similarities
and differences emerge from the data, rather than basing
them on a prior analysis of content. On the other hand, the
map, by itself, assigns no interpretation or categorization to
the vectors. In our design, the students’ answers were coded
into vectors that were clustered with hierarchical cluster
analysis. When the response patterns were projected into
two dimensions, with similar response profiles grouped
together, categorizations provided by the clustering were
used to label the responses.
We then went on to analyze the content of the answers of
the students to identify patterns and the logical relationships
between the categories.

Subjects
All in all 181 students completed the questionnaire (121
upper secondary students and 60 university students). Eleven university students were excluded because of having already completed a university degree (MA, MSc.), leaving a
sample of 170 students (121 upper secondary students, 49
university undergraduates, mean age 19±4 years).
The upper secondary students (65 male, 56 female) were
students of a large upper secondary school in the area of
Helsinki and two upper secondary schools of Oulu (in
northern Finland). The mean age of the upper secondary students was17±1 years. The students were of variable socioeconomic background and academic ability. The university
students (34 male, 15 female) were enrolled on introductory
courses in philosophy of mind and cognitive science, and
filled the questionnaire in partial fulfilment of course requirement. The mean age was 24±5, and the students came
from a variety of disciplines (Table 1).

Aims of the Study
A questionnaire was developed to investigate the students’
thinking on the relationship between mind and matter. The
questionnaire contained several sets of questions probing the
ontological conceptions the students held. The first set was
used to categorize the students based on their ontological
commitment to an immaterial/immortal mind and the
dualistic/materialist differentiation of the students with
respect to ontology.
Do dualists and materialists disagree on the matter of fact
concerning a shared ontology of mind and matter? I.e. do
they agree what material and immaterial things are, but
disagree on whether the mind is an immaterial thing – or
might there be consistent differences in the way students
with different ontological outlook construe the very notion
of matter? The aim of another set of questions was to reveal
something about the differential sets of attributes that are
related to the mental and the material in the conceptual
organization of students’ beliefs. To this end, students were
asked to identify from a list (Table 4) the properties and
attributes that they considered each of the eight categories
given in Table 3 to possess. The attributes included (i)
physical attributes pertaining to basic mechanics (location,
motion, time) (ii) perceptible qualities physical attributes
(color, hotness), and (iii) more abstract attributes such as
being subject to laws of nature. The categories included the
abstract categories of matter and immaterial, the mind, the
color red, and four material categories roughly relating to
the classical four elements. In what follows we will focus
only on analysis of the (im)material status of the mind.

Table 1: University students by major subject.
Major subject
Philosophy
Cognitive Science
Language & humanities
Mathematics
Computer Science
Other
Total

students
13
9
7
6
5
9
49

Materials & procedure
A paper and pencil questionnaire was administered in class.
All responses were given anonymously and the students
were told that there were no “right” answers to the questions
and that they would not be graded on their answers. The
students were allowed to complete the questionnaire at their
own pace.
The set contained 16 statements (Table 2) and the
students answered on a seven-scale likert scale whether they
were in agreement or disagreement with the statement
(“definitely true” to “definitely untrue”). The questions were
framed as much as possible “in the students’ own
language”, that is, using somewhat loose commonsense
turns of phrase, rather than precise definitions and qualifications of academic philosophy.
Another set (8 questions, with 20 yes/no items each) was
designed to further probe the way the students related
different attributes to mind and matter, and how they
conceived mind and matter to other categories of entities,
such as air or colors (see Table). The students’ task was to
judge whether, in their opinion, each of the categories was
material or immaterial (a seven point scale was used), and
whether they possessed or did not possess one of the twenty
attributes listed in Table 4. The students also completed a
two other sets of questions pertaining to mind-body
interaction and reincarnation beliefs. These data are not
analyzed nor further discussed here.

Methods
A multiple choice questionnaire containing items pertaining
to the mind-body problem was administered to upper
secondary and university undergraduate students. The
students were classified into groups based on a set of
diagnostic questions using hierarchical cluster analysis, and
the groups were visualized with a Self-Organizing Map
(SOM). The classification was interpreted qualitatively to
reflect different ontological stances of the students.

680

Data-analysis & Visualization
At first, the orientations of the vectors are random. The
SOM is then trained as follows. The subjects’ responses to
the 16 diagnostic questions can themselves be considered as
16-dimensional data vectors, each vector representing one
subject’s responses. The data is first normalized to avoid
any one dimension becoming dominant. In each round of
training one samples a data vector at random, finds the best
matching neuron on the SOM and then modifies the neuron
and its neighbors slightly so that they match better to the
training sample. After many rounds of training, the end
result is that the neurons on the SOM become ordered:
neighboring neurons have similar weight vectors. The
subjects are then associated to the best matching map nodes
and one obtains a map where subjects with similar response
profiles are close to each other while different types are
farther away or separated from one another.

A hierarchical cluster analysis of the responses to the
diagnostic questions (squared euclidean metric, Ward’s
agglomeration method, performed using SPSS 15.0). The
clustering solution suggested that the students could be
classified into three fairly homogeneous groups. The
purpose of the cluster analysis was to provide category
labels for the students, so that the overall pattern of student
conceptions in the “conceptual space” of our respondents
could be readily identified in the SOM maps.
The SOM maps were constructed and visualized using
SOM Toolbox (version 2) for Matlab (Vesanto et al., 2000).
The SOM map consists of neurons organized in a hexagonal
grid. For visualization of the answers to q1-q16, each
neuron is represented by a 16-dimensional weight vector
(one component per question).
The distance between neighboring neurons is measured
by calculating the Euclidean distance between the weight
vectors. The structure of the map can then be visualized by
assigning color codes to the distance measures. E.g.
neighboring neurons that are very dissimilar in the
Euclidean sense would be separated by dark “walls”, while
patches of similar neurons are identified by light “islands”
on the map.

Table 3: The categories.
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
c7
c8

Table 2: The ontological commitments probe questions
used to cluster the students.
no.
q1
q2
q3
q4
q5
q6
q7
q8
q9
q10
q11
q12
q13
q14
q15
q16

Question
Material entities can bring about (cause)
changes in material entities.
Only material entities can bring about (cause)
changes in material entities.
The human mind has a material basis.
The human mind has no material basis.
The human mind has a material basis in brain
activity, without which it can not exist.
When a human being dies, his/her mind no
longer exists afterwards.
When a human being dies, his/her mind can
still exist afterwards.
The human body can sometimes exist without
a human mind.
The human mind can sometimes exist without
a human body.
The human body can never exist without a
human mind.
The human mind can never exist without a
human body.
The human mind can bring about (cause)
changes in the human body.
The human body is: matter … immaterial
The human body is: a material entity
… an immaterial entity
The human mind is: matter … immaterial
The human mind is: a material entity
… an immaterial entity

Matter
Something immaterial
The human mind
The color red
Water
The flame of a candle
Air
Sand
Table 4: The attributes.

a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
a6
a7
a8
a9
a10
a11
a12
a13
a14
a15
a16
a17
a18
a19
a20

Always has a location
Always has a size
Always has a shape
Always has weight
Has a beginning and an end in time
Is timeless
Can only exist if matter exists
Can move from one place to another
Can move a definite distance
Can move a distance which can be measured
Can move from one place to another during a
definite period of time
Can move from one place to another at a
definite speed
Can move from one place to another at a
speed that can be measured
Is subject to laws of nature
Can bring about (cause) changes in material
entities
Can change from one form * to another
Can be colored
Can be hot or cold
Can form compounds with other substances
Always has structure

* The word for form is the Finnish word used to distinguish different
phases of substances (solid, liquid, gas) from one another.

681

other group who were “between materialism and dualism”,
and whom we will refer to as group X (49 students). An

Fig. 1 The map is based on the proximity of response
patterns on questions probing ontological commitments.
Darker hex indicates longer distance between units in the
input vector space. Students' ontological categorization
labels plotted on map. Materialists (labels M and Y) are
found in the upper left corner, dualists (D) at the lower right.
Group X is more scattered, and located roughly in between
the two opposites.

Fig. 2 Attributes assigned to the immaterial (top) and the
mind (bottom) by the different groups. (x-axis: attributes; yaxis: fraction of students in the group who assigned the
attribute to the category). D = gray diamonds; M = black
diamonds; X = gray squares; Y = black squares.
other group who were “between materialism and dualism”,
and whom we will refer to as group X (49 students). An
overview of the patterns of responses can be quickly formed
by looking at Figure 1: The materialists are a homogeneous
group, except for a small cluster (13 students) whom we
chose to give a separate label on the maps (Y). These
students were the furthest away from the dualists seemed to
have a somewhat different conception of materialism from
the rest (see discussion, below). The average responses of
the groups to each of the questions can be found in Tables 7
and 8 (scoring “definitely true” as 3 and “definitely untrue”
as -3, undecided as 0).
A main line of demarcation appeared to be the belief in a
mind that would or could continue to exist after one’s body
has perished (questions 6, 7, 9 and 11), and to a slightly
lesser extent the belief in the material basis for the mind
(questions 3-5). Overall, the dualists affirmed the existence
of a mind that could survive the death of the body, while the
other groups tended to deny this. (Although there was
individual variation and a large percentage of non-committed middle of the scale answers, especially in group X).
Another line of demarcation would seem to separate group
X from the materialists (especially the Y variety) and, to a
lesser extent, the dualists.

Visualization of the trained SOM map is seen in Fig. 1.
The map consists of 11x6 neurons (the hexes with letters in
them), separated by cells representing the distance
measures. The students are plotted on the map in the
appropriate cells. For purposes of reproduction and
readability, only the category label of the subject given by
the cluster analysis (D, M, Y, X) is shown for each subject.
This is sufficient to get an overall view of the similarity
organization of the responses.

Results
The first set of items (Table 2) probed the basic ontological
commitments of the students. Cronbach’s alpha for this
scale of items was 0.807. When the different response
patterns of the groups - identified by the cluster analysis were qualitatively interpreted, we could assign an ontological interpretation to the group differences. The largest
cluster we could readily interpret to be materialists, comprising nearly half of our sample (74 students). These students affirmed a material basis for the mind (q3-q5), and denied the mind would or could continue its existence after
death (q6, q7, q9, q11). The other half were divided into the
fairly homogeneous cluster of dualists (47 students), and an-

682

Table 5: Correlations of the item scores to three varimax
rotated principal components.

A Principal Components Analysis showed that the there
was one (rotated) principal component that separated the
materialists and the dualists, and a second and third
component that differentiated group X from Y (Tables 5 &
6)1. The three components accounted for half (51%) of the
variance in the responses.
On the items related to attributes associated with the
mental and the material, group Y also differed from the rest
(see Fig. 2). Overall, we found that the average response
profiles for the category Matter across the physical attributes (a1-a4) and the concrete attributes (a16-a19) were
very similar across all groups (group Y assigning marginally
more, group X slightly less of the physical attributes). It is
the view on the mind and the immaterial which differentiates between them. Specifically, the properties assigned to
the category Immaterial were largely similar for the groups
(except that the dualists and the X:s assigned movement, a8,
and timelessness, a6, to the mind). However, when it came
to mind, the students in group Y were clearly different, as
can be seen from Fig. 2. They seem to have a much more
“physical” view of the mental: with the items related to motion (a9-a13) this group (but not the others) assigns the to
the mind (but not the immaterial). This group also considered the mind (but again not the immaterial) to be subject
to the laws of nature (a14) – most of the other students, including materialists, did not.

no.
q1
q2
q3
q4
q5
q6
q7
q8
q9
q10
q11
q12
q13
q14
q15
q16

1
-0.10
0.13
0.15
0.08
0.22
0.84
0.86
0.08
0.85
0.02
0.81
0.09
0.13
0.03
0.11
0.14

2
0.20
0.22
0.73
0.69
0.24
0.26
0.20
0.06
0.03
0.08
0.03
0.10
0.00
0.02
0.86
0.82

3
0.55
0.11
0.41
0.32
0.62
0.07
0.04
0.08
0.10
0.09
0.10
0.16
0.86
0.79
0.00
0.10

Table 6: Individual responses mean regression to the
components, by group.
no.
D
M
Y
X

Discussion
Many of the respondents in our study seemed to be advocates of an ontology that can be considered “materialistic”
in some sense in that they consider the mind to be ontologically dependent on the body. On the other hand, it seems
the mind itself is still considered, by our “materialistically
inclined” students, in quite dualistic terms (that group M are
not “epiphenomenalists” can be seen from the fact that they
predominantly considered the mind to be able to cause
changes in the body, q12). So while the “materialists” believe in a material basis and mortality of the mind, many
still have a conception of the mind itself very much like the
dualists.
A notable exception is the Y subgroup among the materialists. This subgroup was most strongly of the opinion that
the human mind is material (q15 & q16). Among the materialists, the opinion was divided – most chose a non-committed answer in the middle of the scale, with an equal number affirming and denying the proposition. (In contrast, the
dualists, as well as group X, were quite strongly in favor of
the mind being immaterial). However, like many materialists group Y denied that the mind would survive perishing of
the body, but they also differed from the other materialists
and resembled dualists in that they also denied that a human
mind could not exist without a human body.

1
-1.22
0.65
-0.37
0.45

2
-0.33
0.39
1.41
-0.55

3
-0.07
0.33
0.37
-0.45

Table 7: Group mean responses to the ontological
questions 1-12 (-3 indicates a negative answer, and 3
indicates a positive answer on a seven-point scale).
question
q1
q2
q3
q4
q5
q6
q7
q8
q9
q10
q11
q12

D
2.2
-2
0
0
0.9
-1
1.6
1
1.8
-1
-2
2.3

M
2.5
0
1.7
-2
2.2
1.8
-2
2.3
-2
-2
1.8
2.5

Y
2.7
0
2.9
-3
2.4
2.5
-2
2.8
1
-3
-2
2.6

X
1.4
-1
0
0
0.6
1.6
-2
0.8
-1
-1
0.6
1.8

Table 8: Group mean responses to the ontological
questions 13-16 (3 indicates a “material” response -3 an
“immaterial” response on a seven-point scale).
question
q13
q14
q15
q16

1

We also performed a Multidimensional Scaling which does not
require an interval measurement scale, and makes less stringent
assumptions about distributions. It produced the same overall
result of one dimension differentiating materialists from dualists
and another differentiating X from the rest, but especially from Y.

683

D
2
2
-1.7
-1.6

M
3
3
0
0

Y
3
3
2
1

X
2
2
-1.7
-1.3

What could be behind this apparent contradiction? Are
these students just confused? We think not. The group
comprises mainly of Cognitive Science, Computer Science
and linguistics/humanities students (one upper secondary
student). Y thus represents precisely the subgroup that
would be expected to be the most strongly exposed to
alternative, counterintuitive materialist ontologies (e.g. the
computational theory of mind and multiple realizability).
These students might therefore think the mind cannot exist
without a material basis, but that this material basis need not
be the brain (maybe the mind can be downloaded on a
computer etc.). This interpretation is given some
corroboration by looking at the group level responses to the
questions about the material basis of the mind (Tables 7 &
8). Group Y has by far the highest mean value in response to
the statement q4 “The human mind has a material basis”
(mean 2.9). By comparison mean for M is 1.6, for X it is 0.3 and for D -0.1. However, response to the statement q5
“The human mind has a material basis in brain activity,
without which it cannot exist” is 2.4 – i.e. less - while for all
other groups q5 has a higher mean than q3. In other words,
our most materialistic students were less inclined consider
mentioning the brain as the basis of the mind as important.
The opposite is true for the dualistically inclined – indeed,
14 members of groups D and X first denied that the mind
has a material basis, giving a negative answer to q3, and
then immediately affirmed that brain activity is a material
basis of the mind!
This is an important finding in another sense: it brings
home the subtlety of assigning interpretations to student
responses. Interpreting answers to individual items at face
value as indicative of either materialist or dualist ontology,
e.g. taking higher scores on q5 to indicate “more
materialistic” and lower scores “less materialistic”, misses
out on important pattern. The responses should be looked at
in the context of responses to other questions (here the
comparison between q3 and q5).

not form well-differentiated and internally coherent
conceptual clusters, but that there is
We found one subgroup among the materialists, who had
a much more “physical” view of the mind. This group also
considered the mind to be subject to the laws of nature –
(most of the other students, including materialists, did not!).
However, while group Y denied that the mind would continue to exist after death, they also differed from the other
materialists (and resembled) dualists in that they also denied
that a human mind could not exist without a human body.
Thus, they were on the one hand “between materialists and
dualists” (on the first principal component axis), but very
differently so from the X students. One may speculate that
these students base their response on some kind of
“functionalist” framework that allows other material substrates beside the brain, possibly due to exposure to such
ideas in the philosophy of mind and cognitive science. We
hope to further clarify the thinking behind different patterns
of answers by interviewing students with response profiles
most characteristic of each group. Are the Y students
responding based on some kind of proto-functionalism? Are
the 14 members of X and D alluded to above simply undisturbed by their own lack of coherence, or is there an
underlying logic to their answers?
Also, are there systematic differences among university
students of different disciplines? How does higher education
in, say, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology or computer
science affect one’s view on the relationship between the
mind and the body? The small sample size of our study does
not allow us to address these questions quantitatively, and
will be left to future study.
Pursuing such questions emerging from our data will
hopefully help us elucidate the full pattern of variation in
student conceptions, and help in designing more adequate
quantitative measures to capture all the dimensions that
characterize individual differences in students’ ontological
conceptions.

Conclusions & Future directions

Acknowledgments

In this paper we have presented work in progress on
secondary and undergraduate students’ conceptions
regarding the relation of the mind and matter. Explorative
data analysis and visualization methods were applied to
uncover patterns of variation in student conceptions.
At least among our Finnish respondents it appears not
“just about everybody” is committed to dualist ontology. On
the contrary, there is a rich variety in common sense
ontological commitments and conceptualizations regarding
the mind and the body.
Many of the respondents in our study seemed to be
advocates of an ontology that can be considered
“materialistic” in some sense in that they consider the mind
to be ontologically dependent on the body. On the other
hand, it seems the mind itself is still considered, by our
“materialistically inclined” students, in quite dualistic terms.
This suggests that the students’ intuitive conceptions may

We thank Ms. Siru Törnroos, and Mr. Samuli Pöyhönen for
participating in data collection.

References
Bloom, P. (2004). Descartes’ Baby. New York: Basic
Books.
Bloom, P. (2006). My brain made me do it. Journal of
Culture and Cognition, 6, 209-214.
Kohonen, T. (1999). Self-organizing Maps. Amsterdam:
Springer-Verlag.
Stanovich, K. (1989). Implicit Philosophies of Mind: The
Dualism Scale and Its Relation to Religiosity and Belief
in Extrasensory Perception. Journal of Psychology, 123
(1), 5-23.
Vesanto, J., Himberg, J., Alhoniemi, E., & Parhankangas, J.
(2000). Technical Report: SOM Toolbox for Matlab 5.
Espoo: Helsinki University of Technology.

684

