UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inference is Bliss: Using Evolutionary Relationship to Guide Inferences about Biological
Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/35w6c1q4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Catley, Kefyn
Novick, Laura

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inference is Bliss: Using Evolutionary Relationship
to Guide Inferences about Biological Categories
Laura R. Novick (Laura.Novick@vanderbilt.edu)
Dept. of Psychology & Human Dev., Vanderbilt University, 552 GPC, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Kefyn M. Catley (kcatley@wcu.edu)
Department of Biology, Western Carolina University
Cullowhee, NC 28723 USA
Abstract
College students with stronger and weaker backgrounds in
biology were asked to infer whether one taxon (e.g., a certain
reptile) uses the same enzyme to help regulate cell function as
comparison taxon A (e.g., a certain amphibian) or comparison
taxon B (e.g., a certain mammal). Color pictures of the named
taxa were provided. Inferences were made in one of three
conditions: Two conditions gave subjects the evolutionary
relationships among the taxa (amphibians, reptiles, and
mammals in the example), in one of two diagrammatic
formats; the third, baseline, condition did not provide such
information. Subjects uniformly made the incorrect inference
in the baseline condition. Providing the evolutionary diagrams
had different effects depending on the diagrammatic format
and the biology background of the subjects.
Keywords: Categorical inferences, evolutionary diagrams,
cladograms, expertise, macroevolution.

Introduction
Category-Based Induction
One of the most important functions of categories is to
enable people to “know” things, and to take corresponding
action, by inference rather than by perception. As López,
Atran, Coley, Medin, and Smith (1997, p. 252) noted,
“humans evolved in a world where knowing whether an
animal was an antelope or a lion was essential for their
survival: they could eat the antelope, and they could be
eaten by the lion. Accordingly, the human mind seems to
have evolved to organize its knowledge of the natural world
into sets of related categories (e.g., cheetahs and lions are
kinds of felines, aardwolves and spotted hyenas are kinds of
hyenas, and felines and hyenas are kinds of carnivores) and
to use these relations to make inductions about those
categories.” By definition, such inferences are best guesses,
not fact. Thus, for example, one might infer that parrots are
more likely to share a biological property possessed by
squirrels than one possessed by cobras when in fact the
opposite inference is warranted because, evolutionarily,
birds are more closely related to snakes than to mammals
(http://tolweb.org/Amniota/14990). In the experiment
reported here, we assessed whether college students are able
to change the inferences they would normally make if they
are given information about evolutionary relationship that is
inconsistent with their folkbiological categories.

There is an extensive literature on the inferences that
people make from one biological category to another
(primarily though not exclusively involving animal
categories). This research has examined a variety of factors
that influence categorical inferences concerning biological
categories, such as: (a) the similarity between the premise
and conclusion categories (e.g., mouse and rat vs. fox and
rat) and the typicality of the premise category as a member
of the conclusion category (e.g., rabbit/mammal vs.
porcupine/mammal; López et al., 1997; Rips, 1975), (b) the
level of the premise category within the class inclusion
hierarchy (e.g., bald eagle, eagle, bird, animal; Coley,
Medin, & Atran, 1997), and (c) domain expertise or cultural
background (e.g., fishermen or Mayan Amerindians
compared with U.S. college students; Coley et al., 1997;
López et al., 1997; Shafto & Coley, 2003).
This research on category-based inferences has been
conducted within the frameworks of, and motivated by the
perspectives of, cognitive psychology and cultural
anthropology. In our research, we approach this topic from a
different perspective, namely evolutionary biology.

Cladograms and Tree-Thinking
Although U.S. college students know a fair amount about
the biological world, particularly types of animals that live
in their local area or that are commonly found in zoos, their
knowledge of and experience with biological categories is
relatively impoverished compared with that of certain more
homogeneous groups (e.g., Mayan Amerindians, the
Menominee tribe in Wisconsin; Medin & Atran, 2004). It
should not be too surprising, therefore, to discover major
misconceptions and errors in the categorical knowledge of
even very bright college students. For example, Morabito,
Catley, and Novick (2009) asked students at Vanderbilt
University whether lizards are evolutionarily more closely
related to frogs or to mammals. The correct answer is
mammals (http://tolweb.org/Terrestrial_Vertebrates/14952),
but 91% of students with weaker backgrounds in biology
and 74% of students with stronger backgrounds in biology
incorrectly grouped lizards with frogs.
If students’ knowledge of biological categories is
incorrect, their inferences will likely reflect this flawed
knowledge. For example, if students are asked whether the
gecko shares character X with the horned frog or character

2487

Y with the prairie dog, we would expect them to select
character X because of their incorrect belief that lizards are
more closely related to frogs than to mammals. Although in
psychological experiments one may base inferences on
whatever criteria one wishes, and one goal of cognitive
psychology is to uncover those criteria, evolutionary
biology provides an external yardstick for judging inference
quality. Although one perhaps cannot deem one inference to
be correct and another to be wrong, evolutionary biology
does allow one to identify some inferences as better or more
useful than others. For example, inferring which antivenin
would be best for treating the bite of a venomous king
brown snake based on its close evolutionary relationship to
the red-bellied black snake is more likely to lead to a
desirable outcome (survival!) than basing the choice of
antivenin on the king brown snake’s similar coloration to
the western brown snake (Freeman, 2005).

Cladogram Formats
Let us return to the inference question about whether the
gecko shares a property possessed by the prairie dog or one
possessed by the horned frog. As noted earlier, because of
students’ misconception concerning the pattern of
evolutionary relationships among these taxa (Morabito et
al., 2009), we would expect them to choose the property of
the horned frog. The question we ask in the present study is
whether these same students are able to use information
about the correct evolutionary relationships to overcome
their incorrect categorical knowledge and make the more
appropriate, evidence-based inference that the gecko shares
the property possessed by the prairie dog.
As shown in Figure 1, cladograms are typically drawn in
one of two formats, which we have previously labeled tree
and ladder. Although these formats are informationally
equivalent (Larkin & Simon, 1987), our research on
students’ understanding of and ability to reason from
cladograms shows that they are not computationally
equivalent. It is much more difficult to extract the correct
hierarchical relationships from the ladder format than the
tree format (Novick & Catley, 2007, 2009). Although
students with stronger backgrounds in biology perform
better than those with weaker backgrounds on a variety of
cladogram comprehension and reasoning (i.e., tree-thinking)
tasks when the ladder format is used, even they show
decrements in performance with the ladder format compared
with the tree format (Novick & Catley, 2007, 2009).

Overview of the Study
Figure 1: How the evolutionary relationship information
was provided to subjects: The top and bottom cladograms
are in the tree and ladder formats, respectively.
Within the field of evolutionary biology, evolutionary
relationships are depicted as nested levels of most recent
common ancestry in a hierarchical diagram known as a
cladogram. For example, the cladograms in Figure 1 show
that reptiles and mammals share a more recent common
ancestor with each other than either of those two taxa share
with amphibians. It is more parsimonious, therefore, that the
gecko shares a character with the prairie dog than with the
horned frog because geckos and prairie dogs share a most
recent common ancestor that is not shared by the horned
frog. Because cladograms (a) are the most important tool
used by evolutionary biologists, (b) enable evidence-based
inference and prediction, and (c) provide a conceptual
framework for basic and applied biology (e.g., see Cracraft
& Donoghue, 2004), a growing number of biologists and
science educators have called for the inclusion of
cladogram-based tree thinking in biology curricula from
middle school through the undergraduate years (e.g., Baum,
Smith, & Donovan, 2005; Catley, 2006; Goldsmith, 2003;
Meir, Perry, Herron, & Kingsolver, 2007; Nickels &
Nelson, 2005; Novick & Catley, 2007, 2009; O’Hara, 1988;
Sandvik, 2008).

Our earlier studies used cladograms with 5-10 taxa. The
present study examined whether students can use the
simplest possible tree and ladder cladograms, involving only
three taxa, to make appropriate, evidence-based inferences.
Although we expect the tree format to be more helpful,
consistent with our earlier results, it is possible that students
can understand the ladder format when it is pared down to
its minimal version even though they cannot scale up this
understanding to more complex structures. The results of
this study on students’ baseline competence at tree thinking
will inform instructional interventions.
Subjects participated in one of three conditions: The no
diagram condition gave us baseline data on subjects’
inferences. In the two diagram conditions, subjects received
cladograms depicting the correct evolutionary relationships
among the relevant taxa, in either the tree format or the
ladder format. As shown in Figure 1, the taxon labels on the
cladograms were superordinate to those used in the
inference question. Thus, subjects had to integrate the
diagrammatic information showing that reptiles share a
more recent common ancestor with mammals than with
amphibians with their knowledge in long-term memory
concerning the biological categories to which geckos,
prairie dogs, and horned frogs belong. This integration is
critical to preserve the inferential nature of the task.
Following López et al. (1997) and Gelman (1986), the
inference questions were presented as sets of three taxa

2488

(triads), with subjects being asked whether the focal taxon
shared a property with reference taxon A or reference taxon
B. The property we used was reliance on a certain enzyme
to help regulate cell function. The psychological literature
on biological inferences has used a variety of different
properties, including obscure body parts, behavioral
characteristics, genes, enzymes, and diseases. We selected
enzymes as the property of interest because they are likely
to be shared due to recent common ancestry. In contrast,
shared behavioral characteristics are often convergently
evolved, and diseases may be passed on by ecological
mechanisms such as predation. Obscure body parts would
have served equally well, except for the difficulty of
identifying such characters for all the different taxa we used.
There were two sets of experimental inference triads. One
set involved amphibians, reptiles, and mammals. As already
noted, our previous data (Morabito et al., 2009) strongly
suggest that subjects will make the inference that contradicts
evolutionary relationships in the control condition, thereby
leaving room for improved performance when a cladogram
is provided. The other set involved plants, fungi, and
animals. Fungi are more closely related to animals than to
plants, but the second author’s experience teaching zoology
to biology majors led us to believe that our subjects would
make the inappropriate inference in the control condition for
this set as well.

reptile as the focal taxon. The amphibian was either a
salamander/newt or a frog. The reptile either lived on land
(lizard, snake, or turtle) or in the water (crocodilian, snake,
or turtle). These two factors were crossed, and two triads
were created for each of the four combinations. Figure 2
shows an example reptile triad in the no diagram control
condition. As shown in this figure, all taxa were named and
represented by a color picture. Fungus triads used a small
flowering plant and an animal as the reference taxa and a
mushroom as the focal taxon. Five types of animals were
used (fish, invertebrate, large carnivore, primate, and
reptile), with two triads created for each type of animal.
For each triad, subjects were told that a different enzyme
helps to regulate cell function in each of the two reference
taxa. The enzyme names consisted of a randomly generated
consonant pair followed by a randomly generated number
pair (see Figure 2). Subjects were then told to consider the
focal taxon and to decide which of the two enzymes helps to
regulate cell function in that taxon. If they preferred the
enzyme of the reference taxon pictured on the left, they
circled a number on the left rating scale; if they preferred
the enzyme of the reference taxon pictured on the right, they
circled a number on the right rating scale. The left and right
positions were correct (i.e., supported by evidence
concerning evolutionary relationships) equally often.

Method
Subjects
The subjects were 108 Vanderbilt University students who
were recruited during two consecutive fall semesters. They
participated in partial fulfillment of course requirements for
introductory psychology (10 females, 5 males) or
evolutionary biology (25 females, 27 males), or for extra
credit in the psychology (21 females, 2 males) or education
(15 females, 3 males) class from which they were recruited.
The subjects were divided into two groups based on their
background in biology. Stronger background subjects had
taken at least the two-semester introductory biology
sequence required for biology majors and pre-med students.
Weaker background subjects had not completed these two
classes and typically had little exposure to biology. There is
a very large difference in biology background between the
two groups, as can be seen in the mean number of courses
taken (of those listed on our questionnaire). The 54 stronger
background students (26 females, 28 males) had taken an
average of 3.31 semesters of biology (or relevant geology)
classes, whereas the 54 weaker background students (45
females, 9 males) had taken an average of only 0.46
semesters of such coursework, a more than 7:1 difference.

The 8 reptile triads and 10 fungus triads were mixed with
32 filler triads that involved a variety of different kinds of
animals and plants. The filler triads served to disguise the
critical trials. The data from those triads were not analyzed.

Inference Triads

Cladogram Format Conditions

Each inference question involved two reference taxa and a
focal taxon about which an inference was to be made. There
were two types of taxon triads. Reptile triads used an
amphibian and a small mammal as reference taxa and a

As noted earlier, the most appropriate inference depends on
the evolutionary relationships among the taxa. Subjects
should infer that the focal taxon uses the same enzyme as
the reference taxon with which it shares a more recent

Figure 2: A reptile triad in the no diagram condition.

2489

common ancestor. For the reptile triads, that is the mammal.
For the fungus triads, that is the animal. In the no diagram
condition, as illustrated in Figure 2, the inference question
was presented without providing the relevant evolutionary
information. This condition, then, provides data on subjects’
entering biases concerning taxon relationships.
In two other conditions, we gave subjects a cladogram
that depicted the relevant evolutionary relationships. This
diagram was located immediately above the information
depicted in Figure 2. The cladogram was drawn in one of
two formats, either tree or ladder. The two cladograms used
with the triad shown in Figure 2 are depicted in Figure 1.
Subjects received only one of these two diagrams.
Subjects were randomly assigned to cladogram format
conditions. There were 17, 18, and 19 stronger background
students and 17, 21, and 16 weaker background students in
the no diagram, ladder, and tree conditions, respectively.

Procedure
The 50 inference problems were randomly ordered subject
to certain constraints to make sure that critical triads of a
given type (reptile or fungus) did not occur on consecutive
trials and that the critical triads of each type were distributed
throughout the booklet. Two different random orders were
used. The problems were printed two to a page. Subjects
worked through the booklet at their own pace.

= -1.48) than when it was a water mammal (M = -1.22).
This might have been because our pictures of the
amphibians showed them on land. There was also a main
effect of type of amphibian, F(1, 102) = 23.08, p < .001,
MSE = 1.13, partial η2 = 0.19. Subjects showed a stronger
bias to pick the enzyme of the amphibian when it was a
salamander (M = -1.60) than when it was a frog (M = -1.10).
We speculate that this is due to the greater similarity of
locomotion between salamanders and reptiles than between
frogs and reptiles. Neither the type of reptile nor the type of
amphibian interacted with any other factor. Thus, we will
not discuss these factors further.
There was a main effect of diagram condition, F(2, 102) =
40.99, p < .001, MSE = 13.59, partial η2 = 0.45. As
predicted, the ratings were strongly negative in the no
diagram condition (M = -3.10), less negative when the
correct evolutionary relationships were shown in the ladder
format (M = -1.85), and positive when the evolutionary
relationships were depicted in the tree format (M = 0.91).
The main effect of biology background was marginally
significant, F(1, 102) = 2.96, p < .09, partial η2 = 0.03.

Results
The data from the two types of triads were analyzed
separately because different variables were manipulated in
their construction. For both types of triads, subjects’ ratings
for the evolutionarily-inappropriate taxon choice were
coded on a scale from -5 (very likely) to -1 (a bit more
likely); their ratings for the evolutionarily-appropriate taxon
choice were coded on a scale from 1 (a bit more likely) to 5
(very likely). Thus mean negative ratings indicate a
preference for the more-distantly-related taxon (amphibian
choices for the reptile triads and plant choices for the fungus
triads), mean ratings near 0 indicate no preference for one
reference taxon over the other, and mean positive ratings
indicate a preference for the more-closely-related taxon
(mammal choices for the reptile triads and animal choices
for the fungus triads).
Effect sizes are reported as partial η2. A value of .01 was
the minimum taken to indicate a small effect, .09 was the
minimum taken to indicate a medium effect, and .25 was the
minimum taken to indicate a large effect.

Reptile Triads
We conducted a 2 (reptile type; within) X 2 (amphibian
type; within) X 2 (biology background; between) X 3
(diagram condition; between) ANOVA on the mean ratings
for the reptile triads. There was a main effect of type of
reptile, F(1, 102) = 8.11, p < .01, MSE = 0.93, partial η2 =
0.07. Subjects showed a stronger bias to pick the enzyme of
the amphibian when the focal taxon was a land mammal (M

Figure 3: Mean inference ratings for the reptile triads as a
function of biology background and diagram condition.
Negative numbers indicate (incorrect) amphibian choices;
positive numbers indicate (correct) mammal choices. Error
bars are standard errors for the relevant mean.
These main effects were qualified by a diagram condition
by biology background interaction, F(2, 102) = 3.79, p <
.03, partial η2 = 0.07, which is depicted in Figure 3. As
shown in the figure, the overall pattern discussed for the
main effect of diagram condition is largely driven by the
results for the stronger background subjects. They had a
strong negative rating in the no diagram condition, a less
negative rating in the ladder condition, and a positive rating
in the tree condition. The weaker background subjects, in
contrast, had very similar ratings in the no diagram and
ladder conditions, and in the tree condition their mean rating
was essentially 0, indicating no preference for placing the
reptile with either the amphibian or the mammal.

2490

Fungus Triads
We conducted a 5 (animal taxon; within) X 2 (biology
background; between) X 3 (diagram condition; between)
ANOVA on the mean ratings for the fungus triads. The
main effect of type of animal taxon was not statistically
significant, F(4, 408) = 1.64, p > .16, MSE = 0.79, partial η2
= 0.02. Type of animal taxon did not interact with any other
factor. Therefore, it will not be discussed further.
The results for the between-subjects factors were very
similar to those found for the reptile triads. There was a
main effect of diagram condition, F(2, 102) = 37.66, p <
.001, MSE = 15.35, partial η2 = 0.43. As predicted, the
ratings were most negative in the no diagram condition (M =
-2.04), less negative when the correct evolutionary
relationships were presented in the ladder format (M =
-1.16), and positive when the evolutionary relationships
were depicted in the tree format (M = 1.54). The main effect
of biology background was marginally significant, F(1, 102)
= 3.70, p < .06, partial η2 = 0.03. The interaction between
diagram condition and biology background also was
marginally significant, F(2, 102) = 2.51, p < .09, partial η2 =
0.05. Figure 4 shows that the form of this interaction is
similar to that found for the reptile triads, with all the means
shifted in a positive direction.

Figure 4: Mean inference ratings for the fungus triads as a
function of biology background and diagram condition.
Negative numbers indicate (incorrect) plant choices;
positive numbers indicate (correct) animal choices. Error
bars are standard errors for the relevant mean.

Discussion
As expected, both weaker and stronger background subjects
made the poorer inference in the no diagram control
condition, strongly believing that the reptile would share a
cell-function-regulating enzyme with the amphibian and that
the mushroom would share such an enzyme with the plant.
If anything, this tendency to make an incorrect inference

was stronger in the students who were more knowledgeable
about biology.
Providing subjects with the correct evolutionary
relationships among the taxa had different effects depending
on the format in which the cladogram was presented and the
biology background of the subjects. When the cladogram
was depicted in the ladder format, the responses of weaker
background students were unchanged. Three explanations
for this finding are possible: (a) they did not understand the
diagram and so ignored it, (b) they misinterpreted the ladder
to indicate that reptiles are more closely related to
amphibians and fungi are more closely related to plants, and
(c) they misinterpreted the ladder to indicate that the three
taxa are equally closely related and so responded on some
other basis. Although, we cannot discriminate among these
alternatives based on the present data, our previous data
(Novick & Catley, 2007, 2009) suggest that these students
may interpret three-taxon ladders as indicating that all three
taxa are equally closely related. This would mean that the
ladders used in the present study provided them with no
relevant information for choosing one reference taxon over
the other, leading to the results we found. Presenting the
cladograms in the tree format did help the weaker
background subjects, at least in a relative sense: For both the
reptile and fungus triads, the bias to respond incorrectly
disappeared. However, for neither type of triad did weaker
background subjects have a mean rating that was
significantly above zero, indicating that these subjects never
consistently made the evolutionarily-appropriate inference,
even when the relevant evolutionary evidence was provided.
As might be expected, the stronger background subjects
fared better with the cladograms. When given the
evolutionary relationship information in the tree format,
they switched from making the evolutionarily-inappropriate
inference to making the evolutionarily-appropriate inference
for both the reptile and fungus triads. For the fungus triads,
these subjects were as sure that the animal enzyme was the
correct inference in the tree condition (M = 2.21) as they
had been in the no diagram condition that the plant enzyme
was the correct inference (M = –2.23). The incorrect
inference for the reptile triads was more difficult to
overcome, as the mean rating in the tree condition (M =
1.69) was less in absolute value than the mean rating in the
no diagram condition (M = –3.46). These data strongly
suggest that the incorrect reptile/amphibian link is deeply
entrenched. Providing the evolutionary relationship
information in the ladder format reduced stronger
background subjects’ tendency to make an incorrect
inference for both types of triads, but their mean ratings
were still negative in both cases. This result is consistent
with our earlier research showing that even students with
stronger backgrounds in biology have difficulty
understanding the structure of the ladder format.
These results have important implications for instruction.
Cladograms are powerful tools for inference because they
depict the structural information upon which biological
inferences should be based. If students understand this

2491

function of cladograms, they should make better inferences
when they receive a cladogram than when they do not. Our
results suggest that college students understand this function
of cladograms to some extent. Clearly, though, there is room
for improvement, as subjects reliably chose the
evolutionarily-appropriate inference in only one of the four
relevant cells of our design even though the cladograms we
used are the simplest ones possible.
Although we have argued that non-biology majors do not
need to understand the ladder format (Novick & Catley,
2007), biology majors should because it appears in the
research literature (although less frequently than the tree
format). In collaboration with Dan Funk in the biology
department at Vanderbilt University, we are examining the
effects of instruction in phylogenetics (i.e., tree thinking) on
the ability of students enrolled in an evolution class to use
the evolutionary relationship information provided in the
tree and ladder formats to make appropriate inferences.
College students with weaker backgrounds in biology,
and even some with stronger backgrounds, need help
understanding and using cladograms in the tree format. We
are currently evaluating the effectiveness of an instructional
booklet for improving tree-thinking skills in students with
varying backgrounds in biology.
In a third extension of the present findings, we are
investigating the effects of providing evolutionary
relationship information in the tree format on the inferences
made by tenth graders enrolled in a high school biology
class. The results of all three of these studies in progress
will help guide us in the development of a tree-thinking
curriculum at both the college and high school levels.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dan Funk at Vanderbilt University for allowing
us to collect data from the students in his evolution classes
across two semesters. We thank John Coley at Northeastern
University for giving us triads to use for the filler trials. We
thank Julie Denham and Caryn Wang for their help in
creating the stimulus pages; Amy Garza, Courtney Shade,
Marissa Mencio, and Emily Schreiber for their help with
collecting the data; and Amy Garza, Marissa Mencio, and
Aaron Novick for creating and checking the data file. The
research reported here was supported by the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, through
Grant R305A080621 to Vanderbilt University. The opinions
expressed are those of the authors and do not represent
views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education

References
Baum, D. A., Smith, S. D., & Donovan, S. S. (2005). The
tree thinking challenge. Science, 310, 979-980.
Catley, K. M. (2006). Darwin’s missing link: a new
paradigm for evolution education. Science Education, 90,
767-783.
Coley, J. D., Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (1997). Does rank
have its privilege? Inductive inferences within
folkbiological taxonomies. Cognition, 64, 73-112.

Cracraft, J. & Donoghue, M. J. (Eds.) (2004). Assembling
the tree of life. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, S. (2005). Biological science (2nd ed.). Upper
Saddle River (NJ): Prentice Hall.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Goldsmith, D.W. (2003). Presenting cladistic thinking to
biology majors & general science students. The American
Biology Teacher, 65, 679- 682.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
López, A., Atran, S., Coley, J. D., Medin, D. L., & Smith, E.
E. (1997). The tree of life: Universal and cultural features
of folkbiological taxonomies and inductions. Cognitive
Psychology, 32, 251-295.
Medin, D. L., & Atran, S. (2004). The native mind:
Biological categorization and reasoning in development
and across cultures. Psychological Review, 111, 960-983.
Meir, E., Perry, J., Herron, J. C., & Kingsolver, J. (2007,
September). College students’ misconceptions about
evolutionary trees. The American Biology Teacher
Online, 69 (7).
Morabito, N., Catley, K. M., & Novick, L. R. (2009). Seeing
both sides of the coin: The effects of biology background
on university students’ knowledge of most recent common
ancestry and homoplasy. Manuscript under revision.
Nickels, M. K., & Nelson, C. E. (2005). Beware of nuts &
bolts: Putting evolution into the teaching of biological
classification. The American Biology Teacher, 67, 283289.
Novick, L. R., & Catley, K. M. (2007). Understanding
phylogenies in biology: The influence of a Gestalt
perceptual
principle.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 13, 197-223.
Novick, L. R., & Catley, K. M. (2009). Understanding the
tree of life: The effects of biology background, cladogram
format, and cognitive/perceptual factors on tree thinking.
Manuscript under revision for an invited resubmission.
O’Hara, R. J. (1988). Homage to Clio, or, toward an
historical philosophy for evolutionary biology. Systematic
Zoology, 37, 142-155.
Rips, L. J. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural
categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 14, 665-681.
Sandvik, H. (2008). Tree thinking cannot taken for granted:
challenges for teaching phylogenetics. Theory in
Biosciences,
127,
45–51.
Retrieved
from:
http://www.springerlink.com/content/eu62420p381402xr/
March 19, 2008.
Shafto, P., & Coley, J. D. (2003). Development of
categorization and reasoning in the natural world:
Novices to experts, naive similarity to ecological
knowledge. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 641-649.

2492

