UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interaction of Taxonomic and Contextual Knowledge in Categorization of Cross-Classified
Instances

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25z9h4bc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Coley, John
Muratore, Tara
Vasilyeva, Nadya

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interaction of Taxonomic and Contextual Knowledge
in Categorization of Cross-Classified Instances
Nadya Y. Vasilyeva (vasilyeva.n@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, 125 NI Huntington Ave,
Boston, MA 02115-5000 USA

John D. Coley (j.coley@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, 125 NI Huntington Ave,
Boston, MA 02115-5000 USA

Tara M. Muratore (muratore.t@neu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, 125 NI Huntington Ave,
Boston, MA 02115-5000 USA

Abstract

Murphy, 1999) and that accessing taxonomic knowledge
may inhibit access to contextual knowledge (Macrae,
Bodenhausen & Milne, 1995; Vitkin, Coley & Feigin,
2005). However, cognitive scientists are increasingly
acknowledging the important role of contextual categories
in both organizing knowledge and guiding reasoning (e.g.,
Lin & Murphy, 2001; López, Atran, Coley, Medin & Smith,
1997; Medin, Lynch, Coley & Atran, 1997; Murphy, 2001;
Ross & Murphy, 1999; Shafto & Coley, 2003). This
highlights the importance of understanding crossclassification and its implications for conceptual structure
and reasoning.
In previous studies taxonomic and contextual categories
have typically been considered independently to contrast
their representation, accessibility, and use (e.g., Ross &
Murphy, 1999). As a result, we still know relatively little
about how these kinds of conceptual systems interact. In this
study we examine how simultaneous membership in
multiple categories influences detection of relationships
between entities in the complex real-world domain of folk
biology.
One possibility is that taxonomic and contextual
conceptual systems are relatively independent, and that
accessing one kind of category has little effect on the other.
Alternatively, multiple cross-cutting conceptual systems
might interact symmetrically to facilitate or inhibit each
other. In line with a spreading activation view of semantic
memory (e.g., Collins and Quillian, 1969), accessing one
kind of category information could facilitate the
accessibility of semantically related knowledge about other
conceptual systems an object belonged to. In contrast,
accessing one kind of category information might serve to
inhibit accessibility of other kinds of knowledge. Empirical
support for this prediction comes from a study by Macrae,
Bodenhausen and Milne (1995) who primed participants
with either an ethnic (Chinese) or gender (female)
stereotype, then exposed them to a cross-classified stimulus
(a video of a Chinese woman reading a book). On a
subsequent lexical decision task participants were faster to

This study examined the interplay of taxonomic and
contextual knowledge in cross-classification by assessing the
interaction of taxonomic and ecological knowledge in folk
biology. Stimuli were pairs of animal species in which the
presence or absence of taxonomic and ecological relations
was manipulated orthogonally. Participants judged whether
each pair was related taxonomically and ecologically; we
measures speed and accuracy. Presence of taxonomic
relations facilitated ecological judgments for ecologically
related pairs, and hindered judgments for unrelated pairs. In
contrast, although ecological relations hindered taxonomic
judgments for taxonomically unrelated pairs, they failed to
facilitate judgments for taxonomically related pairs. These
results underscore the interactive nature of different
conceptual systems for cross-classified categories and suggest
a disproportionally strong influence of taxonomic categories.
Keywords: Multiple categories; cross-cutting categorization;
taxonomic knowledge; ecological categories; contextual
categories; folkbiology.

Complex real-world knowledge is usually multidimensional.
Most things fall into multiple categories, and multiple kinds
of category systems. For example, although ducks and
roadrunners are birds and otters and coyotes are mammals,
these species can also be cross-classified as pond animals
and desert animals.
Two broad kinds of categories that seem to recur across
domains are taxonomic categories, wherein common
membership stems from shared intrinsic properties of the
members themselves, and contextual categories (also known
as thematic or relational categories), wherein common
membership stems from shared extrinsic properties
including causal relations and spatio-temporal cooccurrence. Traditionally, taxonomic categories have been
assumed to provide the mainstay of conceptual structure
(e.g. Rosch, 1978; Smith & Medin, 1981; Murphy, 2002).
Past research suggests that taxonomic categories may be
more accessible than contextual categories (Ross &

721

make decisions about words pertaining to the primed
stereotype relative to neutral words, and slower to respond
to words related to the unprimed stereotype. This finding
suggests that availability of one category can inhibit
competing categories.
A final possibility is that multiple conceptual systems
might interact, but that interaction might be asymmetrical
due to differences in salience or accessibility of those
systems. In other words, a more salient or accessible
category system might exert stronger effects on a less
accessible system than vice versa. Indeed, a number of
findings suggest that taxonomic categories may be
privileged over contextual categories. First, taxonomic
categories may be more readily accessible. For example,
taxonomic categorization tends to be faster and more
accurate than script categorization (Ross & Murphy, 1999),
and time pressure impedes the use of contextual categories,
but not taxonomic categories, in induction (Coley, Shafto,
Stepanova & Barraff, 2005; Shafto, Coley & Baldwin,
2007). Second, taxonomic categories may be a default for
categorization and reasoning. For instance, neutral sorting
instructions yield predominantly taxonomic groupings (Ross
& Murphy, 1999); moreover, taxonomic categories are
readily employed by novices in a given domain (e.g., López
et al., 1997) and utilized by experts in the absence of
meaningful cues to more specific relations (Shafto & Coley,
2003).
Finally, Ross and Murphy (1999) showed that taxonomic
and relational categorization are differentially sensitive to
priming. Priming taxonomic categories had no effect on the
speed or accuracy of taxonomic category verification
relative to neutral sentences, whereas priming script
categories improved the speed and accuracy of script
category verification relative to neutral sentences.
Moreover, Vitkin, Coley & Feigin (2005) showed that
priming taxonomic categories inhibited scrip classification,
whereas priming script categories had no effect on
taxonomic categorization.
Together, these findings suggest that taxonomic knowledge
may be more accessible and less sensitive to contextual
manipulations than contextual knowledge. If so, then any
asymmetry in the mutual influence of taxonomic and
contextual conceptual systems should favor taxonomic
categories over contextual categories.
To examine interactions between taxonomic and contextual
conceptual systems, we used a relation verification task.
Participants were asked to judge whether pairs of animals
were related taxonomically and ecologically. By
manipulating whether pairs shared both, one, or neither
relation, we were able to examine how the presence or
absence of a one relation influenced judgments about the
other.
If taxonomic and ecological conceptual systems are largely
independent of each other, then ecological relatedness
should have little impact on taxonomic judgments, and vice
versa. If these conceptual systems are symmetrically
facilitating, we would expect better performance on

ecological judgments for pairs related via both ecology and
taxonomy than for pairs related solely via ecology because
both relations potentiate a correct “yes” response. In
contrast, we would expect poorer performance on ecological
judgments for pairs related solely via taxonomy than for
completely unrelated pairs because the taxonomic relation
might increase the likelihood of an incorrect “yes” response.
And if these influences are symmetrical, the converse
should hold for influences of ecological relations on
taxonomic judgments. If taxonomic and ecological
conceptual systems are symmetrically inhibitory, we might
expect the presence of one relation to uniformly interfere
with performance on the other dimension. For example,
ecological judgments should be slower and less accurate for
taxonomically close pairs than far pairs, and vice versa for
taxonomic judgments. Finally, if effects are asymmetrical,
we would expect one kind of judgment to be
disproportionately affected by the presence or absence of
the other kind of relation. If so, research reviewed above
leads us to expect that taxonomic categories might have a
larger impact on ecological judgments than ecological
categories have on taxonomic judgments.

Method
Participants
Participants
were
36
Northeastern
University
undergraduates.
Undergraduates were recruited from
introductory psychology classes and participated for course
credit.

Stimuli and Design
Twenty four pairs of animals were chosen to independently
manipulate the presence of salient taxonomic and ecological
relations. Pairs were either taxonomically near (drawn from
the same or a closely related superordinate biological class)
or taxonomically far (drawn from different superordinate
biological classes). Orthogonally, pairs were either
ecologically related—via shared habitat and predation—or
ecologically unrelated. This yielded four item types:
close/related, close/unrelated, far/related, and far/unrelated
pairs (Figure 1). Participants were presented with all 24
pairs1 and asked to judge whether the pairs were related
taxonomically and ecologically. Taxonomic and ecological
judgments were blocked; order of blocks was
counterbalanced. Thus, we manipulated taxonomic distance
and ecological relatedness of animal pairs as well as the
type of verified relationship within subjects.

1
Stimuli pairs contained either pictures of animals only, or
animal names only, or pictures and names. This manipulation did
not yield significant effects and did not interact with other factors,
and will not be discussed here.

722

three-way interaction between question, taxonomic distance,
and ecological relatedness (F(1,35)=32.59, p<.0001,
ηp2=.48), suggesting that taxonomic distance and ecological
relatedness had different effects on the accuracy of
taxonomic versus ecological judgments.
To investigate this three-way interaction further, we
separately analyzed accuracy of responses to taxonomic and
ecological questions. We were particularly interested in
whether the presence or absence of an ostensibly irrelevant
relation (ecological relatedness for taxonomic verification,
and taxonomic relatedness for ecological verification) had
any effect on accuracy.
Ecological Verification. A 2 (taxonomic distance) x 2
(ecological relation) repeated measures ANOVA on
ecological verification accuracy revealed that responses
were more accurate for ecologically related items (M=0.83)
than for unrelated items (M=0.66, F(1,35)=24.19, p<.0001,
ηp2=.41). Responses were also more accurate for
taxonomically far items (M=0.79) than for taxonomically
close items (M=0.70, F(1,35)=13.34, p=.0008, ηp2=.28).
Most importantly, these effects were qualified by a
significant interaction (F(1,35)=119.69, p<.0001, ηp2=.77).
As shown in Figure 2, among ecologically related items,
taxonomic relatedness facilitated accuracy, which was
higher for close/related (M=0.96) than far/related items
(M=0.70, Tukey/Kramer p<.05).
In contrast, among
ecologically unrelated items, taxonomic relatedness
interfered with accuracy, which was lower for
close/unrelated items (M=0.44) than for far/unrelated items
(M=0.88, Tukey/Kramer p<.05).

Figure 1: Orthogonal manipulation of taxonomic and
ecological relation in animal pairs.

Procedure
Animal pairs were presented in blocks on a computer
running Superlab software. Each block started with
instructions, followed by 2 practice trials with feedback,
after which participants were reminded of the question and
presented all 24 experimental trials. Each trial started with a
blank screen. An animal pair then appeared on the screen,
and the participant indicated their response by pressing the
“0” key for YES or the “1” key for NO. For the taxonomic
block, the question was “Do these animals belong to the
same biological category?” For the ecological block, the
question was “Do these animals live in the same place?”
Participants were instructed to respond as quickly as
possible without sacrificing accuracy.

Results
Scoring
We analyzed accuracy (proportion of items answered
correctly) and reaction time. For ecological judgments,
correct responses were YES for related items and NO for
unrelated items. For taxonomic judgments, correct
responses were YES for close items and NO for far items.
Reaction time was computed for correct responses only. For
each participant, proportion correct and mean reaction time
was computed for each type of item, separately for
ecological and taxonomic judgments.

Figure 2: Accuracy for ecological verification as a function
of ecological relatedness and taxonomic distance. Error bars
represent one standard error of the mean.

Accuracy
In order to examine the effects of taxonomic and ecological
relatedness on judgments, we conducted a 2 (taxonomic
distance: close, far) x 2 (ecological relation: related,
unrelated) x 2 (verification question: taxonomic, ecological)
repeated measures ANOVA on mean accuracy. Results
showed that overall, accuracy of taxonomic verification
(M=0.78) and ecological verification (M=0.74) did not
differ (F(1,35)=1.52, p=.23). However, we did observed a

Taxonomic Verification. A parallel 2 (taxonomic distance)
x 2 (ecological relation) repeated measures ANOVA on
taxonomic verification accuracy revealed that responses
were more accurate for taxonomically far items (M=0.89)
than for close items (M=0.66, F(1,35)=40.38, p<.0001,
ηp2=.54). Although ecological relation had no main effect on
taxonomic accuracy, there was a reliable interaction
(F(1,35)=13.28, p=.0009, ηp2=.28). As shown in Figure 3,
among taxonomically close items, ecological relatedness

723

had no effect on accuracy. However, among taxonomically
far items, ecological relatedness interfered with accuracy,
which was lower for far/related items (M=0.82) than for
far/unrelated items (M=0.96, Tukey/Kramer p<.05).

Reaction Time
In order to examine the effects of taxonomic and ecological
relatedness on reaction time, we conducted a 2 (taxonomic
distance: close, far) x 2 (ecological relation: related,
unrelated) x 2 (verification question: taxonomic, ecological)
repeated measures ANOVA on mean reaction time for
correct responses. Overall RT for taxonomic verification
(M=2105 msec) and ecological verification (M=2248 msec)
did not differ (F(1,35)=2.35, p=.14). However, because the
three-way interaction between question, taxonomic distance,
and ecological relatedness approached significance
(F(1,35)=3.48, p=.071, ηp2=.09), we separately analyzed RT
for taxonomic and ecological verification, as we did for
accuracy.
Ecological Verification. A 2 (taxonomic distance) x 2
(ecological relation) repeated measures ANOVA on RT for
ecological verification revealed that taxonomically close
items (M=2081 msec) were verified faster than far items
(M=2415 msec, F(1,35)=15.28, p=.0004, ηp2=.30), and
showed a significant interaction of taxonomic distance and
ecological relatedness (F(1,35)=7.55, p=.009, ηp2=.18). As
depicted in Figure 4, among ecologically related items,
taxonomic relatedness facilitated speed of verification,
which was faster for close/related items (M=1846 msec)
than far/related items (M=2427 msec, Tukey/Kramer
p<.05). In contrast, RT did not differ for close/unrelated
items (M=2316 msec) versus far/unrelated items (M=2407
msec).

Figure 3: Accuracy for taxonomic verification as a function
of ecological relatedness and taxonomic distance. Error bars
represent one standard error of the mean.
So far, the effects of taxonomic distance on ecological
verification appear larger than the reciprocal effects of
ecological relatedness on taxonomic verification. To test
this, we calculated separate facilitation and interference
scores for each participant. Facilitation scores measured the
extent to which the presence of a second relation increased
accuracy when the target relation was also present. Thus,
taxonomic facilitation for ecological verification was
calculated by subtracting accuracy for far/related items from
accuracy for close/related items, and ecological facilitation
for taxonomic verification was calculated by subtracting
accuracy for close/unrelated items from accuracy for
close/related items. Likewise, interference scores measured
the extent to which the presence of a non-target relation
decreased accuracy in the absence of the target relation.
Taxonomic interference on ecological verification was
calculated by subtracting accuracy for close/unrelated items
from accuracy for far/unrelated items, and ecological
interference on taxonomic verification was computed by
subtracting accuracy for far-related items from accuracy for
far/unrelated items. In both cases higher scores indicated
stronger facilitation or interference.
Analyses confirmed that the presence of taxonomic
relations had a stronger facilitation effect on ecological
verification (M=0.26) than the presence of ecological
relations had on taxonomic verification (M=0.09,
t(35)=2.98, p=.005). Likewise, the presence of taxonomic
relations had a stronger interference effect on ecological
verification (M=0.44) than the presence of ecological
relations had on taxonomic verification (M=0.13,
t(35)=6.42, p<.0001). These results demonstrate mutual
albeit asymmetrical effects of taxonomic and ecological
relations on judgments; the presence of taxonomic relations
had a stronger effect on the accuracy of ecological
verification than the presence of ecological relations had on
the accuracy of taxonomic verification.

Figure 4: Reaction time for ecological verification as a
function of ecological relatedness and taxonomic distance.
Error bars represent one standard error of the mean.
Taxonomic Verification. A second 2 (taxonomic distance)
x 2 (ecological relation) repeated measures ANOVA on RT
for taxonomic verification revealed that participants were
faster to respond to taxonomically far items (M=2016 msec)
than close items (M=2193 msec, F(1,35)=6.79, p=.013,
ηp2=.16), and marginally faster to respond to ecologically
unrelated items (M=2033 msec) than related items (M=2177
msec, F(1,35)=3.50, p=.07, ηp2=.09). The interaction was
not significant (see Figure 5).

724

speed or accuracy from taxonomic judgments for pairs
related via taxonomy alone.
Moreover, focused comparisons of the magnitude of
influence confirmed an asymmetry in the effects of
taxonomic and ecological relations. The presence of
taxonomic relations exerted stronger influence on ecological
verification than the presence of ecological relations did on
taxonomic verification.
These results were unlikely to be accounted for by speedaccuracy trade off, since, as examination of means suggests,
higher accuracy was generally associated with lower RT.
The observed interactive effects rule out the first
possibility described earlier that taxonomic and contextual
systems could act independently in cross-classification.
More specifically, the interaction between multiple category
systems in cross-classification appears to be based on
mutual facilitation, not mutual interference. Facilitation
account relies on the spreading activation view of semantic
memory (e.g., Collins and Quillian, 1969). On this view,
accessing one kind of category may lead to activation of
other conceptual systems an object belongs to. Positive
categorization decisions (confirming presence of the
verified relation) can benefit from additional activation
spreading from ostensibly irrelevant categories, increasing
likelihood of “yes” responses. In negative categorization
(denying a common category in the absence of verified
relation), when activation spreads from irrelevant categories
and increases unwarranted activation of the verified
category system, this results in higher likelihood of
erroneous “yes” responses. This way, underlying facilitation
in accessibility of two conceptual systems would manifest
itself through facilitatory effects in positive categorization,
and interference effects in negative categorization, as
observed in our experiment.
A less interesting explanation for such pattern might be
based on participants’ inability to differentiate between
taxonomic and ecological relatedness. However, the fact
that responses to taxonomic and ecological questions
followed markedly different patterns, and were differentially
affected by taxonomic and ecological relations suggests that
participants were not indiscriminately verifying presence of
some general association between animals.
Importantly, the observed facilitation interaction was
markedly asymmetrical. On positive verification trials,
where the target relation is present and a non-target relation
varies, ostensibly irrelevant taxonomic relations reliably
facilitated both speed and accuracy of ecological
verification of related items, whereas the presence of nontarget ecological relation, on the contrary, had no effect on
speed or accuracy of taxonomic verification of
taxonomically related items. On negative verification trials,
when the target relation was absent, although both
ecological and taxonomic verification showed decrease in
accuracy when a non-target relation was present, the
decrease was three times more pronounced for ecological
verification in the presence of taxonomic relation. These

Figure 5: Reaction time for taxonomic verification as a
function of ecological relatedness and taxonomic distance.
Error bars represent one standard error of the mean.
To evaluate the relative strength of taxonomic and
ecological relation effects on RT, we calculated facilitation
and interference scores as we did for accuracy, except that
the subtraction direction was reversed because facilitation
corresponds to lower RT. As with accuracy, analyses
confirmed that the presence of taxonomic relations had a
stronger facilitation effect on ecological verification
(M=581 msec) than the presence of ecological relations had
on taxonomic verification (M=-75 msec, t(35)=3.76,
p=.0006). Unlike for accuracy, taxonomic and ecological
interference did not significantly differ. The overall pattern
of RT results echoes the findings with accuracy, and
suggests an asymmetry in mutual effects of taxonomic and
ecological relations, with taxonomy exerting stronger
influence on ecological verification than vice versa,
although the pattern is weaker than in the accuracy analyses.

Discussion
This study was conducted to examine the cognitive
consequences of cross-classification. More specifically, we
investigated the interaction of taxonomic and ecological
knowledge in folk biology.
Results of a relation verification task showed that the
taxonomic relatedness of a pair of animals had a marked
effect on the accuracy of ecological judgments about the
pair. Specifically, ecological judgments for pairs related via
both ecology and taxonomy were faster and more accurate
than for pairs related solely via ecology. In contrast,
ecological judgments for pairs related solely via taxonomy
were less accurate than for unrelated pairs, but did not differ
in RT.
Results also showed that the ecological relatedness of a
pair of animals had a reciprocal, albeit weaker, effect on the
accuracy of taxonomic judgments about the pair.
Specifically, taxonomic judgments for pairs related solely
via ecology were less accurate (but not slower) than for
unrelated pairs. However, taxonomic judgments for pairs
related via both ecology and taxonomy did not differ in

725

References

results clearly demonstrate that taxonomic relations exert
stronger effect on ecological relations, than vice versa.
As a speculation, such asymmetric interaction may arise if
the taxonomic category system is more clearly “tagged” as a
distinct categorization dimension, and can be accessed in a
relatively isolated and targeted manner. The system of
ecological categories (or, more specifically, habitat
categories), may lack such a tag of a distinct dimension
which would allow to selectively activate it and ignore
irrelevant dimensions. In the absence of a clear and easily
available criterion of what kind of relatedness counts as
“habitat”, it is hard to identify and discount what is not
habitat. By “playing it safe”, such a system would allow
taxonomic relation to augment decisions about ecological
relatedness, but not the opposite.
Finally, it needs to be noted that in our experiment we did
not observe an overall accessibility advantage of taxonomic
over ecological categories (based on average accuracy or
speed of relation verification). This contrasts with previous
work (Ross & Murphy, 1999; Coley et al., 2005; Shafto et
al., 2007) suggesting overall accessibility as an important
factor on which taxonomic and contextual categories differ.
Our results could be due in part to the specifics of the task
mentioned above: participants were only provided with two
instances and a general category type, but not the specific
level to verify (“Do these animals live in the same place?”,
“Do these animals belong the same biological category?”),
and they were free to interpret the question broadly or
narrowly. In contrast, previous studies involved making
decisions about single instances and their membership in
explicitly provided categories (“Is bacon a meat?”). In our
task, deriving a relevant common category could involve
additional effort (with different amount of effort required
for deriving a relevant common ecological vs. taxonomic
category), which could result in leveling of ecological and
taxonomic verification in overall accuracy and speed.
Nevertheless, the fact that such asymmetrical effects of
taxonomic knowledge were observed even in the absence of
overall accessibility advantage, makes these findings even
more remarkable. In this study, the asymmetry of effects can
not be attributed to taxonomic knowledge being at ceiling of
accessibility, restricting potential influence of ecological
knowledge. The observed effects highlight the fact that there
are multiple ways in which increased accessibility of
knowledge may be manifested in reasoning.
This work contributes to our understanding of how
category knowledge is accessed for multiply classified
instances. Most importantly, these results underscore the
interactive nature of different conceptual systems for crossclassified categories and suggest that this interaction is
markedly asymmetrical, with a disproportionally strong
influence of taxonomic categories.

Coley, J.D., Shafto, P., Stepanova, O, & Barraff, E. (2005).
Knowledge and category-based induction. In Ahn, W.,
Goldstone, R. L., Love, B. C., Markman, A. B., & Wolff,
P. (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside the laboratory:
Essays in honor of Douglas L. Medin. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Collins, A. M., Quillian, M. R. (1969) Retrieval from
semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior Collins 8: 240-247.
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (2001). Thematic relations in
adults'
concepts.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology:General, 130, 3-28
López, A., Atran, S., Coley, J. D., Medin, D. & Smith, E.E.
(1997). The tree of life: Universal and cultural features of
folkbiological taxonomies and inductions.
Cognitive
Psychology, 32, 251-295.
Macrae, C. N., Bodenhausen, G. V., Milne, A. B. (1995).
"The dissection of selection in person perception:
inhibitory processes in social stereotyping." Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 69(3): 397-407.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D, & Atran, S.
(1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree experts:
Do all roads lead to Rome? Cognitive Psychology, 32, 4996.
Murphy, G.L. (2001). Causes of taxonomic sorting by
adults: A test of the thematic-to-taxonomic shift.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 834-839.
Murphy, G.L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge
MA: MIT Press.
Rosch, E.H. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E.
Rosch & B. Lloyd, (Eds.), Cognition and Categorization.
Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum Associates. 27-48.
Ross, B. H. and Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology 38,
495-553.
Shafto, P. and Coley, J. D. (2003). Development of
categorization and reasoning in the natural world: Novices
to experts, naïve similarity to ecological knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 29, 641-649.
Shafto, P., Coley, J.D. & Baldwin, D. (2007). Effects of
time pressure on context-sensitive property induction.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 890-894.
Smith, E.E. & Medin, D.L. (1981). Categories and
concepts. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Vitkin, A.Z., Coley, J.D. & Feigin, K. (2005). Accessibility
of Taxonomic and Script Knowledge in the Domain of
Food. Paper presented at the 46th Annual Meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Toronto.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NSF grant BCS-0236338 to
John D. Coley.

726

