UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Word Production in Dyslexic Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/38t2s2xx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Vallee-Tourangeau, Frederic
Webb, Susan

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Word Production in Dyslexic Children
Susan Webb and Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau
Psychology Research Unit, Kingston University
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
susan.webb@moving-minds.org; f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
In solving problems people naturally seek to modify their
external environment such that the physical space in which they
work is more amenable or ‘congenial’ to achieving a desired
outcome. Attempts to determine the effectiveness of certain
artifacts or spatial reorganizations in aiding reasoners solve
problems must be relativised to the difficulty of the task and the
cognitive abilities of the reasoners. This investigation aimed to
determine the extent to which manipulating the order of letter
tiles can affect participants’ performance in a word production
task. The sample consisted of both developmental dyslexic
children and a control group of typically developing children,
aged between 9 - 11 years. The word production task involved
creating words from sequences of letter tiles in a ‘hands’ and a
‘no hands’ condition. Manipulating the tiles significantly
enhanced word production for the dyslexic children with an easy
letter set but not with a hard letter set. In turn, manipulating the
tiles had a marginal impact on performance in the control
children. Overall, measures of visuospatial and working memory
abilities were better predictors of word production performance
when children did not manipulate the tiles than when they did.
Manipulating the external environment in this task enhanced
performance and reduced the contribution of internal processes,
including working memory.
Keywords: Psychology, distributed cognition, interactivity,
individual differences, working memory.

Introduction
In attempting to solve a wide variety of tasks, people
naturally seek to modify their external environment such
that the physical space in which they work is more
amenable to achieving a desired outcome. Scientists build
(and tinker with) physical models of their object of
investigation, an interactive process that provides
important perceptual feedback that drives the generation
and evaluation of novel hypotheses (e.g., Weisberg, 2006;
Watson, 1968 – see also Clark, 1997, 2008; Giere &
Moffat, 2003). Pilots use and modify external markers in
their cockpit to help them gauge more easily the gap
between the plane’s current status and the desired speed
and altitude as they engage in preparations for landing
(Hutchins, 1995). On a more quotidian level, people use
simple artifacts (e.g., ‘Post-it’ notes, Norman, 1993) or
alter their physical environment to enhance their
prospective memory or facilitate the execution of
everyday tasks (e.g., prepare a meal, repair a bicycle, see
Kirsh, 1995). In so doing, a reasoner delegates some of
the information storage and/or computational costs onto

her immediate surroundings, and the problem solving
activity is distributed among resources internal and
external to the reasoner.
Kirsh (1993) introduced the notion of ‘complementary’
actions, actions that support thinking, and illustrated their
importance in a simple coin counting task. The error rate
for a group of participants who were refrained from
pointing or touching the coins in adding their total was
50%. That rate dropped to 35% when participants were
allowed to point to the coins while counting, and 20%
when they were allowed to touch the coins. Of course, the
act of pointing or touching the coins is not an essential
process required for counting. However, once the number
of coins reaches a certain level then it pays off in terms of
efficiency and accuracy to employ complementary actions
or more direct reshaping of the environment to facilitate
thinking. There are a number of important factors that can
determine the amount of assistance gained by reshaping
or exploiting physical environment in problem solving,
among them experience, maturation, and innate abilities.
When a child learns to count she may use her fingers as a
visual and mental cue to guide her progress on the task.
With experience, the child may no longer rely on her
fingers: The task difficulty no longer outweighs the
physical demands of manipulating her external
environment.

Word Production
In a task where randomly presented letters (e.g.,
HTEGNIS) are assembled to form words, word production
reflects a search process through a space of possible letter
strings (Maglio, Matlock, Raphaely, Chernicky, & Kirsh,
1999; Vallée-Tourangeau and Wrightman, under review).
To be sure, verbal fluency or dexterity with words is likely
to be a strong predictor of performance in this task.
However, an analysis of the task plausibly implicates a
number of processes in the efficient and successful
exploration of that space, including executive search,
working memory and visualisation abilities, psychometric
dimensions that vary considerably across people.
Gavurin (1967) found that a problem solver's
performance on an anagram task, where no overt
rearrangement of the letters was permitted, was related not
only to her level of verbal ability, but also to her level of
non-verbal spatial ability, as the symbolic representations

1436

require a large degree of spatial aptitude (manipulatory
visualisation). This positive relationship between spatial
aptitude and anagram solving was significantly reduced
once participants were allowed to physically rearrange the
letters in producing their solution. This suggests that once
the need for implicit spatial manipulation is factored out
with the physical rearrangement of the work space, an
individual's spatial ability is no longer a predictor of her
performance on an anagram task.
Using a simpler word production task with random
sequences of letters, participants tend to generate more
words when they are allowed to manipulate the letters than
when no overt physical manipulation is permitted (Maglio
et al., 1999; Kirsh, 1995). However, the level of task
difficulty determines the effectiveness of manipulating the
environment to aid task performance. In turn, the
effectiveness of manipulating letter tiles in a word
production task must be relativised to the individual
problem solver’s cognitive ability (Vallée-Tourangeau &
Wrightman, under review).
It is also plausible to conjecture that individual
differences in working memory capacity covary to some
degree with individual differences in the ability to carry
out complex internal calculations. Completementary
actions may enhance the ability to carry out these complex
calculations by structuring interactions with the physical
space to facilitate storage and information processing. For
example, Cusher and Wiley (2008) demonstrated that the
ability to gesture while completing the Tower of Hanoi had
a positive effect on participants’ performance. The results
indicated that gesturing reduced the cognitive workload,
allowing even those participants with a lower working
memory capacity to perform better on the task.
Thus when the demands on working memory are
reduced, more cognitive effort can be focused on the
solution of a task, resulting in an increase in task
performance. The ‘intelligent use of space’ (Kirsh, 1995)
and complementary actions can reduce the cognitive
demands on attention control, working memory, and visual
memory during problem solving. It would therefore be
interesting to see the extent to which individuals with
weaker working memory abilities can exploit their physical
environment to improve problem-solving performance.
Developmental Dyslexia. A specific population of
individuals who demonstrate impairments of working
memory are developmental dyslexics (Oakhill & Kyle,
2000; Lishman, 2003). The term developmental dyslexia
refers to an unexpected difficulty in reading that cannot be
explained by lack of intelligence, motivation, or access to
appropriate schooling (Lishman, 2003). Neuroimaging data
indicate unusual pattern of functional connectivity and
activation of specific regions associated with language
(Benson, 2000; Simos, Breier, Fletcher, Bergman, &
Papanicolaou, 2000). Snowling (1998, 2000) outlines a
phonological deficit disorder theory that identifies

potential processes underlying the deficit as well as the
difficulties that some individuals diagnosed with
developmental dyslexia demonstrate. Working memory
capacity has also been implicated in the efficient
processing of phonological information, as demonstrated
by dyslexics’ performance on a sound categorisation task
involving phonological awareness (Oakhill & Kyle, 2000).

The Present Study
As Kirsh (1995, 1996) argue people naturally attempt to
shape and exploit their environment to help them solve
both quotidian and less prosaic problems. The
development of domain specific expertise coincides with
the restructuring of the physical space so that it facilitates
efficient and robust problem solving. The physical space
can be engineered in a way that it shoulders some of the
computational costs, facilitating choice at important
decision points. The present study investigated the use of
the environment as a tool to facilitate cognitive processing
using a sample of developmental dyslexics involved in a
word production task such as the one described above
(Maglio et al., 1999). Since the facilitating effect of
environmental manipulations is relative to the level of task
difficulty, we explicitly manipulated task difficulty. In
turn, task difficulty can only be defined relative to the
cognitive abilities of the reasoner. In this study, these
abilities were gauged on the basis of performance on a
number of working memory tasks. We predicted that
participants with weaker cognitive abilities would show
most improvements when invited to reshape the external
environment during word production.
Dyslexic children tend to exhibit certain working
memory weaknesses (Oakhill & Kyle, 2000). We
conjectured that developmental dyslexic participants would
perform better on a letter tile word production task if they
were given the opportunity to rearrange the letters.
Reshaping the problem space should facilitate the search
efforts, as the changes in the external environment may
reduce demands on spatial visualisation, working memory
and verbal dexterity. The word production performance of
the control participants, however, may not be as
substantially influenced by the manipulation of the letter
tiles. We also sought to gauge the overall relationship
between word production performance and visuospatial/
working memory abilities. We predicted that, across both
groups, working memory abilities would be positively
correlated with word production performance. However,
the opportunity to manipulate the letters should weaken the
relationship between cognitive skills and word production
performance, as weaker participants elevate their word
production output, thereby shortening the left tail of the
performance distribution and compressing variance.
Hence, the correlation between measures of working
memory abilities and word production performance should
be stronger when the letter tiles are not manipulated.

1437

Method
Norming Data
A pilot study was conducted to establish norming data for
the letter sequences; these data were then used as a basis
from which the letter sequences for the main study were
selected.
Participants. The participants of this study were recruited
at the Wiltshire School of Gymnastics (UK). Twenty
participants were included in this investigation (Males = 4,
Females = 16), ranging in age from 9 to 11 years (M = 9.8
years).
Design and Procedure. Ten different letter sequences
were randomly generated without replacement until each
letter sequence consisted of either 6 or 7 different letters;
five 6-letter sequences and five 7-letter sequences were
created. Participants were asked to produce as many words
as they could from these sequences during a 2 minute time
period. Participants were told that words could be of any
length and that each letter could be used just once per
word. The participants were then instructed to read and
spell out each word as it was produced. The words were
recorded on the data sheet by the experimenter to limit any
confounding effects of spelling and hand writing
proficiency. Each participant was presented with two of the
6-letter sequences and two of the 7-letter sequences, the
order of which was predetermined on a counter balanced
data sheet.
Table 1: Mean number of words produced (with standard
deviation) from the six- and seven-letter sequences in a
two minute period.
Six-letter sequences
M

Seven-letter sequences

SD

M

SD

IKGLAE

3.1

2.4

GRSTAKP

7.3

1.8

UATDNF

6.3

1.7

OPARSJE

4.5

2.4

DEIRPA

8.6

2.9

INHEGTS

11.6

3.4

HOADGR

6.3

2.4

RODECUA

5.0

1.5

CANOLT

7.6

2.6

HETWICY

6.9

2.1

Results The mean number of words produced from each
letter sequence are reported in Table 1. The six-letter
sequences did not differ much in terms of output, with the
exception of a particularly hard sequence (IKGLAE) for
which there was arguably a floor effect (M = 3.1). The
seven letter sequences provided a better range of outputs,
and hence we examined these sequences to identity a hard
and easy set. We elected to use the sequence INHEGTS as
the ‘easy’ letter set (M = 11.6) and the sequence
GRSTAKP as the ‘hard’ letter set (M = 7.3); the difference
was significant, t(7) = -3.15, p < .05. Finally, note that

during this pilot study, participants were still producing
words as the 2-minute period elapsed. Consequently a 3minute time period was employed in the main study.

Experimental Data
Participants. Forty two participants aged between 9 and
11 years were recruited from the Dover Court Preparatory
School (Singapore) for inclusion in the main study. Twenty
of the participants were diagnosed with developmental
dyslexia (mean age 9.9 years) and the remaining 22
participants (mean age 9.8 years) were reported to have no
known learning difficulties. All participants were schooled
in English and were fluent English speakers.
Design and Procedure. Participants in both groups were
exposed to two different letter sequences, a hard letter
sequence (GRSTAKP) and an easy letter sequence
(INHEGTS). A simple word production task was
conducted under two conditions: a ‘hands’ condition,
which allowed for manipulation of the letter tiles, and a
‘no hands’ condition during which the letter tiles could not
be rearranged. Participants were tested one at a time in a
quiet room. They performed four separate tasks (spatial
visualisation, word production, working memory, verbal
fluency) and the testing session lasted 45 minutes.
Spatial Visualisation Task. Participants were first
presented with the symbol coding task B, taken from the
WISC-IV. During this task the number of digits that a
participant was able to transcribe into the corresponding
symbol was assessed in a 2 minute time period. This task
requires executive control, visual scanning and accurate
visual perception.
Word Production Task. The children were then
introduced to the word production task. During this task
participants were given one of the letter sequences, which
was placed on the table in front of them. Each letter tile
was placed one centimetre away from the next. Participants
were instructed to identify, say, and spell as many words as
possible using those specific letters for 3 minutes.
Participants performed the task in two conditions; in the
‘hands’ condition participants were instructed to move the
letter tiles around and reorder the letters to look for or
think up words while in the ‘no hands’ condition
participants were instructed not to touch or point to the
letter tiles. The order in which the manipulation conditions
and the hard and easy letter sets were presented was
counterbalanced. In between each letter sequence
participants were given a 3-minute distracter task, during
which they were asked to complete various mazes.
Working Memory. Participants’ digit span (forward and
backward) was measured (the task was taken from the
WISC-IV). During this task participants were orally

1438

Verbal Fluency Test. The Thurstone (1938) word fluency
test measured verbal fluency. Participants were instructed
to say as many words as possible beginning with the letter
“S” for five minutes, and then as many four-letter words
beginning with “C” for four minutes. The experimenter
recorded the children’s words.

> .05. The difference in their performance when they were
given the easy letter set was indistinguishable (M= 11.4,
SEM = 1.50, v. M = 12.2, SEM = 0.65), t (20) = -0.45, p >
.05. A different pattern of results was observed in the
dyslexic group. A much more pronounced advantage of
manipulating the tiles was observed with the easy letter set
than with the hard letter set. Significantly more words were
produced in the hands condition (M = 7.7, SEM = 0.97)
than in the no hands condition (M= 5.1, SEM = 0.55) with
the easy letter set, t(18) = 2.34, p < .05, but not with the
hard letter set, (M = 4.8, SEM = 0.69 v. M = 4.4, SEM =
0.73), t(18) = .39, p > .05.
Control
14

Mean Number of Words

presented with a sequence of numbers and asked to repeat
them, either in the order of presentation (forward) or in the
reverse order (backward). Initially the number sequences
began with just two digits, which then increased until the
participant recalled a sequence inaccurately on two
consecutive occasions. The backward task is more taxing
as the retained information requires a degree of processing
and manipulation for successful recall.

Results
Working Memory Profile
The mean score on the working memory tasks and verbal
fluency tests of the participants in the dyslexic group were
consistently lower than the mean score of the participants
in the control group (see Table 2). Dyslexic children
scored significantly lower than control (M = 38.5 v. M =
50.0) on the visuospatial task, t(40) = 4.76, p < .001, on the
forward span (M = 7.6 v. M = 9.5), t(40) = 2.02, p < .01, on
the backward span (M = 4.0 v. M = 6.5), t(40) = 4.45, p <
.001 and produced significantly fewer words on the
Thurstone fluency task (M = 24.1 v. M = 41.5), t(40) =
6.34, p < .001.
Table 2: Mean performance score on the working memory
tasks and the Thurstone verbal fluency test for control and
dyslexic participants.
Control

Coding

Dyslexic

M

SD

M

SD

50.0

7.5

38.5

8.2

Forward Span

9.5

2.2

7.6

2.2

Backward Span

6.5

2.1

4.0

1.4

Overall Span

16.0

3.7

11.6

2.8

Thurstone

41.5

9.8

24.1

7.7

Word Production
The mean number of words produced by the participants in
both groups and in both conditions are plotted in Figure 1.
A clear distinction between the two groups of participants
is evident. The control group produced more words than
the dyslexic group over all, regardless of the manipulation
condition or the level of task difficulty. The control group
tended to produce more words in the hands condition (M =
10.3, SEM = 1.25) than in the no hands condition (M = 8.7,
SEM = 1.67) when they were given the hard letter set;
however the difference was not significant, t(20) = 0.80, p

hands

Dyslexic
14

no hands

12

12

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2
0

0
Hard

Easy

Letter Set

Hard

Easy

Letter Set

Figure 1: Mean number of words produced for the hard
and easy letter sets using hands (grey bars) and no hands
(open bars) in both groups of participants (with standard
errors).

Predictors of Word Production
Pearson correlations were calculated to measure the
strength of the relationship between working memory
abilities and word production when tiles were manipulated
(Hands) and when they were not (No Hands) across all
participants. These correlations are reported in Table 3.
Working memory abilities were strong predictors of word
production performance when the letter tiles were not
rearranged during the task. The spatio-visual abilities
(Coding) were most strongly correlated with performance,
r(40) = .67, p < .001, followed by length of the backward
digit span, r(40) = .53, p< .001, which is the digit span
measure that draws more heavily on working memory.
When the participants could manipulate the letter tiles,
however, these correlations were not as strong. While
spatio-visual abilities were still strongly associated with
word production performance, r(40) = .46, p < .002, the
correlation between backward digit span scores and
performance was only marginally significant, r(40) = .32,
p < .04, and the overall digit span scores were no longer
significantly related to word production performance, r(40)
= .25, p > .05.

Discussion
In this experiment children were requested to generate as
many words as they could during a three-minute period
using sets of 7 random letters under different conditions;

1439

participants were either permitted, or not permitted to
manipulate the sequence of a letter string in order to assist
word production. The focus of this study was to investigate
the extent to which an individual's external environment
can act as scaffolding to her internal cognitive processes in
order to enhance her performance in a word production
task.
Table 3: Pearson correlation coefficients (df = 40) for the
association between working memory scores and word
production performance across both groups of participants
when the tiles where manipulated (Hands) and when they
were not (No Hands).
Coding

Forward Span

Hands

No Hands

r

.46

.67

p

.002

.000

r

.12

.25

p

.453

.106

Backward Span r

.32

.53

p

.037

.000

r

.25

.44

p

.115

.004

Overall Span

We conjectured that children diagnosed with dyslexia
would demonstrate significantly lower working-memory
abilities than children with no known language difficulties.
To test this assumption a number of working memory tasks
were performed by our participants. The dyslexic group
performed at a significantly lower level on all measures of
working memory compared to the control group.
Generally, more words were produced when participants
were permitted to manipulate and reorder the letter tiles.
However this effect was only significant with dyslexic
children, and this only with the easy letter set. With the
hard letter sequence, the difference in words produced by
the dyslexic children with and without hands was
negligible. This was possibly a function of the level of
difficulty of the task rather than a function of the ability to
restructure the problem space. For the dyslexic
participants, the hard letter set appears to have been simply
too hard: only 9.1% more words were produced in the
hands condition using the hard letter set, whereas 50%
more words were produced by rearranging the letters with
the easy letter set. In contrast, the easy letter set may have
been too easy for the control group: 6.4% fewer words
were produced by rearranging the letters using the easy
letter set, while 18% more words were produced with the
hard letter set. The experimental manipulation only had a
marginal impact on the performance of control
participants.

Correlational analyses suggested that working memory
abilities were particularly strong predictor of word
production performance overall when the letter tiles were
not manipulated. In turn, when participants could reorder
the letters, working memory abilities correlated less
strongly with performance on the task. For example, the
backward digit span which necessitates a more substantial
coordination of working memory resources, correlated
very significantly with word production performance in the
No Hands condition. When participants could manipulate
the tiles, however, word production performance was less
strongly related to backward digit span. Thus when the
environment can facilitate reasoning, internal processing
abilities become less important in determining
performance.

Conclusion
The dyslexic children in this study benefited the most from
rearranging the letter tiles when producing words. Their
less efficient working memory abilities could be
compensated by reshaping the physical presentation of the
letters. The control children, however, did not benefit from
restructuring the environment; in fact with the easy letter
set their performance was marginally poorer when they
manipulated the tiles. The performance of control children
was in line with the norming data obtained with the pilot
study: They could just as easily produce words with or
without manipulating the tiles.
People engineer cognitive niches to facilitate thinking
(Clark, 2008). However, not all engineering efforts,
especially those that are artificially and transiently created
in the cognitive psychologist’s laboratory, lead to more
efficient thinking. Kirsh (1995) echoed this concern: “(…)
the point of informationally structuring space is to reduce
the time and memory requirements of cognition, the actual
reduction in computation achieved by the various methods
(…) does not, in general, lend itself to meaningful
quantitative estimation.” (p. 41). The data from this study
suggest why it is difficult to specify a priori how and by
how much the physical restructuring of the problem space
can aid thinking. In essence, the effectiveness of the
manipulation of the physical problem space is relative to
the level of task difficulty as well as the cognitive abilities
of the reasoner. To understand and engineer good
distributed cognition design and practice, one must
undertake a thorough analysis of the task, the agents that
perform the task, and the nature of their interaction with
the physical environment (Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsh,
2000). There are extensive individual differences in
learning styles and children’s learning environments must
be tailored to suit their individual needs in order for them
to be able to achieve their full potential.

1440

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank parents and pupils at Dover Court
Preparatory School (Singapore) and Wiltshire School of
Gymnastics (UK) for their support in carrying out this
research.

References
Benson, D. F. (1979). Aphasia, alexia, and agraphia. New
York: Churchill Livingstone.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
Cushen, P. J., & Wiley, J. (2008). Upsides and downsides
of gesturing in problem solving. In B. C. Love, K.
McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 775-780). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Gavurin, E. I. (1967). Anagram solving and spatial
aptitude. Journal of Psychology, 65, 65-68.
Giere, R., N., & Moffatt, B. (2003). Distributed cognition:
Where the cognitive and social merge. Social Studies of
Science, 33, 301-310.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
Cognition: Toward a new foundation for humancomputer interaction research. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 7, 174-196.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speeds.
Cognitive Science, 19, 265-288.
Kirsh, D. (1993). Complementary strategies: Why we use
our hand when we think. In Proceedings of the
Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31-68
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behaviour, 4, 415-452.

Lishman, W. A. (2003). Developmental dyslexia. Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 74, 16031605.
Maglio, P. P., Matlock, T., Raphaely, D., Chernicky, B., &
Kirsh, D. (1999). Interactive skills in Scrabble. In M.
Hahn, & S. C. Stoness (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-First Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 326-330). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Norman, D. A. (1993). Things that make us smart.
Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Oakhill, J., & Kyle, F. (2000). The relation between
phonological awareness and working memory. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 75, 152-164.
Simos, P. G., Breier, J. I., Fletcher, J. M., Bergman, E., &
Papanicolaou, A. C. (2000). Cerebral mechanisms
involved in word reading in dyslexic children: a
magnetic source imaging approach. Cerebral
Cortex,10, 809-816.
Snowling, M. J. (1998). Dyslexia as a Phonological
Deficit: Evidence and Implications. Child Psychology
and Psychiatry Review, 3, 4-11.
Snowling M. J. (2000). Dyslexia (Second Edition).
Oxford: Blackwell.
Snowling, M. J., Hulme, C., Smith, A., & Thomas, J.
(1994). The effect of phonetic similarity and list length
on children’s sound categorization performance.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 58, 160180.
Thurstone, L. (1938). Primary Mental Abilities. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. & Wrightman, M. (under review).
Verbal fluency and interactive skills in a word
generation task.
Weisberg, R. W. (2006). Creativity: Understanding
innovation, problem solving, science, invention and the
arts. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

1441

