UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Intended Meaning and Situational Interest

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9fh822qf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Cruciani, Marco

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Intended Meaning and Situational Interest
Marco Cruciani (cruciani@disi.unitn.it)
Department of Ingegneria e Scienza dell’Informazione
University of Trento, Italy

Abstract
The problem of determining intended meaning is a key topic in
the study of linguistic processes. This paper is part of a research
that attempts to answer the question: how do agents involved in
a linguistic controversy determine the intended meaning of a
sentence? The main thesis of the research is that the
determination of meaning is driven by agents’ situational
interests. The process is analyzed in two phases (individual and
contractual), and the thesis is respectively declined in two
hypotheses. Here I analyze the first phase. The hypothesis is that
an agent’s situational interest drives the individual choice of
meaning for ambiguous sentences. It is argued in particular that
formal semantics, the dictionary, context of use and domain
knowledge are not sufficiently powerful to determine a unique
meaning (condition of legitimacy). From this it follows that an
agent can legitimately choose a meaning (i.e. make a decision)
given a set of contextually admissible interpretations. This
proposal should impact on the problem of meaning under
determination. The contribute consists in providing a further tool
to determine how agents assign meaning to sentences of natural
language. Finally, I shall sketch out a semantic function which
its input is a set of contextually admissible interpretations and
agent’s situational interest, and its output is a ranking of
ordering of interpretations. The approach is theoretical, but the
research is based on cases of disputes concerning ambiguous
clauses in employment contracts.

Introduction
The paper seeks to answer the question: how is it possible
to determine the intended meaning of a sentence within a
linguistic interaction (cfr. Grice 1989, Sperber and Wilson
1986, Kripke 1979)? In my view, in some cases, when
agents determine the meaning of a sentence, they resort to
an individual decision, and then to negotiation between
them. In cases where ordinary tools are not sufficiently
powerful to determine a unique meaning for a sentence or
expression in a given situation, an agent chooses a
meaning, from a given set of admissible interpretations,
which s/he believes to guarantee his/her own interest with
respect to the specific situation. Once an individual choice
has been made, if the agent does not agree with the other
agents, then a linguistic controversy arises and a
negotiation of meaning ensues.
The analysis of linguistic controversies arising from
ambiguous clauses in contracts sheds clear light on real
linguistic interactions, in which interactions are partially
recorded, interests are sufficiently clarified, and meaning
is truly important to the agents involved.
The main thesis of the paper is that in the process of
determination of the intended meaning of a natural
language sentence there exists a relation between possible
logical models of a sentence and extra-semantic interests

of agents, or what they take to be their interests with
respect to the situation. Essentially, agents’ situational
interests drive the determination of meaning. The process
is analyzed in two phases: one individual and the other
contractual, and the thesis is respectively declined in two
hypotheses. These two dimensions are relevant because,
as Clark puts it, “we cannot hope to understand language
use without viewing it as joint action built on individual
actions. The challenge is to explain how all these actions
work” (Clark 1996, p. 4).
Here I analyze the first phase. The first hypothesis
concerns the individual dimension of the process: in the
case of a polysemous sentence, where meaning is
important for an agent, s/he chooses a plausible
interpretation on the basis of his/her own situational
interest, making a choice from a given set of admissible
meanings. In particular, given a specific situation where
the same sentence, or expression, can have different
meanings, even radically different ones, admitted by
ordinary tools, an agent can legitimately choose among
them. An agent chooses an interpretation that s/he
considers to satisfy his/her interest. In my view, it is very
important that an agent can legitimately choose this
interpretation, because ordinary tools leave open a
semantic space in which an agent has no further linguistic
constraints. I call this lack of constraints: condition of
legitimacy.
I shall argue that formal semantics, use of the
dictionary, support of the context of use and domain
knowledge reduce the set of admissible meanings, but
they are unable to determine a unique meaning. I shall
show that each tool imposes certain constraints, and I
shall represent the operation of those constraints by means
of set-theoretical relation. I shall illustrate the tools by
means of a schema in which each tool is represented by a
level of a cone. Each level admits to a set of possible
meanings for a sentence on the basis of constraints
specific to that level. I call this schema the “cone of
language”. In particular, the last level of the cone
concerns the choice of a meaning among those selected by
the previous levels. At this level, the set of possible
meanings is partially ordered with respect to preferences
which represent the agent’s situational interests. At this
point, the agent chooses a meaning.
In the last part of the paper, I shall sketch out a function
that represents how agents’ interests make a selection
from ordered sets of interpretations.

Interest and meaning
In this section I briefly introduce some concepts that I
shall employ and discuss in the paper. I first consider the

2747

notion of meaning adopted in formal semantics, because
this represents a strong attempt to explain the semantic
properties of language. In semantics, the meaning of a
sentence is fixed by its truth-conditions. Truth-conditions
represent how the world would be if the sentence was
true. If an agent knows the truth-conditions of a sentence,
then s/he will also know its meaning. Hence an agent
knows the meaning of a sentence even if s/he de facto
does not know if the sentence is true (Wittgenstein 1921;
see Marconi 1997; Casalegno and Marconi 1992). A
central notion in formal semantics is that of model.
Specifying a model for a language is a way to interpret it,
to confer meaning on its expressions. Since sentences can
be true or false with respect to the meaning that we assign
to them, we say that a sentence is true or false with regard
to a certain model (Casalegno and Marconi 1992).
According to the principle of the compositionality of
meaning, the meaning of an atomic sentence is obtained
by composition of the meanings of its constituents. From
this it follows that if an agent knows the meanings of the
words of a sentence, then s/he will also know the meaning
of the sentence. Put otherwise: knowing the meaning of
the words of a sentence is to know their semantic
contribution to the meaning of the whole sentence.
Similarly, the meaning of a compound sentence
functionally depends on the meanings of its atomic
sentences (see Chierchia 1992).
Another focus of the paper is the role performed by
interest. According to Conte and Castelfranchi, an agent’s
interest can be represented as a state of world which
favours the achievement of the agent’s goal. An agent is
interested in a certain state of the world p, if this implies
another state q which corresponds to his/her goals (Conte
and Castelfranchi 1995). On this view, interest is a
relation between one state of the world and another. An
interest can be considered not only as a relation between
states but also as a motivation for action which realizes a
state. According to Latour, “as the name ‘inter-esse’
indicates, ‘interests are what lie in between actors and
their goals, thus creating a tension that will make actors
only what, in their own eyes, helps them reach these goals
amongst many possibilities” (Latour 1987, pp.108-109).
On this view, an agent is interested in a certain meaning
because s/he believes that it implies her goal.
In what follows, I shall show how lack of constraints
permits to agents’ interests select out which is the
intended meaning for a sentence of natural language.

Cone of language
In the following subsections I shall argue that the support
of formal semantics, use of the dictionary, context of use
and domain knowledge are not able to determine a unique
meaning for an expression. I shall argue that they are able
to reduce possible meanings on the basis of some
linguistic constraints, and I shall represent them by means
of the ‘cone of language’, which is composed of four
levels: formal semantics; use of the dictionary; context of
use of an expression; and finally, the level of ordering
preferences and decision making. Each level produces a
set of meanings equal to or smaller than the previous one.
We can write Mn ≥ Mn+1, where Mn is the set of logical

models admitted by the level n and Mn+1 is the set of
logical models admitted by the following level n+1.

semantically admissible interpretations
linguistically admissible interpretations
contextually admissible interpretations

ordered interpretations
preferred meaning
Figure 1: Cone of language
The formal semantics level admits grammatically
correct
sentences.
Semantics
provides
formal
interpretations of sentences and reduces the set of possible
meanings for a grammatically correct sentence. The
output from this level is a set of semantically admissible
meanings for a sentence. The next level, that of the
dictionary, provides interpretations for single terms and
reduces the former set of meanings obtained by semantics.
The next level, that of context of use and domain
knowledge, provides knowledge which rules out some
meanings with respect to the specific context and reduces
the previous set of meanings obtained by dictionary. The
last level concerns the agent’s preferences and the
individual choice. We can view this level as a function
that has in input a set of contextually admissible
interpretations and agent‘s interest, and its output is a
ranking of ordering of interpretations. At this point an
agent chooses an ordering which accords with his/her
preferences.

Formal semantics
In this subsection I argue that formal semantics does not
capture the meaning of single terms of natural language;
with the consequence that it cannot determine the
intended meaning of a sentence. Formal semantics is the
approach to meaning which applies analytical tools used
to study the semantic properties of formalized languages,
like logic and mathematics, to natural language
(Casalegno and Marconi 1992). It can be regarded as the
main paradigm in the analytic philosophy of language
(Frixione 1994).
According to Bianchi, the main thesis in semantics is
that the rules or conventions of a language are able to fix
the meaning of every expression of that language.
Semantics concerns itself with the meanings of linguistic
expressions independently of the situation in which they
are used, and it investigates the relation between linguistic
expressions and objects in the world. Semantics is:

2748

1.

conventional, that is, meaning depends on
linguistic rules applied to form of expression;

2.

truth-conditional, that is, the meaning of a
sentence identifies with its truth-conditions.
And the meanings of words identifies with
their contribution to the truth-conditions of the
sentence in which they appear;

3.

compositional, that is, the meaning of a
compound sentence functionally depends on
the meanings of its components (Bianchi
2003).

To provide a semantic interpretation of a natural
language sentence, we must first translate the sentence
into a formal language L expressive enough with respect
to the universe of discourse, and we must then assign
interpretations to its non-logical components. We assign
interpretations by means of a function I that associates
elements of L with objects in a domain D (the universe of
discourse). The couple M = (I, D) is called ‘model’; a
semantic interpretation can be true or false with respect to
a model.
The models of a sentence can be infinite because
infinite objects can satisfy the formal conditions expressed
in a semantic interpretation. According to Frixione, formal
semantics does not fix, for example, which sub-set of D
the function I should associate with “glass”. Similarly, it
does not specify the difference between “glass” and
“table”. In essence, formal semantics explains the
semantic properties of a compound sentence through the
semantic properties of its elements, but it says nothing
about these elements, which are considered as given
(Frixione 1994). In this respect, formal semantics does not
contribute to the problem of intended meanings in natural
language because it does not contribute to resolving the
problem of lexical meaning. According to Thomason, the
problems of semantics should be distinguished from those
of lexicography. Formal semantics explains how different
types of meanings are connected to different syntactic
categories, but it does not explain how two expressions
belonging to the same syntactic category differ with
respect to their meanings. Formal semantics does not
concern itself with which entities are correct or intended
with respect to an interpretation of a language (Thomason
1974). From this it follows that, in order to understand the
intended meanings of natural language sentences, we must
support formal semantics with respect to the lexicon. In
my view the best candidate is the dictionary.

Dictionary
In this subsection I argue that the dictionary does not
provide support powerful enough to individuate a unique
meaning for a word, and therefore that it is not able to
determine the intended meaning. This is so in two
respects: in the case of polysemy, the dictionary does not
provide a criterion with which to determine a unique
meaning; but also in the case of a unique definition, the
dictionary provides ‘only’ the conventional meaning, that
is, it does not provide sufficient information with which to
determine truth-conditions (de facto it underdetermines

truth-conditions). Therefore in both cases it is unable to
determine the intended meaning.
According to Putnam, it is the fact that we write
dictionaries that founds the idea of semantics (Putnam
1975). What is a dictionary? It is a list of words, each of
which is followed by a definition of its meaning. A
dictionary has at least three functions:
f1) it shows that a word exists and belongs to the
vocabulary of the language;
f2) it defines the meaning of a word by means of
vocabulary;
f3) provides some alternative interpretations, if
necessary.
According to Bouquet,
interesting properties:

“dictionaries

have

two

p1) they provide a publicly accessible and socially
negotiated list of acceptable interpretations for a word;
p2) however, interpretations cannot ipso facto be
equated with a list of shared meanings for the speakers of
that language, as interpretations are (circularly) defined
through other words, and do not contain the concept
itself” (Bouquet 2007, p. 23).
On this view, a dictionary furnishes a network of socially
accepted lexical relations which constrain concepts, but it
does not contain them. According to Bouquet a linguistic
community can be defined as a group of speakers who
agree on a common dictionary (Bouquet 2007). On this
view, speakers can reach linguistic agreement
independently of actual references of words. However, I
maintain that, in real situations, the dictionary provides a
linguistic support which reduces possible interpretations
in a linguistic community with respect to formal
semantics.
In what follows, I report a case of an ambiguous clause
and illustrate that the Demauro dictionary is unable to
provide a unique plausible interpretation of it. I have
translated the clause from Italian into English, because the
dispute occurred in Italy, but I believe it plausible that the
analysis is equivalent. The clause runs as follows:
“In particular, it is understood that the employment
relationship established with you will be resolved upon
cessation of the absence of Miss Maria Rossi, and
however not beyond 23 December 2005”.
This clause regulated the working conditions and hours of
a recent graduate hired by an insurance company to
substitute M.R. while she was on maternity leave. During
the substitution period, M.R. resigned, and the employer
terminated the graduate’s employment on the grounds that
the absence of M.R. had ‘ceased’. The graduate argued
that the clause referred to the absence of M.R. during
maternity leave, not to her absence due to resignation.
The linguistic controversy arose with regard to the
expression “cessation of the absence”. We may use the
dictionary to determine the meaning of the expression. I
have translated the definitions from Italian into English.

2749

The Italian Demauro dictionary provides two possible
interpretations for the word “cessation”:
- a)
- b)

termination;
interruption, suspension.

It gives three possible interpretations for the word
“absence”:
- c)
- d)
- e)

being away: absence from work;
lack: lack of air, lack of light, lack of gravity;
temporary loss of consciousness.

We can interpret the expression “cessation of the absence”
through different combinations (compositionality) of the
various interpretations of the single terms. The dictionary
provides some socially accepted interpretations of words
which constrain the admissible meanings of a sentence in
which the words appear. On the other hand, the dictionary
is unable to determine a unique meaning for an
expression, because it does not provide a criterion with
which to choose one interpretation rather than another:
they are on the same plane. How can we decide which
interpretation is plausible?
I first introduce the context of use. We can coherently
individuate the expression “interruption of absence from
work” among the others because it is compatible with the
context under examination. For brevity, we suppose that it
is the sole interpretation available from the dictionary. But
if we compare it with the interpretations of the two agents,
we see that it is compatible with both of them. It does not
sufficiently specify the truth-conditions with respect to the
real situation. How can we discern which is the meaning
in cases where we have several interpretations on the
same plane; or, conversely, in cases where we have
insufficient information from the dictionary? We can rely
on a combination of domain knowledge and the context.

Context of use
In this sub-section I argue that information concerning the
context of use of an expression and domain knowledge do
not suffice to determine a unique meaning for an
expression, and that they are therefore unable to determine
the intended meaning.
The philosophy of language considers two kinds of
context: semantic and pragmatic. The semantic context
represents relevant information through variables
associated with the utterance: that is, it fixes the identity
of speakers and interlocutors, the place, the time, etc. It
contributes to determining literal meaning, and it is used
in particular in cases of ellipsis, indexicality and
ambiguity. The pragmatic context is composed of a
network of interlocutor beliefs, intentions and activities,
and it contributes to determining the communicative
intentions of speakers (Bianchi 2003). The pragmatic
context can have pre-semantic and post-semantic uses
(Perry 1997). In the former case, the pragmatic context
intervenes before the semantic context assigns an
interpretation (e.g. in case of polysemy); in the latter, it
intervenes after interpretation has been made to determine
the actual communication (“speaker’s meaning” – Grice
1989) with respect to the conventional meaning
previously fixed by the semantic context (Bianchi 2003).

We need the pre-semantic and post-semantic uses of
context because “the encoded meaning of the linguistic
expressions underdetermines the proposition explicitly
expressed by the utterance: meaning underdetermines
truth conditions. […] According to contextualism:
i)
ii)

the meaning of any sentence underdetermines
its truth conditions - underdetermination
becomes a general property of meaning;
the contextual factors that could be relevant for
determining the truth conditions of a sentence
cannot be specified in advance, and are not
codified in the conventional meaning of the
sentence” (Bianchi and Vassallo 2007, p. 78).

However, in the case examined here, some relevant
pragmatic information is available in advance from
domain knowledge concerning activities related to
contracts. I believe it plausible that the goals, intentions
and beliefs of agents must be at least compatible with
contract-making rules (e.g. see civil code), otherwise a
contract cannot be stipulated. I consider the context of use
and domain knowledge to be collapsed together, and I
refer to their intersection in accordance with what
Bouquet and Giunchiglia (1995) called “context of work”.
On this view, the contextual information relevant to
interpretation of a sentence in a particular context can be
regarded as a subset of domain knowledge.
To clarify this point, I report two criteria (out of many)
with which to disambiguate clauses of contracts stipulated
under Italian law: literal meaning and exegesis of common
intentions of the parties. These criteria are used to settle
judicial and extra-judicial disputes. The former concerns
the semantic context and pre-semantic uses of the
pragmatic context; and the latter concerns post-semantic
uses of the pragmatic context. Let us consider the first
criterion: literal meaning. Suppose that we want to
determine the conventional meaning of the sentence “the
bank is wet”. Before assigning an interpretation to the
sentence, we must assign interpretations to its
constituents: “bank” and “wet”, and then compose the
meanings of the single terms. But we cannot assign an
interpretation to the single words because we must first
know whether we are speaking about a river or a financial
institute. In this sense, pre-semantic uses of context are
based on specific information about the agent’s activities
related to the sentence. For example, “bank” may refer to
“border of river” or “financial institute” and “wet” may
refer to “damp” or “weak”, respectively if an agent is
going to fish or if s/he is talking to a board of directors.
Hence, contextual information provides a criterion with
which to decide which interpretations are plausible with
respect to the situation. However, we have seen that in the
case of “cessation of the absence” the literal meaning
underdetermines the truth-conditions; hence both
interpretations are compatible with the context. From this
it follows that uses of the semantic and pre-semantic
context are unable to indicate which interpretation is
plausible. The second criterion – common intentions serves to determine what was the practical agreement
between the agents, and subsequently, to determine the
meaning compatible with the original agreement.

2750

However, some clauses/sentences admit different possible
interpretations of ‘common intention’ which are
legitimately defensible by the parties. In the case of
“cessation of the absence”, the common intention of the
parties is to replace an employee (MR) with a temporary
worker during the former’s absence due to maternity
leave. It is not foreseen in the common intention that MR
may resign and, in any case, the common intention does
not capture certain aspects of the real situation. The
disagreement arises because the company maintains that
MR is no longer an employee; on the other hand, the new
graduate maintains that the maternity leave of MR has not
ceased. Hence they must refer to the terms of the contract:
“23 December” and not to the condition: “cessation of the
absence”. Essentially, in some cases even the contribution
of the post-semantic context is not sufficiently powerful to
determine a unique meaning for a sentence. In cases of
this kind, when there are no further linguistic tools
available, how can we determine the intended meaning of
a sentence? We must resort to a decision.

Individual choice
In this section I employ some basic notions from decision
theory (Resnik 1987; Myerson 1991; Hansson 1994) to
describe the process of choice upon which decisionmaking is based. First of all, I wish to stress that, from an
epistemological point of view, it is very important that an
agent can legitimately choose an interpretation, among
those admissible, because linguistic tools leave a semantic
space open in which de facto every choice is legitimate.
Following decision theory, I maintain that agents’
interests can be described with the language of
preferences, and that a choice is made coherently with the
agents’ ordering preferences. Decision theory uses three
comparative notions of preference: “better than” (>);
“equal in value to” (≡); “at least good as” (≥). Using this
language we can write, for instance, (m1> m2)Ag1, that is,
agent Ag1 prefers the meaning m1 rather than the meaning
m2. In our case, the set of contextually admissible
meanings M3 represents the set of options which agents
order with respect to their preferences. Decision theory
assumes that a ‘rational’ agent can ‘correctly’ choose an
option if the set of options is ordered in accordance with
some formal properties. Here, I consider only two
essential properties: completeness and transitivity.
The formal property of completeness (for weak
preference ≥) is defined for a relation and its domain:

incapable of being represented by a complete preference
relation. Nevertheless, in decision theory preferences
completeness is usually accepted as a simplifying
assumption, (…) although it is often a highly problematic
assumption”, as well as the assumption of transitivity
(Hansson 1994, p.17). But in our case, agents consider
only a reduced set of all options because ordering involves
only some possible interpretations: that is, the admissible
meanings previously selected by linguistic tools.
Therefore we can consider a partial ordering of
preferences in which an agent ‘coherently’ makes a
decision in accordance with the rule that states: “an
alternative is (uniquely) best if and only if it is better than
all the other alternatives. If there is a uniquely best
alternative, choose it” (Hansson 1994, p.19). In synthesis,
an agent legitimately chooses a meaning from a set of
selected interpretations because it satisfies his/her interest.

Features of a semantic function
In this subsection I show a schema in which is represented
relation between elements of the model and sketch out the
features of the situational semantic function.
I call situational semantic function Fss a function that,
given a situational goal G, assigns a numerical value ψ (α,
β, γ, …) to each possible ordering of contextually
admissible interpretations Ic.
condition of
legitimacy

set of
contextually
admissible
interpretations
Ic (i1, i2, i3, .. in)

situational
semantic
function Fss

- the relation ≥ is complete if and only if for any
element A and B of its domain, either A ≥ B, or B≥A.
This property guarantees that an agent is able to compare
between two options. The formal property of transitivity
(for weak preference ≥) is defined as follows:
- the relation ≥ is transitive if and only if it holds for all
elements A, B, and C, of its domain that if A≥B and B≥C,
then A≥C.
This property guarantees that an agent is able coherently
to compare among options. Indeed, “it is expected that the
preferences that guide decisions are in many cases

extra-semantic
interest founded
on situational
goals G

I1= α

I2=β

I3= γ

I4=δ

Im

i1
i2
i3
in

i2
i1
i3
in

i3
i2
i3
in

i2
i3
i1
in

ik
…
…
in

ranking of ordering

Figure 2: Schema of the model

2751

Definition: Let G be a goal of agent and Im an ordered set
of admissible interpretations in a context c. The situational
semantic function Fss is the function which outputs a
numerical value for each couple (G, Im).
Essentially, Fss is a function which for each possible
combination of interpretations Im (i1, i2, i3, … in) provides
a number with respect to the situational goal. The higher
number corresponds to preferred ordering of contextually
admissible interpretations on the basis of which we can
decide the intended meaning.

Summary
We have seen that, in some cases, ordinary linguistic tools
are unable to grasp the meanings of natural language
sentences and expressions. They reduce the possible
meanings on the basis of different kinds of linguistic
constraints, but they are unable to determine a unique
meaning. Thus, an agent can legitimately choose an
intended meaning from a set of admissible meanings
previously selected by linguistic tools. S/he chooses a
meaning which favours his/her interest. It is in this sense
that situational interest drives the determination of the
intended meaning.

Acknowledgments
Current research is possible in force of funding provided
by European Network of Excellence “KnowledgeWeb”
(www.knowledge.semanticweb.com – knowledge web
project FP6 507482) and by OKKAM project
www.okkam.org

References
Bianchi, C. (2003). Pragmatica del linguaggio. Roma-Bari:
Laterza.
Bianchi, C. and Vassallo, N. (2007). Meaning, contexts and
justification. In B. Kokinov, et al. (Eds.). Modeling and
Using Context. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Bouquet, P. (2007). Context and ontologies in schema
matching. In P. Bouquet et al. Proc. Context and
ontologies representation and reasoning. Roskilde
University: Roskilde DK.
Bouquet, P. and Giunchiglia, F. (1995). Reasoning about
theory adequacy. A new solution to the qualification
problem. Fundamenta Informaticae 23, 247-262.
Bouquet, P. and Warglien, M. (2002). Meaning negotiation:
an invitation. In P. Bouquet (Eds.). Meaning negotiation
papers AAAI workshop. Edmonton: AAAI Press.
Casalegno, P. and Marconi, D. (1992). Alle origini della
semantica formale. In M. Santambrogio (Ed.)
Introduzione alla filosofia del linguaggio. Roma-Bari:
Laterza.
Clark, H.H. (1992). Arenas of language use. Chicago:
University Chicago Press e CSLI.
Clark, H.H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Chierchia, G. (1992). Logica e linguistica. Il contributo di
Montague. In M. Santambrogio (Ed.) Introduzione alla
filosofia del linguaggio. Roma-Bari: Laterza.

Cruciani, M. (2008). Cone of language. 8th Italian
Conference of Analytic Philosophy. Bergamo, Italy, 23-25
Sept.
Cruciani, M. (2008). Meaning negotiation and situational
interest. (ma) Proc. 30° Annual Conference of Cognitive
Science Society. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Cruciani, M. (2008). Interesse e significato. Dept. Cognitive
Sciences and Education, Univ. of Trento, Italy, Phd
dissertation.
Cruciani M. (2007) Situational interests and meaning. (ma)
Proc. 29° Annual Conference of Cognitive Science
Society. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Cruciani, M. (2007). Interesse situazionale, decisione e
significato. In G. Giardini et al. (Eds.) Proc. 4° Italian
Conference on Cognitive Sciences. Roma: AISC.
Cruciani, M. (2007). Negoziazione degli interessi e
significato come epifenomeno. In G. Giardini et al. (Eds.).
Proc. 4° Italian Conference on Cognitive Sciences. Roma:
AISC.
Cruciani, M. (2007). Meaning and interests. In P. Bouquet
(Ed.)http://context-07.ruc.dk/Context2007DocCons.pdf.
Cruciani, M. (2006). Interesse e significato. In A. Greco et
al., (Eds.) Proc. 3° Italian Conference on Cognitive
Sciences. Genova: Erga.
Conte, R. and Castelfranchi, C. (1995). Cognitive and social
action. London: University College.
Frixione, M. (1994). Logica, significato e intelligenza
artificiale. Milano: Angeli.
Gaucker, C. (1997). Domain of discourse. In Mind 106, pp.
1-32.
Gaucker, C. (1998). What is a context of utterance? In
Philosophical Studies, 91, 149-172.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies the way of words. Cambridge:
University Press.
Hansson, S.O. (1994). Decision theory. Royal Inst. of
Technology. www.infra.kth.se/~soh/decisiontheory.pdf.
Kripke, S. (1979). Speaker’s reference and semantic
reference. In A. French, et al. (Eds.) Contemporary
perspective in the philosophy of language. Dordrecht:
Reidel, pp. 6-27.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press.
Marconi, D. (1997). Lexical competence. MA: MIT.
Myerson, R. B. (1991). Game theory: Analysis of conflict.
Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press.
Penco, C. (1999). Objective and cognitive context. In
Lecture notes in artificial intelligence, 1688. Berlin:
Springer, pp. 270-283.
Penco, C. (2002). Context and contract. In P. Bouquet et al.
(Eds.) Contexts. Stanford: CSLI.
Perry, J. (1997). Indexical and demonstratives. In B. Hale
and C. Wright (Eds.) A Companion of philosophy of
language. Oxford: Blackwell; pp.586-612.
Putnam, H. (1975). Mind, language and reality. Cambridge:
University Press.
Resnik, M. (1987). Choices. Minnesota: University Press.
Sperber, D. e Wilson, D. (1986) Relevance theory:
communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Thomason, R. (1974). Introduction to R. Montague Formal
philosophy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1921). Tractatus logico-philosophicus.
Oxford: Blackwell 1961.

2752

