UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investment Decision-Making and Hindsight Bias

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8gm8q60w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Legrenzi, Paolo
Monti, Marco

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investment Decision-Making and Hindsight Bias
Marco Monti (monti@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Department for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition,
Königin-Luise-Straße 5
14195 Berlin Germany

Paolo Legrenzi (legrenzi@iuav.it)
University of Venice and IUAV
Dorsoduro 3488u Rio Novo
30123 Venice Italy
claim to have “known it all along,” (Fischhoff, 1975), that
is, once events have passed, they seem more understandable
and also more predictable than they seemed at the
beginning.
Hindsight and foresight perspectives differ formally in the
information that is available to the observer. The
hindsightful judge possesses final knowledge, that is, he or
she knows what has really happened, in contrast to the
foresightful judge.
Economic studies consider the agent’s foresight
perspective only, without taking into account the hindsight
bias possible effects in the decision-making process.
Economic models consider investors as Bayesian
decision-makers; they are supposed to be able to update
their knowledge by simply acquiring new information. In
order to do so, they are expected to clearly recall their
original estimates (their priors), no matter the observed final
information. Therefore, investors are ideally considered as
those economic agents who can recognise their possible
estimate errors and, consequently, they can modify their
decisions in the future. The “supposed” ability to compare
new information to previous expectations is fundamental.
Hindsight bias may compromise this ability so that
individuals confuse their prior expectations with the new
information. Because of the hindsight bias, investors may
suffer from overconfidence because they believe they are
better forecasters than they really are.
Our research asks three main questions about the
judgemental differences between hindsight and foresight
perspectives in investment decision-making:
1. How does the acquisition of final information affect the
investor’s decisions?
2. What is the “hindsight bias effect” in investment
portfolio management?
3. What is the role of metacognitions1 in decision
making?
In order to answer the previous questions, we explored
three possible hypotheses in an economic framework:
1. Reporting an outcome occurrence increases its
perceived probability of occurrence, as seen by Hawkins
and Hastie, whose results have not been fully explored in
economics yet (Hawkins & Hastie, 1990).

Abstract
We investigated the relationships between investment decision
making and hindsight bias. Economic studies consider the agent’s
foresight perspective only, without taking into account the
hindsight bias possible effects in the decision-making process. We
studied the subject’s overall perceived error by focusing on the
causal relations between the estimate and memory errors and by
analysing his confidence in estimates and memories, therefore, his
meta cognitions.We found strong evidence for the consequences
that hindsight bias can have on the investor’s portfolio decisions:
the portfolio allocation perception and therefore, the risk exposure.

Keywords: hindsight bias, decision making, memory,
metacognitions.

1. Introduction
The approach followed by investors in allocating their
money depends on their ability to remember and learn from
past experiences. Before choosing how to allocate their
money, investors consider many financial data, trying to
transform them into useful information.
Classical economic literature assumes that economic
agents may perform all these cognitive tasks very
efficiently; agents are supposed to perfectly manage and
remember all important information they acquire over time
without omissions or errors. The standard rational choice
theory assumes that investors are able to identify relevant
information, to discriminate against irrelevant information,
as well as to weigh and process them accurately.
“The representative investor is assumed to understand the
economy and the process determining asset prices; the
individual investor frequently does not.” J. M. Keynes.
An intriguing approach to describe and, possibly, explain
investment decisions may be the explicit consideration of
psychological factors. In our research, we empirically
investigate the behaviours of investors by identifying one of
the most relevant memory distortion, the hindsight bias.
Fischhoff (1975) was the first to study what he called
hindsight bias; a person’s tendency to distort a previous
judgement in the direction of the new information after
learning the real outcome of a situation or the correct
answer to a question. It is based on empirical evidence
showing that individuals, after receiving final information,

1

768

Metacognition is the process of thinking about thinking.

2. Hindsight bias induces individuals to be overconfident
and to overreact to new information (Camerer, Loewenstein,
& Weber, 1989).
3. An individual’s high confidence level in their a priori
estimates (those made before knowing the outcome
information) and a low confidence level in their recalled
estimates (those recalled after receiving the outcome
information) will induce hindsight bias for the subject
(Werth, Strack, & Forster, 2002).
Our study extends Fischhoff’s “between subjects” test
design in the economics domain by introducing the
following new elements:
1. We brought subjects into a simulated real-life
investment situation adopting a narrative technique inspired
by economic articles.
2. We involved two different kinds of subjects,
PhD/Master students in economics and financial managers,
in order to investigate the role of expertise on hindsight bias.
3. We analysed hindsight bias by directly collecting both
cognitive and metacognitive variables.
4. We analysed the relations between the individuals’
psychological attitudes and behavioural tendencies and their
hindsight bias.
Our results confirmed the importance of hindsight bias in
an economic decision-making context. In particular, we
found that the Test-Group investors tended to exhibit
hindsight bias once asked to recall their economic
predictions (65% of financial managers and 45% of
students).
If we consider that the investing activity asks for a longlasting learning process, we realise the importance of
hindsight bias.
Our research was mainly inspired by Werth, Strack, and
Forster’s (2002) paper “Certainty and Uncertainty: The Two
Faces of Hindsight Bias.” We adopted a similar approach to
assess the participants’ hindsight bias;

average €6 in compensation, according to their forecasting
and remembering performances.

2. Methodology

Second Questionnaire
Composed of 62 questions divided into seven sets, they
were aimed to investigate investors’ personal experience in
managing money, their investment goals, strategies, their
decision-making approach.

2.2 Experimental Design
The experiment is divided in 2 phases: the estimate and
memory phase.
In the first phase participants read a newspaper-like article
dealing with an hypothetic economic scenario. They were
presented with details on financial markets and invited to
take real-world investment decisions.
After that, they were asked to answer two different
questionnaires.
First Questionnaire
Composed of three different sets of questions it elicited
subjects’ economic estimates and preferences on several
economic variables.
The first set of questions investigated subjects’ expectations
on the future economic developments given the information
they were provided within the text. Subjects were therefore
invited to estimate the probability for each of the four
presented scenarios:
(i) the economy would develop with low inflation,
(ii) the economy would develop with high inflation,
(iii) the economy would stagnate with low inflation and
(iv) the economy would stagnate with high inflation.
The second set of questions asked the subjects to reveal
their estimates on future returns from different forms of
investments: stocks, bonds and real estate.
The third set invited the subject to reveal his preferences
on investment allocations.
After each set of questions, subjects were also invited to
reveal their level of confidence in each single answer they
gave by replying the following question:
“Please write down your confidence level in your
previous answer (1=min; 10=Max).”

We collected data from 25 Master and PhD students
attending courses in Finance and Economics at Bocconi
University and from 35 financial managers from a leading
Italian bank. Bank executives were all financial advisors
usually assisting private investors. On average they had 3years experience in investment management.

The second part of the experiment, the memory phase,
took place two weeks later; participants were randomly
divided into two groups, the Test Group and the Control
Group,
following Fischhoff’s “between
subjects
experimental design”.
The two groups members were invited to solve different
tasks.
Test-Group subjects had to read the second and final part of
the article dealing with the developments of the previously
described economy; they received what we called the real
outcome. Subsequently, they were asked to remember the
estimates they gave in the first phase of the test.

2.1 The instruments
The instruments used in the course of our study consisted of
questionnaires and tests. The paper-and-pencil experiment
took place at Bocconi University and Unicredit Bank
headquarters in Milan. When the subjects arrived, they were
seated at tables and separated from each other for the
duration of the experiment. They were then given a set of
instructions that were read out loud to them after they had
the chance to read them individually. Subjects were not
informed about the aim of the test. Each experimental
session lasted about 40 minutes. Students received on

769

Alternatively, Control-Group subjects were simply asked
to remember the estimates they gave in the first test phase
without receiving any further information.
Dependent Measures
For each group we computed:
1. the estimate error (Est.Err.): the distance between the
original estimates and the real outcome;
2. the memory error (Mem.Err.): the distance between the
recalled estimates and the originally given answers;
3. the correlation between the two errors;
4. the correlation between the level of confidence in the
answers originally provided by the subjects’ and their
memory errors.

The statistical support for the above relationship is weak:
the adjusted r2 is just 0.345.2 However, the signs of the
regressor coefficients are as expected. Indeed, the
e

Hindsight Bias and Self-Confidence
In order to investigate the role of the subject’s selfconfidence, we analysed the connection between his
estimate errors and his confidence in the reliability of his
estimates, as well as his memory errors and the confidence
in his memories. In agreement with the paper “Certainty and
Uncertainty: The Two Faces of Hindsight Bias” (Werth,
Strack, & Forster, 2002), we expected that the higher the
confidence in estimate was, the smaller the estimate error
would be. Data show that:

Overall Perceived Error = (Estimate + Memory) Errors


r

coefficient of C is positive, while the coefficient of C
is negative. Therefore, the more confident is the subject in
his estimates and the more unconfident is in his memories,
the stronger the hindsight bias will be. Once informed about
the real outcome, subjects with a high level of confidence in
their original estimates and a low level of confidence in
their memories perceived the outcome as their own estimate.

How do we remember our estimates?

65 Outcome
Perceived Error

53 Recall Estimate Error

Memory Error

e

Corr. ( C ;Mem.Err.) =-0.674
r

Corr. ( C ;Mem.Err.) =-0.904

45 Estimate

t

Hindsight Bias and Expertise
In order to investigate the interplay between degree of
expertise and hindsight bias, we compared the memory
errors of the two groups. We noticed that, hindsight bias
appeared in 65% of cases for financial managers and in 45%
of cases for students.
This result reveals that the financial managers’ recalled
estimates were more “biased” towards and concentrated
around the real outcomes than the students’ recalled
estimates. By looking at the answers given to the
psychological profiling questionnaires, we may find that the
motivational incentives to appear “right” were stronger for
the financial advisors than for the students, and this may
explain the stronger memory distortion for bankers.

13

t+1

3. Test Results
Here we present the correlation between the two types of
error, the memory and estimate errors for the 2 populations
of examined subjects by considering a “between subjects”
analysis:
Within the hindsight biased students:
Corr. (Est.Err; Mem.Err.) = 0.757.
Whereas, within the hindsight biased financial managers:
Corr. (Est.Err; Mem.Err.) = 0.921.

How To Predict Hindsight Bias
In order to identify potential predictors for hindsight bias,
we analyzed the relationship between the subjects’ answers
to the profiling questionnaire and their memory errors.
The hindsight biased average subject appears to be a wise
investor, who is informed about financial markets and who
collects a lot of information before taking an investment
decision. He also cares about long-run revenues and
diversifies his investments.
But if we analyse the answers provided by the biased
subject to that questionnaire, we realise that he usually
reveals relevant contradictions: for example, even if the
subject is convinced to be very expert in managing his
investments, he describes himself as extremely insecure for

Hindsight Bias and Metacognitive Variables
We also analyzed the relations between hindsight bias and
e

metacognitive variables (confidence in estimate, C , and
r

confidence in recall, C ) by calculating a linear regression
model. In particular, we tried to find a connection between
the overall perceived error, resulting from the interplay of
estimate and memory error, and the two metacognitive
e

r

variables, C and C :

M to+1 = aC e + bC r + ε

2
Low r2 are quite common in the experimental economic
literature.

770

common decisions. Moreover, the observed subjects stated
that they do not care about losses in the short run if high
revenues can be gained in the long run, but, at the same
time, they stated that they strongly prefer safe investments
with low revenues. They also revealed to have a good
memory, but, at the same time, they also show a low level of
confidence in their recalled estimates.

References
Anderson L. J., & Schooler J.R. (1991). Does memory
reflect statistical regularity in the environment? Bulletin
of the Psychonomic Society, 29(6), 507-513

Hindsight Bias and the Investor’s Uncertainty
We considered all these underlying contradictions as a
warning factor on the probable existence of hindsight bias
for those subjects. Therefore, we designed a specific
questionnaire containing a mixed set of similar contents but
differently phrased questions in order to detect conflicts on
the investment aims.
By calculating what we called “cognitive dissonance index”
we transformed an implicit information on the subject’s
information process into an explicit measure: This has been
done by taking into account the number of similar content
questions answered in opposite ways and by measuring their
distances in terms of scores.3 We recognized a positive
relation between the cognitive dissonance index and the
hindsight bias occurrence. Financial advisors may use this
index in order to predict and, therefore, avoid their
customers’ potential hindsight bias effect improving their
relation satisfaction and, consequently, their trust in the
investment advisor.

Bartlett, F. C., (1932,1995). Remembering: A study in
experimental and social psychology. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press
Smith S., M., Glenberg A., & Bjork R., A., (1978).
Environmental context and human memory. Memory &
Cognition, 6(4), 342-353
Brennan M., (1995). The individual investor. Journal of
Financial Research (Spring), 59-74
(1995). p. 61.
Camerer, Loewenstein, & Weber. (1989). The curse of
knowledge in economic settings: An experimental
analysis. Journal of Political Economy, 97(5), 1232-1254.
Camerer, Loewenstein, & Weber. (1989).
Campbell J., & Tesser A., (1982). Self-Evaluation
maintenance and the perception of friends and strangers.
Journal of Personality, 50(3), 261-279.

Conclusions
This study presents cognitive explanations for the
individual’s behaviour in investment decision-making.
In order to identify the hindsight bias effect, we analysed
subjects overall perceived error by focussing on the causal
relations between the estimate and memory errors. We
experimentally tested PhD students in economics and
financial advisors. We asked participants to forecast
economic scenarios and to accordingly decide how to invest
their money after reading an article about the state of an
hypothetic economy. About half of the students and two
thirds of the financial advisors belonging to the Test Groups
tended to confuse their original predictions with the
information they received at the end of the test, therefore
revealing hindsight bias. Hindsight bias was so consistent
that it prevented subjects to recognise their estimates errors.
On the contrary, and because of that, they revealed
overconfidence in their predictions and decisions, showing
the “I knew it all along” bias. From an economic
perspective, hindsight bias can have significant
consequences on the investment behaviour of the average
investor because it may alter the perception of his asset
allocation and, therefore, his risk exposure.

3

Christensen, Jay J. (1991). The hindsight bias: A metaanalysis. In Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, & Amos
Tversky (Eds.), Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics
and biases. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Einhorn H. J., & Hogarth R. M. (1981). Behavioral decision
theory: processes of judgement and choice. Annual
Review of Psychology, 32, 53-88(see p. 19).
Fischhoff,B. (1975). Hindsight not equal to foresight effect of outcome knowledge on judgement under
uncertainty. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human
Perception and Performance, 1(3), 288-299
Fischhoff, Baruch. (2001). Learning from experience:
Coping with the hindsight bias and ambiguity. Principles
of Forecasting: A Handbook for Researchers and
Practitioners, 30, 543-554
Fischhoff, B., & R. Beyth. (1975). "I knew it would
happen": Remembered probabilities of once-future things.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 13, 116.
Flavell, J. (1976). Metacognitive aspects of problem
solving. In L.B. Resnick (Eds.), The nature of
intelligence. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates

See the Model section.

771

Gigerenzer, Gerd, Peter M. Todd., & the ABC Research
Group. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New
York: Oxford University Press.)
Hawkins, S. A., & R. Hastie. (1990). Hindsight: Biased
judgements of past events after the outcomes are known.
Psychological Bulletin 107, 311-327.
Hell W., Gigerenzer G., Gauggel S., Mall M., & MÜller M.
(1988). Hindsight bias: An interaction of automatic and
motvational factors?, Memory and Cognition, 16(6),533538
Hoch, S. J., & Loewenstein G. F. (1989). Outcome
feedback: Hindsight and information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 15(4), 605-619
Hoffrage, Ulrich, & Ralph Hertwig. (1999). Hindsight bias:
A price worth paying for fast and frugal memory. In
Simple heuristics that make us smart
Holzl, E., Kirchler E., & Rodler C. (2002). Hindsight bias in
economic expectations: I knew it all along what I want to
hear. The Journal of applied Psychology, 87(3), 437-443
Keynes, J. M. (1964).The General Theory of Employment,
Interest, and Money, Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc, New
York
Odean, T. (1998). Are Investors reluctant to realize their
losses? Journal of Finance, 53(5), 1775-1798.
Sanna, Schwary, & Stocker. (2002) When debiasing
backfires: Accessible content and accessibility
experiences in debiasing hindsight, Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(3), 497-502
Schwarz S., & Stahlberg, D. (2003). Strength of hindsight
bias as a consequence of meta-cognitions. Memory,
11(4/5), 395-411
Stahlberg D., Eller F., Maass A., & Frey D. (1995). We
knew it all Along: Hindsight bias in Groups.
Organizational Behavioral and Human Decision
Processes, 63(1), 46-58
Werth, L., Strack, F., & Forster J. (2002). Certainty and
uncertainty: The two faces of hindsight bias.
Organizational Behavioral and Human Decision
Processes, 87(2), 323-341

772

