UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is the scope of phonological planning constrained by the syntactical role of the utterance
constituents?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5610w5r6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dumay, Nicolas
Damian, Markus F.
Perez, Miguel A.
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is the Scope of Phonological Planning Constrained by the Syntactic Role
of the Utterance Constituents?
Nicolas Dumay (n.dumay@kent.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Kent, UK

Markus F. Damian (m.damian@bristol.ac.uk)

Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Bristol, UK

Hans Stadthagen-Gonzalez (h.stadthagen@bangor.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Bangor, UK

Miguel A. Perez (maperez@um.es)
Departamento de Psicología Básica y Metodología, Universidad de Murcia, Spain
Abstract
Five experiments looked at the effect of repeated phonemes in
the production of colour adjective+noun phrases in English
(“green gun”), or noun+colour adjective phrases in Spanish and
French. Whereas phoneme repetition sped up naming latencies
in the case of prenominal colour adjectives, it induced either no
effect or inhibition in the postnominal case. We argue that this
dissociation does not reflect a genuine cross-linguistic difference
in the scope of phonological planning. Rather, we explain it in
terms of the interplay between an activation gradient, coding
word order, and an activation bias, coding the syntactic role of
the utterance constituents.
Keywords: psycholinguistics; phonological encoding; speech
production; reaction times; cross-linguistic effects

Introduction
Cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists concerned
with the preparation of voluntary action sequences have
devoted a lot of attention to issue of advance planning. In
their research area, a central issue is whether a given response sequence is planned in its entirety before it is
ted, or whether planning and execution are carried out concurrently (e.g., Inhoff, Rosenbaum, Gordon & Campbell,
1984). A special instance of a voluntary action sequence is
language production. Speakers, prior and during the articulation of any utterance, must achieve the balance between
the cognitive load associated with the planning process and
the risk of dysfluencies due to not having planned enough.
Speakers likely plan ahead to a greater extent at higher
(conceptual and syntactic) processing levels than at lower
(phonological and articulatory) levels. As far as planning at
the phonological level - the focus of this paper - is concerned, several types of accounts have been proposed, ranging from theories hypothesizing only a very small amount of
planning (e.g., MacKay, 1987), to others according to which
articulation cannot proceed before at least one phonological
word has been encoded (e.g., Levelt, Roelofs & Meyer,
1999).
In both research on motor programming and language
production, one methodology used to assess the scope of
advance planning is to manipulate the properties of a non-

initial element of the sequence and examine whether
sponse initiation is affected. For instance, in speech
tion research this approach typically involves manipulating
either the sound or meaning properties of a non-initial portion, or the level of phonological or semantic activation of
that portion. If latencies at initiating the response are affected, then the sequence must have been planned, or at
least its elements up to the manipulated portion must have
been activated, before articulation was initiated.
As far as speech production is concerned, the results obtained with this approach generally favor the idea of a relatively large window of planning at the phonological level.
For instance, Meyer (1996) exploited the picture-word interference paradigm, in which a form relation between a picture name and a to-be-ignored distractor typically entails
facilitation, and extended it to multi-word utterances. She
observed that noun phrases such as “The bag and the spoon”
or sentences such as “ The bag is next to the spoon” were
initiated much faster when distractors were form-related to
the first noun ("bell"), but also found a small inhibitory
trend when distractors were form-related to the second noun
("spouse"). Costa and Caramazza (2002) observed that
when speakers named coloured pictures and produced multiword phrases of the type determiner+adjective+noun (“the
green plane”), latencies were shorter with distractors formrelated to the noun than with unrelated ones (see also
mian & Dumay, 2007, for similar findings under time pressure). Schnur, Costa and Caramazza (2006) subsequently
reproduced this effect with sentences such as “The orange
girl walks” and visual distractors (“walnut”) form-related to
the verb.
A new technique to investigate phonological planning,
and based on phoneme repetition, was introduced by Damian and Dumay (2007, 2009; see also Spalek & Damian,
2008, for a cross-linguistic investigation). In these experiments, participants named coloured objects (line drawings)
as quickly as possible using adjective+noun phrases.
lours and objects were paired such that the adjective and the
noun overlapped in segmental content (“green goat”) or did
not (“red goat”). Naming latencies were shorter in the
mer (related) than in the latter (unrelated) condition. Given

667

that here the identity of a segment of the second word appears to affect the time it takes speakers to initiate the utterance, one can conclude that speakers must have, at least,
co-activated the two phonological forms prior to response
initiation.
In the experiments reported below, we capitalized on this
effect to assess the extent to which the scope of phonological co-activation is modulated by the syntactic properties of
the utterance. One theoretical possibility is that the amount
of phonological co-activation within the utterance is strictly
determined by the quantity of resources available at a given
time, irrespective of higher-level constraints, such as the
syntactic roles of the various elements. For instance, the
model of phonological advance planning outlined by
scheniak, Schriefers and Hantsch (2003) stipulates that the
sequential order of successive phonological word forms is
encoded as an activation gradient, such that the first word of
the utterance receives the most activation, the second one
less, the third one still less, etc. Under this account, advance
planning is thus exclusively driven by the number of
coming lexical elements. However, an alternative scenario is
that the degree of co-activation at the form level is constrained by the syntactic structure of the utterance, a possibility which we assessed in the five experiments reported in
this paper.
Evidence supporting the latter scenario comes from a set
of studies which suggest that semantic/syntactic planning
(and therefore also the access to the lower, phonological
level) is constrained by the syntactic organisation of the
utterance. Schriefers and Teruel (1999) asked German
speakers to name coloured pictures (“der grüne Tisch” [the
green table]) while spoken distractors were presented at
various stimulus-onset asynchronies (SOAs). A semantic
(negative) influence of the distractors related to the noun
(“Stuhl” [chair]) was found on naming latencies at SOA 150 ms, whereas a similar effect from the distractors related
to the adjective (“rot” [red]) was found at a later time point
(SOA +150 ms). Critically, French speakers tested on an
equivalent task, thus using phrases with postnominal adjectives (“la table verte”) showed a different pattern: the
mantic distractors related to the noun had an effect at early
SOAs, but the distractors related to the adjective produced
no effect whatever the SOA. Schriefers and Teruel therefore
suggested that at the higher, lemma level, the phrase as a
whole does not need to be fully encoded before articulation
can ensue: what matters is the position of the head, in this
case, the noun, and whether or not the adjective is part of
the grammatical planning window strictly depends on its
position relative to the noun.
Assuming this is actually how things work, the position of
the noun should also constrain the degree of phonological
planning and, with adjectival phrases, a similar crosslinguistic dissociation at the phonological level should be
observed. In languages with postnominal colour adjectives,
such as French and Spanish, phonological manipulations
targeting the non-initial adjective should not affect naming
latencies, as planning up to the noun should be enough for

articulation to proceed. By contrast, in languages with prenominal adjectives, such as German and English, phonological manipulations targeting the non-initial noun should affect onset latencies. This view therefore predicts that the
effect of phoneme repetition which we reported for English
adjective+noun phrases (Damian & Dumay, 2007, 2009)
should not replicate in languages with postnominal adjectives.
Whether this is the case is still an open question. However, it is already worth noting that picture-word interference
data obtained by Costa and Caramazza (2002) are not
patible with the Schriefers and Teruel (1999) suggestion. In
this experiment, Spanish speakers had to name coloured
pictures using phrases of the type “det+noun+adjective” (“la
casa azul” [the blue house]), while visual distractors semantically or phonologically related to the adjective were presented. Despite the postnominal position of the adjective
("azul"), both classical effects of semantic interference and
phonological facilitation were found, leading the authors to
conclude that at the phonological level phrases are encoded
independently of the grammatical status of their constituents.
In the present series of experiments, we investigated
whether the effect of phoneme repetition between the adjective and the noun which we found in English (Damian &
Dumay, 2007, 2009) generalizes to languages with postnominal adjectives. Whereas Experiment 1 reproduced the
baseline effect in English, Experiments 2 and 3 assessed its
counterparts in Spanish and French. In the latter
ments, we found no effect of phoneme repetition, suggesting
that phonological planning is indeed constrained by
tic structure (cf. Schriefers & Teruel, 1999). However, an
alternative account, relying on the relative temporal availability of the colour and the object dimension, is also possible. Let us assume that in line drawings colour identification
is slower than object identification. In English, the object
name, which should therefore be retrieved first, yet occupies
a non-initial position, and so a phonological effect from the
name onto the adjective should be observed. By contrast, in
Spanish and French, the object name has to be produced
first, and so the fact that one of its phoneme is repeated in
the following adjective should not affect performance.
periments 4 and 5 tested the "relative temporal availability"
account in English and Spanish, by manipulating the saliency of the colour dimension. Through a simple display inversion procedure, the objects in the latter experiments were
presented as white lines on coloured background.

Experiment 1 - English
Methods
Participants Sixteen undergraduates from the University of
Bristol were tested. They were all English native speakers,
with normal (or corrected-to-normal) vision and no history
of language disorder.

668

Materials and design The key materials were 20 coloured
pictures (line drawings) of common objects with monosyllabic names (average length: 3.5 phonemes; average spoken
frequency: 17.7 counts per million; Baayen, Piepenbrock &
Gulikers, 1995). In the phonologically related condition,
objects and colours (blue, green, pink and red) were combined such that the initial phonemes of the adjective and the
noun (and in two cases, also the following vowels)
cided (“blue bed”; the average phonemic overlap
represented 34.8% of target length); in the phonologically
unrelated condition, objects and colours were recombined
such that their initial segments differed (“green bed”) and
overlap in other positions was minimised. In both
tions, care was taken to avoid obvious associations, such as
“green grass”. Each object was presented once in each condition, plus another four times paired with the two remaining colours, which resulted in 40 test and 80 filler trials.
Order of item presentation was pseudorandomized for each
participant, such that neither the same colour adjective nor
the same target appeared on subsequent trials.
Procedure Pictures of size 7 x 7 cm were presented centrally on a computer screen for 1,800 ms, following a 500-ms
fixation cue. Naming responses were captured using a highquality headset microphone and utterance onset latencies
were determined to the nearest millisecond. Participants
were Mrst familiarized with the entire set of pictures and
corresponding names. They were then shown the four possible colours in which the line drawings were to be presented, and instructed to name as quickly as possible what
they saw, using a phrase of the type “adjective+noun”. After
20 unrelated practice trials, four experimental blocks of 30
trials were carried out.

Results and Discussion
Reaction times accompanied by an incorrect response,
i.e., stutters, hesitations, or other than the expected one
(4.7%) were excluded from the chronometrical analysis.
Latencies smaller than 250 or larger than 1,500 ms (1.3%)
were also excluded. All results are reported in Table 1. In
this and the following experiments, the data points were
analyzed using a linear mixed effects methodology (Baayen,
2007). Naming latencies were significantly faster in the related than in the unrelated condition (F(1,562) = 7.56, MSE
= 163,090, p < .01). Error rates were slightly lower in the
related than in the unrelated case; however, this difference
was not significant (F < 1).
The results of this first experiment nicely replicate those
reported by Damian and Dumay (2007, 2009), with a substantial facilitatory "activation exchange" between the phonology of the adjective and that of the noun. Having confirmed our baseline effect in English, we could then look at
languages in which colour adjectives systematically occur in
postnominal position. Experiment 2 used the Spanish language.

Table 1: Mean response latencies (ms) and % errors rates
(in parentheses) for Experiments 1-5.
Unrelated Related
Difference
Exp. 1 (English)

806 (5.3)

766 (4.0)

+40 (+1.3)

Exp. 2 (Spanish)

767 (4.4)

764 (3.4)

+3 (+1.0)

Exp. 3 (French)

749 (9.5)

745 (8.8)

+4 (+0.7)

Exp. 4 (English)

663 (7.3)

633 (4.3)

+30 (+3.0)

Exp. 5 (Spanish)

783 (5.6)

816 (6.9)

-33 (-1.3)

Experiment 2 - Spanish
Methods
Participants Sixteen undergraduates from the University of
Murcia (Spain), all Spanish native speakers, were selected
using the same criteria as for Experiment 1.
Material, design and procedure The materials were devised along the same lines as in Experiment 1. Twenty
common objects with bisyllabic names (average length: 4.1
phonemes; spoken frequency: 20.0 counts per million; Real
Academia Española) were depicted as line drawings in four
colours (blue, red, green and brown). In the related contion (“ajo azul” [blue garlic]), the average overlap
represented 41.5% of target length. Apart from the instructions, to name the pictures using a phrase of the type
“noun+adjective”, and a smaller number of fillers (64), all
other procedural aspects were identical to Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Overall, 3.9% of the trials were classified as errors, and a
further 0.6% of the latencies were excluded from the response time analysis as outliers. As Table 1 shows, naming
latencies in the related and unrelated conditions were virtually identical, with no significant effect of overlap (F < 1),
and error rates showed no effect of overlap either (F < 1).
The results from the Spanish speakers are in stark contrast
to those obtained from the English speakers: a similar degree of onset phonological overlap between colour adjective
and object name had a strong positive influence on the naming performance in the prenominal-adjective, English case,
but no influence whatsoever in the postnominal-adjective,
Spanish case. However, before we attempt to make sense of
these findings, and because our failure to obtain facilitation
in Spanish may be seen as a null result, Experiment 3 tried
to give the effect a second chance, by testing another
guage with postnominal colour adjective, i.e., namely
French. In this as in the English experiment, we were able to
restrict ourselves to monosyllabic nouns and adjectives,
meaning that the temporal distance between the initial phoneme and its repetition was shorter than in the Spanish experiment; we also had a larger picture set and tested more
participants.

669

Experiment 3 - French
Methods
Participants Thirty undergraduates from the Free University of Brussels (Belgium), all native speakers of French,
were selected using the same criteria as for the previous
experiments.
Material, design and procedure Thirty-two common
jects with monosyllabic names (average length: 3.2 phonemes; average spoken frequency: 6.5 counts per million;
Content, Mousty, & Radeau, 1990) were depicted as line
drawings in four colours (blue, grey, green and mauve). In
the related condition (“vache verte” [green cow]), the average overlap represented 34.9% of target length. All procedural aspects were identical to Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
Overall, 4.3% of the trials were classified as errors, and a
further 1.2% of the latencies were treated as outliers. As can
be seen Table 1, naming latencies in the related and unlated conditions were again very similar, with no significant
effect of overlap (F < 1). Likewise, there was no effect
overlap on the error rates (F < 1).
As observed with Spanish speakers (Experiment 2),
French speakers did not show any effect of phonological
overlap between the colour adjective and the noun. Together
these two experiments thus suggest that phonological
coding of an utterance-initial noun is carried out independently of the encoding of the subsequent colour name.
These results fit well with Schriefers and Teruel's (1999)
hypothesis that the scope of syntactic encoding is determined by the position of the head noun; if in Spanish and
French the postnominal adjective is not encoded before articulation proceeds, there is no reason to expect any
logical influence from the adjective onto speech onset latencies.
However, before concluding that the discrepancy between
English, and Spanish and French, reflects a genuine crosslinguistic dissociation, an alternative account in terms of the
relative temporal availability of the colour and the object
dimension has to be assessed. Assuming that in line
ings colour identification is slower than object identifition, a phonological effect should be easier to obtain in English, where the object name which should be retrieved first
yet comes second in the utterance, than in Spanish and
French, where the object name, whether or not retrieved
first, has to come first in the utterance. However, whether
this scenario applies is not straightforward: if colour identification in line drawings may be particularly difficult compared to plain patches (Kuipers & La Heij, 2009), the fact
that we used at least 20 objects and only four colours conversely could make colour names easier to retrieve than
object names.
In the subsequent experiments, we tackled the “relative
time course” account by inverting the colour display, such
that objects were now shown as white lines on four possible

coloured background. Display inversion, if successful in
rendering colour information more salient, should speed up
English speakers: in their language colour adjectives have to
come first in the utterance and no gender agreement with the
noun is required. Crucially, if, despite increased colour saliency, still no phoneme repetition effect emerges in a
guage in which colour is named postnominally, we will be
in a strong position to argue that the dissociation observed
indeed reflects a genuine cross-linguistic difference in the
scope of planning. English was assessed in Experiment 4,
whereas the postnominal case was assessed in Spanish in
Experiment 5.

Experiment 4 - English (with inverted display)
Methods
Participants Sixteen undergraduates from the University of
Bristol, all native speakers of English, were selected using
the same criteria as for the previous experiments.
Material, design and procedure These were identical to
Experiment 1, except that the colour display was inverted,
so that colour was now conveyed by the background, rather
than the lines of the drawing.

Results and Discussion
Overall, 5.8% of the trials were classified as errors, and a
further 0.3% of the latencies were treated as outliers. As
Table 1 shows, naming latencies were significantly faster in
the related than in the unrelated condition (F(1,563) =
11.14, MSE = 124,516, p < .001), whereas there was no significant effect of overlap on error rates (F < 1).
A combined analysis of Experiments 1 and 4 demonstrated that display inversion significantly sped up naming latencies (by 138 ms) compared to the standard mode (F(1,1125)
= 10.69, MSE = 218,545, p < .001), and that the strength of
phonological facilitation was unaffected by display insion (F < 1). In addition, error rates indicated a facilitatory
trend in the related condition (F(1,1196) = 2.94, p = .09).
The significant reduction of the naming latencies with inverted (compared to the standard) colour display
strates that the manipulation introduced in Experiment 4
made colour more salient and so retrieval of the corresponding adjective much quicker. Yet, the fact the phonological
facilitation is unaffected by increased colour saliency
cates that English speakers are still unable to initiate their
response based just on colour information. Having
lished that colour display inversion speeds up retrieval of
the adjective, Experiment 5 applied the manipulation to the
Spanish language.

670

Experiment 5 - Spanish (with inverted display)
Methods
Participants Sixteen undergraduates from the University of
Murcia, all Spanish native speakers, were selected using the
same criteria as for the previous experiments.
Material, design and procedure These were identical to
Experiment 2, except that the colour display was inverted,
so that colour was now conveyed by the background.

Results and Discussion
Overall, 6.3% of the trials were classified as errors, and a
further 0.3% of the latencies were treated as outliers. As can
be seen Table 1 and to our surprise, naming latencies were
now substantially slower in the related than in the unrelated
condition (F(1,596) = 6.78, MSE = 124,257, p < .01), whereas corresponding error rates did not differ statistically (F <
1).
As indicated by a combined analysis of Experiments 2
and 5, the inhibition obtained on the latencies under display
inversion was statistically distinct from the null effect found
in Experiment 2 (F(1,1205) = 4.00, MSE = 74,532, p < .05).
This inhibition is clearly at odds with Schriefers and Teruel's (1999) hypothesis that the planning scope is determined by the position of the head noun: with the right experimental settings, speakers do co-activate noun and postnominal adjective prior to articulation.

General Discussion
The present set of experiments exploited the effect of
phoneme repetition to explore whether the syntactic role of
an utterance constituents modulates the scope of phonological planning. Experiment 1 replicated the baseline effect in
English, using colour adjective+noun phrases, but Experiments 2 and 3 fail to find its counterpart in Spanish and
French, languages where colour adjectives by contrast occur
in postnominal position. The last two experiments increased
colour saliency by inverting the display, such that colour
information was conveyed by the background rather than by
the lines of the drawing. Experiment 4 sped up English
speakers' naming latencies and thereby confirmed that display inversion had the desired effect. Crucially, Experiment
5, carried out in Spanish, showed that, provided increased
colour saliency, phonological overlap between nouns and
postnominal adjectives can result in the inhibition of the
naming responses.
Our finding of phonological inhibition with increased accessibility of a non-initial constituent converges with the
inhibitory trend reported by Meyer (1996; cf. Introduction).
It also converges with the inhibition observed again in the
picture-word interference paradigm by Jescheniak et al.
(2003). Asking participants to produce bare nouns (“Kamm”
[comb]), “det+noun” phrases (“der Kamm” [the comb]), or
“det+adjective+noun” phrases (“der rote Kamm” [the red
comb]), these authors found that phonological distractors

related to the noun induced substantial a facilitation in bare
nouns, which decreased in the “det+noun” phrases and
turned into inhibition in the longer, “det+adjective+noun”
phrases. By contrast to the facilitation observed with
ance-initial constituents, priming an non-initial constituent
thus appears more likely to induce interference. In any case,
our phonological inhibition effect in Spanish is incompatible with Schriefers and Teruel's (1999) suggestion,
ing to which syntactic planning encompasses all constituents up to and including the phrase head, and thus would
include prenominal, but not postnominal adjectives.
Arguably, our inverted stimuli, with the colour filling the
background as well as the internal parts of the object, are
closer to real objects than are the coloured lines of our standard stimuli. Consequently, the main results to account for
here are the phonological facilitation obtained with prenominal adjectives, and its inhibitory equivalent found with
postnominal ones.
The theoretical account of phonological encoding in multiword utterances proposed by Jescheniak et al. (2003) could
be valuable in that respect. Originally devised to explain
picture-word interference in the production of phrases, the
model works as follows. At the lemma level, all the phrase
semantic/syntactic constituents are activated in parallel and
are each assigned to a syntactic slot. At a lower level, the
order of the successive phonological word forms is
represented as an activation gradient, such that the first
word of the utterance receives the strongest activation, the
second one less, the third one still less, etc. Presentation of a
phonological distractor boosts the activation of the target
word, and therefore helps its retrieval. However, priming a
non-initial element has an indirect cost, as it temporally
turbs the activation gradient that codes for the sequential
order of the constituents. Thus, in extreme cases, this may in
fact result in an overt speech error (“the big house r, euh, the
big red house”). Nonetheless, in all other cases, producing
the correct sequence will consume time and resources.
Hence, the net outcome for any experimental situation is a
balance between priming (due to activation boost and easier
retrieval) and interference (due to the time and resources
needed to maintain the correct word order). Distractors
form-related to the utterance initial element should benefit
naming, because in this case the activation boost facilitates
retrieval, but also reinforces the appropriate activation
dient. By contrast, whether a distractor form-related to a
non-initial element should prime or inhibit performance will
depend on the task settings, with the possibility that both
effects cancel each other out.
How Jescheniak et al.'s (2003) “phonological activation
gradient” theory accommodates the present data is not
straightforward though. According to the model, word order
is coded by the activation gradient, meaning that by default
in the English utterance “green goat”, “green” is more activated than “goat”. If an exchange of activation between the
two related word forms underlies our phoneme repetition
effect (cf. Damian & Dumay, 2007, 2009) both elements
should be easier to retrieve. However, as part of this

671

change, and given the activation gradient, the non-initial
element “goat” should receive more activation than it can
give, with the net result that the gradient should be disturbed, thereby counteracting the retrieval of the initial element (“green”). Nonetheless, it is probably safe to assume
that, relative to priming, gradient disturbance is weak, otherwise speakers would produce words in the wrong order.
Under the right parameters, the model could thus explain the
facilitatory effect of phoneme repetition obtained in English.
However, the model is blind to higher-level variables,
such as word class, and only considers the sequential position of the elements. It therefore makes the same prediction
for Spanish/French postnominal-adjective constructions.
One possible modification that would enable the model to
explain our full pattern of effects would therefore be to
sume that all else being equal, nouns always have more activation than adjectives. This could occur via cascadedness
from the syntactic to the word form level: the noun being
crucial element of the phrase, it might have a head start in
terms of activation. Another possibility would be that object
identity (and thus the corresponding noun) always receives
more activation due to attentional factors.
Under this assumption of an asymmetric “baseline” activation, the exchange between adjective and noun should
particularly benefit the “adjective+noun” word order. In
“green goat”, “green” should receive a substantial activation
from the (important) object name “goat”; by contrast, the
object name should benefit relatively less from the priming
flow sent by the (less important) colour adjective. By contrast, for phrases of the type “noun+adjective”, the activation sent by the highly activated “vache” should heavily
prime the postnominal adjective “verte”, thereby affecting
the activation gradient more in the related than in the unrelated condition. As a result, the speaker should find it more
difficult to suppress the colour adjective when it is preceded
by a phonologically related object name. Therefore, by
means of the assumption that nouns have a relatively higher
activation level than adjectives, the model could explain
both facilitation in prenominal constructions and inhibition
in postnominal ones.
Overall, our results and interpretations are compatible
with a view of phonological advance planning which denies
the need for cross-linguistic differences, contrary to
fers and Teruel (1999). The interplay between an activation
gradient, coding word order, and an activation bias, coding
the syntactic role of the constituents, is sufficient to account
for the divergent pattern of results obtained from languages
with different word order.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by grant BB/C508477/1
from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council (BBSRC) awarded to the second author.

References

Baayen, R.H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM]. Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Content, A., Mousty, P., & Radeau, M. (1990). Brulex: Une
base de données lexicales informatisée pour le français
écrit et parlé. L'Année Psychologique, 90, 551-566.
Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of noun
phrases in English and Spanish: Implications for the
scope of phonological encoding in speech production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46, 178-198.
Damian, M.F., & Dumay, N. (2007). Time pressure and
phonological advance planning in spoken production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 195-209.
Damian, M. F., & Dumay, N. (2009). Exploring phonological encoding through repeated segments. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 24, 685-712.
Inhoff, A.W., Rosenbaum, D.A., Gordon, A.M., & Campbell, J.A. (1984). Stimulus-response compatibility and
motor programming of manual response sequences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Human Perception
and Performance, 10, 724-733.
Jescheniak, D., Schriefers, H., & Hantsch, A. (2003). Utterance format affects phonological priming in the pictureword task: Implications for models of phonological encoding in speech production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29,
441-454.
Kuipers, J.R., & La Heij, W. (2009). The limitations of
cading in the speech production system. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 24, 120-135.
Levelt, W.J.M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A.S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-75.
MacKay, D.G. (1987). The organization of perception and
action: A theory for language and other cognitive skills.
New York: Springer.
Meyer, A.S. (1996). Lexical access in phrase and sentence
production: results from picture-word interference experiments. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 477-496.
Real Academia Española: Banco de datos (CREA) [en
línea]. Corpus de referencia del español actual.
<http://www.rae.es>
Schnur, T.T., Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (2006). Planning
at the phonological level during sentence production.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 35, 189-213.
Schriefers, H., & Teruel, E. (1999). The production of noun
phrases: A cross-linguistic comparison of French and
German. Proceedings of the Twenty First Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 637-642).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Spalek, K., & Damian, M.F. (2008). Of blue bottles and
blue flowers: Phonological representations of L1 are active when producing words in L2. Poster presented at the
14th Annual Conference on Architectures and Mechanisms for Language Processing (AMLaP).

Baayen, R.H. (2007). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction to statistics. Cambridge University Press.

672

