UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Iterated Learning and the Cultural Ratchet

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/24w0t8c9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Beppu, Aaron
Griffiths, Thomas

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Iterated Learning and the Cultural Ratchet
Aaron Beppu (abeppu@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science Program
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
How does the behavior of individuals in a society influence
whether knowledge accumulates over generations? We explore
this question using a simple model of cultural evolution as a
process of “iterated learning,” where each agent in a sequence
learns and passes on a piece of information. Using both mathematical analyses involving rational Bayesian agents and laboratory experiments with human participants, we vary whether
agents observe data from the environment and what kind of
information they receive from the previous agent. Our mathematical and empirical results both suggest that merely observing the behavior of other learners is not sufficient to produce
cumulative cultural evolution, but that knowledge can be accumulated over generations when agents are able to communicate
the plausibility of different hypotheses.

Introduction
What we as humans know about the world is largely informed
by what we can learn from others. Our beliefs and behaviors
are built up not only by our own interactions with the environment around us, but by observations of the behavior of others, and by receiving explicit statements of belief. Through
this ability to build off the knowledge and behaviors of those
around us, human societies are able to accumulate information, the so-called “ratchet effect” (Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner, 1993). Large, lasting changes in our beliefs develop by
accruing small, incremental changes over many generations.
In this paper, we use a simple model to characterize the conditions necessary for this accrual, and compare the predictions of this model to experimental results. In particular, we
suggest that these changes will accumulate if learners have
access to the actual beliefs of their teachers, as opposed to
merely observations of behavior informed by those beliefs.
Much of the previous discussion about cumulative cultural
evolution has focused on the relationship between the teacher
and the learner. For example, Tomasello (1993) largely
claims that the ratchet effect is a product of sophisticated imitative learning, emphasizing the advantages of joint attention
and a theory of mind. Gergely and Csibra (2005) suggest
that “natural pedagogy” plays a role, focusing on how human
teachers go out of their way to ease the learning process for
children, providing highly tailored information and a greatly
enriched learning environment. Both of these mechanisms
increase the fidelity of cultural transmission, providing the
opportunity for the ratchet effect occur.
Rather than focusing on the specific actions or abilities
of teachers and learners, we consider the kind of information passed between generations. We model the process
of cultural evolution using an “iterated learning” framework
(Kirby, 2001), in which successive generations are modeled
as a sequence of agents in which each agent learns from

the previous agent. Iterated learning models have recently
been used in simulations exploring the emergence of linguistic structures (Kirby, 2001) and in experiments with human
participants revealing inductive biases in specific domains
(Kalish, Griffiths, & Lewandowsky, 2007). We explore variants of this framework where each agent learns not only from
the behavior of the previous generation, but also from observing the world and from theories summarizing the inferences of the previous generation. The consequences of each
variant for the accumulation of knowledge are determined
through a combination of mathematical analyses of sequences
of Bayesian agents and an experiment in which cultural evolution is simulated in the laboratory with human participants.
Our mathematical and empirical analyses produce two results that help to identify the conditions under which cumulative cultural evolution can occur. First, we show that if the
information passed from teacher to learner is limited to the
learner’s observations of the teacher’s behavior, then cumulative cultural evolution will not take place. We then go on to
show that cumulative cultural evolution can occur if teachers
give learners information about which hypotheses they believe are plausible, rather than just behaviors consistent with
the most plausible hypothesis. These results suggest that a
capacity for communicating such beliefs may be necessary in
order for the cultural ratchet to operate.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section introduces our formal framework, and summarizes our mathematical results. We then outline the motivation for our experiment
with human learners, and describe the procedure and results
of that experiment. The paper concludes with a discussion
of the implications of these results for understanding the conditions under which the cultural ratchet can operate, and the
kinds of cognitive capacities that teachers and learners need
to possess in order to satisfy these conditions.

Analyzing Cultural Transmission
Our first step in exploring the conditions that result in cumulative cultural evolution is analyzing variants of iterated
learning in which the learners are rational Bayesian agents.
The assumption of rationality allows us to examine how ideal
learners use the information transmitted between generations,
and allows us to be explicit about the biases that influence
learning. Specifically, we assume that all agents have a shared
set of hypotheses H, and a prior distribution over these hypotheses p(h) describing the degree to which each h ∈ H is
believed to be true in the absence of any evidence.
Starting with these prior beliefs, agents observe the world
and receive information from other agents, resulting in data,

2089

(a)

hypothesis

data

(b)

hypothesis

data

hypothesis

data

(c)

data

hypothesis

data

data

new data

new data

hypothesis

hypothesis

theory

...

theory

new data

theory

...

...

new data

Figure 1: Three models of cultural evolution. (a) In the
pure iterated learning model, each learner receives data from
the previous learner and generates data provided to the next
learner. (b) In the mixed data model, each learner also receives data generated by the external world. (c) In the posterior passing model, each learner passes information about
his or her current posterior distribution over hypotheses to the
next learner (here taking the form of a theory).
d. Using these data, each agent updates his or her beliefs by
computing a posterior distribution p(h|d) using Bayes’ rule
p(h|d) =

p(d|h)p(h)
∑h0 ∈H p(d|h0 )p(h0 )

chain hears some message whispered by the previous person,
and whispers what they think they heard to the next person.
More formally, all agents share a prior p(h). There is some
“true” hypothesis h∗ which is used to initiate the process. The
first agent receives data d ∗ sampled from the distribution associated with this hypotheses, p(d ∗ |h∗ ). This agent’s beliefs
are updated by applying Bayes rule (Equation 1) to reach a
posterior p(h1 |d ∗ ) ∝ p(h1 )p(d ∗ |h1 ), samples a hypothesis h1
from this distribution, and produces data d1 by sampling from
p(d1 |h1 ).1 These data are passed to the second agent, and
each subsequent agent similarly receives and transmits data.
This process defines a Markov chain over hypotheses, with
transition matrix p(hi |hi−1 ) = ∑di−1 p(hi |di−1 )p(di−1 |hi−1 ).
This chain has the prior p(h) as its stationary distribution,
meaning that the probability a learner chooses a hypothesis h asymptotically converges to p(h) (Griffiths & Kalish,
2007). Laboratory experiments simulating this process of iterated learning with human participants produce results that
are consistent with this prediction (Kalish et al., 2007).
An intuitive explanation for this convergence result can be
provided by considering the “telephone” example. In this
case, we expect that the original message tells us almost nothing about the message heard by a person far down the chain.
This suggests that information is being lost over time. Loss
of information allows the prior to influence the hypotheses
selected by learners, who will use their a priori expectations
to fill the gaps. Each generation, in reconciling the received
data with their prior, thus passes less surprising data to the
next generation. The prior itself is the only distribution over
hypotheses that will be stable under this process.

(1)

Mixed Data

where p(d|h) is the likelihood, expressing how probable the
data are given a particular hypothesis, and the sum in the denominator ensures that the result is a normalized probability
distribution. The learner can now choose a hypothesis based
on its posterior probability. Intuitively, Bayes’ rule provides
a way to combine prior beliefs with observations, with the
probability assigned to each hypothesis being modified by the
extent that it agrees or conflicts with the evidence.
In the remainder of this section we describe three models of
cultural evolution, varying in the nature of the data provided
to learners. These three models are illustrated schematically
in Figure 1. We analyze how the hypotheses selected by the
learners change over time in each of these models, allowing
us to determine whether the assumptions behind the model
are sufficient to support cumulative cultural evolution.

Pure Iterated Learning
The first model might be called the pure iterated learning
model, as it represents the standard scenario assumed in iterated learning. In this scenario, each agent receives only
data which are generated based on the hypothesis maintained
by the previous agent. An intuitive example of this sort of
process is the game “telephone”, where each individual in a

We can take a step towards producing cumulative cultural
evolution by imagining a case where each person both receives data from the previous person, and observes data from
the external world. This is the mixed data case. Receiving data from the world is necessary for cumulative cultural
evolution, as agents are actually trying trying to learn about
something external to their society, rather than a purely cultural creation. As an example, we might imagine that a hunter
observes locations where antelope can be found grazing, but
more experienced hunters also recommend specific locations
where they would expect to find antelope. By combining
these specific locations with prior beliefs about where antelope are found, the hunter reaches a new set of beliefs about
where antelope are likely to be, and can tell other hunters
about specific locations where he expects to find antelope.
The formal description is a simple extension of the above
model. All agents share some prior p(h). Each agent i
still receives data di from the previous agent. Additionally,
the ith agent receives some data di∗ from the world, generated from p(di∗ |h∗ ), where h∗ is the true hypothesis that
1 All results given in this section still hold if learners sample data
directly from the posterior predictive distribution, summing over all
hypotheses, rather than sampling a hypothesis first.

2090

characterizes the state of the world. The agent then updates his or her beliefs by applying Bayes’ rule as in Equation 1, with p(hi |di , di∗ ) ∝ p(hi )p(di |hi )p(di∗ |hi ), and generates data to pass on to the next agent, with p(di+1 |di , di∗ ) =
∑hi p(hi |di , di∗ )p(di+1 |hi ). As a Markov chain over hypotheses, this would have transition matrix p(hi+1 |hi ) =
∑di ∑di∗ p(hi |di , di∗ )p(di |hi )p(di∗ |h∗ ).
An analysis similar to that for the case of pure iterated learning shows that this Markov chain will converge
to the average of the posterior with respect to the distribution from which data from the world are generated,
∑d ∗ p(h|d ∗ )p(d ∗ |h∗ ). Thus, cultural transmission does not result in progress: asymptotically, learners will choose exactly
the same hypotheses as if they had only seen data generated
from p(d ∗ |h∗ ), receiving no benefit from cultural transmission. Intuitively, it should be clear that this process will not
converge to the prior, because of the data observed from the
world, but it should also not converge to the truth, because
each individual is still using the same prior and only has a
small amount of data – the combination of d ∗ and d – from
which to learn. In our hunting example, we might suppose
that all hunters have a strong prior belief that antelope are
likely to hide in thick brush, but in fact antelope are more
likely to graze in open fields. Then even if very few of the
observations of antelope are in thick brush, each hunter will
nevertheless recommend thick brush locations.

Posterior Passing
When learning from others, we are usually not limited to
merely observing their behavior or listening to their predictions. Often, we receive actual statements of belief. This is
the last scenario we consider, which we call posterior passing. Each agent has access to the beliefs of the preceding person, as expressed in a posterior distribution over hypotheses
rather than data reflecting those beliefs, and takes that posterior distribution as their own prior distribution. Agents also
observe data from the world. A model along these lines was
used by Boyd and Richerson (1993) to analyze balancing tradition with innovation in cultural evolution. As an example,
we can return to our hunters, where this time experienced
hunters help train novice hunters by laying out a set of hypotheses about the habits of antelope, and indicating the extent to which they think each of these hypotheses is likely.
This process converges to the truth – the beliefs of successive generations will converge on the hypothesis h for which
p(d ∗ |h) is closest to the distribution p(d ∗ |h∗ ) that characterizes the state of the world h∗ (where proximity is measured
by the Kullback-Leibler divergence, Cover & Thomas, 1991).
The intuitive explanation is that taking the teacher’s posterior distribution as the learner’s prior makes it possible to
preserve the inferences of previous learners, in contrast to
the mixed data case. Formally, if the first agent’s posterior
is p(h0 |d0∗ ), and the second agent takes this as a prior, then
the resulting posterior is p(h1 |d0∗ , d1∗ ). If agents 0 through
(i − 1) do this, then the posterior distribution of the ith agent
is p(hi |d0∗ , . . . , di∗ ). Thus, the whole chain acts like a single

agent who has seen all of the data, and convergence to the
truth follows from standard proofs of the asymptotic consistency of Bayesian inference (e.g., Robert, 1994).2

Summary
These three models describe fundamentally different kinds of
processes. The pure iterated learning model is applicable in
contexts where the thing being learned is purely about the
society the agents live in – the structure of a language, or
taboos and social norms. The mixed data case and the posterior passing case are both situations where the agents are
actually trying to learn about the world, but are distinct in
the kind of transmission that occurs. The crucial point is that
only in the posterior passing case are the inferential contributions of all individuals preserved. In the mixed data case,
the chain will converge, but not to the true distribution; the
progress made by each individual upon observing data from
the world is undone by the next participant’s inferential process, and thus the cultural ratchet slips. This analysis makes a
clear prediction about the conditions under which cumulative
cultural evolution will take place, which we can now test in
an experiment with human participants.

Exploring the Cultural Ratchet through
Function Learning
We test the predictions of our models by extending the function learning paradigm used by Kalish et al. (2007). In this
paradigm, people learn a one-dimensional function relating
two variables x and y. Each person receives data in the form
of a set of (x, y) pairs, which are points generated by that
function. After receiving these data each person is given a
sequence of x values and asked to provide corresponding y
values based on their beliefs about the function. The resulting (x, y) pairs indicate what the person has learned.
This paradigm gives us a convenient way to test the predictions of our models. Previous experiments using this
paradigm have shown that people are strongly biased towards
learning positive linear functions, finding these functions easy
to learn, and have difficulty with non-monotonic functions
(Busemeyer, Byun, DeLosh, & McDaniel, 1997). We interpret this inductive bias as a prior distribution placing high
probability on positive linear functions. If we construct a scenario in which the true function people should be learning
has low probability under this shared prior, such as a nonmonotonic function, we should be able to determine whether
a given scenario results in convergence towards the prior or
towards the true function. In particular, if each person receives an amount of data that would normally be insufficient
to allow them to learn a nonmonotonic function, cumulative
cultural evolution should be the only way for people to learn
the true function. Even if convergence is not directly observable in the lab, we can still evaluate whether a few genera2 In

fact, agents need not communicate the entire posterior distribution: Sampling hypotheses from the posterior is sufficient to
converge to the truth, as in sequential Monte Carlo methods such as
particle filtering (Doucet, Freitas, & Gordon, 2001).

2091

tions of posterior passing produces results that are closer to
the true function than those produced by mixed data.

Methods
Participants
We collected data from 208 participants drawn from the university community. Participants received either course credit
or reimbursement of $10/hour for volunteering. These participants were arranged into chains of eight participants each,
specifically eleven posterior passing chains, ten mixed data
chains, and five pure iterated learning chains. Fewer pure
iterated learning chains were used because this case is equivalent to an existing experiment by Kalish et al. (2007).

Stimuli and Apparatus
Participants completed the experiment in individual booths.
All stimuli and responses were displayed on and recorded
through an Apple iMac. In each trial, a stimulus value x was
presented in the form of a horizontal blue bar, 0.75 cm wide
and from 0.5 cm to 18.75 cm long (corresponding to x = 0
and x = 1 respectively). The stimulus bar was presented in
the upper-left section of the screen, with its upper left corner
7 cm from the left edge and 3 cm from the top of the screen.
Participants gave a response value y by using a slider to adjust the height of a vertical red bar of the same dimensions
as the stimulus bar. The response bar was 0.5 cm from the
bottom of the screen and 5.5 cm from the right edge of the
screen. Participants were able to adjust the response bar using a slider until satisfied, and then submitted their responses
by clicking a button approximately 4 cm to the right of the
red bar. Feedback was given in the form of a yellow bar (of
the same dimensions) approximately one cm to the left of the
response bar. Additionally, in the “posterior-passing” condition, text was displayed in a box on screen at the same time
as the stimulus, response and feedback bars.
Stimuli were taken from a pool of 100 values evenly spaced
on [0.005, 0.995]. The true function that people were supposed to learn was y = f (x) = 4(x − 0.5)2 . Given that we fix
the range of stimulus and response values to [0, 1], this is a
concave up parabola, with f (0) = 1, f (0.5) = 0, f (1) = 1.

Procedure
All conditions of the experiment followed the same general
structure. During a training phase, a participant was shown a
sequence of stimulus values. For each of these values, with
the stimulus bar still on screen, participants chose a response
by adjusting the slider, and submitted their response by clicking a button. The feedback bar was then displayed showing
the correct response for the given stimulus. This was followed
by a one second pause during which all three bars were displayed. Participant responses were considered correct if their
error was less than 5% of the bar’s range of values (slightly
less than one cm). Participants with correct responses moved
immediately onto the next trial. If a participant’s response
was outside this margin of error, a tone sounded. The participant then adjusted the response bar to match the feedback bar,

and submitted this value. This was followed by a two second
pause, and the onset of the next trial. During a test phase,
participants performed the same task, but without feedback;
given a presentation of the blue bar, they simply submitted a
guess of the corresponding height of the response bar.
Participants were divided into chains of eight participants
in each of the three conditions. In all chains, participants were
trained using some set of stimulus/response values, and then
tested using 50 distinct stimulus values. Conditions differed
in the data that were used to train participants. Across all
conditions, the first participant in any chain was trained with
50 distinct data points from the true function f (x). In the
pure iterated learning condition, following participants were
trained using the 50 stimulus/response pairs generated by the
previous participant during the test phase. In the mixed data
condition, subsequent participants were trained with these 50
recycled values, but in addition, received 50 data points generated from the true function. In the posterior passing condition, all participants were trained using only data from the
true function (again, 50 data points). In addition, each participant received a description written by the previous participant
describing what the previous participant thought the function
was. This description was displayed on screen during both
training and test phases. Each participant wrote a corresponding description at the end of the test phase.

Results
Example chains from each condition are shown in Figure 2.
The pure iterated learning condition quickly converged to a
positive linear relationship for all but one chain, which converged to a negative linear relationship. This is consistent
with the results of Kalish et al. (2007), in which 28 of 32
chains converged to a positive linear relationship and the remainder converged to a negative linear relationship. Chains
from the mixed data conditions generally looked like noise,
sometimes with small areas where the participant latched
onto something correct. Sometimes a participant in these
chains would induce a linear relationship, though this generally disappeared from the chain within a few generations.
Importantly, the responses of later participants in a chain resembled the responses of the first participant, consistent with
the prediction that receiving data from the previous generation should ultimately not improve performance. Lastly, the
posterior passing chains did tend to approach the true function more closely than the other groups. However, this was
not necessarily actual convergence. In a few cases, a chain
would approach the true function, but a participant late in the
chain would infer the wrong relationship, derailing convergence.
We performed a more quantitative analysis of the data by
computing the root mean square
q error (RMSE) with respect
∑n ( f (x )−y )2

i
i
i=1
, for each parto the true function, RMSE =
n
ticipant. Figure 3(a) shows this error for each participant,
grouped into chains. Though the raw data is messy, we can
still glean quite a lot from it. The pure iterated learning

2092

Pure iterated learning

Mixed data

Posterior passing

Training

Testing

Figure 2: Example chains from each condition. Each row is a single chain, with each plot representing a participant. Training
data are shown in green, while test responses are shown in blue.
Table 1: Results of ANOVA comparing average RMSE of
chains across conditions
comparison
all conditions
pure v. mixed data
pure v. posterior passing
mixed data v. posterior passing

df1
2
1
1
1

df2
23
13
14
19

F
15.12
23.97
20.54
8.67

tended to have lower error than the mixed data chains. The
difference in performance of chains across conditions was
significant. Table 1 (top) gives the results of comparing the
average RMSE for each chain across conditions, showing
highly significant differences between conditions.

p
6.4e-5
0.0003
Discussion
0.0005
0.0083 We have used the iterated learning framework to define several simple models of cultural evolution, casting the beliefs
of each generation as a random variable in a Markov chain.
Table 2: Results of ANOVA with the RMSE values of indiThis makes it possible to analyze the convergence properties
vidual participants across conditions in each generation
of these Markov chains, making predictions about the condiGeneration F
p
Generation F
p
tions under which cumulative cultural evolution will emerge.
1
1.11 0.3480 5
7.19 0.0038
Our experimental results are consistent with these predic1.03 0.3747 6
6.24 0.0068
2
tions: Cumulative cultural evolution does not occur when
3
4.44 0.0235 7
3.82 0.0368
learners simply observe the behavior of a previous learner,
4
9.06 0.0013 8
4.13 0.0293
but does occur when learners communicate their beliefs about
Note: In all cases df1 = 2, df2 = 23.
the state of the world.
The ability to keep the inferential contributions of previchains proceed quickly to an RMSE of around 0.5. Given
ous generations is, we claim, what allows the cultural ratchet
that responses were limited to [0, 1], this shows the total deto work. Whether in making tools or inferring properties of
coupling of the chain from the true function, as expected. We
the world around us, retaining actual ideas and hypotheses
note that the mixed data and posterior passing chains had a
over time prevents cultural evolution from backsliding. In the
highly varied mix of values, where the error changes dramatposterior passing case, we observed that a sequence of parically over the generations. However, it is also clear that the
ticipants is able to make successively better inferences over
only chains which get at all close to the true function (for inseveral generations. This is in stark contrast to the mixed data
stance, RMSE < 0.2) are posterior passing chains. Table 2
case, where the last participant looks just as confused as the
gives the results of comparing the RMSE across conditions at
first. The inferential steps taken by each generation actually
each generation via a one-way ANOVA, showing that this difdegrade any progress made by the previous generation.
ference is statistically significant after just three generations.
This work introduces several questions to be answered by
The separation between the conditions becomes clearer if
future investigation. A skeptical reader might ask, for instance, what the progress of mixed data chains looks like
we track the cumulative average of the RMSE for each chain.
Figure 3(c) shows these cumulative averages for each chain as
when the amount of data from the world and data from the
a function of generation, and Figure 3(d) averages these valprevious participant changes. Could it merely be that receivues for each condition. Posterior passing chains as a group
ing the posterior beliefs of the preceding generation functions

2093

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

2

4
6
Generation

0

8

(c)

0

2

4
6
Generation

8

(d)
0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4
RMSE

RMSE

The key result of our mathematical and empirical analyses
is that communication of theories about the world, and not
just observational learning, is important in order for the inferences of each generation to be maintained. In the broadest
possible scope, our findings tell us that cumulative cultural
evolution requires communication, not merely observation.
Considering the cognitive capacities that would support this
kind of communication may provide a means of understanding what makes humans unique in being able to exploit the
cultural ratchet.
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by grant number BCS-0704034 from the National Science Foundation.

(b)

RMSE

RMSE

(a)

0.3
0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

2

4
6
Generation

8

References

0.3

0

0

2

4
6
Generation

8

Figure 3: Root mean squared error (RMSE) to the true function at each generation of iterated learning. In all plots, the
pure iterated learning condition is given in red, the mixed
case is given in blue, and the posterior-passing case is given in
green. (a) RMSE for each chain. (b) Average RMSE for each
condition. (c) Cumulative average RMSE for each chain. (d)
Average cumulative RMSE for each condition.
just like receiving more data? Our model indicates that no
amount of observational data is sufficient to produce a ratchet
effect.
Two other related extensions involve agents that reason
about the inferences of other agents. First, what if in the
mixed data case, datapoints were labeled with their source?
If each learner knows which datapoints are predictions from a
previous agent, it is conceivable that learners would use these
to recover an estimate of the teacher’s posterior beliefs. Secondly, what behavior would we see if in the mixed data case
both teachers and learners were both aware that predictions
would be passed between generations (as in Shafto & Goodman, 2008)? We might expect teachers to tailor their predictions to help the learners, implementing the kind of communication that might convey information about plausible hypotheses from one generation to the next.
Other approaches to simulating cultural evolution in the
lab may also be useful, particularly for exploring the
teacher/learner interaction. For instance, Caldwell and Millen
(2008) introduced a method for exploring cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory using a problem solving task
(building better paper airplanes, and taller spaghetti/clay towers). Cultural evolution was simulated by replacing participants one by one, allowing them to directly interact with
the previous generation. This establishes a richer setting to
model, and the opportunity to observe interactions to determine the kind of information being transmitted.

Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1993). Rationality, imitation,
and tradition. In R. H. Day & P. Chen (Eds.), Nonlinear
dynamics and evolutionary economics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Busemeyer, J. R., Byun, E., DeLosh, E. L., & McDaniel,
M. A. (1997). Learning functional relations based on
experience with input-output pairs by humans and artificial neural networks. In K. Lamberts & D. Shanks (Eds.),
Concepts and categories (p. 405-437). Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Caldwell, C. A., & Millen, A. E. (2008). Experimental models for testing hypotheses about cumulative cultural evolution. Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 165-171.
Cover, T., & Thomas, J. (1991). Elements of information
theory. New York: Wiley.
Doucet, A., Freitas, N. de, & Gordon, N. (2001). Sequential
Monte Carlo methods in practice. New York: Springer.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2006). The social construction of
the cultural mind : Imitative learning as a a mechanism
of human pedagogy. Interaction Studies, 6, 43-48.
Griffiths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2007). A Bayesian view of
language evolution by iterated learning. Cognitive Science, 31, 441-480.
Kalish, M. L., Griffiths, T. L., & Lewandowsky, S. (2007).
Iterated learning: Intergenerational knowledge transmission reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 14, 288-294.
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic structure: An iterated learning model of the emergence of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Journal of Evolutionary
Computation, 5, 102-110.
Robert, C. P. (1994). The Bayesian choice: A decisiontheoretic motivation. New York: Springer.
Shafto, P., & Goodman, N. D. (2008). Teaching games : statistical sampling assumptions for learning in pedagogical
situations. Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A., & Ratner, H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495-552.

2094

