UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Japanese sound symbolism facilitates verb learning in English speaking children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00j6764t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Imai, Mutsumi
Kantartzis, Katerina
Kita, Sotaro

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Japanese sound symbolism facilitates word learning in English speaking children
Katerina Kantartzis (kfk495@bham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT UK

Sotaro Kita (s.kita@bham.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT UK

Mutsumi Imai (imai@sfc.keio.ac.jp)
Department of Environmental Information, Keio University, Shonan-Fujisawa

Abstract
Sound symbolism is the non-arbitrary link between the
sound of a word and its meaning. Imai et al. (2008) showed
that Japanese speaking children benefited from the presence
of sound symbolism when learning novel verbs. However,
Japanese is a language rich in sound symbolic elements, but
English on the other hand is not. The present study
investigated whether English-speaking three-year olds can
benefit from a cross-linguistically recognisable sound
symbolic link between a novel word and its referent in word
learning. The children were taught a novel verb and asked to
generalise this to a new situation. It was found that Englishspeaking 3-year-olds peformed better when the taught verb
and the target action matched sound symbolically. This
suggests that sound symbolism can facilitate word learning
regardless of the language the children are learning.
Keywords: language acquisition; sound symbolism; verb;
semantics; motion.

Introduction
Learning words presents a challenge to children
because it is not trivial to map the phonological form of a
word to its meaning (Quine, 1960). For instance, the parent
may point to a rabbit and says to a child, "Look, a rabbit!",
from the viewpoint of the child who hears the word "rabbit"
for the first time, the word could be referring indeed to a
rabbit or alternatively to attributes of the rabbit (e.g.,
colour), to parts of the rabbit (e.g., the ears), to the action
the rabbit is performing, and etc. There are various
proposals in the literature as to how children narrow down
possible meanings of a novel word. For example, children
may assume that a word tends to refer to the whole object
(e.g., a rabbit) or the whole action (e.g., hopping) rather than
its respective parts (e.g., the ear, leg extension in hopping)
(e.g., Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Clark, 1993). In the case
of a verb, children may use the syntactic frame in which it is
embedded (e.g., transitive vs. intransitive) to infer its
meaning (e.g., Naigles & Kako, 1993). This study
investigated another word learning mechanism based on
intrinsic sound-meaning links, known as sound symbolism.
This mechanism can complement other mechanisms
because sound symbolism may help children to find the
relevant aspect of reality in a fine-grained way. Sound
symbolism, for example, can differentiate subtly different

manners of locomotion (Hamano,1998; Matsumoto, 1997).
Due to the intrinsic sound-meaning link, sound symbolism
allows children to focus on the particular manner of
locomotion the novel verb is referring to. An example of
this is, if the parent is teaching the child the verb “hopping”
while pointing to a rabbit which is hopping very fast. In this
situation the novel verb “hopping” could be referring a
number of things: for example the fast movement or the
movement by a rabbit or the manner of movement (which
would be the correct interpretation). However, if the word
“hopping” sound symbolically matches the referent, namely
hopping manner of movement, then the child is able to
focus on the relevant part of the world the adult is referring
to, and therefore potentially learn the verb more
successfully. Other proposed bootstrapping mechanisms for
word learning in the literature cannot help in making such
fine differentiations among words belonging to the same
syntactic class
It has been shown that sound symbolism can help
Japanese speaking children to map a novel verb to its
referent action (Imai, Kita, Nagumo, & Okada, 2008).
Japanese speaking three-year-olds were taught a novel verb
with a video clip of a person walking in a particular manner.
Consistent with preceding research (Imai, Haryu, Okada,
2005; McGuire, 2002), three-year-olds failed to generalize
the verb to a new instance of the same action performed by
a different actor when the novel word did not have a sound
symbolic relation to the referent. However, they succeed in
the task when the novel word had a sound symbolic relation
to the referent. This finding lead the authors to propose the
"sound symbolism bootstrapping hypothesis", which states
that sound symbolism can help children single out the
referent of a novel word in the complex reality.
However, Imai et al.’s results leave an important
question unanswered. Japanese is a language with a very
rich inventory of sound symbolic words (Hamano, 1998;
Kita, 1997, 2001) along with many other non-IndoEuropean languages (see Hinton, Nichols & Ohala, 1994;
Voeltz & Killian-Hatz, 2001). For example, a midsize
dictionary of Japanese sound-symbolic words (Atoda &
Hoshino , 1995) lists more than 1700 entries. However,
Indo-European languages, including English, do not have a

626

large inventory of sound symbolic words (Newmeyer,
1992). Japanese children thus may have an advantage in
that they have much experience with sound symbolism, as
they are learning a language with a large inventory of sound
symbolic words that are frequently used by adults and by
three-year-olds (e.g., Allen et al. 2007). For children to take
advantage of sound symbolism in word learning, is
extensive general experience with sound symbolic words
necessary? Alternatively, is sound symbolism beneficial for
all children regardless of whether their language has rich
sound symbolic lexicon? Does sound symbolism in novel
words scaffold English children as well? If this is the case,
we have strong evidence that sound symbolism functions as
a universal constraint for word learning.
The present study was conducted to address this
question by investigating whether English-speaking threeyear olds perform better in a word learning task when novel
verbs have a cross-linguistically recognisable sound
symbolic link to the referent action. Cross-linguistically
recognisable sound symbolism is well-documented, even for
English speakers. Kohler (1929) found that the novel word
"baluma" was considered to be an appropriate label for a
round object, and the word "takete" for a pointed object.
This type of sound symbolism was recognized both by
English speaking children (Davis, 1961; Maurer, Pathman,
& Mondloch, 2006) and by Kitongwe speaking children
who lived in an isolated part of Tanzania (Davis, 1961).
Similarly, adult English speakers with no knowledge of
Japanese could correctly guess some aspects of the meaning
of Japanese sound symbolic words (Imai, Kita, Nagumo, &
Okada, 2008; Iwasaki, et al., 2008). Thus, it is possible that
sound symbolism inherent in Japanese sound symbolic
words that is recognisable by English adult speakers may
facilitate word learning in English speaking children. In
contrast, if rich experience with sound symbolic words
would be necessary to take advantage of sound symbolism
in novel verb learning, the sound symbolism bootstrapping
effect found in Japanese children would not be found in
English-speaking children.

Current Study
English-speaking children were taught a novel word and
then asked to generalize it to a new situation with the same
action but a different actor. There were three conditions: the
sound symbolic match condition, in which the novel verbs
were sound symbolically related to the referent action, and
two control conditions in which the novel verbs were not
sound symbolically related to the referent action (see
below). We used sound symbolic words that were created
on the basis of Japanese sound symbolic words and were
cross linguistically recognisable (see below for verification).
If all children, regardless of the language they are learning,
have the capacity to use sound symbolism to scaffold word
learning, then English-speaking three-year-olds should
perform better in the sound symbolic match condition than
in the two control conditions.

Method
Participants and Design
Forty-five monolingual English-speaking 3-year-olds
(M=41.57 months, range 36-48 months, 20 boys, 25 girls)
were recruited from nurseries around Birmingham, UK,
with a prior parental consent. The participants were
randomly assigned to one of the following three conditions,
all of which followed the same structure of a training phase
followed by a test phase.
Sound symbolic match condition. Fifteen children in this
condition (Mean age= 41.73, range=33-48 M, 9 girls), were
presented with a novel verb and a training video showing an
actor carrying out the target action (training phase). The
verb sound-symbolically matched the target action. Then,
they were presented with two videos simultaneously, one in
which the action was the same as the training video but the
actor was different (target video), the other in which the
actor was the same but the action was different (distractor
video), and asked in which video the actor was carrying out
the action referred to by the newly taught verb (test phase).
The newly taught verb did not sound symbolically match
the action in the distractor video (see the Stimuli section for
verification). The action used in the target or distractor
video did not re-appear as the action in the target or
distractor video for another word.
Neutral baseline condition. Fifteen children (Mean age =
42.47M, range 35-48, 8 girls) were tested in this condition.
This condition provided a baseline for 3-year-olds’
performance in this verb generalization task when the newly
taught verb did not sound symbolically match the target
action or the action in the distractor video. The verbs were
presented in a form which resembled typical English verbs.
The training videos, the target videos and the distractor
videos were all identical to those in the sound symbolic
match condition.
Sound symbolic mismatch condition. Fifteen children
(mean age = 40.53M, range 33-47M, 8 girls) were taught
the same set of words as in the sound symbolic match
condition. However, the newly taught verb did not sound
symbolically match the target action. Instead, the newly
taught verb sound symbolically matched the action in the
distractor video. That is, the pairs of videos used in the test
phase were identical to those in the sound symbolic match
condition, but what counted as the target in the sound
symbolic match condition now became the distractor and
vice versa, for this condition. Accordingly, the training
videos differed from those in the sound symbolic match
condition because the target actions were different. This
condition would allow us to eliminate alternative
explanations for the predicted finding that children would

627

perform better in the sound symbolic match condition than
in the neutral baseline condition.

Stimuli
The material used for the experiment consisted of wordaction combinations. The actions in the word-action
combinations were various manners of walking. Eight
novel words were prepared to be associated with the four
target actions. Four of them were altered versions of
Japanese mimetics (batobato, nosunosu, chokachoka and
tokutoku) used in the sound symbolic match and mismatch
conditions. The other four were non-words that have the
structure of typical monosyllabic English verbs (bretting,
blegging, blicking and truffing).
The four novel sound symbolic words were paired
with sound symbolically matching actions: batobato = a
large energetic movement, arms are swinging back and
forward outstretched, while legs are making large leaping
movement, chokachoka = walking quickly in very small
steps with the arms with bent elbows swinging quickly;
nosunosu (see below) = walking slowly in large steps with
bent knees and the hands on knees (see the upper pane of
Figure 1); tokutoku = a small shuffling movement, with
straight arms rigidly at the side and legs moving very
slightly and rigidly. The four words were also paired with
an action that does not sound symbolically match the words,
which was used in the distractor video in the sound
symbolic match condition (see the lower pane of Figure 1
for an example).

Target

speaking adults. Each novel word and video were
presented in pairs and the participants were asked to rate
how well they thought each word-action combination
matched on a scale from 1 (did not match) to 7 (matches
very well). The mean rating was significantly higher for
the target videos than for the distractor videos for English
speakers (targets, M = 4.4, SD = 1.02; distractors, M =
3.50, SD = 1.04), t(20) = -3.8, p < .001, d = 7.67 and
Japanese speakers (targets, M = 5.71, SD = .66; distractors,
M = 2.06, SD = .78). t(14) = -14.7, p < .001, d = 10.79.
For the neutral baseline condition, four novel,
English-sounding verbs were prepared. The degree of the
sound-action match was also tested by 20 English speaking
adults. Again words and actions were presented in pairs,
one at a time. The results ensured that the novel verbs did,
indeed, not match any of the actions in the target or
distractor videos: The degree of match was judged to be
poor for both the target videos and the distractor videos
(targets, M=3.81, SD=.57, distractors, M= 3.63, SD=.79)
t(19)=-1.0, and there was no difference between the two.

Procedure
Each child was tested individually in a quiet room of the
nursery. Two warm-up trials took place first, using familiar
nouns to establish the procedure, of indicating the referent
of a word by pointing. Then, a practice trial with a familiar
verb preceded the main experiment to ensure that the
children understood the training-test procedure. The practice
trials followed the same procedure as the experiment proper.
During the training phase in the sound symbolic match
condition and the sound symbolic mismatch condition,
children saw an action video on a laptop computer, and
heard a target verb embedded in the sentence “Look! He is
doing X” ("doing X" represents the novel sound symbolic
verb). In the test phase, the experimenter asked them to
indicate their response by pointing to one of the two action
videos on the screen, saying “which one is doing X?" The
procedure for the neutral baseline condition was identical to
the other two conditions, except that the novel verb was
introduced without the light verb “do” (i.e., “He is Xing”).

Results and Discussion
Distractor
Figure 1. An example of a target video and distractor
videos used in the test phase of the sound symbolic match
condition for the novel word “nosu-nosu”.
A pre-test was conducted to check if these verbs
have the assumed sound symbolic relationships with the
actions in the four target videos and four distractor videos
in the three conditions described above. The novel sound
symbolic words (as an audio recording) were presented
along with the eight videos to 21 English speaking adults
(without any knowledge of Japanese) and 15 Japanese

When a child correctly extended the novel verb on
the basis of the same action, the response was coded as
correct. For each child, the proportion of correct responses
out of the four trials was calculated and served as the
dependent variable.
As we expected, the children
performed differently across the three groups, F(2, 42)=
.388 p<.05, η2= .161 (See Figure 2). More importantly,
children more successfully extended novel verbs to new
situations based on the identity of the action when the word
sound symbolically matched the action than when the word
did not sound symbolically match the action, as the children
in the sound symbolic match condition performed better

628

than those in the sound symbolic mismatch condition or in
the neutral baseline condition (Fisher’s LSD, both p’s <.05).
0.9

mean proportion

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Sound symbolic
match

Sound symbolic
mismatch

Baseline neutral

Figure 2. Mean proportion of correct responses given in
the sound symbolic match, sound symbolic mismatch and
neutral baseline neutral conditions in the verb generalisation
task. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean
for each condition.
Consistent with the previous findings (Imai, Haryu,
& Okada, 2005; Imai et al. 2008; Maguire et al. 2002), the
children in the two control conditions failed to generalize
novel verbs to the same action in the two control conditions,
t(14)=-1.87 (the sound symbolic mismatch condition), and
t(14)=-.49 (the neutral baseline condition). In sharp contrast,
the children in the sound symbolic match condition
successfully generalized the novel verb, t(14)=2.57, p<.05.
d=.663.
The performance in the sound symbolic mismatch
condition ruled out two possible alternative interpretations.
Firstly, one might suggest that children in the sound
symbolic match condition were merely detecting sound
symbolism at the test phase. In other words, the results may
not have reflected the success of verb generalization but
reflected success in detecting sound symbolism between the
word and the action at test. However, the fact that the
children in the sound symbolic mismatch condition did not
select the sound symbolically matching distractor suggests
that this alternative is unlikely. Secondly, one might also
question whether the sentence structure ("doing X") or the
reduplication of the sound symbolic verbs caused good
performance in the sound symbolic match condition. These
possibilities can also be ruled out, because the children were
presented with the same set of novel sound symbolic verbs
in both sound symbolic match and mismatch conditions, but
only the latter group performed at chance and the difference
between the two groups was significant.

General discussion
The present research demonstrated that Englishspeaking children performed better in a verb generalisation
task when the novel verb sound-symbolically matched the
referent action than when it did not. The sound symbolism

in the stimuli was derived from Japanese sound symbolic
words, and the pretest of the stimuli showed that adult
native speakers of Japanese and English recognized the
sound symbolism. As the English adults did not have any
knowledge of Japanese, the sound symbolism in the
stimulus is potentially universal. We found that this crosslinguistically recognisable (potentially universal) sound
symbolism helped the English-speaking children to focus on
the relevant part of the world as the intended referent of a
novel word, and therefore fostered novel verb learning. In
other words, the sound symbolism can help constrain the
meaning of the word which can be highly ambiguous in the
environment (Quine, 1960) even for children who are
learning a language which is not rich in a sound symbolic
lexicon.
It has been known that children can detect
universally recognisable sound-symbolic links between
word form and meaning (Davis, 1961; Maurer, et al., 2006),
but this study shows that they can utilize sound symbolism
in word learning. “Sound symbolic bootstrapping” may be a
mechanism that children can use when learning new words,
in addition to other strategies discussed in the literature such
as the whole-object bias (e.g., Markman & Wachtel, 1988;
Clark, 1993) and syntactic bootstrapping (Naigles & Kako
1990). By incorporating the meaning in the sound of the
word, the relevant part of the world which the novel sound
symbolic word refers to is made obvious to the child.
Sound symbolic bootstrapping has an advantage of
over other word learning constraints proposed in the
literature. Sound symbolism can differentiate events and
states in a very fine grained way. For example, Japanese
sound symbolic words differentiate types of motion such as
“chokochoko” (walking in a short, rapid movement),
“noshinoshi” (walking heavily), “pyonpyon” (hopping
repeatedly) and “gorogoro” (a heavy object rolling
repeatedly). Thus, sound symbolic bootstrapping may be
able to facilitate fine-grained distinctions of events and
states that other word learning constraints cannot.
The finding of the present study, along with the
analogous finding for the Japanese children (Imai et al.,
2008), suggests that sound symbolism can serve as a
language-universal constraint for young children in word
learning. The universality of this phenomenon would point
to the possibility that children are innately disposed to
develop an ability to detect universal sound symbolism and
use it for word learning. The fact that a large number of
geographically dispersed and historically unrelated
languages having a large number of sound symbolic words
(Hinton, Nichols & Ohala, 1994; Voeltz & Killian-Hatz,
2001) and some aspects of sound symbolism are
crosslinguistically recognisable (Davis 1961; Imai, Kita,
Nagumo, & Okada, 2008; Iwasaki, et al., 2008; Maurer,
Pathman, & Mondloch, 2006) also provide further support
for the biological basis for sound symbolism, which might,
in turn, shed light on the evolution of language.
Some researchers have suggested that sound
symbolic words played an important role in the evolution of

629

human language (Kita, 2008; Ramachandran & Hubbard,
2001). The very idea of a word as an association between a
speech sound and a referent might have evolved on the basis
of the ability to directly link representations in auditory and
other sensory modalities and motor processes among each
other (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). For example,
small objects are associated with a high closed vowel /i/ and
large objects are associated with a low open vowel /a/ (e.g.,
Sapir, 1929). This may be because we consider the size of
objects to be analogous to the size of the oral cavity or the
“size” of acoustic image for different vowels (Sapir, 1929)
and because we draw analogy between the size of the oral
cavity and the aperture of a grasping hand (Ramachandran
& Hubbard, 2001). The ability to recognize such analogies
between representations in different modalities might lead
to sound symbolism and the emergence of the first word in
evolution. Once our ancestors evolved the innate disposition
to develop universal sound symbolic intuitions and their use
in word learning, they could rapidly agree on what words
refer to what. This would have facilitated the growth of a
shared lexicon (Ramachandran & Hubbard, 2001). Given
that sound symbolic words in modern languages can refer to
information in various domains such as vision, touch, smell,
taste, manners of movement, emotion and attitude (e.g.,
Kita, 1997; Voeltz & Killian-Hatz, 2001), sound symbolic
proto words of our ancestors may have had a considerable
expressive power (Kita, 2008). This in turn would have
given a considerable adaptive advantage to our ancestors.
Universal sound symbolism in modern languages may be
“fossils” reflecting this evolutionary process.
We suggest that all humans have the innate
disposition to develop sound symbolic abilities and use
them for word learning and that the emergence of this
disposition was a crucial step in language evolution. It is
possible that the present study tapped into the vestige of this
evolutionary process still present in all children.

References
Atoda, T. & Hoshino, K. (1995). Giongo gitaigo tsukaikata
jiten [Usage dictionary of sound/manner mimetics].
Sotakusha.
Allen, S., Ozyurek, A., Kita, S.S Brown, A., Furman, R.,
Ishizuka, T., & Fujii, M. (2007). How language specific is
early syntactic packaging of Manner and Path? A
comparison or English, Turkish, and Japanese. Cognition,
102, 16-48.
Childs, G. T. (1996). Where have all the ideophones gone?:
The death of a word category in Zulu. Toronto Working
paper in Linguistics, 15(2), 81-104.
Davis, R. (1961). The fitness of names to drawings. British
Journal of Psychology, 52, 259-268.
Dediu, D., & Ladd, D. R. (2007). Linguistic tone is related
to the population frequency of the adaptive haplogroups
of two brain size genes, ASPM and Microcephalin.

Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, 104,
10944-10949
Hamano, S. (1998). The sound symbolic system of Japanese.
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications & Tokyo: Kuroshio.
Hinton, L., Nichols, J., & Ohala, J. J. (Eds.). (1994). Sound
symbolism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Imai, m., Haryu, E., & Okada, H. (2005). Mapping novel
nouns and verbs on to dynamic action events: Are verb
meanings easier to learn than noun meanings for Japanese
children? Child Development, 76, 340-355.
Imai, M. Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008).
Sounds Symbolism between a word and an action
facilitates early verb learning. Cognition, 109, 54-65
Kita, S. (2001). Semantic schism and interpretive
integration in Japanese sentences with a mimetic: A reply
to Tsujimura. Linguistics, 39, 419-439.
Kita, S. (2008). World-view of protolanguage speakers as
inferred from semantics of sound symbolic words: A case
of Japanese mimetics. In N. Masataka (Ed.), Origins of
language. Tokyo: Springer.
Kita, S. (1997). Two-dimensional semantic analysis of
Japanese mimetics. Linguistics, 35, 379-415.
Kohler, W. (1947). Gestalt Psychology. (2nd ed.) NY:
Liverlight.
Maguire, M., Hennon, E., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R.,
Slutzky, C. & Sootsman, J. (2002). Mapping words to
actions and events: How do 18-month-olds learn a verb?
In B. Skarabela, S. Fish, & A. H. Do (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 27th Annual Boston University Conference on
Language. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Markman, E. M. & Watchtel, G.F. (1988). Childrens use of
mutual exclusivity to constrain the meaning of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121-157.
Matsimoto, Yo (1997). Kuukan idoo no gengohyoogen to
sono kakuchoo [Linguistic expressions of motion in
space, and their extensions]. In Shigenoti Tanaka & Yo
Matsumoto, Kuukan to idoo no hyoogen [Expressions of
space and motion]. Tokyo: Kenkyuusha.
Maurer, D., Pathman, T., 7 Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: Sound-shape correspondences in
toddlers and adults. Developmental Science, 9, 316-322.
Naigles, L. G. & Kako, E. T. (1993). First contact in verb
acquisition: Defining a role for syntax. Society for
Research in Child Development, 64, 1665-1687.
Newmeyer, F. J. (1992). Iconicity and generative grammar.
Language, 68, 756-796.
Nuckolls, J. (2004). To be or not to be ideophonically
impoverished. Texas Linguistics Forum, 47, 131-142.
Quine, W.V.O.(1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M. (2001).
Synaesthesia- a window into perception, thought, and
language. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 3-34.
Sapir, E. (1929) A study of phonetic symbolism. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 12, 225-239.
Voeltz, F. K. E., & Kilian-Hatz, C. (Eds.). (2001).
Ideophones. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

630

