UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Joint or Conditional Probability in Statistical Word Learning: Why decide?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7247s0pd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Klein, Krystal
Yu, Chen

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Joint or Conditional Probability in Statistical Word Learning: Why decide?
Krystal Klein (krklein@indiana.edu) and Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E. 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

Abstract
Three experiments investigated the ability of human learners
to concurrently extract and track both joint and conditional
probabilities in statistical word learning. In each experiment,
participants were briefly trained on novel word– novel object
pairs and asked to learn correct mappings by the end of
training. Across a series of learning conditions, we
systematically manipulated conditional and joint probabilities
individually and in combination to determine whether learners
are able to encode multiple statistics in various learning
contexts. Our results suggest that participants acquired both
joint and conditional probabilities of word-referent cooccurrences. Based on the results from these experiments, we
propose that learners are capable of utilizing the most reliable
statistics that they acquired in training to make correct
judgments in various testing tasks. These results suggest that
statistical word learning is not only powerful but also
adaptive.
Keywords: Language acquisition; word learning

Introduction
A recent trend in cognitive development is to study how
human learners rely on statistical information to gradually
reduce the uncertainty in the learning environment and
ultimately acquire correct linguistic knowledge. The first
study of this sort by Saffran, Aslin, Newport (1997) showed
that 8-month-old infants can segment continuous speech
into words based on statistical information alone.
Subsequently, evidence has been mounting that both infant
and adult learners can rely on sequential statistics to extract
meaningful units from continuous sequences of stimuli in a
variety of different sensory modalities (e.g., visual object
sequence, action sequences, and tactile sequences) (Conway
& Christiansen, 2005; Kirkham, Slemmer, & Johnson,
2002; Newport & Aslin, 2004; Saffran et al., 1999).
More recently, Yu & Smith (2007) and Smith & Yu
(2008) have extended this line of research to word learning
by integrating this idea with a well-established proposal –
cross-situational learning (e.g. Gleitman, 1990; Siskind,
1996). By doing so, they proposed a new paradigm – crosssituational statistical learning. The basic idea is that a
learner who is exposed to multiple words and multiple
referents in a single learning experience need not solve the
word-referent mapping problem in this moment; if the
learner can instead accumulate co-occurrence statistics of
words and referents across multiple temporally distinct
learning situations, he or she can ultimately figure out the
correct pairings from cross-situational statistics.
For example, in one condition reported by Yu and Smith
(2007), participants were asked to learn 18 word-referent
mappings over a series of learning trials. In each trial,
learners viewed four pictures of objects and heard four
names in an arbitrary order. Given 16 possible wordreferent associations, learners could not have inferred
correct pairings from individual trials. However, after being

exposed to 27 individually ambiguous trials like this,
participants in Yu & Smith (2007) acquired more than 9 out
of 18 words. Further, a statistical associative model was
developed to explain the underlying learning mechanism
that supports cross-situational statistical learning. A set of
simulation studies shows that this general associative
account can serve as a fundamental framework to
incorporate other cues/constraints, such as social cues (Yu
& Ballard, 2007), syntactic cues (Yu, 2006), and prior
knowledge (Klein, Yu, & Shiffrin, 2009), making statistical
learning more efficient and more effective.
Although those recent empirical and computational
studies have advanced our understanding of statistical
learning in general and cross-situational word learning in
particular, important questions regarding the mechanistic
nature of cross-situational learning remain unanswered. For
instance, what word-referent association information do
learners track and compute across multiple learning
situations? Do learners represent these statistics in terms of
joint probabilities of co-occurring events or conditional
probabilities? Do they retrieve statistical information they
have accumulated in a probabilistic way or a deterministic
way? In particular, if they have represented and
accumulated statistical information in more than one form,
which do they rely on in different contexts of knowledge
retrieval?
There are two general probabilistic representations of cooccurring statistics in the context of statistical word
learning: 1) joint probability of co-occurrence of words and
objects p(w,o); 2) conditional probabilities of words given
an object p(w|o) or conditional probabilities of objects given
a word p(o|w). These two representations are not mutually
exclusive, but rather, complementary: they reflect different
aspects of co-occurring statistics. Joint probabilities
represent overall frequencies of two co-occurring events;
and conditional probabilities measure the frequency of one
event (e.g. a word) given the presence of the other event
(e.g. an object), which has predictive power when encoding
sequential statistics. Moreover, one can convert between
these two representations given knowledge of the statistical
base rate of a single event p(w) or p(o):
| = ,
= ,
;
, =
|
= ( | ) ( )
The role of joint and conditional probabilities has been
studied in both statistical speech segmentation (Saffran,
Aslin & Newport, 1997) and visual statistical learning (Fiser
& Aslin, 2001). For example, Fiser and Aslin demonstrated
that learners rely on conditional probabilities of cooccurrences in learning statistical structures of visual
scenes. In their study, they controlled the frequency (joint
probability) of two sets of visual shape pairs and varied the
1

3105

conditional probabilities to distinguish these two groups.
They found that learners are sensitive to conditional
probabilities when joint probabilities have been equated.
The present study has three aims. First, we seek to extend
previous studies on joint and conditional probabilities to
statistical word learning. Learning co-occurrence statistics
between words and referents differs from statistical
sequential learning; it is thus unclear whether the results
from previous studies will generalize to word learning.
Second, having observed that most previous studies have
focused on conditional probabilities (for example, Fiser and
Aslin’s 2001 study showed that given the same frequency,
learners were sensitive to conditional probabilities), we aim
to provide a more complete picture of the role of joint and
conditional probabilities – individually or in combination –
in statistical word learning. Thus, in addition to equating
frequency and varying conditional probability, we equate
conditional probabilities while varying joint probabilities,
and even attempt to vary both such that conditional
probabilities and joint probabilities may potentially compete
with each other. Third, we will probe participants’ statistical
knowledge in different ways, to determine whether learners
retrieve their acquired statistical knowledge differently
according to retrieval situation.

Experiment 1
The aim of Experiment 1 was to determine whether the
result obtained by Fiser and Aslin (2001) in their withinmodality visual statistical learning paradigm would extend
to the cross-modality mapping task inherent in crosssituational statistical word learning paradigms. We
accomplished this by creating a single-factor experiment
wherein a set of to-be-learned words was divided into two
groups: each word in the first group occurred almost twice
as often as each word in the second group, but some of these
occurrences were paired with one referent, and other
occurrences were paired with another referent. Each word in
the second group always appeared with its correct referent;
thus, the joint frequencies were equated across two groups,
while conditional probabilities differed dramatically
between the two conditions. Because we wanted to be sure
of what co-occurrences were being stored by participants,
we modified the standard cross-situational paradigm
(wherein multiple words and multiple referents occur on a
trial) to include only one word and one referent on each trial
(see Vouloumanos, 2007).

object. In an attempt to disguise the design of the study from
participants, each word also occurred one time with another
random TBT object. A “correct” answer for a word at test
was operationally defined as the object from the set of 12
TBT objects that most often occurred with that test word.
Thus, during training, the conditional probability that an
object from the high-conditional probability condition that
appeared on a given training trial was accompanied by its
correct sound was .857; similarly, conditional probability
was .461 in the low-conditional probability condition.
Stimuli Word stimuli were 12 computer-generated
pseudowords pronounced by a computerized voice.
Referents were 18 169 x 169 pixel color images of
uncommon objects. These images were also resized to 100 x
100 px for use in test, in order to comfortably fit all test
items on the computer screen.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of a training phase,
followed immediately by a test phase. In the training phase,
a series of trials were displayed to participants, during each
of which one object appeared in the center of the screen, and
one word was presented auditorily. Each object appeared for
3 seconds. Participants made no responses during the
training phase; they were instructed that they would be
trying to learn a set of word-to-object correspondences over
a series of trials. The order of the 66 training trials was
randomized for each participant.
The test phase commenced immediately following
training. There were 12 test trials, during each of which one
of the trained words was presented auditorily and the twelve
TBT objects appeared on the computer screen. Participants
were instructed to select the object that corresponded to the
test word using a computer mouse (chance = 0.08). A
response was required to advance to the next trial. Each
word was only tested one time, and the order of test items
was randomized across participants.

Results
Percent of correct responses was tabulated for each subject
in each condition, and then a within-subjects t-test was
computed. Mean performance was .462 (SD=.265) for
words with high conditional probability and .432 (SD=.232)
for words with low conditional probability. The difference
between these means was not significant, t(73) = .907, p >
.05, 2-tailed.

Method

Discussion

Participants 74 Indiana University undergraduate students
participated in this study for course credit.

Although words in the low-conditional probability condition
occurred as many times with a second, untested object as
they did with their correct object, the degree of learning (as
measured by percent correct) demonstrated by participants
was not significantly less than in the high-conditional
probability condition. The results of this experiment are
inconsistent with the hypothesis that people are more likely
to form a mapping between a picture and a sound when

Design A single factor design was employed. Conditional
probability of images given words was manipulated within
subjects, such that half of the experimental words occurred
three times with a single referent image (object heretoforth),
and half of the words occurred three times with each of two
objects, only one of which was a To-Be-Tested (TBT)

2

3106

conditional probability of a referent is high than when it is
low, controlling for number of joint exposures.
That participants did not perform better in the high
conditional probability condition than the low conditional
probability condition is especially surprising due to the
presence of an equally strong (i.e. frequent) competitor
object to the TBT object during training. If some learners
had been using a mutual exclusivity assumption, for
example, it would have been just as probable that they
would have learned the untested object as the correct
referent for the word as opposed to the TBT object. The fact
that no difference emerged begs the hypothesis that
participants do not “decide” upon a correct pairing until they
are faced with a situation in which they have to decide.

other item more than one time. Thus, there were no strong
Cond

p (w | o)

fr (w)

LL

3

0.50

6

LH

3

1.0

3

HL

6

0.50

12

HH

6

1.0

6

M (SD)
0.2444
(.216)
0.4278
(.280)
0.4556
(.234)
0.4222
(.281)

competitors in terms of joint probability.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1,
except that there were 120 training trials and 16 test trials.

Experiment 2

Results

A second experiment was developed with two aims. First,
we aimed to expand the question into a complete cross of
joint frequency and conditional probability factors, so that it
could be determined whether a main effect of joint
frequency or an interaction effect between joint frequency
and conditional probability would be evident. Second, we
sought to compare high- and low- conditional probability
conditions in a context where the correct answer had no
strong competitor. Thus, rather than assigning words in the
low conditional probability condition to two equallyfrequently-occurring referents, we included multiple
spurious correlations that only occurred one time each.

Percent correct was tabulated for each participant in each
condition. The results are plotted in Figure 1; means and
standard deviations are displayed in Table 1. Performance in
all conditions was significantly above chance (LL:
t(44)=5.64, p < .05; LH: t(44)=8.75, p < .05; HL:
t(44)=11.26, p < .05; HH: t(44)=9.05, p < .05). A 2x2
repeated measures ANOVA was calculated using SPSS
16.0. The results indicate significant main effects of both
joint frequency [F(1,44) = 9.522, p = .004], conditional
probability [F(1,44) = 5.450, p = .024], as well as a
significant interaction of the two factors [F(1,44) = 14.137,
p < .001].

Method

Discussion

Participants 45 Indiana University undergraduate students
participated in this study for course credit.
Design A 2 (joint frequency) x 2 (conditional probability)
within-subjects design was used. Each participant studied 4
words in each of the four permutations of these factors (LL,
LH, HL, and HH). Three “noise” sounds and three “noise”
pictures were also included during training in order to form
the conditions of interest; however, these words and pictures
were excluded from testing.
The high and low joint probability conditions included 6
correct co-occurrences and 3 correct co-occurrences,
respectively. In the “high” conditional probability
conditions, neither the word nor its correct picture occurred
in the absence of the other; thus, conditional probability was
1.0 in both directions (from word to picture, and from
picture to word). Each word in the “low” conditional
probability condition occurred as many times with other
pictures as it did with its correct referent. Likewise, its
referent occurred as many times with other sounds as it did
with the correct sound. Thus, the conditional probabilities
Table 1: Design summary and results from Experiment 2
were 0.5 in both directions. Both the words and the pictures
in the low conditional probability condition were
constrained such that they were never presented with any

fr (w,o)

Unlike in Experiment 1, higher conditional probability led
to more correct answers in Experiment 2, as indicated by a
significant main effect of conditional probability. A
significant main effect of frequency and an interaction effect
between frequency and probability were also observed.
Although performance in all conditions was above chance,

Figure 1: Experiment 2 results in percent correct as a
function of condition.
performance was dramatically lower in the LL condition
with respect to all the others. This suggests that as long as
either joint frequency or joint probability was strong,
learners could adaptively rely on that cue, learning nearly
3

3107

half of the items in all those conditions within a single
training session. In the absence of a strong cue (i.e., the LL
condition), participants were only able to learn about 1 of 4
items. Conversely, having two strong cues (the HH
condition) did not lead to better performance than in the
other conditions; the observed mean was only the second
highest—indeed, differences between the HL, LH and HH
conditions did not approach significance. The reason for this
cannot be determined from these data, but one may
speculate that ceiling effects of computation came into play.

Experiment 3
The previous experiments compared the effects of joint
frequency and conditional probability through independent
observations, allowing for standard statistical analysis. In
Experiment 3, we were interested in pitting different
combinations of joint probability and conditional probability
levels directly against one another. Thus, we gave each
word two possible referents, and created a number of
conditions in which these two candidate referents had
various combinations of levels on the factors of interest.
Then, we implemented 2-alternative forced choice testing
between the two candidate referents during the testing
phase, so that participants would be forced to select the
referent that they most thought was designated by the word.

Method
Participants 14 Indiana University students and
postdoctoral candidates participated in this study for course
credit or $6 payment.
Design The experimental conditions were formulated from
an incomplete cross of two factors of interest. A condition’s
level on the first factor refers to the co-occurrence frequency
of a word and each of two possible referent pictures. The
three possible levels are low-low frequency (LLF), low-high
frequency (LHF), and high-high frequency (HHF). A
condition’s level on the second factor refers to the
probability of an experimental word conditional upon each
of its possible referents. The three possible levels of this
factor are low-low probability (LLP), high-low probability
(HLP), and high-high probability (HHP). Table 2
summarizes the seven conditions employed in this study.
Cond
HH-HL
LH-HH
LH-HL
LH-LL
LL-HL

fr(w,o1)
6
3
3
3
3

fr(w,o2)
6
6
6
6
3

p(w|o1)
1
1
1
.5
1

p(w|o2)
.5
1
.5
.5
.5

Trials
108
54
90
108
54

Table 2: Design summary for Experiment 3
Stimuli. Word
stimuli
were
computer-generated
pseudowords pronounced by a computerized voice.
Referents were 169 x 169 pixel color images of uncommon
objects.

Each of the seven blocks included six experimental words,
with each word mapping to two distinct images.
Additionally, some blocks contained 3-6 “noise” words,
which occurred on at most one occasion with images in the
block, according to the particular block’s design (see Table
2). In total, there were 51 distinct pseudowords and 60
distinct pictures employed in the experiment; these were
assigned to the blocks randomly within the numerical
constraints inherent to the conditions.
Procedure. Participants experienced five blocked learning
conditions; the order of blocks was randomized across
subjects. Each block consisted of a training phase, followed
immediately by a test phase. In the training phase, a series
of training trials were displayed to participants, during each
of which one image appeared in the center of the screen, and
one name was presented auditorily. Each image appeared
for 3 seconds. Participants made no responses during this
phase; they were instructed that they would be trying to
learn a set of name-referent correspondences over a series of
trials, although sometimes the wrong name for a picture
would be said. The number of trials in a given block
depended on the composition of the corresponding
experimental condition (see Table 2). The training trials
were presented in a random order for each participant.
After each training phase, the 6 experimental words for
the just-occurring block were tested using a two-alternative
forced-choice method. During each trial, one of the
experimental words was presented auditorily, and
subsequently, the two exposed referents appeared on the left
and right of the computer screen. Participants were
instructed to select the referent to which the name
corresponded. A response was required to advance to the
next trial. Every word was tested once, but the order of test
items was randomized across participants.

Results
Figure 2 plots the mean proportion of correct responses in
each condition of Experiment 3, and means and standard
deviations are reported in Table 3. 95% confidence intervals
on the standard error of the mean were calculated in order to
determine whether each condition differed from chance
performance (0.50).
Three of the five conditions were significantly different
from chance. In Condition 1, both referent objects for a
sound had high frequency, but Choice 1 had p(o | w) = 1,
and Choice 2 had p(o| w) = 0.5; participants reliably chose
the high-conditional probability object more often than
would be expected by chance, p < .05. In Condition 2, both
referent objects for a sound had high conditional probability
of p(o | w ) = 1, but Choice 1 had low joint frequency and
Choice 2 had high joint frequency; participants reliably
chose the high joint-frequency object, p < .05. In Condition
5, both referent objects had low frequency, but Choice 1 had
high conditional probability, and Choice 2 had low

4

3108

conditional probability; participants more frequently chose
the high conditional-probability object, p < .05.
Two of the conditions were not reliably different from
chance. Condition 3, in which Choice 1 had low joint
frequency and high conditional probability, and Choice 2
had high joint frequency and low conditional probability,
did not approach significance. This indicates that
participants did not find either candidate object more viable
than the other as the correct referent for the word. In
Condition 4, both objects had low conditional probability,
but Choice 1 had low joint frequency and Choice 2 had high
joint frequency. Participants selected Choice 1 less
frequently than half the time, and this approached
significance, t (13) = -1.975, p < .07.
Table 3: Results from Experiment 3.
Condition
HH-HL
LH-HH
LH-HL
LH-LL
LH-HL

Joint Frequency;
Conditional Probability
Choice 1 = Choice 2 (H);
Choice 1 > Choice 2
Choice 1 < Choice 2;
Choice 1 = Choice 2 (H)
Choice 1 < Choice 2
Choice 1 > Choice 2
Choice 1 < Choice 2
Choice 1 = Choice 2 (L)
Choice 1 = Choice 2 (L);
Choice 1 > Choice 2

Mean (SD)
0.6548 (.201)*

frequency. This difference was not significant, t(13) = .221,
p > .05.

Discussion
The three conditions that differed significantly from chance
(with one more approaching significance) indicated that
both joint frequency and conditional probability came into
play: when conditional probability was equated, participants
reliably chose the high-frequency object, and when
frequencies were equated, participants chose the highconditional probability object.
Experiment 3 differed from the previous two in that it
directly pitted multiple referent objects for the same word
against one another during a 2AFC test. This different
methodology allowed us to observe which cue (conditional
or joint probability) participants preferred to rely upon when
forced to choose. The result is that conditional probability is
preferred over joint probability.

General Discussion

0.1548 (.190)*
0.5595 (.274)
0.3929 (.203)
0.6429 (.205)*

Figure 2: Percent correct in the five experimental
conditions.
Columns marked with an asterisk were
significantly different from chance, p < .05.
Two paired samples t-tests were computed in order to
compare independent effects of conditional and joint
probability. In the first test, Condition 2 and Condition 4
were compared, because in both conditions, Choice 1 had
low joint frequency and Choice 2 had high joint frequency,
but both choices had high conditional probability in
Condition 2, and both had low conditional probability in
Condition 4. This difference was not significant, t(13) =
3.552, p < .05. In the second test, Condition 1 and
Condition 5 were compared; in both of these conditions,
Choice 1 had high conditional probability and Choice 2 had
low conditional probability, but in Condition 1, both items
had high frequency, and in Condition 5, both items had low

A series of experiments in the present study attempted to
understand the role of conditional and joint probabilities in
the context of statistical word learning. Taking together the
results across these experiments, several consistent and
intriguing observations emerge. First, statistical word
learners seem to be able to keep track of both joint and
conditional probabilities. Direct evidence comes from
Experiment 1 and 2, in which participants were able to learn
several word-referent pairs with different conditional and
joint probabilities in a single learning session. More
specifically, in Experiment 2, they relied on joint
probabilities in the testing of those pairs with high joint
probabilities and meanwhile also learned the pairs with low
joint probabilities but high conditional probabilities in the
same training session. Further evidence is from Experiment
3, in which participants demonstrated the sensitivity to both
joint probabilities (when condition probabilities were
equated) and conditional probabilities (when joint
probabilities were equated). Joint and conditional
probabilities are complementary (e.g. one form cannot be
derived from the other) in that they reflect different aspects
of co-occurring statistics. Therefore, learning both joint and
conditional probabilities concurrently enables human
learners to extract and acquire more statistical regularities
from the same learning input. More generally, the
information contained in different probabilistic forms (e.g.
conditional and joint probabilities in our case) may allow
human learners to infer more complex knowledge by
integrating this information to perform more complex
inferences in the future. Indeed, recent work in a variety of
fields suggests that considerable latent structure is derivable
from the statistical analyses of large data sets (Landauer &
Dumais, 1997; Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005). Our
experiments provide direct support to those simulation
studies in that we demonstrated that different kinds of
statistics can be extracted from the learning environment
5

3109

and remain in memory. Moreover, this learning mechanism
seems to be rapid, robust and effective.
Second, our experiments show not only that statistical
word learning is robust and powerful, but also that statistical
learning mechanisms may also be quite flexible and
adaptive. In Experiment 2, participants adaptively relied on
either conditional or joint probability knowledge, depending
on which information is more reliable. In Experiment 3,
when we equated one form of probability, they made their
judgment based on the other. In addition, the fact that
participants from two counterbalanced conditions in
Experiment 2 – high joint probabilities with low conditional
probabilities and high conditional probabilities with low
joint probabilities – performed equally well also suggests
that they may adaptively and automatically switch between
these probabilistic representations depending on which is
more reliable. Thus, in addition to extracting and storing
different kinds of statistical information from the same
training stimuli, statistical learners also know how to
efficiently retrieve the information.
Third, despite the major findings from our research
indicating both probabilistic representations are extracted in
training for adaptive use at test, conditional probabilities
seem to be more influential to the learning system than joint
probabilities. In Experiment 3, when participants were
forced to make a decision between items with high
conditional probabilities but low joint probabilities, and
items with low conditional probabilities but high joint
probabilities, they relied more on conditional probabilities.
However, participants were more sensitive to the changes in
joint probabilities than the changes in conditional
probabilities. We note that these observations may be
unreliable partially due to the special parameters we used in
our studies (e.g. conditional probabilities 1 or 0.5, and with
3 or 6 repetitions) and the limited number of subjects
recruited. Therefore, we intend to vary these parameters in a
future study will and test whether the same conclusion can
be generalized to other situations.
In summary, we have shown that human observers can
extract and keep track of both conditional and joint
probabilities in various learning situations. They perform
this statistical learning within a short, unsupervised training
session. Moreover, statistical learners can apparently take
advantage of acquired statistical information in a way that
they always count on the more reliable information in
knowledge retrieval. This work represents our first efforts
on this topic and there are intriguing questions that are
unanswered. For instance, are there any difference between
two forms of conditional probabilities p(w|o) and p(o|w) in
the context of word learning? Are human learners able to
integrate different kinds of information to make a joint
decision? Will the results reported here be generalized to
other statistical learning tasks, such as statistical sequential
learning and visual statistical learning? More studies will be
needed to further document the role of both conditional and
joint probabilities in word learning.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Health
Grant R01HD056029 and National Science Foundation
Grant BCS 0544995.

References
Aslin, R.N., Saffran, J.R., & Newport, E.L. (1997).
Computation of conditional probability statistics by 8month old infants. Psychological Science, 9, 321-324.
Conway, C.M., & Christiansen, M.H. (2005). Modalityconstrained learning of tactile, visual, and auditory
sequences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 31, 24-39.
Fiser, J., & Aslin, R.N. (2001). Unsupervised statistical
learning of higher-order spatial structures from visual
scenes. Psychological Science, 12, 499-504.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.
Kirkham, N.Z., Slemmer, J.A., & Johnson, S.P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: evidence for a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83, B35B42.
Klein, Yu, & Shiffrin (2009). Prior knowledge bootstraps
cross-situational learning. Manuscript in preparation.
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Saffran, J.R., Johnson, E.K., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L.
(1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by human
infants and adults. Cognition, 70, 27-52.
Siskind, J.M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61, 39-91.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106(3), pp 1558-1568.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29, 41-78.
Vouloumanos, A. (2007). Fine-grained sensitivity to
statistical information in adult word learning. Cognition,
107, 729-742.
Yu, C. and Ballard, D. H. (2007) A Unified Model of Early
Word Learning: Integrating Statistical and Social Cues.
Neurocomputing, 70(13-15), 2149-2165.
Yu, C. & Smith, L.B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.

6

3110

