UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Kitchen Russian: First-language Object Naming by Russian-English Bilinguals

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8j98x9hd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Malt, Barbara
Pavlenko, Aneta

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Kitchen Russian:
First-language Object Naming by Russian-English Bilinguals
Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Aneta Pavlenko (apavlenk@temple.edu)
Department of Curriculum, Instruction, and Technology in Education, Temple University, 451 Ritter Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Abstract
A bilingual’s two lexicons are linked rather than isolated from
each other. An implication of this linkage is that the contents
of one might influence the contents of the other. We
examined naming of common household objects by early,
childhood, and late Russian-English bilinguals to assess a
possible second language (L2) English influence on first
language (L1) Russian naming patterns and typicality ratings.
L2 influence was evident in the data even for late bilinguals.
It was most pronounced with earliest arrival and entailed both
narrowing and broadening of linguistic categories.
Keywords: bilingualism; bilingual word use; semantics

Introduction
Bilinguals must be able to understand and communicate
more or less the same thoughts using two different
languages. At the lexical level, this feat is achieved via a
cognitive architecture in which words of the two languages
are connected indirectly through links to a common
conceptual space and directly through links between word
forms (e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994). These connections have
a consequence for on-line comprehension and production:
Activation of words in one language prompts activation of
words in the other, requiring the bilingual to inhibit the
words of the non-target language for each utterance (e.g.,
van Hell & Dijkstra, 2002).
Another consequence of the interconnections, only
recently beginning to be appreciated, is that the meanings
associated with the word forms of one language may be
influenced by the existence of the other lexicon. Many
roughly corresponding words, even cognates, are not true
translation equivalents across languages as used by
monolinguals. For instance, the set of objects called botella
by Argentinean Spanish monolinguals only partially
overlaps with the set called bottle by American English
monolinguals (Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, & Wang, 1999).
If there are interconnections between representations when
two lexicons co-exist in one mind, the meanings encoded in
one lexicon might influence those of the other.
There are three potential directions of lexical influence
between a bilingual’s two languages. Most intuitively
plausible is an influence of the L1 (first-learned language)
on an L2 (second-learned language), especially early in
acquisition. Learners may import the meaning of an L1

word as their first attempt to connect meaning to an L2
word (e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994). More surprising is
recent evidence for a mutual influence of two languages
when they have been learned in parallel. Bilinguals who
have been raised with two languages from birth differ from
monolingual users of either language in their patterns of
word use; they converge the patterns of their two languages
toward each other (Ameel, Storms, Malt, & Sloman, 2005;
see also Brown & Gullberg, 2008; Pavlenko & Jarvis,
2002). This effect occurs despite the fact that they have had
the benefit of extended exposure to both languages from a
young age and have achieved high levels of overall
proficiency in both. These factors would seem to predict
high mastery of the two lexical systems. Yet it might be that
two lexicons being developed in parallel are made
vulnerable by interleaved exposure to the words of the
languages (possibly initially not even fully distinguished as
belonging to different systems), and by the fact that neither
lexicon is well-established when the other is being learned.
What, then, should be expected of the third possible
direction of influence, namely, an L2 influence on L1? Will
speakers who begin life with one language but then acquire
a second show any influence of the second-learned language
on their use of the first? The considerations just mentioned
suggest possibly not: Once one language is reasonably wellestablished, the content of its lexicon may be relatively
invulnerable to any influence from a new one, even if there
is competition between them in production. Empirically,
however, there is growing evidence of L2 influence on wellestablished L1s in other linguistic domains from phonology
to pragmatics (see, e.g., Cook, 2003; Pavlenko, 2000),
indicating that earlier-learned representations can have some
vulnerability to influence from later-learned ones. If an
influence also exists for the lexical domain, it would suggest
that the direct and indirect connections between
representations of the two language systems leave them
perpetually open to cross-language influence, possibly
because of the fact that accessing lexical items of one
language activates lexical items of the other. These
activations may provide an opportunity for the stored
memory traces of one language to be influenced by the other
(Ameel, Malt, Storms, & von Assche, in press; Wolff &
Ventura, in press).

1822

Evidence of an L2→L1 influence to date, though, has
been limited. For instance, in Pavlenko’s (2002; in press)
studies, late Russian-English bilinguals displayed an L2
influence on L1 in lexicalization of emotions but not in
lexicalization of motion. Wolff and Ventura (in press) found
an influence of L2 English usage patterns for causal verbs
on use of L1 Russian causal verbs, but they noted that the
verb patterns are linked to differences in what kinds of
agents can serve as sentences subjects in the two languages.
They suggested that an L2 → L1 influence may be most
likely for expressions that lie at the interface of syntax and
semantics. Thus, although there is reason to think that the
L1 lexicon can be influenced by L2 acquisition, much
remains to be understood about the scope of this effect.
The present study evaluates the possibility of an L2
influence on L1 for common, concrete nouns in RussianEnglish bilinguals. All participants learned Russian in their
early years but resided in the United States at the time of
testing and used both Russian and English in their daily
lives. They varied in the extent to which each language had
been dominant for them over their lifetime, as well as their
age of immersion in the English-speaking environment. The
late bilinguals came to the U.S. as students or professionals
and had the most extensive exposure to Russian and the
most recent and least extensive exposure to English. The
early and childhood bilinguals came in immigrant families
and grew up in the U.S., receiving earlier exposure to
English and somewhat reduced input in Russian. In the
literature, such speakers are referred to as heritage language
learners, L1 attriters, or incomplete acquirers. In lay
conversations, their L1 competence may be derisively
labeled ‘kitchen Russian’. We will evaluate whether any or
all of these groups show an influence of L2 English naming
patterns on their use and knowledge of L1 Russian words,
and how age of arrival (with its resultant variation in
exposure to the two languages) influences any appearance
of an L2 influence on L1.

Method
Russian-English bilinguals were undergraduate and graduate
students and staff members at Temple University. The early
bilinguals (n = 9) arrived in the U.S. between the ages of 1
and 6 (mean = 3.4) and grew up in Russian-speaking
families, using Russian at home and English outside the
home. On a self-report proficiency measure using a scale of
1 (“not at all”) to 7 (“native or native-like”), their mean
rating was 7.0 for English and 4.5 for Russian. The
childhood bilinguals (n = 9) arrived in the U.S. between the
ages of 8 and 15 (mean = 11.7) and likewise used Russian at
home and English outside, but they had lived in Russia
longer and had begun their schooling there. Their mean
proficiency rating was 6.65 for English and 5.94 for
Russian. Late bilinguals (n = 11) arrived in the U.S.
between the ages of 19 and 27 (mean = 22.8) and most had
completed their undergraduate education in Russia. They
used Russian with Russian-speaking friends, colleagues, and
family members, and English for work and study and with

English-speaking friends. Their mean proficiency rating was
5.41 for English and 6.89 for Russian.
For comparison, 20 largely monolingual native speakers
of American English from Lehigh and Temple Universities,
and 20 largely monolingual native speakers of Russian from
the University of Kazan, Russia also participated1.
Photographs of sixty common drinking containers were
used as stimuli. The set consisted of objects likely to be
called cup, mug, or glass in English and chashka, kruzhka,
or stakan in Russian. They encompassed a wide range of
shapes, size, materials, and specific uses, and included ones
made in the U.S. (e.g., a beer stein) and in Russia (e.g., a tea
glass in a metal glassholder). Objects were photographed on
a neutral background with a ruler to provide size
information. Testing was carried out in English for the
English monolinguals and in Russian for the Russian monoand bilinguals. Pictures were presented in a random order on
a computer screen, and participants typed in whatever name
they thought they would call each one in ordinary
conversation. For English speakers, each object was also
rated for its typicality with respect to cup, glass, and mug.
For Russian speakers, typicality as chashka, kruzhka, and
stakan were rated.

Results
Monolingual Naming Patterns
Table 1 shows all the names that were the dominant (most
frequent) name for at least one object for the Russian
monolinguals, along with the number of objects out of 60
for which each was dominant. It also shows the composition
of each Russian category in terms of the names assigned by
English monolinguals speakers to its members. The table
makes clear that the naming patterns of the two languages
have some similarities. For both languages, three names
accounted for the bulk of the objects. Also, the set of objects
called kruzhka by Russians was essentially the same as that
called mug by English speakers. However, there are
substantial differences, too. Russians used several additional
names applied to small numbers of objects apiece. Most
importantly, although stakan/glass and chashka/cup are
generally treated as translation equivalents, the data show
that they are not so closely equivalent, as we now describe.
Cup vs. Chashka Cup was used more broadly than
chashka, encompassing more than twice as many objects,
but not all objects with chashka as the dominant name were
labeled cup by English speakers. Objects typical of cup
were generally tapered, handle-less objects for cold drinks
but included various materials and shapes and some with
handles and intended for hot drinks (see Figure 1). In
contrast, all of the objects with chashka as their dominant
name were short, ceramic, slightly rounded at the bottom,
had handles, and were for hot drinks (see Figure 2).
1
Some had modest knowledge of another language but not the
one of interest here, and it was not in use in their daily lives.

1823

Table 1: Linguistic categories for Russian monolinguals and
their composition in terms of English monolingual names.
N = number of objects for which the name was dominant.
Monolingual
Russian Name
stakan
chashka
kruzhka
riumka
fuzher
bokal
kuvshin
lozhka
piala
vaza

Figure 4: Examples of stakan
N
23
11
9
6
4
3
1
1
1
1

English composition
14 cup, 7 glass, 2 mug
7 cup, 4 mug
8 mug, 1 cup/mug
4 glass, 2 cup
4 glass
3 glass
1 mug
1 cup
1 cup
1 glass

Bilingual Naming Patterns

Glass vs. Stakan For this pair, English had the more
restricted use. Objects with glass as their dominant name
were almost entirely limited to tapered containers without
handles, made of glass, and for cold drinks (see Figure 3).
Objects with stakan as dominant were also tapered
containers without handles, but they included ones that were
made out of paper, styrofoam, plastic, metal, or ceramic as
well as glass and used for either hot or cold drinks. Some of
the most typical stakan were cup in English (see Figure 4).

Figure 1: Examples of cup

Figure 2: Examples of chaskha

Figure 3: Examples of glass

Given the differences between the naming patterns for
monolinguals, we can now ask whether exposure to English
alters Russian name use. We need a measure of
correspondence that can provide a baseline level of
agreement between the monolingual groups, which can then
be compared directly to agreement with bilinguals. In
addition, although dominant names give a good intuitive
sense of naming patterns, for many objects there is some
variability in speakers’ name choices. That is, the dominant
name is produced by less than 100% of participants.
Therefore, following Malt et al. (1999), we used a measure
that takes into account all responses to each object and the
frequency of each as a response to the object. For each
speaker group, we created a matrix in which rows represent
the 60 objects, columns represent the names generated by
participants (to the whole stimulus set), and each cell entry
is the frequency with which a particular name was generated
to a particular object by the speaker group. Each object’s
name distribution (its vector of frequency values for all the
names) can then be compared to every other object’s using a
Pearson correlation in order to see how much the two
objects are similar in what they are called. For each speaker
group, this measure yields 1770 correlations (from every
possible pairing of the 60 objects). The 1770 values for one
group can then be correlated with the 1770 values of a
different group, even when the actual names produced are in
different languages. This second-order measure reflects the
extent to which any two speaker groups correspond in the
pairs of objects that have similar name distributions. Table
2 provides the resultant correlations.
The correlations of the bilingual name similarity matrices
with the Russian monolingual speakers’ matrix show an
orderly shift as a function of age of arrival. The late
bilinguals’ naming pattern correlates most strongly with the
monolingual speakers, followed by the childhood bilinguals,
and then by the early bilinguals, indicating that the
bilinguals are moving farther from the monolingual Russian
pattern with earlier age of arrival in the U.S. The
correlations among the bilingual groups themselves are also
orderly: The late bilinguals correlate more strongly with the
childhood bilinguals than they do with the early bilinguals,
and the early bilinguals correlate more strongly with the
childhood bilinguals than with the late bilinguals.
There is, however, one aspect of the correlations that is
less regular. If the progression away from the Russian
monolingual pattern with earlier age of arrival is because
speakers are moving closer to the English monolingual
pattern, then, looking across the bottom row, one would
expect to see correlations with the English pattern

1824

half, and it is the least tapered of these that was shifted to
stakan by the late bilinguals. The switch brings the use of
stakan in closer correspondence with that of glass, and it
takes place despite the continued and even increased use of
bokal for other objects with more pronounced stems (the
original fuzher objects). Similarly, one object named riumka
by monolinguals was more often called stakan by the late
bilinguals, consistent with a shift by the other groups and
with the English choice of glass for it: This object was least
distinctively like typical riumka (small shot glasses for
alcohol) and most like typical glasses.

Table 2: Correlation of name similarity measures.
Mono.
Russian

Late
Biling.

Child.
Biling.

Early
Biling.

Mono.
Russian
Late
Biling.

0.81

Childhood
Biling.

0.73

0.77

Early
Biling.

0.48

0.43

0.66

Mono.
English

0.37

0.42

0.42

0.37

correspondingly increasing. Late and childhood bilinguals
show a small but significantly increased (p < .05)
correlation with the English monolingual pattern compared
to the correlation of Russian monolinguals. However, early
bilinguals show only the same level of correlation with
English as the Russian monolinguals.
One possible
explanation is that the bilinguals’ Russian word use simply
becomes more random (less closely tied to either language),
perhaps because they have learned the language less well
and use words less systematically. The alternative is that the
pattern becomes more like English in some ways but less
like English in others. Table 3 provides information about
how the size of different Russian lexical categories expands
or contracts across groups. Based on this information and
consideration of the dominant name for individual objects in
each group, to which we now turn, we will argue for the
second possibility.
Late Bilinguals The late bilinguals differed from
monolinguals in name choices for a handful of objects. The
differences mentioned here are those least likely to reflect
only noise in the data by virtue of also appearing in the next
two groups’ choices. Two of the more specialized terms,
kuvshin (for a round, lidded drinking vessel) and fuzher (for
ones with narrow stems for alcohol) were replaced by the
more general terms kruzhka (for mugs) and bokal (for glass
objects for alcohol with or without a stem). At the same
time, one object with a dominant name of bokal for
monolinguals was preferentially called stakan by the late
bilinguals. The first of these shifts, assimilating the kuvshin
and fuzher objects to kruzhka and bokal, has the effect of
better aligning the Russian categories with the English but
could be simply vocabulary attrition rather than an influence
of English. However, the switch of one original bokal object
to stakan represents a trend that is amplified in the next two
groups and seems to reflect a more direct influence of
English. The original bokal objects were three glass vessels
for drinking alcohol only slightly tapered in their bottom

Childhood Bilinguals The childhood bilinguals continued
the trend shown by the late bilinguals of dropping out low
frequency terms. For them, not only fuzher and kuvshin but
also piala, vaza, and lozhka were replaced with one of the
higher frequency names. They also had a higher number of
objects (six) with two equal-frequency names. In each case,
one name was the one used by monolinguals but the other
brought name patterns in closer correspondence to English
(e.g., where the preferred monolingual English name was
mug and the preferred Russian was chashka, this group used
kruzhka as often as chashka). In addition, this group named
two of the original three bokal objects as stakan. This shift
again brings stakan in closer correspondence to the
distribution of English glass despite familiarity with bokal
as shown by its continued use for the original fuzher objects.
They also showed indecision about the original riumka
object that late bilinguals had tilted toward stakan, calling it
a variety of names including stakan.
Early Bilinguals The early bilinguals showed the sharpest
departures from the monolinguals. Surprisingly, along with
lack of the other more specialized terms, they dropped use
of kruzhka, calling each of the nine original kruzhka objects
either stakan or chaskha. It is this loss of the entire kruzhka
category, so closely aligned with English mug for
monolinguals, that causes the reduced correlation with the
English naming pattern. Because the monolingual use of
kruzhka is so similar to that for mug, this loss cannot be
attributed to an L2 influence. However, other changes point
to an L2 influence. The early bilinguals completed the
renaming of the original bokal objects, calling all three
stakan, while still showing productive use of bokal for the
original fuzher objects. Again, this shift brings the
distribution of stakan in closer correspondence to English
glass. They also preferred stakan for the original riumka
object that the other groups shifted. Strikingly, they also
renamed 7 of the original stakan objects chashka, plus used
chashka equally as often as stakan for two more. In each
case, the English dominant name is cup and the shift brings
the Russian use of chashka in closer correspondence to cup
(and, simultaneously, the use of stakan in closer
correspondence to glass). Their naming patterns thus seem
to reflect a substantial influence of exposure to English.

1825

Table 3: Number of objects (out of 60) for which a given
name is dominant across Russian-speaking groups. “Mixed”
indicates objects having two equally frequent names.

stakan
chashka
kruzhka
riumka
fuzher
bokal
lozhka
piala
vaza
kuvshin
stopka
(mixed)

Mono.
Russian
22
11
9
6
4
3
1
1
1
1
0
1

Late
Bilingual
23
12
12
2
0
6
1
1
1
0
1
1

Childhood
Bilingual
22
12
10
5
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
6

Early
Bilingual
19
27
0
5
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
2

Bilingual Typicality Ratings
The typicality ratings of each group provide additional
information about whether the meanings associated with
chashka, stakan, and kruzhka shifted for bilinguals. See
Table 4a for correlations with monolingual English
judgments of each object as cup, glass, and mug, and 4b for
correlations with the monolingual Russian judgments of
chashka, stakan, and kruzhka.
Table 4a: Correlations of monolingual English typicality
ratings with Russian typicality ratings. Boldface numbers
are discussed in the text.

Monolingual
Russian
Late
Bilingual
Childhood
Bilingual
Early
Bilingual

chashka
stakan
kruzhka
chashka
stakan
kruzhka
chashka
stakan
kruzhka
chashka
stakan
kruzhka

Monolingual
English
cup
glass mug
0.79
0.06 -0.45
0.49
0.21 -0.36
-0.06 -0.40
0.94
0.70
0.10 -0.48
0.20
0.59 -0.60
-0.15 -0.45
0.96
0.73
0.22 -0.47
0.26
0.62 -0.52
-0.05 -0.39
0.93
0.78
0.36 -0.59
0.41
0.41 -0.33
0.15 -0.46
0.92

These tables show that the judgments for chashka increase
in correspondence with judgments for cup across the three
bilingual groups, and judgments for stakan increase in
correspondence compared to the monolingual Russian

Table 4b: Correlations of monolingual Russian typicality
ratings with bilingual Russian ratings. Boldface numbers are
discussed in the text.

Late
Bilingual
Childhood
Bilingual
Early
Bilingual

chashka
stakan
kruzhka
chashka
stakan
kruzhka
chashka
stakan
kruzhka

Monolingual
Russian
chashka stakan kruzhka
-0.50
0.71
0.93
-0.63
-0.58
0.85
0.75
-0.40
0.94
-0.32
0.77
0.92
-0.58
-0.50
0.82
0.77
-0.33
0.94
-0.21
0.79
0.88
-0.40
-0.29
0.81
0.82
-0.21
0.93

judgments (though, for some reason, not monotonically).
Conversely, the bilingual judgments show slight decreases
across the three groups with monolingual chashka and
stakan judgments.
(The correspondence of bilingual
kruzhka judgments to monolingual kruzhka and mug show
little change, suggesting that even the early bilinguals have
passive knowledge of the meaning of kruzhka.) Thus,
typicality judgments support the idea that the bilingual
groups, including the late bilinguals who were young adults
at the time of their immersion in English, show an influence
of exposure to English in their Russian lexical knowledge.

Discussion
Summary of Evidence for an L2→L1 Lexical
Influence
The loss of kruzhka from the early bilingual naming is not
easily accommodated by the notion of an L2 influence on
L1, since kruzhka so closely maps onto mug. It is likely that
objects called kruzhka were present in their home
environment but this group’s somewhat reduced exposure to
Russian was simply insufficient to put this word into their
productive vocabulary. More ambiguous with respect to an
L2 influence is the loss of some of the more specialized
drinking vessels terms starting with the late bilinguals; this
loss might reflect insufficient input for productive mastery,
or it could reflect a realignment of the Russian categories
with the smaller number of English ones. However, the
shifting rather than disappearing use of bokal suggests that
some L2 influence is present even for the late bilinguals.
These bilinguals, who came to the U.S. as young adults with
presumably well-developed Russian vocabulary, showed the
beginnings of a terminology shift for stemmed glasses that
was systematically enhanced across the other bilingual
groups and that resulted in closer alignment of stakan with
English glass. The shift of one riumka to stakan beginning
with the late bilinguals is similar in nature. These two
observations suggest that even for the late bilinguals, a

1826

small English influence was taking place. The childhood
bilinguals showed only slightly more evidence of changes in
their naming patterns through an additional shift of bokal.
The typicality data, however, bolster the interpretation of
both the late and childhood bilinguals as experiencing a
genuine and increasing, although small, L2 influence: Their
ratings for two of their most productive terms, chashka and
stakan, show changes consistent with an influence of the
English cup and glass categories. The late bilinguals show
the greatest L2 influence in the considerable adjustments to
their use of stakan and chashka to more closely mirror glass
and cup, and in changes to their typicality ratings that are
consistent with these shifts in naming patterns.

Implications for the Generality of an L2→L1
Lexical Influence
Our findings suggest that an L2 influence can occur even for
familiar, concrete nouns naming common household
objects. The evidence for an L2 influence in this familiar
and concrete domain suggests that even when one lexicon is
established before significant exposure to a second,
vulnerability to influence from the newer one may be
unavoidable. Information stored in memory is rarely
unalterable. The direct and indirect connections between the
two language systems, which can cause cross-activation of
stored knowledge, may leave the lexicons perpetually open
to cross-language influence.
The effects we observed were strongest in the early
bilinguals for whom the chronological L2 had become the
dominant language. It is noteworthy, though, that the late
bilingual group showed some L2 influence given that they
were mature language users before leaving Russia, their
exposure to English was relatively limited, and their (selfrated) mastery of English was incomplete. This finding
suggests that a modest L2 influence may occur for virtually
any group of speakers given moderate exposure to the L2.
Since, for the most part, our late bilinguals had been in
the U.S. only a short time, their L2 influence might increase
with longer immersion. However, the childhood bilinguals
showed a relatively small increase in L2 influence, despite a
substantially longer period of stay in the U.S. and higher
self-rated proficiency in English. The largest L2 influence,
and the biggest jump from the previous group, was in the
case of the early bilinguals, who rated themselves only
slightly more proficient in English than the childhood
bilinguals but substantially less proficient in Russian. It may
be the incomplete mastery of the L1 (with, perhaps, memory
representations that are not well-consolidated) that leaves it
most vulnerable to L2 influence, rather than the degree of
exposure to or mastery of the L2.
Finally, we note that consistent with Ameel, Malt, and
Storm’s (2008) developmental study, changes do not seem
to be limited to either narrow categories broadening or
broad categories narrowing. Shifts go in both directions,
influenced by both the nature of the L1 and L2 categories
involved. Chashka is a rather narrow category centered on
small cups with handles for hot liquids and admitting little

else, whereas cup is a much more diverse category. In this
case, the Russian usage moved from the narrower Russianlike pattern to a broader, more English-like pattern. On the
other hand, stakan is a category that is broader than glass, at
least on the dimension of material. In this case, the Russian
usage moved from the broader use toward greater constraint
on the material dimension, consistent with English. There
may be few lexical categories that are immune to such
shifts.

Acknowledgments
We thank Arlo Bensinger, Eef Ameel, Viktoria Driagina,
Nina Vyatkina,Valery Solovyov, and Maria Volynsky for
assistance with this research.

References
Ameel, E., Malt, B.C., and Storms, G. (2008). Object
naming and later lexical development: From baby bottle
to beer bottle. Journal of Memory and Language, 58,
262–285.
Ameel, E., Malt, B. C., Storms, G., & van Assche, F.
(2009). Semantic convergence in the bilingual lexicon.
Journal of Memory and Language, 60, 270-290.
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B. & Sloman, S. (2005). How
bilinguals solve the naming problem. Journal of Memory
and Language, 52, 309-329.
Brown, A., & Gullberg, M. (2008). Bidirectional
crosslinguistic influence in L1-L2 encoding of manner in
speech and gesture: A study of Japanese speakers of
English. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 30(2),
225-251.
Cook, V. (ed.) (2003) Effects of the second language on the
first. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Kroll, J., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Malt, B., Sloman, S., Gennari, S., Shi, M. & Wang, Y.
(1999) Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Pavlenko, A. (2000) L2 influence on L1 in late bilingualism.
Issues in Applied Linguistics, 11, 2, 175-205.
Pavlenko, A. (2002) Bilingualism and emotions.
Multilingua, 21, 1, 45-78.
Pavlenko, A. (in press). Verbs of motion in L1 Russian of
Russian-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition.
Pavlenko, A., & Jarvis, S. (2002). Bidirectional transfer.
Applied Linguistics, 23, 190-214.
Van Hell, J., & Dijkstra, T. (2002). Foreign language
knowledge can influence native language performance:
Evidence from trilinguals. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 9, 780-789.
Wolff, P. & Ventura, T. (in press). When Russians learn
English: How the semantics of causation may change.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition.

1827

