UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Knowledge Effect and Selective Attention in Category Learning: An Eyetracking Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3m82n78s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kim, ShinWoo
Rehder, Bob

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Knowledge Effect and Selective Attention in Category Learning:
An Eyetracking Study
ShinWoo Kim (shinwoo.kim@nyu.edu)
Bob Rehder (bob.rehder@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University
6 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003 USA

Abstract
Two experiments tested the effect of prior knowledge on
attention allocation in category learning. Using eyetracking,
we found that (a) knowledge affects dimensional attention
allocation, with knowledge-relevant features being fixated
more often than irrelevant ones, (b) this effect was not due to
initial attention bias to the relevant dimensions but rather
gradually emerged in response to observing category
members, and (c) the effect grew even after the last error trial,
that is, in the absence of error. These results pose challenge to
current models of knowledge-based category learning.

Because of the importance of categories for human
cognition, the manner in which people learn categories has
received intensive study. Among many procedures,
supervised classification learning has been popular, and a
number of basic facts have been established.
One of these concerns the role of selective attention in
category learning. Selective attention has played a
prominent role in theories of category learning since the
finding that learning difficulty correlated with the number of
diagnostic dimensions needed for classification (Shepard,
Hovland, & Jenkins, 1961). In both exemplar models and
prototype models, selective attention is explicitly formalized
in terms of the weights of dimensions on classification (e.g.,
Kruschke, 1993; Nosofsky, 1992). Rule-based models also
assume selective attention to the dimensions referred to by
the current hypothesis (Smith, Patalano, & Jonides, 1998).
A second finding concerns the role of the prior knowledge.
Although early research focused on the effect of empirical
information, subsequent research has shown that theoretical
knowledge influences every type of category-based
judgment that has been tested, including learning, induction,
and categorization (Murphy, 2002). For example, subjects
usually learn categories far faster when a category's
diagnostic features can be related to a common theme, and
also show better learning of those related features versus
unrelated ones (Murphy & Allopenna, 1994).
Although attention and knowledge each has been shown
to be important, little is understood on how knowledge
affects attention in category learning. This question is
important because any theory that accounts for knowledgebased category learning (e.g., Heit & Bott, 2000; Rehder &
Murphy, 2003) is incomplete in the absence of attention
mechanism. However, this omission is understandable
because virtually nothing is known about how knowledge
affects attention: modeling attentional effects is impossible
if there is no data to model.

Knowledge Effect on Selective Attention
Using eyetracking, we addressed three open questions
regarding how knowledge affects dimensional attention
during category learning. The first concerns whether in fact
prior knowledge affects dimensional attention. If a subset of
category features is knowledge-related, it is likely that such
knowledge directs attention to the related features and away
from unrelated ones (Kaplan & Murphy, 2000). However,
knowledge might instead change how features are processed
and encoded without changing what is attended. For
example, knowledge might allow knowledge-related
features to be associated more strongly with its underlying
representation. Thus, our first goal is to determine whether
knowledge indeed induces any change to what is attended.
Assuming that it does, the second question concerns the
time course of that effect. Some theorists have suggested
that one role of knowledge is to preselect dimensions for
further testing. For example, Pazzani's (1991) rule-based
PostHoc model selectively attends to goal-relevant features
and thus predicts preselection of those dimensions.
Kruschke (1993) suggested that his associative ALCOVE
model can account for knowledge by setting initial attention
weights on the related dimensions higher than on others.
However, knowledge effect on attention might emerge
gradually in response to observing category members.
Because prior knowledge consists of representations in the
long-term memory, multiple exemplars may need to be
observed for it to become sufficiently active. Or, a learner
may only begin to make use of knowledge when a simpler
strategy yields error signals. Thus, our second goal concerns
whether preference for attending to related dimensions
emerges gradually with experience of category members.
Assuming that it does, the third question concerns
whether error feedback is required to mediate change in
attention. One possibility is that (even) greater attention to
related features occurs in the absence of error, because
merely observing related features might be sufficient to
further activate prior knowledge. However, supervised
learning is often characterized as learners' adapting their
responses to error feedback so as to minimize error
(Kruschke, 2001). It is assumed that doing so requires
adjusting attention to more diagnostic dimensions. This
error-driven account might be extended for knowledgebased category learning, for example, error feedback might
serve as cue indicating to the learner to use prior knowledge
(and attention might shift as a result). Thus, our third

230

question concerns whether such shifts occur only while
learners are committing errors or even in the absence of
error, that is, after solving the classification problem.
To address these questions, we conducted an eyetracking
study of thematic category learning (e.g., Murphy &
Allopenna, 1994). In recent years, eyetracking has been
successfully applied to studying dimensional attention in
various category learning tasks (Rehder & Hoffman,
2005ab; Rehder, Colner, & Hoffman, 2009). We now use
eyetracking to study knowledge effect on attention.

Overview of the Experiments
Two categories of ants (i.e., Dax and Kez) were constructed
from six binary dimensions using one-away structure (Table
1). Figure 1 illustrates two example prototypes. Four
dimensions were described as useful in either a cold, tundralike environment or a hot, desert-like environment. The
other two "neutral" dimensions were unrelated to these
themes. Table 2 presents example feature descriptions for
the prototypes in Figure 1. To prevent the themes from
being blatantly obvious, the "tundra" and "desert" themes
were not mentioned, but only indirectly suggested by the
feature descriptions.
In Experiment 1, we conducted a non-eyetracking study
to establish whether our novel materials would induce
standard behavioral effects of prior knowledge on category
learning. In Experiment 2, we conducted an eyetracking
study to address the three questions we raised above.

Experiment 1
Materials. Dax and Kez categories were constructed from
six binary dimensions. Table 1 presents category structure
in which the prototypes are 111111 (for Dax) and 000000
(for Kez). Four feature assignments to Dax/Kez prototypes
were used to balance features to categories: 111111/000000,
101010/010101, 010101/101010, and 000000/111111.
In the related condition, Daxes were related to the tundra
theme and Kezes to the desert. Of the six dimensions, four
were related to the themes and the other two were neutral.
The neutral dimensions were either tail/foot, wing/mouth, or
forearm/antenna with the remainder being theme-related. In
the unrelated condition, all features were neutral.
The two experimental conditions (related vs. unrelated),
the four feature assignments to categories, and the three
related/neutral dimension assignments resulted in 24 cells.
Table 1: Structures of Dax and Kez categories.
Exemplars
Dax
D0
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
Kez
K0
K1
K2
K3
K4
K5
K6

Dimensions
Tail Foot Wing Mouth Forearm Antenna
1
1
1
1
1
1
0

1
1
1
1
1
0
1

1
1
1
1
0
1
1

1
1
1
0
1
1
1

1
1
0
1
1
1
1

1
0
1
1
1
1
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
0
1
0
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
0
1
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0
0
0

Participants. Thirty NYU students were randomly assigned
to the 24 cells with a constraint of at least one person in one
cell (related, n = 14; unrelated, n = 16).
Procedure. The experiment consisted of three phases:
knowledge acquisition, category learning, and a singlefeature test. In knowledge acquisition, participants studied a
total of 12 features, six from each category. Each screen
displayed an ant with one visible feature and the other five
features hidden behind gray rectangles. Below the ant were
descriptions of the visible feature. Subjects studied the 12
features on their own pace by navigating 12 screens with
left/right arrows keys.
To ensure learning, participants were required to take a
multiple-choice test followed by a recall test. Both tests
consisted of 12 questions, one for each feature. In the
multiple-choice test, a question presented an ant with one
visible feature (as in the learning screens), and participants
chose one of the four alternatives below the ant. Immediate
feedback was provided for each question, and after the test,
total number of errors was also provided. When any error
occurred, they were returned to the initial learning screens
for additional study, and then retook the test that presented
only the questions they missed. This process repeated until
all questions were correctly answered. In the recall test,
subjects verbally described the visible feature instead of
making a choice. Immediate feedback was provided for each
question, and after the test, total number of errors was
provided. Any error during the recall test obligated the
subject to restart the knowledge acquisition all over again.
The category learning phase began with two practice trials
followed by training blocks that randomly presented 14
exemplars, seven from each category (Table 1). subjects
classified each as either a Dax or Kez by pressing "z" or "/".
Immediate feedback was provided below the exemplar
("Correct" or "Wrong") and the exemplar remained visible
for 3.8 s after the response. The training ended after two
consecutive errorless blocks or after the 15th block.
Finally, a single-feature test followed category learning.
Each trial presented an ant displaying one visible feature (as
in the learning screens), and subjects classified the visible
feature (as in training). No feedback was provided. After
each choice, subjects rated confidence by positioning a
slider on a scale, which was then converted to [0–100] range.

Results
Subjects were very accurate in the test during knowledge
acquisition. 22 subjects committed zero errors. Related (.97)
and unrelated (.98) subjects were equally accurate, t < 1.
A. Dax: Prototype (111111)

B. Kez: Prototype (000000)

Figure 1: Two categories' example prototypes.

231

Tab le 2: Example feature descriptio ns.
Dimension Dax [Tundra Theme]
Relat ed
Antenna
Because the tem perature i s very low, parts of ants ' eyes (e.g.,
cornea, iris , pupil) often freeze and t he ants become blind. When
that happens, this thread type of flexible antennae is used to detect
close obj ects.
Mouth
Because the ground is frozen, the ants need to cut and break
tough soil in search of their food. This type of mouth wi th sharp
incisors serves this funct ion.
F orearm
Because of frequent bl izzards , the ants need to a nchor
themselves duri ng hi gh winds . This type of forearm allows t he ant
to hold its positi on.
F oot
Because the ground surface is slippery, the ants need to have
wide feet to m aintain their footi ng.
Neutral
Tai l
The ants feed prot ei ns stored in the hum ps to thei r larvae us ing
the sharp nozzle in the end of tail.
W ings
While flying, the ants control their rapid changes in direction by
adjusting the fore- and rear-flaps in each wi ng.

During training, 12 related and 14 unrelated subjects
reached the learning criterion of two errorless blocks. The
related learners did so in fewer blocks (5.50) than the
unrelated learners (8.57), t(24) = 2.85, p < .01, while
committing fewer total errors (8.67 vs. 19.07), t(24) = 3.29,
p < .01. These results replicate standard behavioral effect of
faster learning in thematic categories.
Single-feature test (Table 3) also replicated greater
accuracy on related dimensions (.89) than on the neutral
ones (.71), t(11) = 1.79, p = .05 (one-tailed) and than on the
neutral dimensions in the unrelated condition (.76), t(24) =
1.85, p = .07. The more sensitive signed confidence ratings
were computed by negating the ratings in the incorrect trials
(Table 3). Related learners' signed ratings were greater than
0 for both dimension types, p's < .01. More importantly and
consistent with the accuracy, the ratings were greater for the
related dimensions (67.1) than for the neutral ones (37.0),
t(11) = 1.82, p < .05, and for the neutral dimensions in the
unrelated condition (43.8), t(24) = 2.32, p < .05.
Table 3:Single -feature test results .
Related
Related
Neutral
Dimensions Dimensions
Experiment 1
Accuracy
Signed rating
Experiment 2
Accuracy
Signed rating

.89
67.1

.71
37.0

.91
73.6

.70
29.1

Unrelated
Neutral
Dimensions
.76
43.8

Discussion
Experiment 1 confirmed the standard learning advantage of
thematic categories with our novel materials. Related
learners learned to distinguish the categories faster with
fewer number of errors, and showed better single-feature
test performance on the related features than on the neutral
ones. The 5.5 blocks of learning speed suggests that the
categories were not pre-learned in the knowledge
acquisition phase.

Experiment 2
To address the main questions, we set out to measure eye
movements during training. Because unrelated condition

Kez [Desert Theme]
B ec aus e t he air is hot and dry, the ants are vulnerable to dehydration.
To m aintain hydration, the ants use thi s fan type of a ntennae to absorb
wa ter vapor from the a ir.
B ec aus e sources of food are c overed with sand, they need to be
cleared before s wallowing. The inner surfac e of the ants' m outh has
short but s tiff hairs that filter out these impurities.
B ec aus e t he ants' prey (e.g., fleas) hide in sand, the ants use this type
of forearm t o sweep the sand and detect the prey.
B ec aus e t he ground surface is extrem ely hot, the ants switch the toe
that comes into contact with the ground in each step t o avoid burni ng.
The ants la y a large number of eggs at a time. This trum pet-shaped
tail allows the ant s to deliver a l arge num ber of eggs.
The ants have red spot s in t he wing ends. The color becomes bright er
in the m ating seas on by the horm ones produced in t he gra y area.

was included as a control for learning performance, we only
tested the related condition in Experiment 2.
Materials. The materials were the same as in Experiment 1.
Participants. Twenty-four NYU students were randomly
assigned in equal numbers to one of the four assignments of
features to categories and to one of the three assignments of
related/neutral dimensions.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1,
with a few additional steps for eyetracking during training.
Participants were first fitted and calibrated to the eyetracker.
Each trial began with a drift correction that compensated
small movements of the eyetracker on the head. We used a
gaze-contingent display such that a feature was fully visible
when it was fixated but blurred when it was not, to
minimize use of peripheral vision. After each classification,
auditory feedback indicated whether the response was
correct (chime) or incorrect (ding).
Eyetracking measures. The eyetracker yields a stream of
fixations and their corresponding x-y screen locations and
durations. We defined six circular areas of interest (AOIs)
that encompass the features on the monitor. All fixations
outside of the AOIs were discarded, as were those that
occurred after classification response. Using the remaining
fixations, we computed four measures on each trial.
The first is the number of dimensions observed in each
trial. We counted a dimension "observed" if that dimension
is fixated at least once, and thus, it ranges [0–4] for the
related dimensions and [0–2] for the neutral ones. The
second, fixation probability, is obtained by dividing the
number of dimensions observed by 4 and 2 for the related
and neutral dimensions, respectively. The third, proportion
fixation number, is computed by taking the number fixations
to the related dimensions and dividing it by the total number
of fixations. The fourth, proportion fixation time, is the
result of taking the time fixating the related dimensions and
dividing it by the total fixation time in each trial.

Results
Basic learning results. Once again, participants were very
accurate in the multiple-choice and recall tests in knowledge
acquisition (avg. accuracy = .97). During training, 20 of 24
participants reached the learning criterion of two errorless

232

blocks (M = 6.5 blocks; cf., 5.5 in Expt. 1) while
committing 10.60 total errors (cf., 8.67 in Expt. 1).
Single-feature test. As in Experiment 1 (Table 3), learners
exhibited greater accuracy on the related dimensions (.91)
than on the neutral ones (.70), t(19) = 3.31, p < .01. Once
again, the signed confidence ratings were greater than 0 for
both dimension types, p's < .01, and greater for the related
dimensions (73.6) than for the neutral ones (29.1), t(19) =
5.75, p < .001.
B. Probability of Fixation
1.0

Related

2

Neutral

1

A. Probability of Error

0.9
0.7
0.6

Related

0.5

Neutral

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.0

Block

Block

Proportion fixation number
Proportion fixation time

Probability

Proportion

0.8

.67
0.7

0.6

Block

Figure 2: Eye fixation results from Experiment 2.
Eye fixations. Figure 2 reports learners' eye fixations
averaged in each block. In construction of this figure, we
assumed that the learners' eye movements in the remaining
blocks after reaching criterion would have been identical to
those in their last block.
Figure 2A shows that learners initially observed 3 of the 4
related dimensions and 1.25 of the 2 neutral dimensions.
Figure 2B equates different number of dimension types. The
figure indicates that learners fixated the two types of
dimensions with about equal probability but become more
(less) likely to fixate related (neutral) dimensions.
A 2 x 2 within-subjects ANOVA was conducted on
fixation probabilities in Figure 2B with dimension type
(related vs. neutral) and block (first vs. last) as factors.
There was a main effect of dimension, F(1, 19) = 20.294, p
< .001, indicating overall greater chance of fixating related
dimensions. There was no main effect of block (p > .10), but
a significant interaction between dimension type and block,
F(1, 19) = 25.904, p < .001, suggested the increase
(decrease) in fixating the related (neutral) dimensions. Ttests revealed that learners were more likely to fixate the
related dimensions than the neutral ones in all blocks, p's
< .03, except block 1, p > .09. The small (nonsignificant)
difference in block 1 might have resulted from fixations in
the later trials of the block. The nearly identical probabilities
for the related (.73) and neutral (.75) dimensions on the first
trial suggest absence of strong initial preference.
These results are further supported by more sensitive
proportion measures in Figures 2C. Because there were four

-2

-1

0

Relat ed

2

Neut ral
1

1

-4

2

1.0

0.8

0.9

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Related
Neutral
-4

-3

-2

-1

Block

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

D. Proportion F ix ation Num ber/Time

1.0
0.9

0.1
0.0

9 10 11 12 13 14 15

3

0
-3

C. Probability of Fix ation

0.9

6 7 8

0 .2

-4

1.0

2 3 4 5

0 .3

0 .0

C. Proportion Fixatoin Number/Time

0 1

0 .4

0 .1

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

4

0 .5

0.1
0

B. Num ber of Dimensions F ixated

0 .6

0.8

Numbe r of Dimensions

3

Probability

Probability of Fixaton

Number of Dimensions.

4

Propo rtio n

A. Number of Dimensions Fixated

related and two neutral dimensions, a value of .67 (= 4/6)
reflects bias toward neither dimensions. Both proportions
start off slightly greater than .67 and then shift in favor of
the related dimensions. T-tests comparing the first and last
blocks confirmed increase in both proportions, p's < .001. In
addition, both proportions were greater than .67 in all blocks
except blocks 1 and 2, p's < .02. This result is consistent
with the fixation probabilities in Figure 2B indicating no
attentional preselection of the related dimensions (although
very weak but nonsignificant initial preference is obtained).

0

1

0.8
Fixation
number
Fixation
t ime

0.7
0.6

2

0.5
-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

Block

Figure 3: Backward learning curves from Experiment 2.
Backward learning curves. Figure 2 indicated learners'
gradual shift in attention during training. We also asked how
that shift relates to reduction in error. To address this
question, we created backward learning curves (Figure 3) by
translating each subjects' trial numbers so that their last
error occurred on trial 0. Because the primary interest was
knowledge use and its relation to error reduction, we
included only 14 of the 20 learners (i.e., knowledge users)
whose eye movements and single-feature test results both
showed obvious bias for the related dimensions. In Figure 3,
we included 60 trials (about 4 blocks) before the last error
and 28 trials (the 2 blocks of learning criterion) after the last
error. We averaged every 4 trials to obtain one data point.
Figure 3A presents the probability of error that indicates
nonzero but small number of errors until the last error. Of
greater interest are Figures 3B (number of dimensions
fixated) and 3C (fixation probabilities). First, consider the
eye fixations before the last error. Both figures indicate that
shift in attention begins from about three blocks before the
last error. T-tests confirmed that the related dimension were
fixated with greater probability than the neutral ones starting
from the data point indicated by an arrow (Figure 3C), p's
< .05. The proportion measures (Figure 3D) were also
reliably greater than .67 from the same data point, p's < .01.
These results establish that the knowledge users began shift
in attention well before solving the classification problem.
Next consider the eye fixations after the last error. Figures
3B, 3C, and 3D all indicate continued shift in attention after

233

the last error, that is, despite in the absence of error
feedback. A 2 x 7 within-subjects ANOVA was conducted
on the fixation probabilities (Figure 3C) with dimension
type (related vs. neutral) and data point (1 to 7) as factors.
There was a main effect of dimension type, F(1, 13) =
40.617, p < .001, confirming grater chance of fixating
related dimensions. There was no main effect of data point
(F < 1), but significant interaction, F(6, 78) = 5.796, p
< .001, confirmed the increase (decrease) in fixating the
related (neutral) dimensions. Considering the two dimension
types separately, fixation probabilities (Figure 3C) increased
from the first two data points to the last two (p = .10) for the
related dimensions and decreased for the neutral dimensions
(p = .09). Finally, the two proportions (Figure 3D) also
showed reliable increase for the same data points, p's < .05.

Discussion
Experiment 2 addressed our three main questions. First, eye
fixations showed that prior knowledge indeed affects
dimensional attention allocation, as learners devoted more
attention to related dimensions. Second, learners showed
only a weak or no initial attentional preference but then
gradually shifted attention to related dimensions. Third, this
shift in attention continued after the classification problem
was solved, that is, in the absence of error feedback.

General Discussion
Previous research has documented large knowledge effects
on category learning, and many investigators considered the
possibility that these effects are mediated by attention. We
discuss our findings regarding the questions we raised and
the implications they have on models of knowledge-based
category learning.
An effect of prior knowledge on attention. Using
eyetracking, we answered the most basic question that
knowledge indeed affects dimensional attention. Contra the
encoding account in the basic memory literature, we found a
robust effect of knowledge on dimensional attention. To our
knowledge, this is the first direct confirmation of the
frequent proposals that knowledge directs attention to
knowledge-relevant information (e.g., Heit & Bott, 2000;
Kruschke, 1993; Murphy & Medin, 1985; Pazzani, 1991).
Regarding feature learning, both Baywatch (Heit & Bott,
2000) and KRES (Rehder & Murphy, 2003) correctly
predicted better learning of related features (Experiments 1
& 2). However, in these models, this result has been
accounted for not by attention allocation but solely by
various forms of cue competition that arise from errordriven learning. For example, in Baywatch, related features
are learned faster because they are additionally connected to
the category label via common prior concept units that
accelerate their learning at the cost of the neutral features.
However, it is well-known that many standard effect of
cue competition can arise not only from dynamics of errordriven processes but also by attentional mechanisms (e.g.,
Kruschke, 2001). The present results suggest that such
attentional effect on cue competition on feature learning

also hold in knowledge-based category learning: Because
learners attend the neutral features less often, they will be
learned less well. Thus, neutral features were at a double
disadvantage in learning, suffering from not only the effects
of cue competition but also fewer attentional resources.
Regarding features' contribution to final classification
decisions, the neutral features were learned less well means
that they are contributing less to final classification
decisions. Also, at the end of training, they were fixated less
often. In other words, the neutral dimensions were at a
double disadvantage in classification as well—they
provided a only weak source of evidence which was largely
ignored anyway. Models, like Baywatch and KRES, assume
that information about features equally enter the network on
every trial throughout training. But, the current eye fixations
results indicate that these models are likely to overestimate
the influence of neutral dimensions on final classification
decisions because of continued input from those dimensions.
Knowledge selection in response to observed exemplars.
The second question was the time course of knowledge
effect on attention. It is appealing that the impact of
knowledge will be greatest initially and then decrease with
experience of category members, because prior knowledge
is what learners bring to the learning task as compared to
empirical observations that come later (e.g., Heit, 1995;
Pazzani, 1991). However, the eye fixations results showed
that subjects gradually allocated more eye fixations to the
related dimensions with more experience with exemplars.
We interpret this result as arising from accumulation of
semantic activations associated with the related features.
That is, the knowledge associated with related features were
not initially comprehensible, but repeated observation of
sets of related features might have lead subjects to make
sense of them via common theme (or via coherent relations
among the related features). This process does not have to
occur in a manner of "aha" experience because relations
between related features could have been noticed in a
piecemeal manner. Heit and Bott (2000) have labeled this
"knowledge selection," and like us, showed gradual effect of
knowledge on feature learning (but not on attention).
Baywatch and KRES assume that knowledge is in place
from the start of training, rather than being constructed
dynamically in response to observed category members.
However, if knowledge were active from the start, these
models predict initial attention preference for the related
dimensions, a prediction we failed to confirm. Thus,
because of the built-in knowledge representation, these
models oversimplify the process by which knowledge is
gradually activated in response to exemplar observations.
The (non)necessary role of error in attentional shift. The
third question we asked is whether error is required to
mediate attentional shift. Note that all current accounts of
attention change during learning are based on error. For
example, ALCOVE predicts gradual attention shift to
dimensions that reduce error (Kruschke, 1992). But, contra
this account, eye fixations continued to shift to related
dimensions even after subjects learned to classify all items.

234

Thus, we conclude that error is not a necessary condition for
attention shift in knowledge-based category learning.
We propose two explanations for this result. The first is
what we have already mentioned, that is, the activation of
semantic representations. In our experiment, merely
observing exemplars that consist of related features might
have been sufficient to further activate associated
representations, that is, the tundra and desert themes. This
theme discovery in the absence of error is consistent with
the extensive literature documenting knowledge effect in
unsupervised category learning. When prior knowledge is
available, subjects can come up with theme-based (family
resemblance) category construction.
The second reason that attention might shift without error
is the desire for speed that our cognitive systems are trying
to achieve—all else being equal, a faster response is more
adaptive than a slower one. One way that latency can be
decreased is by gathering less information in preparation of
a decision, and of course, to maintain accuracy, less learned
neutral dimensions were the first to go.
In supervised learning not involving prior knowledge,
Rehder and Hoffman (2005a) also found that learners first
discovered a one-dimensional rule and then, after a few
errorless trials, they discontinued attending to other
redundant dimensions. Moreover, Blair, Watson, & Meier
(2009) found that learners continued to optimize attention in
the absence of any feedback whatsoever. These results,
along with the current one, altogether pose problems for all
category learning models that tie attention to error-driven
mechanisms (e.g., Kruschke, 1992).

Summary
Using eyetracking, we found that (a) knowledge directs
attention to related dimensions and away from unrelated
ones, (b) this effect did not emerge immediately but
gradually emerged in response to observing category
members, and (c) this effect grew even after the last error,
that is, in the absence of error. Models of knowledge-based
category learning will remain incomplete until they include
attention mechanisms that explain these empirical results.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0545298.

References
Blair, M., Watson, M. R., & Meier, K., M. (2009). Errors,
efficiency, and the interplay between attention and
category learning. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Bott, L., Hoffman, A., & Murphy, G. L. (2007). Blocking in
category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 136, 685-699.
Heit, E. (1995). Belief revision in models of category
learning. In J. D. Moore & J. F. Lehman (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 176-181). Mahwah, NJ:

Erlbaum.
Heit, E., & Bott, L. (2000). Knowledge selection in category
learning. In D. L. Medin (Ed.), Psychology of learning
and motivation (pp. 163-199). San Diego: Academic
Press.
Kaplan, A. S., & Murphy, G. L. (2000). Category learning
with minimal prior knowledge. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 829846.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological
Review, 99, 22-44.
Kruschke, J. K. (1993). Three principles for models of
category learning. In G. V. Nakamura, R. Taraban, & D.
L. Medin (Eds.), Categorization by humans and
machines: The psychology of learning and motivation
(Vol. 29, pp. 57-90). San Diego: Academic Press.
Kruschke, J. K. (2001). Toward a unified model of attention
in associative learning. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 45, 812-863.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Murphy, G. L., & Allopenna, P. D. (1994). The locus of
knowledge effects in concept learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 904-919.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1992). Exemplars, prototypes, and
similarity rules. In A. F. Healy, S. M. Kosslyn, & R. M.
Shiffrin (Eds.), From learning processes to cognitive
processes: Essays in honor of William K. Estes (pp. 149167). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pazzani, M. (1991). The influence of prior knowledge on
concept acquisition: Experimental and computational
results. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition, 17, 416-432.
Rehder, B., & Murphy, G. L. (2003). A KnowledgeResonance (KRES) model of category learning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10, 759-784.
Rehder, B. & Hoffman, A.B. (2005a). Eyetracking and
selective attention in category learning. Cognitive
Psychology, 51, 1-41.
Rehder, B., & Hoffman, A. B. (2005b). Thirty-something
categorization results explained: Selective attention,
eyetracking, and models of category learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 31, 811-829.
Rehder, B., Colner, R. M., & Hoffman, A. B. (2009).
Feature inference learning and eyetracking. Journal of
Memory & Language, 60, 394-419.
Shepard, R. N., Hovland, C. L., & Jenkins, H. M. (1961).
Learning
and
memorization
of classifications.
Psychological Monographs, 75, (13, Whole No. 517).
Smith, E. E., Patalano, A. L., & Jonides, J. (1998).
Alternative strategies of categorization. Cognition, 65,
167-196.

235

