UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language Differences in Bilingual Parent Number Speech to Preschool-Aged Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8fd7f88j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Chang, Alicia
Sandhofer, Catherine

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language Differences in Bilingual Parent Number Speech
to Preschool-Aged Children
Alicia Chang (aliciac@pitt.edu)
Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O’Hara Street
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA

Catherine M. Sandhofer (sandhof@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of California, Los Angeles, 1285 Franz Hall, Box 951563
Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
Abstract

specifically, previous findings on language input strongly
suggest that parents who frequently talk about number
should have children who acquire numerical terms more
readily and more deeply than children who hear number
terms less often. Such findings have strong implications for
numeric input, and indeed, recent research (Suriyakham,
Levine, & Huttenlocher, 2006) finds that children who hear
more number words at 30 months of age say more number
terms at 30 and 38 months of age. As a whole, these
findings suggest that differences in numeric language input
may result in different levels of numerical competence and
thus may factor into the early differences between Englishspeaking and Mandarin-speaking children in tests of
mathematical performance (e.g., Mullis et al., 2004).

Number-specific parental language input has been shown to
influence children’s number word acquisition (Suriyakham,
Levine, & Huttenlocher, 2006). That is, the more frequently
children hear number words and concepts, the more readily
they acquire them. In a cross-national study, Mandarinspeaking Chinese parents were found to use significantly
more number language than their English-speaking
counterparts when interacting with their preschool-aged
children in naturalistic settings (Chang et al., under review).
The current study examined parental numeric language input
to preschool children in Mandarin-English bilingual speaking
American parents. Results were consistent with a previous
cross-national, cross-linguistic investigation, and suggest that
early exposure to Mandarin Chinese, whether in a
monolingual or bilingual setting, provides young children
with more instances and examples of the cardinal number
principle than their monolingual English-speaking peers.
Keywords: bilingualism; child-directed
linguistic; language development; number.

speech;

Language and Number
Differences in mathematical achievement between
Mandarin Chinese and English speaking children have been
widely and consistently documented (e.g., the Trends in
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS);
Mullis et al., 2004). Children in Mandarin speaking
countries have outperformed their English-speaking
counterparts in both the fourth and eighth grades on each
successive year of the TIMSS since its inception in 1995.
Moreover, other cross-national studies have found superior
performance for Mandarin speakers at even younger ages.
On achievement tests based on the content of their
respective textbooks, Chinese first graders outperformed
American first graders on computation and story problems
(Stevenson, Lee, & Stigler, 1986). Although a majority of
comparative research has focused on school-aged children,
studies have shown that even prior to formal schooling,
Chinese children outperform American children in mental
addition (Geary et al., 1993). At the start of kindergarten,
Chinese children, who had not yet received any formal
education, showed a 3:1 advantage over their American
counterparts on a paper-and-pencil test of addition.
While a wide body of research has examined educational,
cultural, as well as linguistic factors that might account for
the disparities in mathematical performance between
Mandarin and English speaking children, the remainder of
this paper will focus on structural and pragmatic differences

cross-

Introduction
Prior to formal schooling, parental language input has been
shown to be an important source of informal learning for
young children. For example, a direct relationship has been
shown between child vocabulary acquisition and the overall
amount of parental language spoken to children during daily
activities (Huttenlocher et al., 1991). More specifically, the
types and tokens that appear in parents’ speech to children
appear to influence the words earliest acquired in children’s
vocabularies. For instance, the more often a particular verb
is used in parents’ speech, the more often that same verb
appears in children’s speech in subsequent weeks (Naigles
& Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998). Although most input studies have
suggested that breadth of vocabulary is directly related to
input frequency, it is also noteworthy that depth of
vocabulary, or understanding of words and their meanings,
is also strongly related to frequency of input (Vermeer,
2001). Given the strong relationship between parental
language input and children’s acquisition, an understanding
of the type of numeric language children hear is critical for
understanding children’s numerical development. While
few studies have examined parental number speech

887

between the two languages that may lead to divergence in
the amount and type of number speech that parents use
when interacting with their children.

population makes it difficult to disentangle the influences of
language alone from cultural context.
The present study Although the previous results (Chang et
al., under review) indicated that there are definite
differences in the ways Mandarin and English speaking
parents talk to their children about number that might have a
later impact on numerical vocabulary and concept
acquisition, the naturalistic methods used to examine
parental speech, as well as the nature of the transcripts
analyzed did not allow careful examination of the reasons
underlying the differences in parental input.
More
specifically, language and culture could not be uncoupled in
each language group, as the observations transcribed were
taken of monolingual speakers in different countries and
cultural contexts. Thus, the individual influences of either
language or culture alone on parent number speech could
not be determined. Furthermore, the methodology used did
not allow the original observers to control for the
stimulation provided to each parent-child pair.
The current study considers similar questions, but focuses
on the influences of language on parental numeric input,
while employing an experimental design controlling for
language as well as culture. In this design, MandarinEnglish bilingual speaking parents and their preschool-aged
children were recruited to serve as participants. All
participants were residents of Southern California, and were
proficient in both languages. Therefore, experimenters
could instruct the parent to speak in one language at a time
within the research paradigm and examine speech provided
in each language. Additionally, culture was kept constant,
as all recruited parents lived and worked in the Los Angeles
and San Gabriel Valley areas, and all children were enrolled
in English speaking daycare or preschool programs.
Finally, a within-subjects design was used – each parent
spoke in both English and Mandarin, using each language
for half of the experimental session, providing equivalent
control groups for each language, which was not possible in
a cross-national design.
The design implemented in the present study allows
examination of the linguistic influences on parental number
input without the confound of culture. The results obtained
from the present study were analyzed to determine any
cross-linguistic differences in number speech. A survey was
also given to assess the attitudes of bilingual, bicultural
parents on math and education.

Cross-linguistic differences In a cross-national, crosslinguistic examination of naturalistic Mandarin Chinese and
English transcripts from the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney & Snow, 1990), Chang and colleagues (under
review) found several distinct differences in the number
language used by Mandarin speaking parents and English
speaking parents when speaking to their preschool-aged
children (mean age 23.4 months).
When examining all instances of number terms (e.g.,
“one,” “twenty-seven”) and questions or requests for
quantities (e.g., “How many cats are there?” “Can you count
these?”), Mandarin speaking parents talked about number
more often than English speaking parents overall. However,
there were also marked differences in the types of number
constructions that were used between the two languages.
While “one” was the most commonly used number term in
both languages, English speaking parents most often used
“one” as a pronoun (i.e., in place of a noun, such as that one
instead of that dog, without directly naming its noun
referent), rather than as a numeric label. Pronouns were also
the most frequent type of number utterance found in the
English speaking sample. Conversely, pronoun usages of
“one” and other numbers were found significantly less often
in the Mandarin speaking sample.
Chinese parents used numbers in cardinal constructions
(e.g., “liang31 zhi1 lao2 hu3,” or “two tigers”) to directly
quantify sets of objects most often, and significantly more
often than English speaking parents. Classifiers, or measure
words (e.g., “slice” or “sheet” in English), were found in the
majority of cardinal number utterances in Mandarin, but
were essentially absent across all English transcripts.
References to written numerals (e.g., the numeral “3” or
“san1” written as its Chinese character), as well as ordinal
numbers, or sequences (e.g., “fourth,” “di4 si4”) were also
significantly more frequent in the Mandarin sample.
In sum, the sheer amount of numeric language input that
native Mandarin speaking children receive from their
parents may contribute to earlier and deeper understanding
and acquisition of number words and concepts. Further, the
types of numeric input in Chinese parents’ speech –
especially cardinal numbers, which point to specific
quantities – may guide young children’s attention to the
concept of set size, or the cardinal number principle, while
giving them more practice with quantities than their English
speaking peers.
However, despite the clear cross-linguistic differences in
the content of parental numeric speech across the Mandarin
and English samples, the nature of the data and each

Method
Participants
Twenty-two Mandarin Chinese-English bilingual parentchild dyads volunteered to participate in this study. The
participants consisted of 11 male and 11 female preschoolaged children (mean age 49.14 months, SD=10.60 months,
range 29 months to 69 months), 20 mothers, and two
fathers. The mean age of parent participants was 38.36
years (SD=4.02 years, range 31 to 49 years). At the time of

1

Throughout this paper, Hanyu pinyin, a standardized
Romanization system for Mandarin Chinese, is used to represent
Chinese characters. The number next to each Romanized character
denotes the tone (1-4) that is used to correctly pronounce the
character in Mandarin.

888

testing, none of the children had yet to enter kindergarten.
Parents and children were recruited from preschools,
childcare centers, and Chinese language schools in Los
Angeles and San Gabriel Valley area communities.
Twenty-one parents identified as native Mandarin speakers,
and one identified as a native Cantonese speaker who selfreported “good” speaking and listening Mandarin abilities.
All parents reported English as their second language.
Fourteen of the parents were natives of Taiwan, R.O.C., six
reported that they originated from the People’s Republic of
China, and two were from Hong Kong, China. On average,
parents had lived in the United States for 14.24 years
(SD=7.29 years, range=3 to 26 years), and began learning
English at 12.59 years of age (SD=2.68 years, range=5 to 20
years of age). Participants were tested in the laboratory, at
their preschool or childcare center, or in their homes.

picture book at home. The researchers also requested that
parents avoid code mixing, and told parents that they would
be asked to switch languages later in the study. They were
not timed. The entire session was recorded on digital
camcorder.
After viewing and discussing the first set of 20 pictures in
the assigned first language, children were given a fiveminute play break during which they played with toys such
as Play-Doh or stuffed animals. Parents were asked to
continue playing with their child while using the first
assigned language as if they were doing so at home.
Approximately two minutes and 30 seconds into the play
period, parents were asked to switch into the second
assigned language, and to continue playing while speaking
the second language. This break allowed children a rest
period from looking at the photographs, and was further
used as parent speech samples in each language, to assess
parental fluency. Finally, the break served as a transition
period in which subjects became accustomed to speaking in
the second assigned language.
Parents and children were next presented with the second
set of 20 stimuli. Parents were asked to discuss the second
set of 20 pictures in the second assigned language with their
child, as if they were doing so at home. They were not
timed during the second picture book session.
After completing discussion of the second set of 20
photographs, the child’s numerical competence was
assessed by asking him to count and label quantities of
objects.

Materials
Forty full-color photographs of familiar objects were
chosen as the stimuli for this experiment. Each stimulus
appeared as an approximately 4 in by 5 in (10.16 cm by
12.70 cm) color photograph centered on a 8.5 in by 11 in
(21.59 cm by 27.94 cm) sheet of white matte presentation
paper. Objects were chosen to be familiar to both parents
and children (e.g., common animals, toys, household items)
and to be readily identifiable in both Mandarin and English.
Twenty of these photographs were selected because they
depicted good examples of cardinal number situations
(easily quantifiable sets of objects, e.g., nine crayons) that
did not require the use of a classifier (e.g., piece or pair) in
English. The remaining 20 photographs were selected
because they depicted good examples of settings where a
classifier could be used when labeling quantities.
Classifiers are nouns that indicate a unit of measurement
(e.g., two glasses of water, liang3 zhi1 mao1) when labeling
quantities. Fluent bilingual speakers confirmed that these
20 objects typically co-occurred with a classifying noun in
both Mandarin and English.
In each set of 20 photographs, all quantities from one to
ten appeared twice.
In order to minimize demand
characteristics, stimuli were chosen such that they depicted
several dimensions (including number) so that parents could
discuss other attributes than number if they so chose, such
as color and shape. The 40 photographs were
counterbalanced for order and divided into two sets of 20
stimuli each (one for each language) for each subject. This
process was repeated three additional times to create a total
of four counterbalanced orders of stimuli. Across the four
orders, each stimulus appeared an equal number of times in
the first half and the second half, and never appeared more
than once in each counterbalanced order of 40 stimuli.
Orders were created to allow opportunities to use English
classifiers during half of each set of stimuli.

Data Analysis
Recordings of the experimental sessions were examined for
number-related speech. “Number utterances” were defined
as speech that included a number term (e.g., one, two, first,
second, etc.) or a counting question or request, such as “how
many are there?” or “can you count these?” Bilingual
coders viewed the recordings, identified, and categorized all
number utterances. Interrater agreement between coders
across over 20% of the recordings was 94.03%. MandarinEnglish bilingual coders viewed the recordings and selected
all number utterances that occurred with each stimulus,
recorded the utterance and noted its speaker. Number
utterances were also coded for the following types.
Cardinal Cardinal utterances included specific references to
quantity when describing an object (e.g., one shirt, yi1 ding3
mao4 zi) or a set of objects (six kittens, liu4 zhi1 xiao3 ya1
zi).
Counting routine Counting routines occurred when the
child or parent counted objects without specifically labeling
them (e.g., “one, two, three, four, five,” “yi1 er4 san1 si4”).
These sequences typically occurred after parents asked
counting questions, which were also identified and recorded.

Procedure

Counting questions Counting questions occurred when the
parent asked the child to count a set of objects or to

Parents were assigned to discuss 20 pictures in Mandarin
or English with their child as if they were looking at a

889

Pronoun versus non-pronoun utterances

otherwise indicate a quantity (e.g., “How many are there?”
“Can you count the ducks?” “You3 ji3 ge4 qian1 bi2?”
“Shu3 yi1 shu3 kan4 you3 ji3 ge4 gou3 gou.”).

Parents used number terms in several ways in their
interactions with their children. One of these forms was the
pronominal form, which occurred when number terms such
as “one” were used in place of a noun (e.g., “Which one do
you like the best?” “Ni3 xi3 huan1 zhe4 yi1 ge4 ma?”)
without affecting the grammaticality or semantics of the
sentence. That is, the parent could have replaced the
number term with a noun such as “dog,” or “[zhi1] gou3,”
without affecting the meaning of their speech. Pronominal
number utterances were coded separately from non-pronoun
usages of number, which were defined as the use of a
number term that could not be grammatically replaced with
another noun. Pronoun and non-pronoun forms of number
statements were examined separately because they express
slightly different meanings. For example, “this one is red”
and “this crayon is red” share similar meanings, specifically
that red is a property of a crayon. In these phrases, the
number term does not serve as an explicit quantifier. The
example “this one is red” would have been coded as a
pronoun utterance in the present study. On the other hand,
“there is one red crayon” emphasizes the quantity of crayons
that are red, and would have been coded as a cardinal
number utterance. Both “one” and “red” in this example act
as descriptors of the crayon, with “one” serving as a
quantifier.
In general, parents made more pronoun number utterances
when they were speaking English (M=3.773, SD=4.09, for a
total of 166 utterances) compared to when they were
speaking Mandarin (M=2.068, SD=2.76, for a total of 91
utterances). Pronoun number utterances made up 40.39% of
parental number speech in English, but only 17.5% of
parental number speech in Mandarin. A paired-samples ttest showed a strong trend suggesting that pronoun number
utterances are made more often when parents speak English
(M=3.77, SD=4.09) compared to when parents speak
Mandarin, t(21) = 4.021, p = 0.058.
Between Mandarin and English, the amount of nonpronoun number speech differed substantially. Figure 2
presents the average number of pronoun and non-pronoun
number utterances spoken by parents in both languages.
When speaking Mandarin, parents used a greater amount of
non-pronoun number speech (M=9.750, SD=11.76, 429
total utterances) than when speaking English (M=5.57,
SD=4.80, 245 total utterances). A paired-samples t-test
revealed significant language differences, t(21) = 7.212, p <
0.05.

Pronoun Pronoun usage, or the use of a number term
without a direct cardinal referent in cases where the number
term could be grammatically replaced with a noun (e.g., this
one, these two, zhe4 yi1 ge4, na4 liang3 ge4), was also
noted.
Idiom Idiomatic usage of number terms, particularly the
number one (yi1), which occurs regularly in Mandarin, was
also identified and categorized. These types of utterances
typically occurred when parents compared objects within
pictures, and declared them “the same” or “one type,” or
“yi1 yang4” (e.g., “zhe4 liang3 zhi1 gou3 xiang4 ni3 de yi1
yang4,” which translates to “these two dogs are the same as
yours”).
Other categories Other documented categories of number
speech that occurred rarely during this experiment included
references to money (e.g., $4.25), age (e.g., one year old),
and other number utterances that did not fall into one of the
previously mentioned categories.

Results
Figure 1 shows the average number of overall parental
number utterances spoken in Mandarin and English. Across
both languages, parents talked about number an average of
42.36 times (SD=43.97, range 0 to 154). When speaking
Mandarin, parents made an average of 23.82 number
utterances (SD=28.22, range 0 to 114). When speaking
English, the same parents made an average of 18.59 number
utterances (SD=18.66, range 0 to 75). There did not appear
to be any particular stimuli that generally elicited
significantly greater or fewer number utterances than other
stimuli in either or both languages. A paired-samples t-test
did not reveal significant differences in the amount of
parental number speech between languages.

Figure 1. Mean overall parental number speech by language
(n.s.)

890

subjects ANOVAs compared parental number language
input across languages and levels of number skill. Analyses
revealed a strong trend of parents speaking a greater amount
of cardinal and other non-pronoun forms of number terms
when discussing cardinal number stimuli to children with
higher number skill (M=12.136, SD=9.147) compared to
when they spoke to children with lower number skill
(M=4.773, SD=8.01), F(1,21) = 3.881, p = 0.077. A
significant interaction was also found between language and
number skill when parents used number in non-pronominal
forms while discussing cardinal number stimuli, such that
children were most likely to receive Mandarin number
speech in these categories if they were more highly skilled
in counting, F(1,21) = 5.038, p < 0.05.

Figure 2. Types of parental number speech by language

Discussion

Other number categories

The present study aimed to determine whether parental
number speech to preschool aged children varies between
Mandarin Chinese and English in bilingual speakers of both
languages.
Similar to previous work, pronoun number utterances
were made much more often in English than in Mandarin.
Pronoun number utterances were relatively uncommon in
Mandarin. This suggests that the similar trend among native
monolingual speakers in English is not based in cultural
differences between English and Mandarin speakers
residing in different countries, as the same result was found
within these bilingual subjects when speaking English.
Also, because pronominal usage of number terms does not
emphasize the dimension of quantity as clearly as cardinal
number constructions (“that one,” as opposed to “one
shirt”), this finding suggests that even bilingual children
receive less explicit numeric input in English compared to
Mandarin. However, this result does not completely rule
out culture as a contributor to cross-linguistic differences in
input. The prevalence of pronoun number speech in
English, and the greater amount of counting questions and
cardinal constructions used in Mandarin suggests that these
bilingual preschoolers may gain a greater understanding of
the concepts of cardinality, quantity and number-related
vocabulary words through Mandarin, but not necessarily
English.
Indeed, when examining the non-pronominal number
utterances between the two languages, these utterances
occurred significantly more often when parents spoke
Mandarin.
The two most commonly spoken nonpronominal number utterances were cardinal numbers and
counting questions. Both of these types of number speech
occurred more often when parents spoke Mandarin.
In a cardinal number statement, the number term is used
as a descriptor, or adjective, which modifies the noun it is
quantifying. Previous research has indicated that children
are more likely to learn the meanings of novel adjectives
when the words are used as modifiers for “strong” nouns
with coherent category information (e.g., Mintz & Gleitman,
2002). In the present study, all objects were chosen as
familiar members of coherent categories such as animals,

Idiomatic phrases containing number were significantly
more common in Mandarin, and parents tended to use
cardinal numbers and ask counting questions more
frequently in Mandarin as well. There were no significant
differences in the frequency of counting routines between
languages.

Classifiers
In a majority of Mandarin number speech, parents used
classifiers, modifiers indicating units of measure (e.g.,
“slices” in seven slices of pizza, or “tiao2”in “jiu3 tiao2 ku4
zi”) when discussing photo stimuli with their children.
Classifiers were used in 69.39% of all Mandarin number
utterances. On the other hand, classifiers were used in
English extremely rarely – only five times overall. These
comprised only 1.22% of all English parental number
utterances.
A paired-samples t-test revealed significant language
differences, such that parents made many more number
utterances using classifiers when speaking Mandarin
compared to when speaking English, t(21) = 11.296, p <
0.01.

Counting Tasks
Children were awarded one “point” for correct
completion of each of the following ten counting tasks:
counting in English and Mandarin, giving 3 and 5 objects in
both languages, as well as choosing between 4 and 5, and 7
and 9 in both languages). Scores ranged from 1 to 10, with
a mean score of 6.18 (Median=6.50, SD=3.22). Children
with scores higher than 6.50 (the median score) were
considered “higher skilled” and children with scores below
the median were considered “lower skilled.” Eleven
children fell into each category. The average age of the
children in the higher skilled group was 56.36 months
(Median=58 months, SD=7.76), while the average age of
children in the lower skilled group was 41.91 months
(Median=42 months, SD=7.80).
To determine whether amount of parental number speech
differed as a function of child counting skill, 2x2 within-

891

food items, and household objects. In line with prior
findings, the greater exposure to cardinal number statements
that children receive when their parents speak Mandarin
may help them learn the meanings of number terms when
used in adjectival form to a much greater extent than when
they hear number terms in a more indefinite form, such as
the pronominal form commonly found in English number
speech.
Because true understanding of mathematical
operations presupposes knowledge of the cardinal principle
of number, the understanding of cardinality that may arise
from Mandarin number input that bilingual children are
receiving prior to formal schooling may in fact help them
learn how to manipulate numbers earlier and with more ease
than their monolingual English speaking peers. Because the
children in the present study interact with their parents at
home mostly in Mandarin, it may be reasonable to infer that
in everyday interaction with their parents, they are receiving
many more cardinal number statements than pronominal
number statements, which not only suggests that their
number-related Mandarin vocabulary and concept
development may be more advanced than English
monolingual children of the same age, but also supports the
idea that these bilingual preschoolers may show similar
mathematical advantages to the Chinese pre-kindergarteners
in the Geary et al. (1993) study due to the numeric input
they are receiving from their parents.
Nonetheless, the similarity in Mandarin number input
between the bilingual sample in the present study and the
Mandarin sample in the Chang et al. cross-national study
suggests that parental number speech may not differ
significantly based on the host culture in which the language
is used. In the same way, the frequency of English
pronominal number utterances was comparable between
English monolingual speakers in the previous study and
speakers of English as a second language in the present
study. These results indicate that exposure to Mandarin
Chinese during preschool ages provides children with more
experience with direct quantification of objects and usage of
classifiers, which imply cardinality. The amount and
frequency of these types of number utterances may help
children to develop an earlier understanding of the cardinal
principle of number than their monolingual English
speaking peers, who receive less input of this nature from
their parents’ speech. Therefore, speaking or hearing
Mandarin as a first language, specifically as the majority
language of interaction with caregivers, may be a
contributor to the math advantage prior to entering formal
schooling seen in Mandarin speaking children (Geary et al.,
1993). Due to the strong coupling between language and
culture, it is impossible to rule cultural influences out
completely as a cause for the cross-linguistic differences
seen in bilingual parental numeric input, although the results
do suggest that the usage and knowledge of Mandarin
Chinese alone may affect parents’ number speech to their
children.
Consequently, child speakers of Mandarin,
whether monolingual or bilingual, may already differ from
monolingual child speakers of English in their

understanding of, and their ability to count and manipulate
numbers by the beginning of kindergarten, due to the
disparate frequencies, amounts, and types of number
language input they receive from everyday interaction with
their caregivers. In this case, a preschool math advantage
due to parental input may then be an early contributor to
later differences in mathematical achievement seen across
cultures and languages throughout formal education.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by a UCLA Department
of Psychology Excellence in Research Award for the first
author. Special thanks to Tammy Ko, Tiffany Tseng, and
Olivia Wu for subject recruitment and data collection, and
the UCLA Language and Cognitive Development Lab,
Alison Bailey, Alan Castel, and Jim Stigler for helpful
comments and suggestions.

References
Chang, A., Sandhofer, C.M., Adelchanow, L., & Rottman,
B. (under review). Parental numeric language input to
Mandarin Chinese and English speaking preschool
children.
Geary, D.C., Bow-Thomas, C.C., Fan, L., & Siegler, R.S.
(1993). Even before formal instruction, Chinese children
outperform American children in mental addition.
Cognitive Development, 8(4), 517-529.
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Seltzer, M., &
Lyons, T. (1991). Early Vocabulary Growth: Relation to
Language Input and Gender. Developmental Psychology,
27(2), 236-248.
MacWhinney, B. & Snow, C. (1990). The Child Language
Data Exchange System: an update. Journal of Child
Language, 17, 457-472.
Mintz, T.H., & Gleitman, L. R. (2002). Modifiers really do
modify nouns: The incremental and restricted nature of
early modifier acquisition. Cognition, 84, 267-293.
Mullis, I.V.S., Martin, M.O., Gonzalez, E.J., &
Chrostowski, S.J. (2004). Findings from IEA’s Trends in
International Mathematics Science Study at the Fourth
and Eighth Grades. Chestnut Hill, MA: TIMSS & PIRLS
International Study Center, Boston College.
Naigles, L.R., & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are some
verbs learned before other verbs? Effects of input
frequency and structure on children’s early verb use.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 95-120.
Stevenson, H.W., Lee, S.-Y., & Stigler, J.W. (1986).
Mathematics Achievement of Chinese, Japanese, and
American Children. Science, 231(4739), 693-699.
Suriyakham, L.W., Levine, S.C., & Huttenlocher, J. (2006).
A Naturalistic Study of Input Effects on the Development
of Number Concepts. Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 2613.
Vermeer, A. (2001). Breadth and depth of vocabulary in
relation to L1/L2 acquisition and frequency of input.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 22(2), 217-234.

892

