UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Words from Context: A Powerful Associative Mechanism of Early Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sk421px

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Sloutsky, Vladimir
Yao, Xin

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Words from Context: A Powerful Associative Mechanism of Early
Word Learning
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu) and Xin Yao (yao.64@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science and Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
Keywords: Cognitive Development, Attention, Language
Acquisition, Psychology, Human Experimentation.

activate properties associated with animacy, thus
guiding learning of the word dax. Although this
associative mechanism does not offer a complete
solution to the mapping or generalization problems, it
presents evidence that reasoning and problem solving
are not necessary for word learning.
This ability to learn words from a semantic context
was tested in the five experiments with 4-5 year-olds.
In all these experiments participants were presented
with a modified word learning task, in which a novel
count noun was embedded in a list of familiar words
(either nouns or adjectives). Participants were then
asked to extend this novel word to either animals or
artifacts. In some conditions, the words on the list
were semantic associates of the word animal,
whereas in other the words were animals, but had no
forward associative strength with the word animal.
It was found that word learning was successful in
those conditions where, according to reasoning
accounts, it should fail. These results support the
proposed associative mechanism of word learning,
while posing problems for reasoning accounts.

Word learning consists of several very difficult
problems. First, when presented with a novel word, the
young word learner has to solve a mapping problem –
how to map the word in question onto the world. And
second, the word learner has to solve a generalization
problem – given that most of the time words can be
extended to multiple individuals, it is necessary to
determine the class of entities the word refers to. Both
problems are massively underdetermined by the input.
Given this massive uncertainty, how do young children
acquire meanings of new words?
Several ideas have been proposed to explain the word
learner’s ability to handle this word-world indeterminacy.
According to one approach, the problem of word learning
requires reasoning and problem solving skills (see Bloom,
2000, for a review). One proposal within this approach is
that young word learners use their knowledge about the
language and the world to select a correct word-world
mapping and this knowledge helps them to zero in on a
correct hypothesis (Markman, 1989; Xu & Tenenbaum,
2007).
Under a different view, there are multiple mutually
reinforcing correlations among language, perceptual
properties and category structure (i.e., distribution of
perceptual features within and between categories) and
reliance on these correlations may help solving the
mapping and generalization problems (e.g., Samuelson &
Smith, 1999; Colunga & Smith, 2005).
In this work, we suggest that the there is another source
of statistical information that can help the learner to solve
the mapping and generalization problems. It has been
known for some time that statistical regularities in
linguistic input are often reflected in associations between
words: early in development words that co-occur in
sentences and have high transitional probabilities (e.g.,
dog and bark) tend to be highly associated (Brown &
Berko, 1960; Nelson, 1977).
At the same time,
associations among taxonomically related words (e.g., cat
and dog) are not present until later in development. If
words are associated, then presence of one word can
prime the associated words.
If this is the case, then the semantic context, in which a
novel word is introduced, may provide additional
guidance as to what this word might mean by triggering
semantic associations. For example, in a sentence “look
at this dax, he is very cute”, the words cute and he could

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by grants from the
This research was supported by grants from NSF
(BCS-0720135) and from the US Department of
Education (R305H050125 and R305B070407) to
Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings
of words. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Brown, R., & Berko, J. (1960). Word association and
the acquisition of grammar. Child Development,
31, 1–14.
Colunga, E. & Smith, L.B. (2005) From the lexicon
to expectations about kinds: A role for associative
learning. Psychological Review, 112, 347-382.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming
in children. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nelson, K. (1977). The Syntagmatic-Paradigmatic
shift revisited: A review of research and theory.
Psychological Bulletin, 84, 93-116.
Samuelson, L. K., & Smith, L. B. (1999). Early noun
vocabularies: do ontology, category structure and
syntax correspond? Cognition, 73, 1-33.
Xu, F., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Word learning
as Bayesian inference. Psychological Review, 114,
245–272.

1
273

