UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mathematical Cognition and its Cultural Dimension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6df9543b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Beller, Sieghard
Bender, Andrea
Brysbaert, Marc
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mathematical Cognition and its Cultural Dimension
Organizers
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology
University of Freiburg, Germany

Presenters
Marc Brysbaert (marc.brysbaert@ugent.be)
Department of Experimental Psychology
Ghent University, Belgium

Stanislas Dehaene (stanislas.dehaene@gmail.com)
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Paris, France

Heike Wiese (heike.wiese@uni-potsdam.de)
German Department
University of Potsdam, Germany

Recent research has uncovered an increasing range of mathematical notions that are accessible to intuition. Numerosity,
for instance, may be represented in an analog magnitude
code that we even share with non-human species (Feigenson,
Dehaene & Spelke, 2004). Similar findings are documented
for topological and other geometrical notions (Dehaene et
al., 2006). For precise operations, however, these intuitions
need to be framed into more elaborate representations, and
the way in which they are represented and the emphasis
placed on them varies across languages and cultures.
Even so simple an act as precisely assessing numbers
requires a cultural representation, namely a counting
sequence (Frank et al., 2008; Gordon, 2004; Wiese, 2003).
The number words of which such sequences consist constitute distinct numeration systems with specific properties and
do not only provide indispensable tools for counting and calculating, but may also affect the way in which numbers are
processed (Chrisomalis, 2004; Fuson & Kwon, 1991; Miller
et al., 1995; Nickerson, 1988; Schlimm & Neth, 2008; Zhang
& Norman, 1995). The mathematical domain thus offers a
great opportunity to study interactions between culture and
cognition—a research agenda that is increasingly recognized
as one of prime interest for cognitive science.
In their attempt to unravel these interactions, the contributions to this symposium will focus on several related topics—the cognitive architecture for mathematical cognition,
the evolution of mathematical representations and cognitive
skills, or the impact of representations on the cognitive processes—and they will do so from various perspectives, drawing on findings and insights from anthropology, cognitive
sciences, linguistics, and psychology. Among the core questions to be addressed are the following:
(1) Which of our mathematical competencies are intuitive,
and to what extent do they depend on cultural representations?

(2) How strongly do the properties of these representations
affect cognitive processing?
(3) And how have characteristics of cognitive processes enhanced or constrained the development of culture-specific representations?
In order to answer these questions and to disentangle the intricate relationship of mathematical notions, cultural representations, linguistic phrasing, and cognitive processing, this
symposium brings together researchers from different disciplinary backgrounds. It is co-organized by an anthropologist
and a psychologist who will give an introduction to the symposium’s topic by summarizing some of the cognitive implications that culture-specific representations may have for
numerical cognition (e.g., Beller & Bender, 2008; Bender &
Beller, 2007). The presenters are among the leading scientists in their fields and have contributed considerably to the
expanding knowledge on mathematical cognition in the form
of comprehensive monographs and articles in high ranking
journals such as Cognition, Lingua, or Science:
• Psychologist Marc Brysbaert of Ghent University has
worked on basic numerical processes and how these may
be affected by linguistic representations (Brysbaert,
2005; Brysbaert, Fias & Noël, 1998; Reynvoet & Brysbaert, 1999).
• Last year’s winner of the Dr. A. H. Heineken Prize for
Cognitive Science, Stanislas Dehaene from CNRS in
Paris, has published extensively on the cognitive architecture of numerical cognition and on mathematical intuitions in cultures without mathematical vocabulary and
education (e.g., Dehaene, 1997; Dehaene et al., 2006,
2008; Pica et al., 2004).
• And linguist Heike Wiese from the University of Potsdam has analyzed the status of counting words as language-dependent numerical tools and their co-evolution
with numerical cognition (Wiese, 2003, 2007).

2079

How Do People Process Numbers?

References

Marc Brysbaert

Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2008). The limits of counting:
Numerical cognition between evolution and culture. Science, 319, 213-215.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2007). Counting in Tongan: The traditional number systems and their cognitive implications.
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 7, 213-239.
Brysbaert, M. (2005). Number recognition in different formats. In J. I. D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical cognition. Hove: Psychology Press.
Brysbaert, M., Fias, W., & Noël, M.-P. (1998). The Whorfian
hypothesis and numerical cognition: Is ‘twenty-four’ processed in the same way as ‘four-and-twenty’? Cognition,
66, 51-77.
Chrisomalis, S. (2004). A cognitive typology for numerical
notation. Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 14, 37-52.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dehaene, S., Izard, V., Pica, P., & Spelke, E. (2006). Core
knowledge of geometry in an Amazonian indigene group.
Science, 311, 381-384
Dehaene, S., Izard, V., Spelke, E., & Pica, P. (2008). Log or
linear? Distinct intuitions of the number scale in Western
and Amazonian indigene cultures. Science, 320, 12171220.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307-314.
Frank, M. C., Everett, D. L., Fedorenko, E., & Gibson, E.
(2008). Number as a cognitive technology: Evidence from
Pirahã language and cognition. Cognition, 108, 819-824.
Fuson, K. C., & Kwon, Y. (1991). Chinese-based regular and
European irregular systems of number words: The disadvantages for English-speaking children. In K. Durkin & B.
Shire (Eds.), Language in mathematical education. Milton
Keynes: Open University Press.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical cognition without words: Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306, 496-499.
Miller, K., Smith, C. M., Zhu, J., & Zhang, H. (1995). Preschool origins of cross-national differences in mathematical competence: The role of number-naming systems.
Psychological Science, 6, 56-60.
Nickerson, R. S. (1988). Counting, computing, and the representation of numbers. Human Factors, 30, 181-199.
Pica, P., Lemer, C., Izard, V., & Dehaene, S. (2004). Exact
and approximate arithmetic in an Amazonian indigene
group. Science, 306, 499-503.
Reynvoet, B., & Brysbaert, M. (1999). Single-digit and twodigit Arabic numerals address the same semantic number
line. Cognition, 72, 191-201.
Schlimm, D., & Neth, H. (2008). Modeling ancient and modern arithmetic practices: Addition and multiplication with
Arabic and Roman numerals. In B. C. Love et al. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin: Cognitive Science Society.
Wiese, H. (2003). Numbers, language, and the human mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wiese, H. (2007). The co-evolution of number concepts and
counting words. Lingua, 117, 758-772.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1995). A representational analysis of numeration systems. Cognition, 57, 271-295.

This talk gives a review of the cognitive processes underlying number processing. The first part includes a summary of
the main variables affecting number processing times, namely the magnitude of the number, the distance to the previous
number, and spatial information activated by the number.
This is followed by an overview of the current ideas about
the impact of the numerical format (verbal, Arabic, analogue) and the relationship between number processing and
language processing.

Arithmetical and Geometrical Intuitions
Without Mathematical Education
in Amazonian Indians
Stanislas Dehaene, Véronique Izard,
Pierre Pica & Elizabeth Spelke
“Intuition” is knowledge that we deploy spontaneously, effortlessly, and without any awareness of its origins. Our proposal is that mathematical intuitions are grounded in
evolutionarily ancient representations of space, time and
number that we share with other animal species and that
emerge early in development. We will present evidence that
adult Amazonian Indians, even in the absence of any mathematical vocabulary and education, possess clear intuitions of
the relations between number and space—albeit of a logarithmic nature, similar to those of young children in our culture. Furthermore, when introduced with an appropriate
mental model, they exhibit a surprising mastery of basic Euclidean and even non-Euclidean geometries—although Euclidean concepts appear to be most intuitive.

Numbers as a Culture-Driven Adaptation
Heike Wiese
I present a view of numbers as cognitive tools that are adapted to human cultures: While all cultures have the same options to employ different aspects of numerical cognition,
they make use of these options selectively, leading to culture-dependent variation and to developmental paths that
lead from less complex to more complex number systems as
well as vice versa. I show that the human number concept
makes use of two main systems, supporting (1) the perception of quantity, based on iconic representations of set sizes,
and (2) the grasp of numbers as cognitive tools that can assess cardinal, ordinal, and nominal relations. I discuss examples from different human cultures that provide evidence for
the selective realization of different aspects involved in these
two systems.

2080

