UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Memory strategies mediate the relationships between memory and judgment

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cp7087f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Aldrovandi, Silvio
Ayton, Peter
Huessen, Daniel
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Memory strategies mediate the relationships between memory and judgment
Silvio Aldrovandi (S.Aldrovandi@city.ac.uk)
Marie Poirier (M.Poirier@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University, Northampton Square, London, EC1V 0HB, UK

Daniel Heussen (Daniel.Heussen@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, Tiensestraat 102, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Peter Ayton (P.Ayton@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University, Northampton Square, London, EC1V 0HB, UK

Abstract
In the literature, the nature of the relationships between
memory processes and summary evaluations is still a debate.
According to some theoretical approaches (e.g., “two-memory
hypothesis”; Anderson, 1989) retrospective evaluations are
based on the impression formed while attending to the to-beassessed stimuli (on-line judgment) – no functional
dependence between information retrieval and judgment is
implied. Conversely, several theories entail that judgment
must depend, at least in part, on memory processes (e.g.,
Dougherty, Gettys, & Ogden, 1999; Schwarz, 1998; Tversky
& Kahneman, 1973). The present study contributes to this
debate by addressing two important issues. First, it shows
how more comprehensive memory measures than those used
previously (e.g., Hastie & Park, 1986) are necessary in order
to detect a relationship between memory and retrospective
evaluations. Secondly, it demonstrates how memory strategies
influence the relationship between memory and judgment.
Participants recalled lists of words, after having assessed each
of them for their pleasantness. Results showed a clear
association between memory and judgment, which was
mediated by the individual strategies participants used to
recall the items.
Keywords: Memory-judgment
judgment; Accessibility

relationships;

On-line

Introduction
How do people provide summary assessments? That is, how
do they provide an unitary and coherent judgment about an
event that may have changed in quality over time (e.g.,
Fredrickson & Kahneman, 1993) or about a target stimulus
that has been described in a sequential manner (e.g.,
Lichtenstein & Srull, 1987)?
One appealing and experimentally supported answer to
the above question is that people are largely influenced by
the memory trace they retain about the to-be-assessed
stimuli (e.g., Dougherty et al., 1999; Schwarz, 1998). Biases
in retrospective assessments can therefore be comprehended
on the basis of a bias in retrieval-based processes (e.g.,
“Availability”; Tversky & Kahneman, 1993).
However, an alternative series of interpretations have
been formulated in the literature where memory does not
play a central role (e.g., Anderson, 1989; Betsch, Plessner,

Schwieren, & Gütig, 2001). According to these views,
people evaluate the stimuli while they experience them (online judgment) and rely on this on-line impression in order
to provide summary assessments. Retrieving information
about the stimuli themselves becomes both cognitively
costly and unnecessary in order to provide retrospective
evaluations. Fuelling the debate, experimental evidence
which failed to obtain correlations between memory and
judgment supports this “Independence” view (see Hastie &
Park, 1986).

Memory measures and individual strategies
In the present paper, it is argued that a number of issues
must be addressed before the memory-judgment relationship
can be adequately understood.
Together with several other studies which investigated
memory-judgment correlations (e.g., Lichtenstein & Srull,
1987; Reyes, Thompson, Bower, 1980) Hastie and Park
(1986) used a ratio measure for the memory output. For
instance, in their Experiment 1, participants heard a
recorded 5-min conversation between two people, after
which they had to assess the job suitability of one of the two
characters. The authors then computed a memory ratio by
dividing the positive arguments recalled (i.e. those
supporting candidate suitability) by the total number of
arguments remembered: the higher the ratio, the more
favourable the memory for the specific candidate. This
memory measure was then correlated with the overall job
suitability rating the participant provided for the
hypothetical character.
An implicit assumption underlying the use of this type of
ratio is that each argument recalled (and possibly each item
on participants’ mind at the time of judgment) has the same
weight in the overall evaluation. Such an assumption is
disputable in light of the work reviewed above showing
significant biases in the weight various elements have in
retrospective judgments. In addition, the availability
heuristic (Schwarz, 1998; Tversky & Kahneman, 1973)
suggests that the ease of recall of a given piece of
information mediates its effect on evaluations. Accordingly,
it can be argued that the availability of each item at the time
of judgment will impact on retrospective evaluations: the
more easily accessible a specific item is at the time of

2457

evaluation, the higher its influence on the evaluation itself.
This would in turn entail that a memory measure (like a
ratio) which assigns the same weight to each item recalled
does not adequately represent the memory content accessed
in order to produce overall assessments.
Second, it is argued that recall strategies can severely
impact the relationships between memory and judgment. In
most research which investigated memory-judgment
correlations, the memory task usually follows the judgment
task (see Hastie & Park, 1986). The nature of the stimuli
representation accessed at the time the memory task is
prompted can therefore be different from the representation
of the stimuli accessed at the time an overall assessment is
produced. One possible mechanism which can increase the
difference between these two representations is the recall
strategies participants adopt. In the present paper we focus
on serial recall strategies, i.e. the tendency to recall the
items from the just-presented series in the order in which
they were presented. Relying extensively on this memory
strategy could cause the last item, which possibly affected
retrospective evaluations due to its high accessibility, to
have a diminished possibility of being recalled at the later
stage. This in turn could hamper the correlations between
memory and judgment.

Study
In this study the predictions of the memory-based
approach to retrospective assessments are tested through
various means. First, correlations between memory and
judgment were examined. In doing so, we compared
different measures. We computed a “global”, ratio-type,
memory measure, as this was called upon in previous
studies and we have argued that it may have masked the
relationship between memory and judgment (e.g., Hastie &
Park, 1986; Lichtenstein & Srull, 1987). This memory ratio
measure reflected the degree of isolation with which a
distinctive (negative) item was recalled: the higher the ratio,
the fewer neutral items were recalled together with the
negative item. We then correlated this measure of memory
with a retrospective judgment measure.
Second, judgment was required first and memory for the
content of the word-list obtained second (details of how this
was done follow below). Hence, it was possible to contrast
the mean pleasantness rating obtained when the negative
item was recalled with the mean rating for the trials when it
was not recalled. Presumably, if a distinctive item is
available for later recall, it is more likely to have been
available at the time of judgment; conversely, if the negative
item is not available for recall, the probability that it was
available at the time of judgment is reduced. Hence, we
would expect that on average, the pleasantness rating will be
lower in the cases where the negative item was available for
the memory component of the task.
Third, the mediating role of recall output strategies on the
memory-judgment
correlations
was
investigated.
Participants were administered a “free” recall task, where

they were provided no constraints about the order in which
they could recall the items1. In doing so, it was possible to
investigate participants’ preferential output strategies by
comparing the items presentation order with the item recall
order; participants were then divided into two groups,
depending on the extent to which they recalled the items in
the order in which they were presented to them. It is
predicted that different memory-judgment correlations
pattern will arise between the two groups: Participants who
exhibit serial recall strategy to a larger extent in their
response will produce diminished memory-judgment
correlations for items presented in later positions.
Last, the effect of negative item availability was further
analysed by examining ease of recall. As a measure of
relative memory accessibility, we used output position in
the memory task. Since participants were asked to perform
free recall (hence no output constraints were implemented),
we made the simplifying assumption that items recalled first
are on average more readily accessible in memory. It was
assumed that negative items recalled early on were more
easily accessible than negative items that are recalled later
on and would have had more impact on the retrospective
assessment. Hence, our hypothesis was that the earlier a
negative item was recalled, the stronger its impact on
retrospective evaluations. For this reason, the effect of this
differential accessibility of negative words was analysed in
relation to the retrospective evaluations participants provide
for the lists as a whole.

Method
Participants Thirty-six undergraduate students (31
females) from City University London took part in the
study. Age ranged from 18 to 56 years (M = 26.7, SD =
10.6). Participants were granted course credits for an
introductory course in psychology for their participation.

Design and Materials A pool of 192 words was selected
from the Affective Norms of English Words database
(ANEW; Bradley & Lang, 1999). Twenty-four negative
items were selected along with 168 neutral ones. The
selection was based on the valence (i.e. how positive or
negative they are) and arousal scores (e.g., how much
activation the normative sample reported on reading the
word) of each item on database scales. Negative items were
selected to be low in valence (less than 3, on a scale of 1-9)
and high in arousal (over 5.9, on the same scale). Neutral
items scored in the middle range for valence (4.5 to 6.9) and
low on the arousal scale (less than 5). The selected negative
items scored significantly lower than neutral items on
valence scores (M = 2.3 and M = 5.7, respectively), t(190) =
25.3, p < .001 and had a significantly higher arousal rating
(M = 6.5 and M = 4.1, respectively), t(190) = 21.1, p < .001.
1
A pilot study revealed that the combination of a judgment task
with a serial recall task is too demanding for participants to pay
enough attention to both tasks. Participants tended to perform the
judgment task in a cursory manner.

2458

Procedure All participants took part in individual testing
sessions that lasted approximately 45 minutes. The
experiment was controlled by a computer program
developed specifically for the present experiment with
Authorware 7.0 (Adobe / Macromedia, 1987, 2003). A
series of introductory screens familiarised participants with
the
computer-controlled
procedure and
gathered
demographic data.
Participants were told that the aim of the experiment was
to collect normative data about the pleasantness of 6-word
lists. They were instructed to attend to the lists and to
provide an overall pleasantness rating for each one
immediately after its presentation. The ratings were on a 0100 scale (0 = very unpleasant, 100 = very pleasant), and
participants were encouraged to make use of the whole
range in their responses.
Each word was presented for one second with an interstimulus interval of 0.75 seconds. A series of asterisks
appeared on the screen for 3 seconds to signal the end of the
list presentation. After the asterisks had disappeared from
the screen, participants were prompted to provide their
rating – for which they had no time limit. Participants were
required to use the mouse to click on a slide bar (with
extremes of 0 and 100) on the position they felt was closest
to their impression of the list. In order to limit the extent of
anchoring effects (e.g., Chapman & Johnson, 2002) a
sliding marker would appear on the bar (with its equivalent
numerical value underneath) only after participants clicked
for the first time on the slide bar. Participants then had the
opportunity to adjust this initial rating by sliding the marker,
and were to confirm their final one by clicking on a
“Continue” button.
After rating a given list’s overall pleasantness,
participants were required to perform a free recall task, i.e.
they were asked to type all the words they could remember
from the most recently presented list. The instructions
emphasised that spelling errors would not affect scoring and
that both the assessment and recall tasks were equally
important; participants were asked not to overlook the rating
task in order to proceed more quickly to the recall task.
2

Analyses revealed no differences in either memory or judgment
measures between lists with a negative item in 3rd or 4th position.

After participants had completed the recall task, the next list
was presented, and so on.
Three practice trials were provided. List presentation
order was randomised independently for each participant
and no time limit was set for either the rating or the recall
tasks. A post-experimental questionnaire was used at the
end of the session in order to gather information about how
participants completed both the judgment and recall tasks.

Results
Due to the dual nature of the task, a precautionary measure
was taken in order to exclude from the analyses any
participant who neglected the judgment task in order to
proceed more quickly to the memory task. Participants
whose judgment scores were characterised by a standard
deviation of 5 or less (5% of the scale) were eliminated from
the analyses. One participant was excluded according to this
criterion. Moreover, in the post-experimental questionnaire,
the same participant indicated that s/he performed the
pleasantness ratings according to list memorability rather
than perceived pleasantness. Alpha was set to .05 for all
analyses.

Judgment Figure 1 presents the mean pleasantness ratings
as a function of list type. Ratings for the Control lists were
the highest (M = 60.8, SD = 12.4). Moreover, lists with a
negative item in either first (Start lists; M = 44.3, SD = 13.3)
or last position (End lists; M = 44.2, SD = 12.5) were rated
as more unpleasant than Middle lists (M = 49.7, SD = 12.0).

70
65

Pleasantness ratings

From the resulting word pool, 32 six-word lists were
created, as follows. Eight lists included a negative item in
the first position followed by 5 neutral words—hereafter
identified as “Start” lists. Eight “Middle” lists had a
negative item in the middle positions (4 lists in 3rd position
and 4 lists in 4th position.)2 Eight “End” lists comprised five
neutral items and a negative word in last position. Finally,
eight control lists contained only neutral words.
Within-list matching between the negative (if any) and the
neutral items ensured that negative and neutral words were
equated on familiarity ratings (Coltheart, 1981), number of
phonemes, and the Kucera-Francis frequency index (Kucera
& Francis, 1967).

60
55
50
45
40
35
30
Start

Middle

End

Control

List type

Figure 1: Mean pleasantness ratings as a function of list
type. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
A one-way ANOVA was run, with list type (Start, Middle,
End and Control) as the within-subject factor. Overall, there
was a significant main effect of list type, F(3, 102) = 52.5,
p < .001, ηp2 = .61. Planned contrasts indicated that

2459

pleasantness ratings for Start, Middle and End lists were
significantly lower than for Control lists (all ps < .001).
Planned contrasts also revealed that the pleasantness ratings
for Start (primacy) lists were lower than for Middle lists,
t(34) = 4.8, p < .001, d = .81. Moreover, a recency effect
was observed too as the ratings for End lists were lower than
for Middle lists, t(34) = 5.2, p < .001, d = .88.

Memory Figure 2 represents the mean recall proportion for
the negative item as a function of word position and
valence. It seems that overall there was a memory advantage
for the negative items as compared to the neutral ones
presented in the same position; participants exhibited higher
recall rates for the negative items than for the neutral ones,
across presentation positions. More importantly, memory
primacy and recency effects for the negative items can be
observed: Negative items presented in either first (M = .78,
SD = .17) or last position (M = .71, SD = .23) were better
recalled than those presented in the middle positions (M =
.56, SD = .23).
1
0.9
0.8

Mean prop recall

0.7
0.6
Negative

0.5

Neutral

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Pos1

Pos3-4

Pos6

Position

Figure 2: Mean proportion recall as a function of word
position and valence. Error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.
The data were analysed using a 2 (valence: negative vs.
neutral) × 3 (position: 1st, 3rd/4th, and 6th) repeated measure
ANOVA. Main effects of position (F(2, 68) = 26.9, p <
.001, ηp2 = .44) and valence (F(1, 34) = 12.0, p < .01, ηp2 =
.26) were noted. The valence by position interaction was
not significant (F(2, 68) = 1.4, p = .25), indicating that the
memory advantage for the negative items over the
corresponding neutrals was relatively constant across
positions.
To test for primacy and recency effects in the recall of the
negative items, planned contrasts analyses were computed.

The results showed that negative items presented in the
middle positions were recalled less than those presented in
first (t(34) = 5.5, p < .001, d = .92) and last positions (t(34)
= 2.9, p < .01, d = .49). Hence, primacy and recency effects
were observed for the recall of the negative items.

Memory-Judgment relationships In order to reduce the
influence of potential anchoring effects (e.g., Chapman &
Johnson, 2002) and of inter-individual differences in the use
of the 0-100 scale, judgment scores were transformed as
follows: For each participant, the average pleasantness
rating for the Control lists was subtracted from the
pleasantness ratings for each Start, Middle and End list –
that is the lists that contained a negative item. The new
corrected judgment scores (J’) therefore represented how
much more unpleasant each Start, Middle and End list was
in comparison to the average Control list for each
participant. J’ scores were then averaged for each
participant, according to the negative item presentation
position and whether the negative item presented in the list
was recalled or not.3
1. “Global” correlation First, a “global” memory score for
each participant was computed (e.g., Hastie & Park, 1986).
This score was the average ratio between the negative
information recalled and the total amount of words recalled:
the higher the value, the more negative the memory for the
list. Thus, the lowest possible score of 0 corresponds to
neutral items only being recalled and the maximum score of
1 refers to lists where only the negative item was recalled.
We then correlated this measure with the overall average
corrected judgment (J’) for each participant: It was expected
that the more negative the memory for the list, the lower the
pleasantness ratings. However, the correlation yielded non
significant results, r (35) = -.133, p = .45, and revealed how
memory and judgment measures were not associated – at
least when using this ratio-style memory measure.
2. Judgment according to negative item recall Second, we
computed more comprehensive memory measures: we
compared the corrected average pleasantness rating for lists
where the negative item was recalled versus lists where the
negative item was not recalled. Overall, when the negative
item was recalled in the memory task, pleasantness ratings
were lower (M = -16.7, SD = 11.4) than when the negative
item was not recalled (M = -9.9, SD = 9.5). When these
results were broken down by list-type, the same pattern
appeared for Start and Middle lists. For End lists, the
pleasantness ratings were low regardless of whether the
negative item was recalled or not.
A 2 (Memory: Negative item recalled Vs. not recalled) ×
3 (List type: Start, Middle and End) within-subjects
ANOVA confirmed these observations. The main effect of
Memory was significant (F(1, 34) = 20.4, p < .001, ηp2 =
3
This analysis yielded a total of 6.2% missing values. Missing
values were replaced using different methods, including mean
substitution by subject, grand mean, and ExpectationMaximization algorithm (Schafer & Olsen, 1998). As all the
analyses returned the same results, we will be reporting the data
obtained via mean by subject substitution.

2460

.38), confirming that overall ratings were more unpleasant
for those lists where the negative word was recalled. The
List by Memory interaction was significant, too (F(2, 68) =
5.0, p < .01, ηp2 = .13). Follow-up analyses revealed that the
main effect of Memory was significant for Start and Middle
lists (t(34) = 4.3, p < .001, d = .74; t(34) = 3.0 p < .01, d =
.51, respectively). However, for End lists the pleasantness
ratings were invariably low regardless of the negative item
being recalled or not (t(34) = 1.2, p = .24). Table 1 below
summarises these findings.
Table 1: Mean corrected pleasantness ratings (J’) as a
function of list type and negative item being recalled or not

Was the negative
item recalled?
No
Yes

M
SD
M
SD

Start

List Type
Middle

-7.7
(12.9)
-19.1
(13.3)

-7.1
(10.5)
-13.8
(12.5)

End

-14.9
(14.8)
-17.2
(11.0)

3. The role of memory strategies In order to investigate
why no relationship between memory and judgment was
observed for End lists, the extent to which participants
serially recalled the items was investigated. The rationale
behind this analysis goes as follow: As soon as the negative
item presented in last position disappeared from the screen,
its availability in memory was still high and hence it
influenced the retrospective judgment; however, if a
participant tended to output the items in the order in which
they were presented to them, the likelihood of that negative
item to be produced at the recall stage diminished (e.g.,
because of output interference; Nairne, 1990).
In order to test this hypothesis, participants were divided
into 2 groups, depending on their recall output strategies.
Fourteen “Serial recallers” (SR) obtained the top 40% score
in strict serial recall; on the other hand, “Non serial
recallers” (NSR; n = 13), scored at the bottom 37%.4 Table
2 below shows that SR achieved considerably higher strict
serial recall scores across positions (F(1, 25) = 31.1, p <
.001, ηp2 = .56).
Table 2: Mean proportion strict serial recall depending on
item presentation position for Serial (SR) and Non serial
recallers (NSR)

SR
NSR

4

Pos1
.67
.34

Pos2
.48
.17

Pos3
.36
.14

Pos4
.25
.06

Pos5
.16
.02

Pos6
.14
.01

The middle 23% of the sample was excluded from the analyses in
order to increase the distinction between the two groups. However,
the results did not substantially change when the allocation to
groups was median-based.

Two separate 2 × 3 within-subjects ANOVAs were ran5,
with Memory (Negative item recalled Vs. not recalled) and
List type (Start, Middle and End) as the factors. The
analyses revealed how for NSR the main effect of Memory
was significant (F(1, 12) = 11.2, p < .01, ηp2 = .48) – but the
interaction List type by Memory was not (F < 1). Taken
altogether these analyses confirmed that overall ratings were
more unpleasant for those lists where the negative word was
recalled – and this was true regardless of the presentation
position of the negative item. Conversely, for SR, both the
main effect of Memory (F(1, 13) = 9.0, p < .05, ηp2 = .41)
and the interaction Memory by List Type (F(2, 26) = 5.1, p
< .05, ηp2 = .28) were significant. Follow-up analyses
revealed how the association between memory and
judgment measures was observed for Start and Middle lists
(t(13) = 3.7, p < .001, d = .99; t(13) = 2.5 p < .01, d = .66,
respectively); on the other hand, for End lists the
pleasantness ratings were comparably low regardless of the
negative item being recalled or not (t(13) = 0.1, p = .90)6.
4. Accessibility Finally, retrospective evaluations were
analysed depending on the negative item recall position (see
Table 3). In other words, the pleasantness ratings (J’) were
examined according to the position in which the negative
item was recalled by the participants (regardless of its
presentation position). The underlying rationale was that
items that are more accessible in memory are likely to be
recalled earlier—if the negative item is more accessible and
recalled early we would expect its impact on retrospective
evaluations to be higher than when it is recalled later in the
protocol or not at all.
Table 3: Mean corrected pleasantness ratings (J’) as a
function of negative item recall output position
Negative item recall output position
Not
Positions Positions
recalled
1&2
3 to 6
Pleasantness
ratings (J’)

M
SD

-10.3
(10.7)

-18.9
(11.7)

-13.8
(10.8)

Overall, the pleasantness ratings varied depending on the
negative item output position: They were lowest when the
participants recalled the negative item as either the first or
second response (M = -18.9, SD = 11.7).
The analysis revealed a significant main effect of recall
position on pleasantness ratings (F(2, 68) = 16.0, p < .001,
ηp2 = .32). Planned contrasts confirmed that judgments were
5

These analyses yielded a total of 7.4% missing values – which
were once again replaced via mean by subject substitution.
6
The same conclusions were also reached through analyses where
no missing values imputation was required. For instance, the
association between memory and judgment was significant for the
whole sample also for End lists (F(1, 28) = 5.2, p < .05) – once the
variability due to strict serial recall scores was accounted for (F(1,
28) = 4.7, p < .05).

2461

lower when the negative item was recalled amongst the first
for End lists were observed for participants who constrained
two responses than when it was recalled amongst the last
to a less extent the order in which to recall the items.
four responses, t(34) = 4.3, p < .001, d = .72, which in turn
were lower than for those lists where the negative item was
References
not recalled at all, t(34) = 2.3, p < .05, d = .38.
Anderson, N. H. (1989). Functional memory and on-line
attribution. In J. N. Bassili (Ed.), On-line cognition in
Discussion
person perception (pp. 175–220). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
The results of the present experiment largely support the Betsch, T., Plessner, H., Schwieren, C. & Gütig, R. (2001). I
view that memory plays a central role in retrospective
like it but I don’t know why: A value-account approach to
evaluations (e.g., Dougherty et al., 1999; Schwarz, 1998).
implicit attitude formation. Personality and Social
First of all, both primacy and recency effects were
Psychology Bulletin, 27, 242–253.
observed for summary evaluations and negative items recall. Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1999). Affective norms for
Negative items presented either at the beginning or at the
English words (ANEW): Instruction manual and affective
end of the series exerted a larger impact on pleasantness
ratings. Technical report C-1, Gainesville, FL. The Center
evaluations – and were better remembered at a later stage.
for Research in Psychophysiology, University of Florida.
The results of the correlational analyses produced Chapman, G. B., & Johnson, E. J. (2002). Incorporating the
different outcomes, depending on the memory measure that
irrelevant: Anchors in judgments of belief and value. In T.
was being used. When a global, ratio-style, memory
Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman, (Eds.), Heuristic and
measure was utilised (e.g., Hastie & Park, 1986;
Biases (pp.120–138). New York: Cambridge University
Lichtenstein & Srull, 1987) – where each recalled item
Press.
holds the same weight – no significant associations were Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database.
observed between memory and judgment. However, when
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497–
the role of memory was tested through more comprehensive
505.
measures – or measures which also take item accessibility Dougherty, M. R. P., Gettys, C. F., & Ogden, E. E. (1999).
into consideration (e.g., Schwarz, 1998) – the results
MINERVA-DM: A memory processes model for judgments
provided support for a memory-based approach.
of likelihood. Psychological Review, 106, 180–209.
Pleasantness ratings for those lists where the negative Fredrickson, B. L., & Kahneman, D. (1993). Duration neglect
item was recalled were significantly lower than for those
and in retrospective evaluations of affective episodes.
lists where the negative item was not recalled. This result
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 45–55.
supports the idea that when a negative item was easily Hastie, R., & Park, B. (1986). The relationship between
available in memory at the time of judgment it exerted a
memory and judgement depends on whether the judgment
higher impact on judgment. The assumption was that when
task is memory-based or on-line. Psychological Review, 93,
a negative item was not recalled in the memory task, it was
258–268.
also less likely to be available at the time of retrospective Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational Analysis
evaluations; on average, this would lead to a less negative
of Present-Day American English. Brown University Press,
assessment of the list.
Providence R.I.
These results seem to suggest that participants relied at Lichtenstein, M., & Srull, T. K (1987). Processing objectives
least to some extent on episodic information stored in
as a determinant of the relationship between recall and
memory when providing retrospective evaluations. If they
judgment. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 23,
had exclusively relied on on-line judgment formation, there
93–118.
would be no reason to expect an association between Nairne, J. S. (1990). A feature model of immediate memory.
memory and judgment measures, although as is always the
Memory & Cognition, 18, 251–269.
case with a correlational approach a third factor could Reyes, R. M, Thompson, W. C., & Bower, G. H. (1980).
perhaps be causing changes in both memory and
Judgmental biases resulting from differing availabilities of
retrospective evaluations. However, accessibility in memory
arguments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
of a negative item seemed to mediate retrospective
39, 2–12.
judgment, since lower ratings were associated with the Schafer, J. L., & Olsen, M. K. (1998). Multiple imputation for
negative item being recalled early in the response sequence.
multivariate missing-data problems: A data analyst’s
The on-line view does not lead to the expectation that the
perspective. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 33, 545–
accessibility of the distinctive-negative item would have an
571.
impact on retrospective evaluation.
Schwarz, N. (1998). Accessible content and accessibility
Finally, some of the more detailed follow-up analyses
experiences: The interplay of declarative and experiential
showed how the above mentioned association between
information in judgment. Personality and Social Psychology
memory and judgment was not observed when the negative
Review, 2, 87–99.
item was presented in last position. Results suggest that one Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
possible explanation lies in the recall strategies participants
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
used – as clear associations between memory and judgment
Psychology, 5, 207–232.

2462

