UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mind the gap: the cost of looking at nothing, or the performance implications of memoryinduced attention shifts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gm932vb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Vankov, Ivan

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mind the Gap: The Cost of Looking at Nothing, or the Performance Implications of
Memory-induced Attention Shifts
Ivan Vankov (i.i.vankov@gmail.com)
Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The visual indexing theory proposed by Zenon Pylyshyn
predicts that visual attention mechanisms are employed when
projecting mental images onto a visual scene. Recent eyetracking have supported this hypothesis by showing that
people tend to look at empty places, where requested
information has been previously presented. However it
remained unclear what performance implications this
behavior has. The present study aimed to explore how the
relative location of presentation affects performance in tasks
involving recalling whether an object has already been seen.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that recalling objects which have
been presented away from the current focus point results in
slower reaction times. Experiment 2 showed that a spatial
compatibility effect arises if the relative location of the
memorized object is incompatible with a spatial task at hand.
Keywords: attention; memory; space; visual imagery; spatial
compatibility; Simon effect

Introduction
The visual indexing theory proposed by Zenon Pylyshyn
(Pylyshyn, 1989) stipulates that there is a pre-attentive
mechanism in the visual system for individuating features
and indexing their locations within the visual field. Once
such location indexes are formed, they serve to bind
together the features of an object and maintain its identity.
The indexes are also used to refer to information which was
bound to a certain location in the visual field and guide
visual attention.
One of the major implications of visual indexing theory is
that visual indexes are used to direct attention not only when
attending directly perceivable stimuli, but also when
projecting mental images onto some visual scene (Pylyshyn,
1998). Recent eye-tracking studies have rendered support
for this hypothesis by showing that people look at empty
spaces where requested information has previously been
presented (Richardson & Spivey, 2000; Spivey & Geng,
2001; Hoover & Richardson, 2008). For example, Spivey
and Geng (2001) asked participants to memorize a set of
four simple shapes displayed at the corner cells of a 3x3
grid. The display then vanished and reappeared with one of
the objects missing. When asked about the properties of the
missing object, participants spontaneously looked at the
blank region where the object had been previously
presented. These results were interpreted in terms of the
visual indexing theory: the missing object identity had been
bound to a specific location in the visual field and

attempting to access any information about the object
resulted in an attention shift towards that location.
An important question that remained unexplored by the
eye-tracking studies was whether the attention shifts
towards locations of previously seen objects were related to
memory performance. If attention shifts are employed in the
retrieval process, then one would expect that their
processing costs would be reflected in the speed with which
objects are recalled. In other words, the question is whether
one would need more time to retrieve information which
was presented away from the current focus point compared
to when it was at the same location. The results of previous
studies focused on the interplay of memory and visual
imagery suggest that indeed the relative location of a target
item within a visual image affects memory performance.
The seminal work of Kosslyn, Ball and Reiser (1978)
demonstrated that people needed more time to mentally scan
further distances across visual images, even when the same
amount of material fell between the initial focus point and
the target. However, Kosslyn and colleagues explicitly
asked the participants to base their responses on their visual
mental images and when this instruction was omitted, the
effect of distance disappeared. Thus, the first goal of the
present study was to investigate whether it is possible to
show an effect of the relative location of a memorized item
on performance in a purely memory task even if no explicit
instructions for employing visual imagery are given.
A second issue which remains is what consequences the
memory-driven redirection of attention would have if
subjects are given a task requiring them to respond on the
basis of available spatial information. To this end, a task
was selected which has both memory retrieval and spatial
judgment components. If the memory retrieval aspect of the
task induces attention shifts, then they may happen to be
incompatible with some of the responses and thus a spatial
compatibility effect would be observed.
A spatial compatibility effect, usually referred to as a
Simon effect (Simon & Rudell, 1967), denotes faster and
more accurate responses when the task-irrelevant stimulus’
location is compatible with a response action than when it is
not. Several researches have advocated that the Simon effect
is related to attention shifts (Nicoletti & Umilta, 1994;
Rubichi at el, 1997). According to the attention shift
account, directing attention to a location in space facilitates
actions towards that position. Hence, there are good reasons
to expect that attention shifts generated in the process of
memory retrieval may cause Simon-like effects.

1318

Simon-like effects on memory retrieval have already been
reported (Hommel, 2002; Zhang & Johnson, 2004; Wühr &
Ansorge, 2007). For example, Hommel (2002) asked
participants to first memorize a display of four stimuli that
varied in color, shape, and location. Then, a cue stimulus
required to retrieve one of the stimuli on the basis of its
color, and to respond to stimulus shape by pressing a left or
right key. The irrelevant horizontal location of the to-beretrieved stimulus in the encoding display produced a Simon
effect in subsequent responses to the cue.
The existing studies of memory-induced Simon-like
effects have demonstrated that a spatial compatibility effect
could be invoked not only by a present spatially incongruent
stimulus, but also by one which is retrieved from memory.
The second aim of this study was to investigate whether a
similar effect would be found even in the presence of
directly available spatial cues which determine the correct
response action.

128 different images and 32 unrelated words from the same
database.
All images used in the experiment were resized to 200 x
200 pixels and displayed on a 2x2 gird which covered the
whole screen. The justification for presenting the objects
within a grid came from the study Spivey and Geng (2001),
which showed that such a spatial context enhances attention
shifts towards the empty spaces where objects have been
previously presented.

Experiment 1
The goal of this experiment was to investigate whether the
location of previously presented objects is related to the
speed with which they are later recalled. During the
experiment, participants viewed images of four objects
located on a 2x2 grid and tried to remember them.
Afterwards the objects disappeared and a single word
appeared in one of the 4 cells of the grid. The task of the
participants was to press a button if the word denoted some
of the objects and do nothing otherwise (a go/no-go task).

Figure 1a: Sample stimulus. The guitar is a target object.

Method
Participants 24 participants (14 females) took part in the
experiment. Their average age was 25.79 (age range from
15 to 47, SD = 7.28). Participants were paid for
participation.
Stimuli The stimulus set was constructed out of 128 images
of various objects and 32 ‘cuing’ words denoting 32 of the
objects. The images and words were taken from a picture
naming database with 520 pictures and their dominant
responses (Szekely et al., 2004) 1 . For ease of exposition,
throughout this paper objects denoted by words will be
referred to as ‘target objects’. Each stimulus consisted of
four pictures of objects, one of them being a target object
(Figure 1a), and a corresponding cuing word (dominant
response of a picture) denoting the target object (Figure 1b).
The number of stimuli was 32. The target object – word
pairs were controlled for image agreement (M = 5.61; SD =
0.65), name agreement (M = 85.43; SD = 11.09), word
length (M = 5.28; SD = 0.72) and objective frequency (M =
1.76; SD = 0.35). All images were controlled for visual
complexity. An equal number of fillers were compiled using

Figure 1b: Sample stimulus. The relative position of the
cueing word with respect to the position of the target object
determines the condition. Enlarged is the position of the cue
in condition S. The circled letters in the center of the grid
indicate the condition; they were not displayed in the real
stimuli. The actual cuing words used in the study were
Bulgarian.
Design The independent variable was the relative location
of the cuing word with respect to the target object. Thus
four possible conditions were defined:

1 For more details on participants, procedures, and pictorial
stimuli in the picture naming norming study, see Szekely et al.
(2004) or visit the online database at http://www.
crl.ucsd.edu/~aszekely/ipnp/.

1319

S (Same): The word appeared in the same grid location as
the target object
H (Horizontal): The word appeared in the position to the
left or right of the target object
V (Vertical): The word appeared in the position below or
above the target object
D (Diagonal): The word appeared in the position diagonal
to the position of the target object

Procedure Four lists were generated; each of them
containing all the stimuli and the same number of fillers.
Each stimulus was included in each of the lists in a different
condition by varying the position of the word (the object
images were always located at the same grid locations).
Target object locations were counterbalanced across stimuli.
The lists were pseudo-randomized, so that the same
condition appeared no more than 2 consecutive times and
there were at least 15 trials between two appearances of the
same stimulus, no matter what the list order was. The order
of stimuli and filler trials was also pseudo-randomized, so
that a stimulus or filler trial would appear no more than 2
consecutive times. Each subject went through all the lists in
varying order. Thus the total number of trials was 256,
including 128 filler trials.
Participants were tested in a sound-proof booth. The
stimuli were being presented on a 17” computer monitor
with a resolution of 800x600 pixels. The experimental
session started with 10 practice trials, none of which
appeared in the experimental part. Each trial began with 4
objects displayed simultaneously in the four cells of the grid
for 2000 ms. Then the objects disappeared and the grid
stayed blank for 300 ms. After that a word was presented in
one of the grid cells for 2500 ms or until a subject’s
response was generated by pressing a predefined button of a
serial response button box. The participants were instructed
to react as soon as possible if the presented word denoted
any of the objects shown at the previous screen. The intertrial interval was 1500 ms. Reaction time (RT) was
measured from the onset of each word stimulus. Stimulus
presentation and response recordings were controlled by Eprime software (Schneider, Eschman, & Zuccolotto, 2002).
The experiment took about 25 minutes.

Results and Discussion
One subject had more than 40% errors and his data were
excluded from the analysis. Trials with errors were excluded
from the analysis (5.0%). Response times below 200 ms and
those lying more than ±2.5 standard deviations from the RT
mean were removed as well, which resulted in the removal
of 2.7% of overall responses. Thus, a total of 92.4% of the
originally collected non-filler RT data were included in
further analyses.
As mentioned above, each subject went through 4 lists
containing the same stimuli. A 4x4 repeated measures
ANOVA performed on subject RT means failed to show an
interaction between the list serial number and condition
(F(9, 189) = 0.863; p > .5), so the data was collapsed across
all lists for further analysis.
A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed
for subjects RT means and revealed significant main effect
of the word location factor (F(3, 63) = 2.71; p < .05) –
Figure 2.

A set of planned orthogonal contrast tests revealed
significant difference between reaction times in condition S
and in condition H (F(1, 22) = 5.46, p < .05) and marginally
significant difference between conditions S and D (F(1, 22)
= 3.778; p = .065). The difference between conditions S
and V was not significant (F(1, 22) = 2.88; p > .1). Another
planned contrast test revealed a significant difference
betweenreaction times in condition S and the mean of the
other conditions (F(1, 22) = 4.80; p < .05).

780
730
RT (ms)

The dependent measure in this experiment was reaction
time.

680
630
580
S

H

V

D

Figure 2: Experiment results. Subjects were faster when
the target object and cuing word appeared in the same
location (S), compared to mean of the other conditions (H –
in the same grid row, V – in the same grid column, D –
diagonally to each other). The error bars stand for
confidence intervals.
The results demonstrated that the relative location of the
target objects affected task performance, although object
locations were irrelevant to the task. Subjects responded
more slowly when they had to retrieve an object which had
been presented away from the position of the cue. This
result bears two alternative explanations. First, it is possible
that in condition S the location of the cuing word directly
activated the corresponding object representation, which
was bound to the same location through visual indexing.
Another possibility is to attribute the slower mean reaction
times in the distant conditions to an attention shift, which
was required in order to retrieve an object that had been
presented at a different location. The eye-tracking results of
Richardson and Spivey (2000), Spivey and Geng (2001) and
Hover and Richardson (2008) are consistent with the latter
explanation.
Although the main effect of relative location was
significant, its size effect was rather small (h2 = .11). One
reason for this could be that the manipulation of the factor
was not strong enough. The experiment lacked enough
power to reveal more clearly an effect which was expected
to be subtle.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 aimed to investigate if retrieving target
objects which had been presented away from the cuing word
would invoke attention shifts and whether this memorydriven redirection of attention will affect performance in a
spatial judgment task. Also it aimed to differentiate

1320

Method
Participants 20 participants (15 females) took part in the
experiment. Their average age was 22.50 (age range from
19 to 28, SD = 2.58). Participants were paid for
participation.
Stimuli The stimulus set was the same as in Experiment 1.
Design The same four conditions standing for the relative
location of cuing word with respect to the target objects
were used. Unlike Experiment 1, error rates were also
considered as a dependent measure.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1,
except for the task. Participants were instructed to respond
by pressing the leftmost button of the response box with the
left hand when the cuing word denoted any of the objects
and appeared in the left part of the screen; press the
rightmost button with their right hand when the word
denoted any of the objects and appeared in the right part of
the screen; press the middle button when the word did not
denote any of the objects. The response box was located just
in front of the screen and its width roughly corresponded to
the distance between the centers of the left and right side
grid cells. The experiment took about 30 minutes.

Results and Discussion
One subject had more than 40% errors and her data were
excluded from the analysis. All other subjects had less than
20% errors, including filler trials. Filler trials were not
included in the analysis. Trials with errors were excluded
from the RT analysis (8.1%). Response times lying more
than ±2.5 standard deviations from the mean were removed
as well, which resulted in the removal of 2.1% of overall
responses. Thus, a total of 89.7% of the originally collected
non-filler RT data were included in the RT analyses.
A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed
for subject RT means and error rates (ER) and revealed
significant main effects (RT: F(3, 54) = 11.24, p < .001; ER:
F(3, 54) = 13.81, p < .001).
A set of planned orthogonal contrast tests revealed
significant difference between conditions S and H (RT: F(1,
18) = 11.16, p < .001; ER: F(1, 18) = 22.58, p < .001),
conditions H and V (RT: F(1, 18) = 7.57, p < .01; ER: F(1,
18) = 14.25, p < .001) and conditions V and D (RT: F(1, 18)
= 19.70, p < .001; ER: F(1, 18) = 14.19, p < .001). The RT
results are shown in Figure 3.
An additional contrast test compared the mean of
conditions S and V against the mean of conditions H and D.
The idea was to contrast conditions in which the cue and the
target appeared on the same horizontal side of the screen
against conditions in which they did not. The result of this

comparison was significant (RT: F(1, 18) = 25.32, p < .001;
ER: F(1, 18) = 37.85, p < .001). Another contrast test, nonorthogonal to the previous one, failed to find an RT effect of
a vertical separation of the screen by comparing the mean of
conditions S and V to the mean of H and D (F(1, 18) = 2.78,
p > .1), but found it in error rates data (F(1, 18) = 6.74, p <
.05).
The results indicate that a robust Simon-like effect was
found, most clearly demonstrated by the difference between
the horizontal (H) and the vertical (V) conditions.
Experiment 1 failed to find a significant difference between
these two conditions and the only change in Experiment 2
was the task, so the difference can only be attributed to a
spatial interference which arose in condition H. In this
condition the cuing words appeared in the opposite
horizontal (left/right) part of the screen with respect to the
target objects.

1100
1050
RT (ms)

performance effects that were due to memory retrieval from
those due to spatial incompatibility. The same stimuli from
Experiment 1 were used, but the task was modified, so that
it had both a memory and a spatial component.

1000
950
900
850
S

H

V

D

Figure 3: Experiment 2, RT results. Subjects were
significantly slower when the cuing word was located on the
opposite horizontal side of the screen, compared to the
object it denoted.
The outcome of Experiment 2 can be accommodated
within the response-discrimination account of the Simon
effect (Ansorge and Wühr, 2004). According to this theory,
stimulus-triggered response activation shows up in Simon
effects only when stimulus locations match the top-down
selected spatial codes used to discriminate between
alternative responses. Hence, the response-discrimination
account predicts that no spatial compatibility effect will be
revealed when comparing conditions S and V, as well as H
and D, because in these pairs the position of the cueing
word was varied only along the vertical axis, which was
irrelevant to choosing the correct response action. That was
exactly the pattern found in Experiment 2 (Figure 3).
The response-discrimination account makes no claims
about the particular stimulus and response spatial features
which are employed in the process of discrimination. Thus,
it is consistent with the attention shift explanation of the
Simon-like effects. Combining these accounts with visual
indexing theory leads to an explanation of the results of
Experiment 2. Retrieving target objects required directing
attention to the location at which they had been previously
presented. If in this process attention was shifted along the
critical axis which discriminated responses, a spatial

1321

compatibility effect was exhibited. In this experiment only a
non-correspondence effect was observed, as there was no
condition in which attention was shifted in a direction
compatible with the correct response action.
The significant difference in error rates between the mean
of conditions S and H compared to the mean of conditions
V and D can be explained with the results of Experiment 1,
which showed that having to shift attention by itself
worsens performance. Two additional orthogonal contrast
tests were performed on RT and ER data and revealed that
only the difference between conditions S and V was
approaching significance (RT: F(1, 18) = 3.75, p = 0.087, h2
= .15; ER: F(1, 18) = 3.74, p = 0.069, h2 = .17), while
comparing H and D failed to show an effect of a vertical
discrimination (RT: F(1, 18) = .52, p > .4, h2 = .03; ER: F(1,
18) = 2.82, p > .1, h2 = .13). Thus, the effects of vertical
discrimination, if any, could be attributed to facilitation in
condition S, in which there was no need to shift attention in
any direction.
Two types of errors were analyzed separately in order to
set apart the effects that are due to the memory and to the
spatial aspect of task. A ‘memory’ error was counted when a
subject wrongly pressed the middle button, as if the cuing
word did not denote any of the objects. An error was
regarded as a ’spatial’ one if a subject responded by
pressing the right button instead of the left one and vice
versa.

10
Errors (%)

8
6
4
2
0
S

H

V

D

Figure 4: Error rates results. The pattern of spatial errors
closely resembles the pattern of reaction times displayed in
Figure 3.
A one-way repeated measures ANOVA was performed
for subjects’ memory and spatial error rates, computed
separately for each condition as a percentage of the total
number of target trials. The results are presented in Figure 4.
No main effect or any significant difference between
conditions was found for memory error rates. There was a
main effect of relative location for spatial errors (F(3, 54) =
12.95, p < .001), as well as significant differences between
conditions S and H (F(1, 18) = 18.56, p < .001), H and V
(F(1, 18) = 20.94, p < .001), V and D (F(1, 18) = 13.47, p <
.01). A set of non-parametric Friedman tests for related
samples were performed on spatial error numbers as the
number of spatial errors in some of the conditions was very
low. A significant difference between all conditions was

found (c2(3, 19) = 31.62, p < .001), as well as between the
conditions S and H (c2(1, 19) = 15.00, p < .001), H and V
(c2(1, 19) = 11.28, p < .001), V and D (c2(1, 19) = 8.07, p <
.01).
The failure to find an effect of relative location on
memory error rates suggests that the spatial aspect of the
task did not influence memory performance. Participants
made an equal number of errors in recalling objects that
were located on either side of the response discriminating
axis. This result is compatible with the eye-tracking studies
by Richardson and Spivey (2000) and Spivey and Geng
(2001) which also did not find an effect of the relative
location of fixation on memory performance. However, the
relative location of the correctly recalled objects did
interfere with the spatial judgment component of the task.

General Discussion
The two experiments presented in this paper demonstrated
that the relative location of presentation with respect to the
current focus of attention is an important factor when
recalling previously seen objects.
Experiment 1 revealed that subjects were slower when
recalling an object that was presented away from the cue
position, although they were not instructed to employ visual
imagery. One of the reasons the experiment succeeded in
showing this effect could be that the pictures of objects were
displayed within a grid which allowed for better visual
indexing. Also, the pictures were visually rich enough and
referred to real-world objects, rather than to abstract entities,
such as geometric shapes or letters. Thus, it was difficult for
participants to represent the objects solely as symbolic
structures by verbalizing or classifying them.
The results of Experiment 1 are in favor of the view that
spatial information is automatically encoded and exploited
by memory retrieval processes. It was demonstrated that
irrelevant spatial information may interfere into a task
which does not involve any kind of spatial discrimination –
a memory recall go/no-go task. This finding reveals the
ubiquity of spatial information and shows that it can intrude
into cognitive processes, which, at first glance, seem to have
nothing to do with space. In broader terms, the results of
Experiment 1 are consistent with the externalist view of
cognition (O'Regan, 1992; Spivey, Richardson & Fitneva,
2004), according to which cognitive processes such as
memory retrieval can not be fully explained in terms of
neural activity, but are also related to bodily states and
properties of the environment.
The goal of Experiment 2 was to investigate the possible
consequences of redirecting attention when retrieving
objects which had been located at a distant position with
respect to the current focus of attention. Several eyetracking studies have shown that when asked to retrieve
information from memory people look at the empty spaces
where it has been previously presented. The results of
Experiment 2 indicated that such an embodied memory
retrieval process may drastically affect performance if it is
running in parallel with a spatial judgment task. They imply

1322

that the reported eye-movements to empty spaces reflect
attention shifts which are similar in nature to directing
attention towards currently displayed objects. However the
experiment failed to find evidence in favor of the view that
looking at nothing facilitates memory retrieval (Ferreira,
Apel & Henderson).
Although other studies have already reported Simon-like
effects by memory retrieval, the novelty of the present study
is in demonstrating that irrelevant spatial cues generated by
attention shift to the locations of absent objects may affect
performance even in the presence of directly (visually)
available relevant spatial cues. This finding has important
methodological implications for the studies of spatial
cognition. One must always be aware that if a given
stimulus is related to information previously presented at a
different location it could invoke attention shifts towards
this location and thus affect performance in tasks involving
spatial discrimination of responses, even if the relevant
spatial features are directly available. Also, Experiment 2
proposed a new experimental paradigm, which could be
useful for studying the interplay of cognitive processes
involving memory retrieval and spatial discrimination.
Finally, the fact that memory processes may intervene in
spatial tasks has to be taken into account when designing
human-computer interfaces.

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Armina Janyan for her invaluable
guidance and suggestions. I would also like to thank Marina
Hristova and the ANALOGY team for useful discussions
and Kristina Nenova for collecting most of the data.
This work was supported by the Project ANALOGY:
Humans–the Analogy-Making Species, financed by the FP6
NEST Programme of the European Commission. (Contr. No
029088).

References
Ansorge, U., & Wühr, P. (2004). A response-discrimination
account of the Simon effect. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 30(2),
365-377.
Ferreira, F., Apel, J., & Henderson, J. (2008). Taking a new
look at looking at nothing. Trends in Cognitive Science,
11, 405–410,
Hommel, B. (2002). Responding to object files: Automatic
integration of spatial information revealed by stimulus–
response compatibility effects. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 55A(2), 567-580.
Hoover, M., & Richardson (2008). When facts go down the
rabbit hole: Contrasting features and objecthood as
indexes to memory. Cognition, 108, 533-542.
Kosslyn, S., Ball, T., & Reiser, B. (1978). Visual images
preserve metrical spatial information: evidence from
studies of image scanning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4, 4660.

Nicoletti, R., & Umilta, C. (1994). Attention shifts produce
spatial stimulus codes. Psychological Research, 56, 144150.
O'Regan, J. (1992). Solving the ‘real’ mysteries of visual
perception: The world as an outside memory. Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 46, 461-488.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1989). The role of location indexes in spatial
perception: A sketch of the FINST spatial-index model.
Cognition, 32, 65-97.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1998). The role of visual indexes in spatial
vision and imagery. In R. Wright (Ed.), Visual Attention.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Richardson, D., & Spivey, M. (2000). Representation, space
and Hollywood Squares: looking at things that aren't there
anymore. Cognition, 76(3), 269-295.
Rubichi, S., Nicoletti, R., Iani, C., & Umilta` , C. (1997).
The Simon effect occurs relative to the direction of an
attention shift. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 23, 1353–1364.
Schneider, W., Eschman, A., & Zuccolotto, A. (2002). EPrime user’s guide. Pittsburgh: Psychology Software
Tools Inc.
Simon, J., & Rudell, A. (1967). Auditory S–R compatibility:
The effect of an irrelevant cue on information processing.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 51, 300-304.
Spivey, M., Geng, J. (2001). Oculomotor mechanisms
activated by imagery and memory: eye movements to
absent objects. Psychological Research, 65, 235-241.
Spivey, M., Richardson, D., & Fitneva, S. (2004). Thinking
outside the brain: Spatial indices to linguistic and visual
information. In J. Henderson and F. Ferreira (Eds.), The
Interface of Vision Language and Action. New York:
Psychology Press.
Szekely, A., Jacobsen, T., D’Amico, S., Devescovi, A.,
Andonova, E., Herron, D., Lu, C-C., Pechmann, T., Pléh,
C., Wicha, N., Federmeier, K., Gerdjikova, G., Gutierrez,
G., Hung, D., Hsu, J., Iyer, G., Kohnert, K., Mehotcheva,
T., Orozco-Figueroa, A., Tzeng, A., Tzeng, O., Arévalo,
A., Vargha, A., Butler, A.C., Buffington, R., & Bates, E.,
(2004). A new on-line resource for psycholinguistic
studies. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 247-250.
Wühr, P., & Ansorge, U. (2007). A Simon effect in memory
retrieval: Evidence for the response-discrimination
account. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(5), 984-988.
Zhang, J., & Johnson, M. (2004). A memory-based, Simonlike, spatial congruence effect: Evidence for persisting
spatial codes. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 57A(3), 419–436.

1323

