UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Missing working memory deficit in dyslexia: children writing from memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qx30861

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cheng, Peter
Leseman, Paul P.M.
Messer, Marielle H.
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Missing working memory deficit in dyslexia: children writing from memory
Erlijn van Genuchtena,b (e.w.vangenuchten@students.uu.nl)
Peter C-H. Chengb (p.c.h.cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
Paul P. M. Lesemana (p.p.m.leseman@uu.nl)
Marielle H. Messera (m.h.messer@uu.nl)
a Langeveld Institute, Utrecht University
Utrecht, 3584 CS, NL
b Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
Abstract
This research focused on the fluency of writing processes of
children with dyslexia, in order to examine the relationship
between WM and writing. An experiment was used in which
children with dyslexia, and chronological age-matched and
reading age-matched children without dyslexia wrote 24
sentences. Sentences with existing words and non-words were
used. The results show that there are no differences between
children with dyslexia and their chronological age-matched
peers during writing. This similarity is surprising and
indicates that WM problems in children with dyslexia may
have no impact on their writing. The results imply that when
different components of WM interact with each other, a
model in which visuospatial and verbal WM are separated is
more appropriate than a model with a pooled WM.
Keywords: Temporal signal analysis, writing, working
memory, dyslexia, sentences.

Introduction
The process of writing involves a large number of processes
in different cognitive components. Therefore, understanding
of how writers produce sentences includes an explanation of
how activities are orchestrated in the cognitive system.
Here, an important characteristic is the limited capacity of
working memory (WM) to simultaneously maintain and
process information (Olive, 2004). Children with dyslexia
suffer from inefficient automatic information-handling
processes (Turner, 1997), and have impaired WM
(Berninger et al., 2006), and are therefore struggling with
writing (Berninger, Abbott, Thomson, & Raskind, 2001).
Another explanation for writing problems in children with
dyslexia, is that these children have difficulties with
phonological representations that stems (partly) from a
phonological core deficit. Specifically, these children have
difficulties with constructing, maintaining, and retrieving
phonological representations (De Bree, 2007).
This research focused on the fluency of writing processes
of children with dyslexia, in order to examine the
relationship between WM and writing.

Working memory
According to Baddeley (2000), WM consists of several
components which work together to enable the active

processing and preservation of information in memory
(Gazzaniga, 2002).
During writing, cognitive processes operate on different
levels. For example, on a high level, visual WM stores the
orthographic information of already written words, as an aid
to catching spelling, or other errors (Kellogg, Olive, &
Piolat, 2007). Also, WM is used to represent the physical
layout of the text (Kellogg, Olive, & Piolat, 2007).
On a lower level of representation, for example, spelling
involves a number of functionally distinct processing
components. According to a spelling framework described
by Tainturier and Rapp (2001), the ability to generate a
spelling for words relies on the phonology to orthography
conversion system. In this system, words are segmented into
smaller units (e.g., phonemes, syllables). These smaller
units are then converted into orthographic units which are
assembled into a correctly sequenced abstract letter string.
These abstract strings do not have a specific format. This
means that a specific modality and format of output should
be chosen, which is handwriting in this research.
Children with dyslexia are constrained by their WM
limitations during writing, because they lack fluent textgeneration processes (e.g., blending individual sounds to
make a word) and writing-relevant knowledge (e.g.,
knowledge about which letter is associated to which sound).
Therefore, these children may not have sufficient WM
capacity to deal with the multiple demands imposed by the
writing processes (McCuthen, 2000), causing the writing
process to be slower and more laborious (Siegel, 2003). The
writing process is even slower and more laborious in the
case of sentences containing non-words, because the word
identification process is more cumbersome. This is caused
by the inability of children with dyslexia to rely on their
mental lexicon during identification of a word (Siegel,
2003). Because of these increased processing demands, less
capacity is left for storing words that should be written.

Phonological core deficit
Another problem reported in children with dyslexia is the
phonological core deficit. According to this hypothesis,
children with dyslexia code phonology in the brain less
efficiently than children without dyslexia. This problem
causes symptoms, such as difficulties with verbal short-term

1674

memory (STM), non-word repetition, phonological
awareness, phonological learning of new verbal
information, word retrieval, and rapid naming (De Bree,
2007). These problems in turn lead to slow literacy
development, poor generalisation of word reading skills to
non-word reading, and poor spelling development (e.g.,
Snowling 2001).
As there is more to phonology than just awareness and
categorical perception, another aim of this research was to
look at the production of speech sounds and sound patterns,
as well as on-line operations on phonological
representations (De Bree, 2007). The focus was on how
quickly information stored in WM was processed and
retrieved during writing. In an experiment, children
rehearsed target sentences until they could verbally repeat
them without errors, which eliminates some of the
processing demands associated with encoding the stimulus
but leaves the substantial demands of the writing process
itself.

Graphical Protocol Analysis
The research method used in this research is called graphical
protocol analysis (GPA) and was validated by Cheng and
Rojas-Anaya (2005, 2006, 2007). They found that there is a
strong and robust temporal chunk signal that reflects
structure of chunks in WM and also measures how quickly
chunks are processed in WM. Chunks are individual pieces
of information grouped into larger units that increase our
information retention (Carroll, 2004). Though chunks are
formed at different levels (e.g., for experienced readers a
letter is a chunk because it consists of different strokes, and
a word is a chunk because it consists of several letters), in
this research, the focus is on words as a chunk of different
letters. To identify the structure of chunks in WM, writing
has been shown to be useful (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2007).
This can be brought about by measuring the pauses between
the end of writing one letter and the beginning of the next
(Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2005). These pauses are specified
by the amount of time that the pen is lifted from the paper.
In previous research with adults on writing tasks, pauses
were between 200 and 400 ms (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya,
2006).
This research will exploit the feature of GPA that
determines how quickly information stored in WM will be
processed during writing by comparing the overall pattern
of pause lengths of all written elements. Because children
with dyslexia have difficulties on tasks incorporating a
verbal component, whereas they perform at the same level
as children without dyslexia on comparable tasks without a
verbal component (Tijms, 2004), a verbal task was used.
Specifically, sentences were used, because children with
dyslexia have problems with activation of phonological
codes for naming and direct repetition of sequences of
words (Tijms, 2004). In this research, a distinction was
made between existing words and non-words, because
children with dyslexia have problems with reading and
writing non-words (Mann, 2003) which is even more salient

in case of non-words with low phonotactic probability
(Messer, Leseman, & Mayo, submitted). All sentences were
aurally presented to the children, because children with
dyslexia often have word identification problems with
written language (Vellutino, 2004), which causes an
incorrect encoding of representations (Tijms, 2004).

Research question and hypotheses
Focussing on the differences in WM performance during
writing by children with and without dyslexia, the present
research question is: To what extent do the working
memory problems of children with dyslexia impact on their
writing of sentences from memory?
To address this question, pause lengths between the
written letters in sentences were compared between children
with dyslexia and children without dyslexia. Poorer
performance of WM was correlated to longer pauses,
because the slower the rate of processing, the smaller the
amount of information that can be processed in one unit of
time (Conway, 2002). Here, poor performance is taken to
indicate the inability to readily and properly process a
sentence in WM.
Pause lengths in children with dyslexia (DYS) were
expected to be longer than pause lengths in chronological
age-matched (CA) as well as reading age-matched (RA)
children without dyslexia, since processing in DYS children
is slower due to the multiple demands imposed by the
writing process (e.g., blending individual sounds to make a
word, and keeping track of what should be written)
(McCuthen, 2000). Memory performance for words is
superior to non-words for all groups, thus longer pauses
were expected in sentences containing non-words in all
three groups. As DYS children have impaired WM for nonwords (Wijsman et al., 2000), it was expected that the
difference in pause length between DYS children and both
groups of children without dyslexia in non-word sentences
is larger than in familiar sentences.
Finally, a word-likeness effect was expected in sentences
containing non-words. Specifically, non-words that sound
like real words (i.e., non-words composed of highly
frequent phoneme clusters, yet with a small neighborhood
size) should be easier to recall than words that do not sound
like real words (i.e., non-words composed of infrequent
phoneme clusters, with a small neighborhood size)
(Gathercole, Frankish, Pickering, & Peaker, 1999). This
difference was expected to be larger in DYS children,
because some language knowledge can still be used in nonwords with high phonotactic probability, but to a lesser
extent in non-words with low phonotactic probability
(Messer, Leseman, & Mayo, submitted).

Methods
Participants
Participants in this study were 109 Dutch children between
seven and ten years old, from nine primary schools and two
dyslexia institutes in the Netherlands. Six of them had to be

1675

excluded from the analysis because they did not obey the
instructions. The remaining 103 participants (M = 8.28
years, SD = .63 years) were 31 grade 3 DYS children, 35
grade 3 CA children without dyslexia, and 37 grade 2 RA
children without dyslexia. All participants were native
Dutch speakers without cognitive or neurological
impairments. For example, children with ADHD or autism
were excluded. To be classified as having dyslexia, children
had received an official diagnosis from a dyslexia institute.
School achievements of children without dyslexia in both
grades were in the normal range.

Design and procedure
The experiment had a duration of 45 to 60 minutes per
child. The session began with an acclimatisation period
which allowed the participants to become familiar with a
digital writing tablet by having them write their names and a
dummy phrase on the tablet. After familiarization, the
participant wrote 24 sentences, six of four different kinds of
sentences. Familiar sentences were semantically easy
sentences in order to facilitate remembering because of
phonotactic, semantic, and syntactic knowledge in long term
memory (e.g. ‘Ik ben mooi’ - ‘I am pretty’). Jumbled
sentences consisted of existing words in a jumbled order
(e.g. ‘Jij het hond’ - ‘You the dog’) and were included to
exclude the influence of syntactical information on recall
and processing. Also sentences containing non-words with
high phonotactic probability (e.g. ‘Baam vus beg’ ‘Rummer hoat barden’) and non-word with low phonotactic
probability (e.g. ‘Knuk greupeg’) were included to exclude
to influence of semantic information on recall and
processing. The level of difficulty of sentences was
determined by pilot work to ensure that they were
sufficiently demanding, but could nevertheless be
remembered. All sentences were written on a paper
containing a horizontal row of rectangles (width: 7 mm,
height: 10 mm).
All sentences were presented in turn, alternating between
familiar, jumbled and non-word sentences. After presenting
a sentence, the experimenter checked recall accuracy by
asking participants to repeat the sentence until they were
able to recite it in a continuous unhesitating manner. Verbal
recall was used to ensure that the content in WM was the
same in all participants, which makes comparison of the
output possible. A hash (#) was written at the beginning of
each sentence to ensure that the writing process was well
underway before the first letter was generated (Cheng &
Rojas-Anaya, 2006).
WM and short-term memory performance of all
participants was tested using two subtests of the Dutch
version of the Automated Working Memory Assessment
(AWMA) battery. In the digit span task, children were asked
to remember series of numbers and had to recall these in the
same order. Similarly, in the backward recall task, children
had to remember an array of numbers, but had to recall them
in reversed order. An additional test of the AWMA was
administered to test memory for non-words with high

phonotactic probability. In this test, series of non-words
with high phonotactic probability were aurally presented,
which had to be recalled in the same order.
Testing sessions were conducted by three experimenters,
including one of the investigators, who trained the others by
demonstration and the use of a video of one session. Also, a
written protocol was provided to increase treatment
integrity.

Data and analyses
A specially written program, TRACE, was used to record
the writing actions and to extract the pen positions, times of
points and pauses (Cheng & Rojas-Anaya, 2003). All files
generated by TRACE were analysed using a special
computer-program, written by the investigators. Because of
the large amount of data (2472 sentences), automatic
detection of letters and automatic calculation of pauses had
to be applied. This involved identifying the horizontal
position of strokes making up a letter and the horizontal
separation between these strokes. Only in those cases where
no automatic detection of letters was possible was manual
calculation of the pauses applied. Data of 321 sentences
(13%) scattered across participants were not included in the
analyses, as in these sentences the instructions were not
followed. Also, pause lengths larger than 3000 ms were
excluded from the analysis, as they were found to be related
to distraction and memory loss for the sentence. A threshold
of 5000 ms did not change the results except for one minor
case.

Results
WM and STM performance of children in the AMWA
subtests was compared. The results of a one-way ANOVA
on the backward recall task indicated that there were
differences between the groups in WM performance
(F(2) = 45.61; p < .01). The post-hoc test showed that the
RA and CA groups differed (p = .04), also the CA and the
dyslexics group (p < .01), but not the RA and dyslexics
group (p = .12). The effects found were not large (see Table
1). Similarly, a one-way ANOVA on the digit span task
indicated that there were no differences between the groups
in short-term memory performance (F(2) = .13; p = .88).
To test whether there were performance differences in WM
between children with and without dyslexia in the two
different age groups, the means of the medians of the pauses
for each kind of sentence were calculated.
Table 1: Group comparisons for AWMA backward recall
subtest.
Group comparison
DYS
CA
DYS
RA
CA
RA

1676

n
31
35
31
37
35
37

M
8.71
11.11
8.71
9.78
11.11
9.78

SD
.51
.46
.51
.45
.46
.45

p
< .01

Cohen’s D
.33

.12
.04

.18

Table 3: Group comparisons for different types of sentences.

A one-way MANOVA revealed
that there existed significant
differences between different
types of sentences in different
groups (Wilks’ lambda = 0.77,
F(8;194) = 3.44; p < .01). The
univariate results showed that
these group differences existed for
all sentence types (see Table 2). It
was expected that the longest
pauses would be found in DYS
children, shorter pauses in RA
children, and the shortest pauses
in CA children. However, this
turned out to be not the case (see
Figure 2). A similar pattern was
found for all types of sentences.
Specifically,
significant
differences were found between
the RA group and the other two
groups, but no significant
differences between the dyslexic
and CA group. All significant
effects between the RA group and
CA or DYS group had a medium
to large effect size (see Table 3).

Sentence type
Familiar

Jumbled

High phonotactic
probability

Low phonotactic
probability

Table 2: Univariate comparisons
between sentence types.
Sentence type
Familiar
Jumbled
High phonotactic probability
Low phonotactic probability

df
2
2
2
2

F
6.75
12.18
6.51
6.08

p
< .01
< .01
< .01
< .01

800

700

Jumbled
High phon. prob.
Low phon. prob.

500
RA

CA

DYS

GROUP

Figure 2: Patterns of mean pause lengths (ms) for different
types of sentences for the different groups.

n

M

SD

p

31
35
31
37
35
37
31
35
31
37
35
37
31
35
31
37
35
37
31
35
31
37
35
37

617
587
617
713
587
713
581
581
581
733
581
733
610
611
610
743
611
743
630
623
630
758
623
758

123
109
123
201
109
201
117
95
117
206
95
206
143
133
143
236
133
236
140
151
140
238
151
238

.43

Cohen’s D

< .01

.63

.03

.83

1.00
< .01

1.01

< .01

1.01

.98
< .01

.74

< .01

.74

.88
< .01

.70

< .01

.73

Finally, paired samples t-tests were conducted to test the
word-likeness effect. The means of medians in sentences
with non-words with high and low phonotactic probability
were compared. The results indicated that there was no
difference in pause length between these two kinds of
sentences in general (t = -1.52; p = .13). This also applied
for the individual groups (dyslexics: t = -1.08; p = .29; CA:
t = -.77; p = .45; RA: t = -.79; p = .43) indicating that the
word-likeness effect was not found in this experiment.
(When the longer pause threshold was used (5000 ms) on
pause length, a difference between sentences with nonwords with high and low phonotactic probability was found
(t = -2.46; p = .02), but again no effects were found in the
individual groups (dyslexics: t = -1.88; p = .07; CA: t = 1.38; p = .18; RA: t = -1.00; p = .33).)

Discussion

Familiar

600

Mean (ms)

Group
comparison
DYS
CA
DYS
RA
CA
RA
DYS
CA
DYS
RA
CA
RA
DYS
CA
DYS
RA
CA
RA
DYS
CA
DYS
RA
CA
RA

The main aim of this research was to investigate the extent
to which working memory (WM) problems of children with
dyslexia impact on their writing of sentences from memory.
It was expected that pause lengths in children with dyslexia
(DYS) would be longer than pause lengths in chronological
age-matched (CA) as well as reading age-matched children
(RA) without dyslexia. However, the results show that there
are no differences between DYS children and their CA
peers, and that children in these groups perform better than
RA children.

1677

The difference between CA and RA children is as
expected, because memory capacity increases when children
get older (Alloway, Gathercole, & Pickering, 2006).
However, the similarity between the CA and the dyslexics
group in the writing task is surprising and indicates that
WM problems in the latter group have no impact on their
writing, which is in line with the absence of the wordlikeness effect. This result is surprising, because the results
of the backward recall test show that these groups differ in
WM performance. It is difficult to imagine that no WM
processes were involved in the writing task, and that
demands involved in the writing task were small and of a
level comparable to the recall of a sequence of digits. As
Cheng & Rojas-Anaya (2008) propose, writing involves the
planning and monitoring of graphical production at multiple
representational levels, which puts high demands on WM.
For example, while writing a sentence, words should be
segmented into smaller units, these units should be stored
and conversion rules should be applied to converse them
into orthographic units, and finally the orthographic units
should be conversed into graphemes. Therefore, a possible
interpretation is that these results are consistent with a WM
model in which separate WMs exist for visuospatial and
verbal information (as originally proposed by Shah and
Miyake (1996)). The added visuospatial demands seem to
draw on a different resource than the verbal demands,
because the added visuospatial aspects of writing do not
seem to influence the performance of WM during writing. It
seems as if an increasing amount of information can be
processed, instead of information competing for a fixed
amount of capacity.
These results are not consistent with the results of
Alloway, Gathercole, and Pickering (2006). They
investigated performance of children between four and
eleven years old on different WM and STM tasks. They
concluded that a model with separate STMs for visuospatial
and verbal information, but a pooled WM is most
appropriate in young children. However, the tasks they used
were different from the task used in this research in several
respects. First, the tasks they used measured
visuospatial/verbal WM/STM performance separately,
whereas in our task, these components continuously
interacted with each other. Second, in their tasks, the
stimulus was presented only once, whereas in our task, the
stimulus was presented several times if necessary. This
indicates that the memory trace in our research was
stronger, influencing the ease with which information was
recalled. Third, the output in their tasks was in general much
shorter than the output in our research. For example,
responses in their tasks involved stating ‘true’ or ‘false’,
repeating a series of numbers, retracing the route through a
maze, and identifying an odd-one-out shape and recall its
location later. Compared to these tasks, writing of sentences
is more complex.
Another interpretation could be that phonological
processing is not intrinsically necessary in written language
production. However, the present data discussed here does

not address this interpretation. Further analyses will be
conducted in order to address this possibility, by explicitly
considering pauses between and within word chunks.
The results are not compatible with a general WMcapacity deficit as the primary cause of dyslexia or at least
of dyslectics’ difficulties with writing. However, the results
do not provide unequivocal support for the alternative
hypothesis. Expected effects such as a pause length
difference between DYS children and CA children were not
found. This may be due to the basic research procedure. As
children were instructed and supported to rehearse the
sentence as many times as needed, this enabled them to
overcome possible weaknesses in phonological encoding
and to use compensating mechanisms (e.g., semantic,
syntactic, and phonotactic LTM knowledge). The results
lead to more insight into the nature of the representation
difficulties.
In conclusion, the findings from the present study indicate
that WM problems in DYS children have little impact on
their writing. This supports an interpretation that when
different components continuously interact with each other,
a WM model in which visuospatial and verbal WM are
separated (Shah and Miyake, 1996) is more appropriate than
a model with a pooled WM (Baddeley, 2000).

Acknowledgments
Erasmus and Dhr. Hendrik Muller’s Vaderlandsch Fonds
supported this research.
We thank Janet Moerland and Anne-Marthe Sigmond in
assisting with the data gathering and both the schools and
the dyslexia institutes for their willingness to participate in
this study. We are grateful of the children for their
participation in the experiment. Finally, we would like to
express our gratitude to Paul Kirschner, Renske de Kleijn,
Helen Reed, and Haytske Zijlstra for their helpful
comments.

References
Alloway, T.P., Gathercole, S.E., & Pickering, S.J. (2006).
Verbal and visuospatial short term and working memory
in children: Are the separable? Child Development, 77,
1698-1716.
Baddeley, A. D. (2000). The episodic buffer: A new
component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4, 417-423.
Berninger, V., Abbott, R., Thomson, J., & Raskind, W.
(2001). Language phenotype for reading and writing
disability: A family approach. Scientific Studies in
Reading, 5, 59–105.
Berninger, V., Abbott, R., Thomson, J., Wagner, R.,
Swanson, H. L., Wijsman, E. M., & Raskind, W. (2006).
Modeling phonological core deficits within a working
memory architecture in children and adults with
developmental dyslexia. Scientific Studies of Reading, 10,
165-198.
Carroll, D. W. (2004). Psychology of language. Belmont,
KY: Thomson Wadsworth.

1678

Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2005). Writing out a
temporal signal of chunks: Patterns of pauses reflect the
induced structure of written number sequences.
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 424-429). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2006). A temporal
signal reveals chunk structure in the writing of word
phrases. Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 160-165). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cheng, P. C. H., & Rojas-Anaya, H. (2007). Measuring
Mathematic Formula Writing Competence: An
Application of Graphical Protocol Analysis. Proceedings
of the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 869-874). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Conway, A. R. A., Cowan, N., Bunting, M. F., Therriault,
D. J., & Minkoff, S. R. B. (2002). A latent variable
analysis of working memory capacity, short-term memory
capacity, processing speed, and general fluid intelligence.
Intelligence, 30, 163-183.
De Bree, E. H. (2007). Dyslexia and Phonology: A study of
phonological disabilities of Dutch children at-risk of
dyslexia. Doctoral dissertation, Utrecht University.
Gathercole, S. E., Frankish, C. R., Pickering, S. J., &
Peaker, S. (1999). Phonotactic influences on short-term
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory and Cognition, 25, 84-95.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B., & Mangun, G. R. (2002).
Cognitive neuroscience: The biology of the mind. New
York: Norton.
Kellogg, R. T., Olive, T., & Piolat, A. (2007). Verbal,
visual, and spatial working memory in written language
production. Acta Psychologica, 124, 382-397.
Mann, V. A. (2003). Language processes: Keys to reading
disability. In H. L. Swanson, K. R. Harris & S. Graham
(Eds.), Handbook of learning disabilities. New York: The
Guilford Press.

McCuthen, D. (2000). Knowledge, processing, and working
memory: Implications for a theory of writing. Educational
Psychologist, 35, 13-23.
Messer, M.H., Leseman, P.P.M., & Mayo, A.Y. (submitted).
Phonotactic probability effects in nonword recall and its
relationship with vocabulary in monolingual and bilingual
children. Utrecht: Langeveld Institute.
Olive, T. (2004). Working memory in writing: Empirical
evidence from the dual-task technique. European
Psychologist, 9, 32-42.
Shah, P., & Miyake, A. (1996). The separability of working
memory resources for spatial thinking and language
processing: An individual differences approach. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 125, 4–27.
Siegel, L. S. (2003). Basic cognitive processes in reading
disabilities. In H. L. Swanson, K. R. Harris & S. Graham
(Eds.), Handbook of learning disabilities. New York: The
Guilford Press.
Snowling, M.J. (2001). From language to reading to
dyslexia. Dyslexia, 7, 37‐46.
Tainturier, M. J., & Rapp, B. (2001). The spelling process.
In B. Rapp (Ed.), The Handbook of Cognitive
Neuropsychology: What deficits reveal about the human
mind. Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Tijms, J. (2004) Verbal memory and phonological
processing in dyslexia. Journal of Research in Reading,
27, 300–310.
Turner, M. (1997). Psychological assessment of dyslexia.
London: Whurr Publishers Ltd.
Vellutino, F. R., Fletcher, J. M., Snowling, M. J., &
Scanlon, D. M. (2004). Specific reading disability
(dyslexia): what have we learned in the past four decades?
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 2–40.
Wijsman, E. M., Peterson, D., Leutenegger, A., Thomson, J.
B., Goddard, K. A. B., Hsu, L., Berninger, V. B., &
Raskind, W. H. (2000). Segregation Analysis of
Phenotypic Components of Learning Disabilities. I. Nonword Memory and Digit Span. American Journal of
Human Genetics, 67, 631–646.

1679

