UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modelling the Category-Order Effect with an Oscillator-Based Connectionist Network

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7wp647hn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Schoenherr, Jordan
Thomson, Robert

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modelling the Category-Order Effect with an Oscillator-Based Connectionist Network
Jordan Schoenherr (psychophysics.lab@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada

Robert Thomson (rthomson@connect.carleton.ca)
Department of Cognitive Science, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada
Watkins, 1990; Greene & Lasek, 1994; Schoenherr &
Thomson, 2008). Still, the robustness of the category-order
effect is not unquestionable: the effect can be eliminated by
inhibiting the consolidation of information by decreasing
presentation rates, through articulatory suppression and
through the reduction of available attentional resources
(Greene & Lasek, 1994; for a more complete discussion of
the influences on category-order effects, see Schoenherr &
Thomson, 2008).

Abstract
Numerous factors interact to affect a participant's ability to
encode and recall information. One example of this
interaction is known as the category-order effect (COE;
Brooks and Watkins, 1990). The present study models earlier
work performed by the authors (Schoenherr & Thompson,
2008) with an oscillator-based model of memory (Brown et
al., 2000). The OSCillator-based Associative Recall
(OSCAR) network developed by Brown et al. (2000) was
adapted to examine the role that attention plays in the COE. A
series of simulations demonstrate that both the differential
allocation of attention to items, as well as the strength of
items stored in memory, independently contribute to the COE.
Further lines of experimental inquiry are also discussed.

Models of Human Memory
To better understand the processes underlying categoryorder effects, it is important to identify several models of
human memory and identify which provides a plausible
explanation of the effects. Three models proposed different
underlying mechanisms to describe serial position findings
in the memory literature (see reviews in Brown et al., 2000;
Henson, 1998).
Chaining Theory (Ebbinghaus, 1964) postulates
associations between neighbouring elements such that each
element is the cue for the subsequent items in memory.
Once retrieval is initiated, each item should activate its
neighbour in a series of sequential pairwise associations
until all items are retrieved. In this model, order information
corresponds to the associations between items in memory. A
limitation of chaining models is that high item-similarity
(including item repetition in the extreme example) causes
much higher than expected confusion during recall because
highly-similar associations have similar retrieval cues.
Positional Theory (Conrad, 1965) assumes that, after
encoding, successive items are stored in ordered slots (i.e.
bins). In contrast to chained associations, there is no
individuated storage of item and order information: order
(re: bins) is an implicit mechanism which cues retrieval of
item information. Two difficulties of this theory are that
there is no plausible explanation of how bins are organized,
and theoretically this theory claims there should be no serial
position errors.
Ordinal Theory (e.g., Estes, 1972) assumes that the
position of a list item is stored as a relative value along a
continuous property of the items. In the case of memory, the
relative strength of the memory trace is used to derive
positional information. An advantage of ordinal models is
that no explicit positional information need be encoded.
The main limitation in ordinal models is that the middle

Keywords: category-order effect; OSCAR; list recall;
memory; lexicality; working memory

Introduction
Early studies of memory capacity observed a central
distinction between the items being retained and their order
of presentation and recall (Healy, 1974; Lashley, 1951).
More recently, the interaction of item and position in a
sequence have been examined in terms of the category-order
effect (Brooks & Watkins, 1990). Brooks and Watkins
(1990) defined the category-order effect in terms of an
improvement in list recall performance when items from a
relatively smaller, homogeneous category are presented
prior to a comparatively larger, heterogeneous category
(Brooks & Watkins, 1990; Greene & Lasek, 1994). Later
work by Schoenherr & Thomson (2008) expanded this
notion, finding category-order effects when stimuli from a
more salient category preceded those from the less salient
category, regardless of category size.
Extending our previous work on the category-order effect
(Schoenherr & Thomson, 2008), the present study uses an
OSCillator-based Associative Recall (OSCAR) network
developed by Brown et al. (2000) to examine the
contributions of stimulus presentation order and readily
distinguishable categories that underlie the category-order
effect (Brooks & Watkins, 1990; Greene & Lasek, 1994).

The Category-Order Effect
Category-order effects have been revealed across a wide
range of category properties (e.g. differential frequency,
lexicality, and numerals) and are present during both
forward and backward recall of list stimuli (Brooks &

709

elements in a list cannot be recalled before prior elements
(as prior elements will have a stronger memory trace).
To account for the aforementioned limitations, the general
processes implicated in Ordinal Theory were expanded to
account for more temporal and contextual serial order
effects. Instead of including item-item connections (as in
Chaining Theory), context was simulated by linking sets of
items to different control nodes. Reactivation of multiple
items could then be achieved by the activation of a single
control node, with the learned size of these control nodes
thus seen as grouping effects. Connections between control
nodes and their items are then periodically (i.e. temporally)
‘refreshed,’ which accounts for grouping effects due to
presentation rate.
Errors result from perturbations in the order of items
during reactivation, and increase as a function of the density
of items stored within an arbitrary time interval, thereby
reducing the distinctiveness of the portion of a signal
associated with a particular item. This allows items in close
spatial-temporal proximity to be highly confusable, thus
replicating a robust finding in the experimental literature.
The notion of distinctiveness has also been incorporated
by other models of serial-order memory, based on both
global (Murdock, 1960) and local properties of a sequence
(Neath, Brown, McCormack, Chater, & Freeman, 2006).
More recently, models have been developed that use
dynamic learning-context signals that use a competitive
process of activation and inhibition to determine which item
is retrieved from memory (for a review, see Brown et al.,
2000). One such model proposed by Brown et al. (2000)
assumes that the synchronicity of such a dynamic learningcontext signal with incoming evidence provides an elegant
means to model serial-order memory in a neurologically
plausible fashion (for a discussion of concerns with this
model see Lewandowsky et al., 2006).
In more concrete terms, Brown et al. (2000) have likened
the model to a clock. As the hour and minute hands move
over the face of the clock, an item is associated with a
particular time. To retrieve an item, one need only turn back
the clock to the starting point and allow the clock to run its
course.
For the present study, we adopted the Brown et al. (2000)
model of OSCillator-based Associative Recall (OSCAR)
due to the neurological plausibility and its ability to retrieve
items in memory by simply reinitiating the learning-context
signal. However, we readily acknowledge that other models
may be capable of modeling the present data (e.g., Henson,
1998). Given that we are not directly concerned with a
comparative analysis of short-term memory models, but
rather seek to identify the mechanisms underlying the
category-order effect, we do not address these
considerations here.

learning-context signal, a portion of which is associated
with each item that is presented to the model using a oneshot Hebbian learning rule. Once an item is stored, serialorder recall simply requires resetting the learning-context
signal to its initial state whereupon each item is retrieved in
the order in which it was presented.
Three features of the dynamic learning-context signal are
critical to the model as implemented in the present study
(for a more in-depth discussion, see Brown et al., 2000).
First, the similarity of the components of an oscillation
pattern determines the distinctiveness of the learningcontext signal. In a non-repeating signal, when two states
are proximal to one another they will have greater similarity
than those that are distal. This leads to a second property:
the learning-context signal is capable of creating a distinct
representation for the relative order of items in a sequence.
In order to accomplish this, an oscillation pattern must not
repeat over a given interval of time. This is akin to winding
back the arms of an analog clock and letting it run through
again.
Another feature of the learning-context is that it can store
hierarchical representations: information from different
groups of items can be encoded using the same context
signal. Confusability between portions of the learningcontext signal (i.e. transposition errors) can occur when
items occupy the same position in different sequences.

Modified Oscillator model: OSCAR-COE
Our model of oscillator-based recall assumes three critical
factors for the determination of the category-order effect.
First, as was observed by earlier studies, the category-order
effect is dependent on the rate of stimulus presentation
(Greene & Lasek, 1994). This is instantiated in our model
by assuming that rapid presentation of stimuli reduces the
learning rate thereby increasing the difficulty of accurately
associating portions of the learning-context signal with an
item for storage.
Second, in the original OSCAR model the density of the
temporal neighbourhood of an item determined the
distinctiveness of the learning-context signal. The more
items in a temporal neighbourhood, the greater the
confusability between items and the greater the resulting
recall decrement. The category-order effect is assumed to
result from the difference between the properties of items
from different categories. We assume that the portion of the
learning-context signal associated with an item becomes
more distinctive as a result of prior associations stored in
long-term memory. This would create something akin to an
attentional template (Duncan & Humphreys, 1989) that
guides the processing of the items during the encoding
phase. In the present model two separate distinctiveness
values are used during every trial to simulate the facilitation
afforded by these existing memory traces. One of these
distinctiveness values is assigned to the first set of four
items presented whereas the other is assigned to the second
set of four items.

OSCillator-based Associative Recall
OSCAR assumes a set of endogenous oscillators, each
represented as a sinusoid of a different frequency that varies
over time. Together, these oscillators create a dynamic

710

digit 7 was excluded as a memory item by Brooks and
Watkins). By contrast when recall of unrelated words are
attempted, lexical or phonotactic properties limit the subset
of 26 possible letters for each position only marginally
given that the word stimuli used in the experiment vary
considerably in length.

Third, as in the simulations conducted by Brown et al.
(Simulations 8 and 9; 2000), we modelled grouping effects
by advancing the step of the learning-context signal for the
first item in the second half of the memory item list. This
allows for greater differentiation of the learning-context
signal for those items in the first and second portions of the
signal, respectively. However, since the learning-context
signal has some degree of similarity within the portions of
the memory items these items should be more confusable.

Method
The version of OSCAR used in the present study was
programmed into MATLAB and modified from that used by
Brown et al. (2000) in terms of the parameters mentioned
below. This simulation modelled the results for 30
participants, each performing 160 recall trials. The number
of trials was selected to make the findings commensurable
with Schoenherr & Thomson’s (2008) study. These trials
were divided into two in terms of whether numbers or letters
were assumed to constitute the first tetragram.
Distinctiveness was varied across category type. Numerals
were assigned a higher distinctiveness value (D = 4) relative
to words (D = 3). Again, the assignment of these values
resulted from the associations assumed to exist in long-term
memory (for the word stimuli) as well as the relative
simplicity of the number stimuli relative to the unrelated
words.
Grouping effects were obtained by moving the learningcontext signal for the fifth item (this item marked the
boundary between the first and second category) ahead at a
much greater rate (Step Size = 4) than for all other items
(Step Size = 3). Learning rate was adjusted to a one-shot
Hebbian rule, representing a moderate presentation rate (LR
= 1.0). Output interference for words was accomplished by
adding noise to the retrieval process. This same noise value
was not included for numerals, assuming that participants
need only recall a single item.
A caveat is also required. Although typically recall order
effects are modelled in studies of memory, we make no
attempt to do so here. Firstly, the OSCAR model was not
designed to examine this procedure (although for
suggestions see Brown et al., 1990), and second, other
studies examining the category-order effect have observed
no significant effect of recall order (Greene & Lasek, 1994;
although for some suggestive findings see Schoenherr &
Thomson, 2008). We therefore bypass this consideration in
developing the OSCAR-COE model.

Present Research
The present study models the experiments of Brooks &
Watkins (1990) and Schoenherr and Thomson (2008) that
examined the category-order effect. An important difference
observed between these two studies is that whereas Brooks
& Watkins reported greater recall for lists of single digits
that preceded lists of words, Schoenherr and Thomson
found that by equating the number of digits and words in a
display, word stimuli became the more salient category.

Simulation 1: Brooks and Watkins (1990)
Simulation 1 models the basic findings observed by Brooks
and Watkins (Experiment 1, 1990; see also Young and
Supa, 1941): that recall is improved when a more salient
category precedes a less salient category. In order to achieve
this, we assume that numeric digits are more distinctive than
word stimuli due to limitation in the number of items that
can be held in the focus of attention.
Although in general the lexical and phonotactic properties
of words should make them more distinctive, the conditions
used by Brooks & Watkins (1990) favour numeric digits.
Words, both spoken and written, occur with far greater
frequency than numerals. However, for the memory list
examined here we assume that the words are unrelated and
therefore there is no relational knowledge that facilitates
encoding of the stimuli as a category. Elsewhere in the
categorization literature, Murphy and colleagues (for a
review see Murphy, 2000) have demonstrated that when
relational knowledge is available it greatly facilitates
stimulus encoding. However, if this knowledge is only
general in nature it does not have any effect (e.g., Murphy &
Allopenna, 1994). Indeed, although words can be related
together if they are not from the same category they
function merely as a subset of all possible words. Given that
a lexicon of average college students ranges between 12,000
- 17,000 word families (e.g., Zechmeister et al., 1995) this
makes the retrieval of any word potentially difficult if the
set of all possible retrieval candidate cannot be narrowed.
For the purposes of Simulation 1, we assume that there is
greater output interference with words than with numeric
digits. This interference arises from the retrieval mechanism
that underlies recall for numerals and letters. For the
memory stimuli from the number category, Brooks and
Watkins used only single digit numeric stimuli whereas they
used numerous words that varied in length (e.g., cow, area,
nickel, diamond). Thus, when a participant attempts to
retrieve a number there are only 9 possible candidates (the

Results
The results are presented in Figure 1. As is immediately
apparent, a similar pattern of results is observed as those
found by Brooks and Watkins (1990). When the number
category precedes the word category, OSCAR-COE recalled
a greater number of items then when words preceded
numbers.

Discussion
It should first be noted that Brooks & Watkins (1990) used
the number of items recalled as their dependent measure
whereas our analyses used proportion correct. Additionally,

711

the purposes of Simulation 2 by modelling a situation in
which equal numbers of stimuli were used in both categories
of tetragrams.

their analysis collapsed item recall over both numerals and
words whereas our analysis separated the two. However, a
similar pattern to their observation that digit-word recall
(7.07 items) was greater than word-digit recall (6.29 items)
is evidenced in the means response of the model presented
above. OSCAR-COE responses were in fact more dramatic
than Brooks & Watkins (1990) findings, but can be
achieved by allowing for further adjustments in the
distinctiveness of the learning-context signal for both
numeric and word items.

Simulation 2: Schoenherr & Thomson (2008)
Simulation 2 sought to replicate the findings of
Schoenherr & Thomson (2008). Schoenherr and Thomson
(2008) used four tetragram categories: words, pseudowords, rhyming letters (i.e. b, c, d, e, g, p, and v), and
random letters. One letter tetrgram was paired with one
random number tetragram creating compound stimuli that
was presented for a brief duration (750ms in Experiment 1).
Recall performance was observed to improve when words
and pseudo-words were presented first as well as when
random numbers preceded rhyming and rhyming letters.
These results not only confirmed the category-order effect
but indicated that it can be observed at rapid presentation
rates. The findings that numeric stimuli enjoyed only a
relative advantage in comparison to letter stimuli provided
evidence for the prior associations in memory are also
determinants of the category-order effect.
As noted above, in Experiment 1 of Schoenherr and
Thomson (2008), a category-order effect was observed
wherein word and pseudo-word items were more accurately
recalled than numeric stimuli. Sequences of random and
rhyming letters were recalled with less accuracy than
numeric stimuli. In order to draw a parallel with Brooks and
Watkins (1990) we assume that the various lexical and
phonotactic properties of words stored in long-term memory
facilitate encoding of stimuli in comparison to four digit
memory items that have no prior associations (i.e., they do
not represent a historic date or any other meaning number
sequence such as pi). Thus, while the same number of items
are in the focus of attention for both categories the number
of associations those items have in memory differs. As a
result, an attentional template (Duncan & Humphreys, 1989)
is capable of guiding processing more efficiently for those
items with a greater number of associations.

0.90

Proportion Correct

0.85
Number Presented First
Word Presented First
Brooks & Watkins (1990)

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

0.60
NUMBER

WORD

Category

Although Simulation 1 models only one experiment of
Brooks and Watkins (1990) study, it can be readily extended
to other experiments conducted within that study as well as
other studies (Greene & Lasek, 1994; Young & Supa,
1941).
These findings suggest that the category-order effect
results from the grouping of items in memory. Early
versions of the OSCAR-COE model simply advanced the
learning-context signal as a single chunk of memory items,
which did not produce differential recall patterns for the
various categories. Thus, the further iteration of the
learning-context signal was required to instantiate a
category-order effect. Simulation 1 demonstrates that the
number of associations in long-term memory should interact
with presentation order and output interference from
retrieval in order to produce the category-order effect.
The use of greater distinctiveness values for the numeric
stimuli stems from the number of prior associations in
memory as well as the limits of the number of items that can
be held in the focus of attention during encoding. However,
as noted by Schoenherr and Thomson (2008), this
comparison is unbalanced in that if we consider the number
of elements in each memory item that need to be retrieved,
there are far greater demands for encoding word stimuli in
the absence of any association between them.
Simulation 2 sought to align the findings of early
experiments that have observed the category-order effect
with those found by Schoenherr and Thomson (2008). For

Method
The model was modified from Simulation 1 but used the
same parameters for the number of participants and trials.
Each category is associated with a separate distinctiveness
value, and are further assumed to change with the number of
associations in long-term memory that facilitate allocation
of attentional resources.
Word stimuli are assumed to be the most distinct having
both lexical and phonotactic properties (D = 4). Pseudowords were assumed to contain fewer word-like properties
(e.g. evincing only phonotactic structure), and were
consequently less distinctive than words (D = 3.5). Numbers
were assumed to be drawn from a small set that while not
having complex associations are nevertheless memorable
due to their small set size in memory (D = 3). Finally, given
that random letters and rhyming letters are drawn from the
set of all letters stored in memory, we assume equivalent
values that are relative indistinct (D = 2).

712

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4
RANDOM

RHYMING

NUMBERS PSEUDO-WORD

RANDOM

WORD

RHYMING

NUMBERS PSEUDO-WORD

Proportion Correct

Proportion Correct

Category Presented First (Human Data)
Category Presented Second (Human Data)

Category Presented First (Model Data)
Category Presented Second (Model Data)

0.9

WORD

Tetragram Category

Tetragram Category

Figure 2A. Modelled data for Schoenherr and Thomson (2008):
Category-Order Effect over Tetragram Category

Given that an equivalent number of memory stimuli were
presented from each category (i.e., 4 letters or numbers) we
assumed that there was no differential output interference
and so did not include it in the model. Grouping effects
were modelled in the same fashion as Simulation 1. The
learning rate was reduced from the one-shot Hebbian (LR =
0.8) to model a more rapid presentation relative to
Simulation 1.

Figure 2B. Human data for Schoenherr and Thomson (2008):
Category-Order Effect over Tetragram Category

Schoenherr and Thomson (2008) found roughly equivalent
recall patterns regardless of the presentation order. This
shortcoming is not critical though as it could have
conceivably resulted from greater output interference for
those items presented second or simply a failure to account
for recall order (see above). In either case, OSCAR-COE
accounts for the major empirical trends.

Results

General Discussion

As in Simulation 1, OSCAR-COE was capable of
generating the category-order effect. As is clear from Figure
2A, the means show a comparable pattern of performance to
those reported by Schoenherr and Thomson (2008;
reproduced in Figure 2B). When words or pseudo-words
preceded numbers they are more accurately recalled than
when they follow numbers. It is also clear that numeric
stimuli were more salient than rhyming or random letters.
The Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient for the means
of these two data sets revealed that this trend was highly
significant, r = .879, p < .001.

The overall findings of this paper suggest that OSCAR-COE
can effectively model the category-order effect by varying
the distinctiveness of the learning-context signal, allowing
for item grouping, and by varying the learning rate. This
suggests a central role for the prior associations of items
stored in long-term memory.
The present study also has ramifications for models of
memory. Although it has elsewhere been argued that
classical models of memory are incapable of replicating
certain errors during retrieval (Brown et al., 2000; Henson,
1998), it is also clear from OSCAR-COE that a means is
required to account for facilitation of encoding of items in
memory. Without some ability to model associations stored
in long-term memory, any neural architecture may fail to
account for performance patterns that can only arise out of
these associations. Even the present model cannot fully
duplicate the effects of long-term memory as we modeled it
here
indirectly
through
assumptions
regarding
distinctiveness.
Given the complex nature of the category-order effect,
further studies need to be performed to bridge the gap that
exists in the experimental literature. The present study
demonstrates that when differences in distinctiveness of the
learning-context signal are accounted for the category-order
effect is produced.
However, distinctiveness has been modelled here as a
unidimensional construct. Instead it seems more than likely
the difference between implicit knowledge of prior
association and explicit relational/theoretical knowledge

Discussion
As in Simulation 1, differences in the distinctiveness of the
learning-context signal again proved to be a critical feature
when modelling the category-order effect. When the more
salient categories were presented first, they facilitated
overall encoding of stimuli by focusing attention on
attributes of the memory items. By allowing for the
grouping of items recall performance improved between the
tetragram.
It should be noted that there are difference in performance
for the number, random letter and rhyming letter conditions
than were observed by Schoenherr and Thomson (2008).
Namely, Figure 2 demonstrates that when random and
rhyming letters precede numeric stimuli recall was
improved relative to when they followed numerals. This
same pattern was observed for numbers. However,

713

International Phonetic Association (1999). Handbook of the
International Phonetic Association: A guide to the use of
the International Phonetic Alphabet. England: Cambridge
University Press.
Kausler, D. H., & Puckett, J. M. (1979). Effects of word
frequency on adult age differences in word memory span.
Experimental Aging Research, 5, 161-169.
Landauer, T. K., & Freedman, J. L. (1968). Information
retrieval from long-term memory: category size and
recognition time. Journal of Verbal Leaning Behaviour,
7, 291-295.
Lashley, K. S. (1951). The problem of serial order in
behavior. In L. A. Jeffress (Ed.), Cerebral mechanisms in
behavior. The Hixon symposium (pp. 112–136). New
York: Wiley.
Lewandowsky, S., & Brown, G. D. A. (2005). Serial recall
and presentation schedule: A micro-analysis of local
distinctiveness. Memory, 13, 283-292.
Murdock, B. B., Jr. and von Saal, W. (1967). Transpositions
in short term memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 74, 137-143.
Murphy, G. L. (2000). The Big Book of Concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murphy, G. L. & Allopeena, P. D. (1994). The locus of
knowledge effects in concept learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 904-919.
Neath, I., Brown, G.D.A., McCormack, T., Chater, N., &
Freeman, R. (2006). Distinctiveness models of memory
and absolute identification: Evidence for local, not global,
effects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
59, 121-135.
Reber, A. S. (1992). The Cognitive Unconscious: An
Evolutionary Perspective. Consciousness and Cognition,
1, 93-133.
Ryan, J. (1969). Grouping and short-term memory:
Different means and patterns of grouping. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 21, 137-147.
Reichler, G. M. (1969). Perceptual recognition as a function
of meaningfulness of stimulus material. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 275-280.
Schoenherr, J. R. & Thompson, R. (2008). Category
Properties and the Category-Order Effect. Proceedings of
the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Washington, USA.
Watkins, M. J. (1977). The intricacy of memory span.
Memory & Cognition, 5, 529-534.
Waugh, N. C., & Norman, D. A. (1965). Primary Memory.
Psychological Review, 72, 89-104.
Young, C. W., & Supa, M. (1941). Mnemic inhibition as a
factor in the limitation of the memory span. American
Journal of Psychology, 54, 546-552.
Zechmeister, E.B., Chronis, A.M., Cull, W.L., D'Anna, C.A.
and Healy, N.A. (1995) Growth of a functionally
important lexicon. Journal of Reading Behavior, 27, 201212.

retained in memory should be considered. It is likely that the
variety of stimuli used thus far (for reviews see Greene &
Lasek, 1994) produce the category-order effect for different
reasons. That the effect can be caused by separate sources of
knowledge suggests that one source (e.g., implicit
knowledge) may be more robust than another source (e.g.,
explicit knowledge; for a consideration of this sort see
Reber, 1992). If so, different modes of interference should
be capable of disrupting encoding of these various kinds of
associations.
Similarly, further investigations must be performed to
determine how attention facilitates the encoding of
information in the context of the category-order effect.
Although the work of Schoenherr and Thomson (2008) and
the presented study suggest that the primary influence of
attention is at the perceptual level during the encoding phase
of memorization this has yet to undergo empirical
investigation. Although Greene & Lasek (1994) used
articulatory suppression, tasks that target executive
functions could disrupt encoding of higher-order relations.
OSCAR-COE also provides predictions for future studies.
If the distinctiveness is a function of the number of
associations in memory that creates a processing template to
facilitate encoding of items, than increases in the quantity of
numeric items should result in a concomitant decrease in the
category-order effect for numeric stimuli.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to sincerely thank Dr. Craig LethSteensen for coding the base version of the OSCAR model
in MALAB.

References
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working Memory. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Brooks, J. O., & Watkins, M. J. (1990). Further evidence
of the intricacy of Memory Span.
Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 1134-1141
Brown,G. D. A., Preece, T., & Hulme, C. (2000). Oscillatorbased memory for serial order. Psychological Review,
107, 127–181.
Duncan, J., & Humphreys, G. W. (1989). Visual search and
stimulus similarities. Psychological Review, 96, 433-458.
Greene & Lasek (1994). Category-order effects in memory
span. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1391-1395.
Healy, A. F. (1974). Separating item from order information
in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behaviour, 13, 644-645.
Henson, R. N. A. (1998). Short-Term Memory for Serial
Order: The Start-End Model. Cognitive Psychology, 36,
73-137.
Hulme, C., Maughan, S., & Brown, G. (1991). Memory of
familiar and unfamiliar words: Evidence for a long-term
memory contribution to short-term memory span.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 685-701.

714

