UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motor Affordances in Mental Rotation: When minds reflect the world and when they go
beyond

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1k75d054

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Flusberg, Stephen
Jenkins, Gavin

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motor Affordances in Mental Rotation:
When minds reflect the world and when they go beyond
Stephen J. Flusberg (sflus@stanford.edu)
Gavin W. Jenkins (gjenkins@stanford.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@stanford.edu)
Stanford University, Department of Psychology
Jordan Hall, 450 Serra Mall, Building 420, Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
A vivid imagination is one of the defining features of human
mental life. A large body of research has shown that mental
imagery is supported by some of the same cognitive systems
that underlie perception and action (Decety, 1996; Kosslyn,
Thompson, & Ganis, 2006). At the same time, our
imaginations can go far beyond what is currently available in
our physical environment; we can conjure up new worlds in
art and literature, design new technologies, and conduct
thought experiments that lead to major scientific discoveries.
In this paper we investigate the extent to which the physical
constraints and affordances of objects in the real world
impinge on our ability to represent and manipulate those
objects in our imagination. In particular we ask: are objects
that are more difficult to physically manipulate also more
difficult to mentally manipulate? Participants interacted with
two wooden objects modeled after the figures from Shepard
and Metzler’s (1971) classic mental rotation study. One
object was easy to physically rotate while the other was
difficult to rotate. They then completed a mirror-image
mental rotation task consisting of images of the manipulated
objects. Participants were slower to solve the mental rotation
task for trials consisting of images of the hard-to-rotate
object, but only when they used a motor strategy in the task.
Keywords: Mental representation; Mental imagery; mental
rotation; motor affordances

Background
The capacity to vividly imagine scenes, events, and actions
is one of the hallmarks of human mental life, and
researchers have been investigating the nature of mental
imagery for the better part of four decades (Kosslyn, Ganis,
& Thompson, 2001; Shepard & Metzler, 1971). A great
deal of research has suggested that mental imagery is
supported by some of the same cognitive systems that
underlie perception and action; brain areas known to process
visual information are also engaged during imagined visual
activity (Kosslyn, Ganis, & Thompson, 2001; Kosslyn,
Thompson, & Ganis, 2006; O’Craven & Kanwisher, 2000;
Winawer, Huk, & Boroditsky, under review) and brain areas
responsible for planning and executing motor movements
are also activated during imagined motor movements (e.g.
Decety, 1996; Jeannerod & Frak, 1999; Porro et al., 1996).
It seems that the imagination is intimately tied to the
processes that mediate our perceptual and motor interactions
in the world.
At the same time, however, our imaginations often appear
to go far beyond the information that is available in our

physical environment: we can conjure up new worlds in art
and literature, design new technologies, and even conduct
thought experiments that lead to major scientific advances.
In fact, what often seems to separate our imagination from
the everyday world is that mental imagery appears free from
the constraints imposed by the physical environment.
Indeed, people often imagine actions or events that they
have never seen or never could experience themselves. We
can imagine ourselves riding on a beam of light, leaping tall
buildings in a single bound, or making a hook shot from half
court.
On the one hand, then, mental imagery is supported by
perception and action systems in the brain, but on the other
hand our imaginations seem to go above and beyond our
possible perceptual and motor worlds. This begs the
question, to what extent do the constraints and affordances
of objects in the real world impinge on our ability to
represent and manipulate those objects in our imagination?
Consider that you are redecorating your office and you are
imagining what the room would look like if you moved a
few items around. When you imagine moving the couch to
the far wall, does the bulk of the couch, which constrains
your physical motor interactions, automatically affect your
mental imagery for the couch? Or can you just as easily
imagine moving the heavy couch as the small reading lamp?
Here we ask this very question: are objects that are more
difficult to physically manipulate also more difficult to
mentally manipulate?
We address this issue by utilizing a novel adaptation of
the classic Shepard and Metzler (1971) mental rotation task.
In their original study, participants were presented with
images of two three-dimensional block figures and had to
indicate whether the objects were identical or were mirror
images of one another. Interestingly, reaction times were
linearly proportional to the angular disparity between the
two objects. These findings have since been replicated
many times, though several researchers have argued that
there are actually several possible mental strategies for
solving this task (e.g. Kosslyn et al., 2001b). For example,
it is possible to use a motor strategy and imagine manually
rotating the objects (Kosslyn et al., 2001b; Wexler, Kosslyn,
& Berthoz, 1998) or to use a visual strategy and imagine the
objects rotating on their own (Kosslyn et al., 2001b).
Kosslyn and colleagues (2001b) used PET imaging to
demonstrate that participants were able to consciously adopt
one of these strategies and flexibly switch to a different

1453

strategy when cued by the experimenter. Critically, using a
motor strategy reliably activated motor regions of the brain
in addition visual areas, while using the visual strategy only
activated visual areas.
In our study, participants interacted with and physically
rotated two identically shaped (but differently colored)
Shepard and Metzler-like objects that were constructed out
of wood. Crucially, one of the objects was easy to rotate
while the other was more difficult to rotate. Participants
then completed a standard mirror-image mental rotation task
on the computer that consisted of images of the objects they
had interacted with along with similarly shaped control
objects. Following Kosslyn and colleagues (2001b),
participants were given a specific strategy for carrying out
the mental rotation task to ensure that all participants were
engaged in the same mental task. Results indicate that
people are significantly slower to mentally rotate objects
that are more difficult to physically rotate when they use a
motor mental rotation strategy. However, this reaction time
difference goes away when participants are instructed to use
a purely visual strategy for mental rotation. When
participants are not given any strategy instructions their
overall reaction times speed up, suggesting that the mind is
free to find a more efficient way to solve these tasks when
left to its own devices.
All together, these results support the idea that under
certain circumstances the physical motor properties of
objects may be integrated into mental imagery, constraining
imaginative processes. However, these constraints may be
avoided by switching mental imagery strategies, and people
may search for the most efficient imagery strategy by
default.

Experiment 1
While the imagination often appears free from the physical
constraints of the world, mental imagery is supported by
some of the same cognitive systems that support perception
and action. Here we explore to what extent the constraints
and affordances of objects in the real world impinge on our
ability to represent and manipulate those objects in our
imagination.
Experiment 1 investigated whether
participants would be slower to mentally rotate an object
that was more difficult to physically rotate. To try to ensure
that all participants were engaging in the same imagery
processes, participants were given a “motor” strategy and
were told to imagine grasping one of the objects and turning
it until it aligned with the other object.

Methods
Participants 40 members of the Stanford community
participated in this study in exchange for payment or class
credit.
Physical Rotation Apparatus We constructed four Shepard
and Metzler-style block figures from small wooden beams
(Figure 1). The objects were approximately 15 cm tall and
had small holes drilled into the center beam to allow them to

be mounted to the rotation platforms. The objects came in
two distinct shapes with two instances of each shape. One
instance of each shape was painted purple while the instance
was painted green.
We also built two rotation platforms to control the
rotation affordances of the objects. Each rotation platform
consisted of a coffee can with an axle installed in the bottom
and a freely rotating wooden paddle inside. The objects
could be mounted on top via protruding metal rods. One
device was completely filled with sand, making it difficult
to rotate when an object was mounted onto it. The other
platform was left empty, making it easier to rotate. Both
devices were painted black and their inner workings were
visually obscured from participants by wooden covers.

Figure 1: Images of the 4 objects built for Experiment 1.
Physical Rotation Procedure Participants received
physical training with two of the Shepard and Metzler
objects from the same shape class. One shape was mounted
to the rotation platform filled with sand (hard-to-rotate)
while the other was mounted to the empty platform (easy-torotate). For half of the participants, the green object was
mounted to the hard-to-rotate platform while for the other
participants the purple object was mounted to the hard-torotate platform. Half of the participants manipulated objects
from one shape class while the remaining participants
manipulated objects from the other shape class. The objects
that participants did not manipulate would serve as control
trials in the mental rotation task.
Half of the participants rotated the hard-to-rotate object
first while the remaining participants rotated the easy-torotate object first. Participants were instructed to stand at
arm’s length from the object, grasp the object by the center
beam with their right hand and rotate it as far as they could
clockwise and then counterclockwise. This step was then
repeated for the left hand. The object was then removed
from its mounting by the experimenter, rotated 90°, and
remounted in a new orientation. Participants then
performed the right and left-handed physical rotations in
this position. This process was repeated twice more until
the object had been manipulated from four different
orientations. At this point the experimenter removed the
apparatus and replaced it with the other rotation platform.
The second object (same shape, different color) was already
attached to this platform. Participants replicated the entire

1454

physical rotation processes described above for this second
object. Finally, they repeated this whole procedure again
from the beginning, rotating the first object and platform
followed by the second object and platform. The entire
training session lasted approximately five minutes.
Mental Rotation Stimuli and Procedure The mental
rotation task was conducted on a computer. Stimuli
consisted of full color photos of the physical objects
described above. Each object was photographed in three
different orientations, with identical shapes photographed
from the same angles. These orientations were chosen to
allow for the unambiguous identification of each object
from the digital image.
On every trial, one of these twelve images appeared in the
left half of the display, subtending approximately between
12-15 cm by 12-15 cm depending on the orientation, angle
and shape. Either the same image or a mirror-reflected
version of the image appeared in the right half of the
display. The image on the right could be rotated 0°, 60°,
120°, 180°, 240°, or 300° clockwise in the picture plane.
Every possible trial based on the combination of these
images was used exactly once in this experiment. Since
there were 4 objects, 3 orientations, 2 response types (same
or mirror-reversed), and 6 rotation angles, this yielded 144
unique trials. The order of trials was randomized across
participants.
Participants had to press one button if the images on the
screen depicted the exact same object and a different button
if they were mirror-reversed images of one another.
Feedback was given after each trial in the form of a high
tone or low tone for correct versus incorrect responses,
respectively. All participants completed five practice trials
before running through the experimental trials. Practice
trials were similar to the experimental trials but consisted of
grayscale images of the objects.
Following Kosslyn (2001b), Participants were given a
motor strategy to use for responding in the task: Please use
the following strategy to accomplish this task: Imagine that
you are grasping one of the objects with your hand and
turning it until it aligns with the other object.

Results
The data from 8 individuals were removed prior to analysis
because they either failed to complete the entire experiment
or they had error rates in excess of 20%. The remaining 32
participants had a mean accuracy of 93% and represent a
fully counterbalanced set of data.
To ensure that our rotation platform manipulation really
made one object significantly harder to rotate than the other,
we asked participants at the end of the experiment to rate
how difficult it was to physically rotate each object on a
scale from 1 (extremely easy to rotate) to 10 (extremely
difficult to rotate). Participants rated the object that was
attached to the sand-filled rotation platform (M=6.5,
SD=1.87) as significantly harder to physically rotate than
the object attached to the empty rotation platform (M=2.2,

SD=1.45), t(29)=9.19, p < 0.001. Two participants failed to
respond to this question.
On the mental rotation task, mirror-reversed response
trials were treated as distractors and were not considered in
this analysis. We removed incorrect trials as well as correct
trials where the RT was greater than two standard deviations
slower than the mean RT across all trials for all participants.
Because mental rotations of 240° and 300° clockwise are
equivalent to rotations of 120° and 60° counterclockwise,
we collapsed the 240° and 300° trials into the same bin as
120° and 60° trials, respectively.
Easy - Motor Strategy
Hard - Motor Strategy

4000

3000

2000

p < 0.01
1000

0

60
120
180
Angle of Rotation (degrees)

Figure 2: RTs by angle of rotation for experimental trials in
Experiment 1. Error bars on all graphs represent standard
error of the mean.
There were two trial types: Experimental trials were those
where the image on the screen depicted an object that had
been physically manipulated, while Control trials were
those where the image on the screen depicted an object that
had not been physically manipulated. Experimental trials
were divided into Easy and Hard trials based on whether the
object on the screen had been attached to the easy or hardto-rotate platform for a given participant (rotation
difficulty).
First we analyzed data from just the experimental trials in
a 2 (rotation difficulty) X 4 (angle of rotation) repeated
measures ANOVA (Figure 2). Consistent with previous
studies of mental rotation, there was a significant main
effect of angle of rotation, with RTs increasing with
increased angle of rotation, F(3, 93) = 102.1, p < 0.001.
More interestingly, there was a significant main effect of
rotation difficulty, with faster responses to images of the
easy-to-rotate object as compared to the hard-to-rotate
object, F(1, 31) = 8.54, p < 0.01. There was no interaction
between rotation difficulty and angle of rotation, F(3, 93) =
0.77, p = N.S.
We also analyzed control trials to see whether the effects
of trial subtype (easy vs. hard rotation difficulty)

1455

generalized to trials depicting objects of the same color and
similar shape that participants never actually physically
interacted with. Control trials were separated by color and
matched to whatever colors the hard and easy objects were
for each participant. In a 2 (trial type) X 2 (rotation
difficulty) X 4 (angle of rotation) repeated measures
ANOVA we found a significant interaction between trial
type and rotation difficulty, F(1, 31) = 11.65, p < 0.01,
suggesting that the RT effects observed for the experimental
trials did not extend to the control trials. Looking just at the
control trials in a 2 (color-matched rotation difficulty) X 4
(angle of rotation) ANOVA, there was a significant main
effect of angle of rotation, with reaction times increasing
with increased angle of rotation, F(3, 93) = 124.40, p <
0.001. However, there was no main effect of color-matched
rotation difficulty, F(1, 31) = 0.15, p = N.S. There was a
marginal interaction between angle of rotation and colormatched rotation difficulty, F(3, 93) = 2.53, p = 0.062,
though this seems to be driven by the fact that at 180° of
rotation, RTs to color-matched easy trials were somewhat
slower than RTs to color-matched hard trials.

Discussion
The results from Experiment 1 suggest that certain physical
properties of an object may be automatically integrated into
mental imagery and constrain our ability to imagine
manipulating that object. Participants were significantly
slower to mentally rotate an object that was more difficult to
physically rotate, even though both objects were the same
exact shape. Furthermore, this effect did not generalize to
images of objects of similar shape that were color-matched
to difficulty of rotation, suggesting that was an objectspecific effect. Interestingly, there was no interaction
between trial type and angle of rotation, suggesting that the
cost of mentally rotating a difficult object may be fixed.
This might reflect an additional processing demand that is
required for preparing to interact with – or imagine
interacting with – a more difficult to manipulate object.
However, it is unclear whether the specific motor
affordances of an object will always and automatically
influence imagined interactions with that object or whether
this depends in part on the mental imagery strategy that is
deployed. This issue was explored in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
The results from Experiment 1 suggest that motor properties
of objects in the world can constrain our ability to imagine
manipulating them. However, people can easily imagine
impossible physical feats such as lifting a car or even a
mountain. How might this possible? Perhaps people can
ignore certain physical properties of objects in mental
imagery by deploying a different imagery strategy. In
Experiment 2, we investigated whether we could eliminate
the effects of physical rotation difficulty on mental rotation
speed by instructing participants used a purely visual
strategy.

Methods
Participants 36 individuals from the Stanford community
were recruited to participate in this study in exchange for
payment or class credit.
Stimuli and Procedure The stimuli and procedure for
Experiment 2 were identical to Experiment 1 with the
following exception: mental rotation task instructions
included a visual strategy for solving the task instead of a
motor strategy. The new instructions read: Please use the
following strategy to accomplish this task: Imagine that one
of the objects is rotating by itself and turning until it aligns
with the other object.

Results
The data from 6 individuals were removed prior to analysis
because they had error rates in excess of 20%. The
remaining 32 participants had a mean accuracy of 92% and
represent a fully counterbalanced set of data. First, we
analyzed data from just the experimental easy and hard trials
in a 2 (rotation difficulty) X 4 (angle of rotation) repeated
measures ANOVA (Figure 3). Once again there was a
significant main effect of angle of rotation, with RTs
increasing with increased angle of rotation, F (3, 93) =
80.56, p < 0.001. However, there was no main effect of
rotation difficulty, F (1, 31) = 0.002, p = N.S, and no
interaction between rotation difficulty and angle of rotation,
F(3, 93) = 0.91, p = N.S.
Next, we combined the data from Experiment 2 with the
data from Experiment 1 to directly compare the effects of
mental imagery strategy in a 2 (rotation difficulty) X 4
(angle of rotation) repeated measures ANOVA with strategy
as the between-subjects variable. Overall, there was a
marginal main effect of rotation difficulty, with slower RTs
for trials depicting the hard-to-rotate object, F(1, 62) = 3.81,
p = 0.055. However, this effect was entirely driven by the
motor imagery strategy employed in Experiment 1, as the
interaction between imagery strategy and rotation difficulty
approached significance, F(1, 62) = 3.53, p = 0.065.

Discussion
The results from Experiment 2 demonstrate that the motor
affordance properties of an object do not always constrain
our ability to imagine interacting with that object. When
participants used a visual strategy for mental rotation,
imagining the objects on the screen moving of their own
accord, there was no cost for mentally rotating an object that
was harder to physically rotate. This is interesting because
it suggests that our mental representation of an object is
intimately tied to how we imagine interacting with that
object. However, in both Experiments 1 and 2 participants
were given explicit mental rotation strategy instructions, so
it is impossible to tell how participants would represent the
objects without being told what to do. This issue was
explored in Experiment 3.

1456

significant main effect of angle of rotation, with RTs
increasing with increased angle of rotation, F (3, 93) =
87.20, p < 0.001. However, there was no main effect of
rotation difficulty, F (1, 31) = 0.164, p = N.S, and no
interaction between rotation difficulty and angle of rotation,
F(3, 93) = 1.42, p = N.S.

Easy - Visual Strategy
Hard - Visual Strategy

4000

3000

Easy - No Strategy
Hard - No Strategy

4000
2000
3000

p = N.S.
1000

0

60
120
180
Angle of Rotation (degrees)

2000

Figure 3: RTs by angle of rotation for Experiment 2
p = N.S.

Experiment 3

1000

Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrated that physical properties
of objects in the world could constrain mental imagery for
those objects, but that these constraints could be avoided by
switching mental imagery strategies. However, because we
provided participants with explicit strategies, it is unclear
how people would represent the objects on their own
without instruction. Because they had just physically
interacted with these objects, it is possible that they would
be biased towards using a motor strategy. However, it is
also possible that they would settle on a more efficient
strategy that is not constrained by the motor affordance
properties of the objects. In Experiment 3, participants
completed the same physical training and mental rotation
task as in Experiments 1 and 2. However, they were not
given any explicit strategy instructions for completing the
mental rotation task in order to see how they would solve
the task on their own.

Methods
Participants 38 individuals from the Stanford community
were recruited to participate in this study in exchange for
payment or class credit.
Stimuli and Procedure The stimuli and procedure were
identical to Experiments 1 and 2 with the following
exception: mental rotation task instructions did not include
any explicit strategy for responding to the task.

Results
The data from 5 individuals were removed prior to analysis
because they had error rates in excess of 20%. The
remaining 32 participants had a mean accuracy of 91% and
represent a fully counterbalanced set of data.
First we analyzed data from just the easy and hard trials in
a 2 (rotation difficulty) X 4 (angle of rotation) repeated
measures ANOVA (Figure 4). Once again there was a

0

60
120
180
Angle of Rotation (degrees)

Figure 4: RTs by angle of rotation for Experiment 3
Next we compared the results of Experiment 3 to the
results from Experiment 1 in a 2 (rotation difficulty) X 4
(angle of rotation) repeated measures ANOVA with strategy
as the between-subjects variable. Overall, there was a main
effect of rotation difficulty, with slower RTs for trials
depicting the hard-to-rotate object, F(1, 62) = 4.65, p = <
0.05. However, this effect seems to be largely driven by the
motor imagery strategy employed in Experiment 1, as the
interaction between experiment and rotation difficulty
approached significance, F (1, 62) = 2.33, p = 0.13.
Interestingly, there was a marginal main effect of the
between-subjects experiment variable, with RTs slightly
slower overall for Experiment 1, F(1, 62) = 2.35, p = 0.13.
When we compared Experiments 2 and 3 we found a similar
result, with overall RTs marginally slower for Experiment 2,
F(1, 62) = 2.63, p = 0.11.

Discussion
The results from Experiment 2 demonstrated that the mental
rotation task could be solved without representing the motor
properties of the objects in imagery. The results from
Experiment 3 suggest that when participants are not
explicitly instructed to use a motor strategy, they do not
automatically represent the motor affordances of the objects
that they are mentally rotating. Moreover, there is a trend in
the data that suggests that participants are faster to mentally
rotate when they are not provided with any specific strategy
to use. One possibility is that this simply reflects the added
cognitive cost of maintaining a strategy in mind when one is
provided by the experimenter. On the other hand, it could
also be the case that participants are more likely to settle on

1457

a more efficient mental rotation strategy when they are not
constrained by specific task instructions. At the end of the
study we asked participants to describe what strategies they
used for solving the mental rotation task, and we received a
startling assortment of responses. Many participants
reported using a strategy that could be interpreted as either a
visual or motor rotation strategy (e.g. “I rotated the image
on the right to be oriented the same way the image on the
left was”), but other people seemed to just compare key subsections of the objects (e.g. “I first focused on one corner of
the first object, and then looked for the corresponding
corner in the other object”), while some participants came
up with even more novel strategies (e.g. “After a while, I
imagined them as a sea lion with different positions”).
Several people even reported using several strategies
throughout the experiment. We do not have enough data at
this point to analyze how well participants’ reports of their
strategies tracks their RT data, but it could be that
participants typically search for the most efficient way to
solve the task. Why and under what conditions people
might adopt a given strategy is an interesting area for future
research.

General Discussion
We began this research by asking a simple question: are
objects that are more difficult to physically manipulate also
more difficult to mentally manipulate? Our answer is a
conditional yes, but this depends in large part on what form
of mental imagery is utilized. The results from Experiment 1
suggest that when we imagine a motor interaction with an
object, the properties of the object that constrain physical
motor interactions also appear to constrain imagined motor
interactions. However, the data from Experiment 2 suggest
that this cost can be avoided simply by imagining the object
moving by its own accord. Finally, we found that when left
to their own devices, many participants seemed to settle on a
more efficient mental rotation strategy that did not consist of
representing the specific motor affordances of the objects.
Taken together, these experiments demonstrate that the
motor properties of objects are not automatically integrated
into mental imagery for those objects, unless you are
specifically imagining a motor interaction with those
objects.
One interesting aspect of our findings is the fact that the
cost for mentally rotating a more difficult object in
Experiment 1 appears to be fixed rather interacting with
angle of mental rotation. One explanation for this effect is
the possibility that it takes longer to (imaginatively) prepare
for a motor interaction with an object that is more difficult
to manipulate relative to one that is known to be easier to
manipulate. Once you have planned and started to execute
the motor movement, however, the mental rotation speed for
hard versus easy to rotate objects is roughly the same. It
will be interesting to explore these effects in more depth in
future work. For example, our participants only had a few
minutes to interact with the real-world objects. Would more
time spent physically interacting with these objects reduce

the cost for mentally rotating a difficult object due to
increased experience planning the motor movement? Or
would this extra experience cause the disparity in RT to be
even greater due to a stronger representation of the motor
affordances of the difficult object? Similarly, if participants
in Experiment 3 were given more time to interact with the
objects, might they be more likely to use a motor strategy by
default even when given no explicit instructions to do so?
At the beginning of this paper we noted that while mental
imagery may be supported by some of same cognitive
systems that underlie perception and action, our
imaginations often seem to go way beyond the constraints
of the physical world to allow us to experience the
impossible. All together, the experiments presented here
represent a step towards understanding what specific
information makes it into mental imagery under what
circumstances.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Travis Kiefer for help
gathering data as well as Adriana Weisleder, Nathan
Witthoft and the citizens of Cognation for discussion of this
work. This research was supported by an NSF Career
Award Grant given to Lera Boroditsky.

References
Decety, J. (1996). Do imagined and executed actions share
the same neural substrate? Cognitive Brain Research, 3,
87-93.
Jeannerod, M, & Frak, V. (1999). Mental imaging of motor
activity in humans. Current Opinion in Neurobiology.
9(6), 735-9.
Kosslyn, S. M., Ganis, G, & Thompson, W. L. (2001a).
Neural foundations of imagery. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2, 635-642.
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L., Wraga, M., & Alpert, N.
M. (2001b). Imagining rotation by endogenous versus
exogenous forces: Distinct neural mechanisms.
NeuroReport, 12(11), 2519-2525.
Kosslyn, S. M., Thompson, W. L. & Ganis, G. (2006). The
case for mental imagery. Oxford Press, New York.
O'Craven, K. & Kanwisher, N. (2000). Mental imagery of
faces and places activates corresponding stimulus-specific
brain regions. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 12
1013-1023
Porro, C. A., Francescato, M. P., Cettolo, V., Diamond, M.
E., Baraldi, P., Zuiani, C., Bazzocchi, M., & di Prampero,
P. E. (1996). Primary motor and sensory cortex activation
during motor performance and motor imagery: a
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. T h e
Journal of Neuroscience, 16(23), 7688-98.
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science. 171(972), 701-3.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998). Motor
processes in mental rotation. Cognition, 68, 77-94.
Winawer, J., Huk, A., & Boroditsky, L. (in prep). A motion
after-effect from visual imagery of motion.

1458

