UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Non-categorical approaches to property induction with uncertain categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5v66z4kj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hayes, Brett
Newell, Ben
Papadopoulos, Christopher

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Non-categorical approaches to property induction with uncertain categories
Christopher Papadopoulos (Cpapadopoulos@psy.unsw.edu.au)
Brett K. Hayes (B.Hayes@unsw.edu.au)
Ben R. Newell (Ben.Newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales
Sydney, 2052, Australia

approach people base their inductive predictions only on
information contained in the most likely or target category.
To illustrate these induction strategies consider the
geometric stimuli in Figure 1, said to have been drawn by
different children. After studying these categories a
participant is shown a novel instance with a given feature
and asked to predict the presence of another feature (e.g.,
given that the object is a square, what colour is it most
likely to be?). Category membership is uncertain as either
Peter or Chris could have drawn a square, but Peter drew
more squares and so would be considered the target
category. According to the multiple category approach
people would predict the feature “purple” because it is the
most common colour across both categories 1. Murphy and
Ross (1994, 2005), however, have repeatedly found that on
such tasks people ignore the less likely category and make
inferences based only on feature frequencies within the
target (leading to the prediction of “aqua” in this example).

Abstract
Three studies examined how people make feature inferences
about exemplars whose category membership is uncertain.
Participants studied categorized exemplars, were given a
feature of a novel item and asked to make predictions about
other features. Stimuli were constructed so that different
inference strategies led to divergent feature predictions.
Experiments 1 and 3 found that most participants used a
feature association strategy where predictions were based on
comparisons with exemplars similar to the test item.
Experiment 2 showed that the dominance of feature
association over categorical approaches to reasoning was not
an artifact of stimulus complexity.
Keywords: Induction, Feature inference, Inductive reasoning

Introduction
Most previous work on inductive inference has focused on
how we use category membership to guide inferences about
the features of category members (see Heit, 2000 for a
review). Given the often unpredictable nature of the
environment, however, it is inevitable that people will also
have to make inferences about objects whose category
membership has yet to be determined. Imagine, for example
that you were a physician dealing with a patient who
presents with an x-ray showing a shadow on their lung.
Some diagnoses (e.g., lung cancer) would be statistically
more likely given this symptom but less likely alternatives
(e.g., tuberculosis) could not be ruled out. This uncertainty
of diagnosis becomes particularly important when trying to
predict the future disease course. Some symptoms (e.g.,
swelling of the neck) are reasonably likely if the correct
diagnosis is cancer but unlikely if it is tuberculosis.
Previous research has focused on two possible approaches
to such problems of inference under category uncertainty,
both of which accord a central role to categories. One
approach derived from Bayesian calculus assumes that
people use information from multiple possible categories
when making these kinds of inferences (Anderson, 1991).
This approach assumes that people identify the categories to
which an object might belong, derive the probabilities of a
predicted property for each category, and then combine
these conditional probabilities, weighting each according to
the likelihood of the object being in that category.
Arguing against this “multiple-category” account is a
body of evidence that people usually ignore category
uncertainty when making inductive inferences (e.g., Murphy
& Ross, 1994, 2005). According to this “single-category”

Figure 1. Example of a shape/color item from Experiment 1.
There is, however, a third way of making feature
predictions under category uncertainty. People could simply
ignore category-level information and examine the
distribution of features in exemplars that have the given
feature, an approach we refer to as “feature association”. In
Figure 1 this would involve looking only at the squares and
noting that they are most often “red”. In the earlier medical
example it would involve the physician making a prediction
about the patient based on a comparison with previous cases
with the presenting symptom, without making an a priori
assessment of the probable diagnostic categories.
The notion of feature association as a basis for induction
seems consistent with the fact that natural categories are rich
in feature correlations (Rosch & Mervis, 1975), and that
1

Note that Anderson’s (1991) Bayesian model assumes that given
and predicted features are conditionally independent within and
between the experimental categories.

236

these correlations influence the way that novel instances are
categorized (Crawford, Huttenlocher, & Hedges, 2006;
Medin, Altom, Edelson, & Freko, 1982). Moreover, there is
evidence that people are sensitive to the presence of feature
correlations when making uncertain inferences (e.g., Hayes,
Ruthven & Newell, 2007; Murphy & Ross, 1994,
Experiments 7-8). More broadly, the feature association
approach seems consistent with the notion that when
learning categories people store the details of individual
category exemplars and use these episodic details (in
addition to category-level information) to classify new
instances (e.g., Brooks & Hannah, 2006; Nosofsky, 1986;
Regehr & Brooks, 1993).
What is yet to be established is the extent to which people
rely on feature-association as a basis for inductive inference
when alternative predictions can also be derived from
category-based approaches (based on either single- or
multiple-categories). In most previous studies of inference
under category uncertainty feature association has been
suppressed (by making it impossible for a clear prediction to
be made based on this approach) or feature association
predictions have been confounded with those of categorybased strategies. In Murphy and Ross (1994, Experiments 13; 2005), for example, a feature association approach would
have made the same predictions as the single-category
approach favored by the authors.
Hayes et al. (2007) found some evidence that people use
feature association to make property inferences even when
an alternative category-based strategy is available.
Participants were presented with a series of uncertain
induction items where they had to predict the probability
that a test object would have various features given that it
had a certain feature. Feature base rates were manipulated
so that, for some items, feature probabilities increased if
people used feature association but remained at a baseline
level if they used category-based strategies. It was found
that some participants did use feature associations to guide
their predictions. A major limitation of this study, however,
was that use of category-based strategies led to null
predictions about feature probabilities. Hence when some
individuals showed no evidence of using feature association
we could not be certain that they were using some form of
category based reasoning.
The main aim of the current studies therefore was to
examine the extent to which people used feature association
as opposed to category-based approaches as a basis for
inductive prediction when category membership was
uncertain. Critically, in these studies we used a paradigm in
which feature association and the two types of categorybased reasoning (single- and multiple-category) led to
divergent patterns of feature prediction (cf. Murphy & Ross,
2009). This meant that we were able to establish whether a
participant was using feature association or a type of
category based reasoning for any given item.

Experiment 1
This study compared the predictions of three approaches for
making property predictions about instances whose category
membership was uncertain. The first approach was
inference via feature association. The second was multiplecategory-reasoning as described by Anderson (1991). The
third was the single-category approach described by Murphy
and Ross (1994). Based on the results of Hayes et al. (2007)
we expected that a substantial proportion of participants
would ignore category structure and use salient feature
correlations (computed across all available exemplars) to
make feature predictions.

Method
Participants
Twenty five university undergraduates participated for
course credit (MAGE = 20.48 years).
Design and Materials
Two stimulus sets, each containing four items, were
constructed. For each item there were two categories
containing ten exemplars that varied on two feature
dimensions (set 1: shape and color; set 2: shape and pattern
fill). Each dimension could take one of three feature values.
For every item the distribution of feature frequencies across
the two categories was the same as for the item shown in
Figure 1. The cover story was that these were drawings done
by different children (set 1) or that these were drawings
done by college students in a graphic design course (set 2).
At test, for each item participants were given one feature of
a novel exemplar whose category membership was
uncertain (e.g., a drawing of a square). They had to judge
which category it was most likely to belong to and to predict
what other feature it was most likely to have. As in Figure 1,
all items were designed so that use of feature association,
multiple-category and single-category approaches led to
qualitatively different feature predictions at test. The
assignment of feature dimensions to the roles of given and
predicted feature was counterbalanced across items. The
assignment of specific feature values to the role of predicted
feature was counterbalanced across participants to control
for the effects of possible differences in feature salience.
Procedure
Participants were presented with eight items. For each item
colored pictures of the exemplars from each of the two
categories were presented on a laminated A4 sheet in
portrait orientation. Category labels (first name of the child
or student who drew the exemplars) were positioned above
the relevant category. The relative position of the target and
non-target categories on the page was counterbalanced
across items so that the target category appeared an equal
number of items at the top or bottom. Participants were first
given one minute to study the two categories and were then
presented with a novel instance and six test questions (with
the categories still in view). The first two test questions
asked participants to identify the target category for the

237

novel instance (e.g., “I have a picture of a square. Which
child do you think is most likely to have drawn it?”), and to
rate their confidence in this judgment (0 = not at all
confident; 100 = extremely confident). The next two
questions were fillers that asked about the number of items
in each category. The final two questions involved the key
feature predictions. Participants were asked to choose what
other feature would most likely be found in the novel
instance together with the given feature (e.g., “What colour
do you think a drawing with a square would be?”). Three
feature alternatives were presented (each corresponding to a
different reasoning approach) and participants circled the
one they believed to be correct. They then rated their
confidence in this judgment (0 = not at all confident; 100 =
extremely confident). The order of presentation of the two
stimulus sets was counterbalanced across participants.

present, there was a strong tendency for people to ignore
category bounds and make predictions based only on these
feature associations.
These data suggest that when an object’s category
membership is uncertain, people may make predictions
about other object properties based on a comparison with
other exemplars that share a given feature, eschewing
considerations of possible category membership. To be
confident in these conclusions, however, we need to first
consider some alternative explanations.

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses established that feature predictions did
not vary across the two stimulus sets or counterbalanced
versions of the task. All subsequent analyses were collapsed
across these factors.
Our predictions about different approaches to inferential
reasoning were based on the assumption that people could
readily identify the target category for each item, and that
they recognized that category membership of test instances
was uncertain. Participants were extremely accurate in
identifying the target category (M = 0.99 correct). However,
mean confidence for target category judgments was modest,
(M = 64.85, SD = 10.79), suggesting that participants
recognized that category membership was uncertain.
The most important analyses relate to feature predictions
when the given feature was presented. The proportion of
feature predictions consistent with each of the three
approaches to reasoning (feature association, multiplecategory, single-category) was calculated for each
participant. Predictions were only included in the analysis
for items where the target category was correctly identified.
Figure 2 shows that the vast majority of responses were
consistent with the feature association approach, with the
proportion of such responses well above a chance value of
0.33, t(24) = 30.67, p < .001. The proportion of multiplecategory and single-category predictions was close to the
floor. Confidence in feature predictions was reasonably high
(M = 74.63, SD = 18.69) and did not vary across reasoning
approaches.
We also examined the extent to which individuals showed
“consistent” use of a reasoning strategy (defined as at least
five predictions based on the same strategy). Twenty four
participants were found to have used feature association
consistently. One did not show any consistent strategy.
Unlike previous work on induction under category
uncertainty, the current study allowed for a clear
differentiation of the predictions based on categorical
approaches (single- or multiple-category) and noncategorical feature association. When a salient pattern of cooccurrences between a given and predicted feature was

Figure 2. Proportion of feature predictions based on each
reasoning approach.
The levels of single- and multiple-category reasoning
shown in Figure 2 are considerably lower than those
observed in previous work. Murphy and Ross (1994), for
example, using geometric category stimuli, found that most
participants employed single-category reasoning for most
inductive predictions. Although Murphy and Ross (1994)
precluded use of feature association in many of their studies,
the almost complete lack of category-based reasoning in
Experiment 1 remains surprising. One factor that may have
contributed to this result is the complexity of our category
structures. Experiment 1 used categories containing 10 bidimensional exemplars. By comparison, most of the
Murphy and Ross (1994) studies used smaller categories
(with 4-6 exemplars per category). It is possible that the
larger categories made it more difficult to keep track of the
distribution of features within and between each category,
which in turn made it hard to generate either a single- or
multiple-category prediction. If this was the case then the
results of Experiment 1 would seem less interesting; in
effect they would show that people use feature association
only when it is very difficult for them to generate categorybased predictions.
To rule out this possibility Experiment 2 used stimuli that
were of comparable complexity to those used in Experiment
1 but where only category-based predictions were possible.

Experiment 2
The aim of this study was to examine whether people were
capable of making category-based predictions about

238

instances with uncertain category membership using
category stimuli that were similar in complexity to those
used in Experiment 1. As in many previous studies of
induction under category uncertainty (e.g., Murphy & Ross,
1994, 2005), in this case we made it impossible for
participants to make an unambiguous prediction based on
feature association alone. The only way to make a feature
inference was via multiple-category reasoning (Anderson,
1991) or single-category reasoning (Murphy & Ross, 1994).

items where the target category was correctly identified. The
mean proportion of single-category predictions was 0.52
(SD = 0.25) and the mean proportion of multiple-category
predictions was 0.48 (SD = 0.25). Both of these were above
chance (t(24) = 3.81, p < .001 and t(24) = 3.06, p < .005,
respectively). Note that the chance value was still 0.33
because participants always had a choice between three
alternatives when making a feature prediction (two
alternatives corresponded to single- and multiple-category
reasoning respectively, one was a feature present in both
categories but not associated with any strategy). Confidence
in feature predictions was modest (M = 49.7, SD = 9.1) and
did not vary across reasoning approach.
Analysis of individual profiles (using the same
consistency criterion as Experiment 1) found that 11
participants consistently used single-category reasoning, 9
used multiple-categories and 5 had no consistent strategy.
These data show that, in general, participants had little
difficulty in making single- or multiple-category predictions
with category items that were as complex as those used in
Experiment 1. As in most previous studies of categorybased approaches (e.g., Murphy & Ross, 1994, 2005),
single-category reasoning was the most prevalent approach,
albeit by a slim majority. These results suggest that the low
levels of category-based reasoning found in Experiment 1
cannot be attributed to the complexity of the categories used
in that study.

Method
Participants
Twenty five university undergraduates participated for
course credit (MAGE = 20.48 years). None took part in the
previous study.
Design and Procedure
The design and procedure followed Experiment 1 with the
major exception that items were designed to contrast
inductive predictions based on single-category or multiplecategory reasoning, in the absence of feature association. An
example is given in Figure 3. For this item if the given
feature was “a square” then the single-category approach
predicts that participants would look only at the frequency
of features within the target category (Peter), leading to a
prediction of “aqua”. If multiple categories were considered,
however, then “red” should be predicted. Note that feature
association (i.e. just looking at features that co-occur with
squareness) leads to an ambiguous prediction (since there is
an equal number of aqua and red squares). Eight such items
were developed and administered using the same procedure
as in Experiment 1.

Experiment 3
This study examined another possible explanation for the
dominance of a feature association approach found in
Experiment 1. It may be that feature association is only used
in preference to category-based approaches when the
categories in question are perceived as uninformative or
lacking coherence. Past work (e.g., Patalano, Chin-Parker,
& Ross, 2006) has shown that the degree to which
categories are perceived as coherent influences the extent to
which category membership is used as a basis for inductive
prediction. It may be that participants saw the categories in
Experiment 1 as ad hoc collections of instances, with
category labels (names of the child or college artist)
providing few clues for feature prediction. If this was the
case then it is perhaps unsurprising that people used a noncategorical approach to derive feature inferences.
In Experiment 3 we re-examined feature-association
reasoning with categories that varied in the extent to which
category level information was salient during exemplar
presentation. The categories used in the low- and highcategory salience conditions had the same distribution of
features as the items in Experiment 1. In the high salience
condition, however, the categories were presented as
different kinds of viruses, with exemplar features
representing different structural parts of individual viruses.
Given that categories of living things are often perceived as
sharing a range of both known and unknown features
(Gelman, 2003), this manipulation was intended to promote
the belief that the categories were coherent and meaningful

Figure 3. Example of a shape/color item from Experiment 2

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses established that feature predictions did
not vary across the two stimulus sets or counterbalanced
versions of the task. All subsequent analyses were collapsed
across these factors.
Participants always identified the target category
correctly, except for one participant on one item. Again,
mean confidence for target identification was modest (M =
58.03, SD = 7.42).
The proportion of feature predictions consistent with the
two category-based approaches to induction was calculated
for each participant. Predictions were only included for

239

groupings. By contrast, the exemplars in the low-salience
condition were presented with little rationale for category
structure and relatively meaningless category labels. The
critical question was whether feature association would
remain the dominant strategy when category-level
information was made more salient.

salience: M = 61.40, SD = 3.70; low salience: M = 69.90,
SD = 15.85). Confidence did not differ as a function of
category salience.
The proportion of predictions consistent with feature
association was at, or close to, ceiling in both the low (M =
1.0) and high salience conditions (M = 0.96). A small
number of single-category predictions were made in the
high-salience condition (M = 0.04). No predictions based on
multiple-category reasoning were found. Across conditions,
the proportion of predictions based on feature association
was above chance, t(11) = 31.16, p < .001, and the
proportion of predictions based on single-category
reasoning was below chance, t(11) = -14.98, p < .001.
Confidence in predictions based on feature association was
high and did not differ across the salience conditions (high
salience: M = 84.13; low salience: M = 93.02). Participants
were classified as using a reasoning approach consistently if
at least three of their four predictions were based on this
approach. All 12 participants in each salience condition
were found to make consistent use of feature association.
Overall these results show that even when steps were
taken to highlight the significance of category-level
information, feature association remained the dominant
approach for making feature predictions under conditions of
uncertain category membership.

Method
Participants
Twenty four university undergraduates participated for
course credit (MAGE = 19.34 years). Equal numbers were
randomly allocated to the low and high salience conditions.
None took part in the previous studies.
Design and Procedure
In this study the appearance and relative frequency of
features within and between experimental categories was
identical to the four graphic-design items used in
Experiment 1. This feature distribution allowed for the same
demarcation between predictions based on feature
association,
single-category
and
multiple-category
reasoning as in the earlier study. The way that categories
and exemplars were presented in this study, however, was
quite different from Experiment 1. In the high-salience
condition participants were told that they had to learn about
the features of two kinds of recently discovered viruses
(Sirus, Karplek). Exemplar features for each category were
embedded within a “virus-shaped” outline, with different
outlines used for members of the two virus categories (see
Figure 4). In the low category salience condition exemplars
had exactly the same shape/pattern configuration but had no
outline and were given neutral category labels (Set A, Set
B). In other respects the procedure for stimulus presentation,
presentation of test instances and scoring of responses was
identical to Experiment 1.

General Discussion
These studies examined how people make feature inferences
when an exemplar’s category membership is uncertain.
Previous work on this issue has suggested two possible
reasoning strategies, a Bayesian multiple-category strategy
(Anderson, 1991) and a single-category strategy (Murphy &
Ross, 1994), with much of the evidence favoring the latter
approach. Our studies suggest, however, that when given an
opportunity to make predictions based on associations
between given and predicted features across available
exemplars, most participants will do so. This dominance of
reasoning based on feature association was not due to the
use of complex stimuli that precluded category-based
inference and persisted even when category-level
information was made more salient.
These results have important implications for the way that
we conceptualize inferential reasoning. There is little doubt
that when an object is known with certainty to be a member
of a familiar category people will use category-level
information to make feature predictions about the object
(Heit, 2000; Osherson et al., 1990). When category
membership is uncertain, however, our findings show that
people will often look for alternatives to category-based
reasoning. Specifically, we have shown that when someone
knows at least one feature of a target object they will base
their predictions about other features on the characteristics
of instances that are identical (or similar to) the target,
regardless of category bounds.
Previous work has shown that the specific similarity
between exemplars often influences categorization
judgments even when there are clear rules about category

Figure 4. Examples of item presentation in the high salience
conditions. All members of the respective categories had the
same “virus-shaped” outlines as these instances.

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analyses established that feature predictions did
not vary across counterbalanced versions of the task. All
analyses were collapsed across these versions.
Participants in both category salience conditions always
identified the target category correctly. Both groups gave
modest confidence ratings for these judgments (high

240

membership (e.g., Regehr & Brooks, 1993). Our work
extends these effects of exemplar similarity to the domain of
inference under category uncertainty.
In the current series we found that when making
inferences based on feature association people showed little
respect for category boundaries, examining all available
instances that were similar to the target. It is possible that
people may not always ignore category bounds when
making inferences based on feature association. As noted
earlier, a substantial body of evidence suggests that people
often focus their attention on the most likely category to
which an object might belong when making feature
predictions. Hence, people could make feature association
inferences based on a consideration of only a subset of the
available exemplars (i.e., those in the target category). This
possibility could not be examined in the current study,
where feature association based only on target category
members did not produce a clear feature prediction. Other
work, however, suggests that such “single-category feature
association” is rare. Papadopoulos (2008) found that when
participants had the option of making feature association
predictions based on exemplars from multiple categories or
only those from a target category, the overwhelming
majority adopted the former approach. This shows that
when people can make feature predictions based on feature
correlations within specific exemplars, they prefer do so
using all available exemplars.
Together with Hayes et al. (2007), our data suggest that
when category membership is uncertain people may use a
broader range of strategies for inductive prediction than has
previously been acknowledged. Future work needs to
provide a clearer specification of the conditions under which
people adopt either feature association or category-level
approaches to uncertain inference. An obvious minimal
condition for feature association is the presence of salient
patterns of co-occurrence between given and to-be-predicted
features. What is less clear is whether feature association
would persist as a dominant approach to inference if
exemplars had to be learned on a trial by trial basis and then
retrieved from memory when inferences are required. Under
such conditions it seems likely that some of the details of
individual exemplars may become unavailable, particularly
if there are extended delays between encoding and retrieval
(cf. Posner & Keele, 1970). Under such conditions people
may fall back on category-level information for feature
predictions.

Brooks, L. R., & Hannah, S. D. (2006). Instantiated features
and the use of “rules”. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 135, 133–151
Crawford, L., Huttenlocher, J. & Hedges, L V. (2006).
Within-category feature correlations and Bayesian
adjustment strategies. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
13, 245-250.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Hayes, B. K., Ruthven, C., & Newell, B. R. (2007).
Inferring properties when categorization is uncertain: A
feature-conjunction account. In D. McNamara & G.
Tafton (Eds) Proceedings of the 28th Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, pp. 209-215. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum
Heit, E. (2000). Properties of inductive reasoning.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7, 569-592.
Medin, D. L., Altom, M. W., Edelson, S. M., & Freko, D.
(1982). Correlated symptoms and simulated medical
classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 8, 37-50.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (1994). Predictions from
uncertain categorizations. Cognitive Psychology, 27,
148-193.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (2005). The two faces of
typicality in category-based induction. Cognition, 95,
175-200.
Murphy, G. L., & Ross, B. H. (2009). Induction with
uncertain categories. Unpublished manuscript.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification–categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39–57.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A. &
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185–200.
Papadopoulos, C. Inductive reasoning when category
membership is uncertain. Unpublished Honours thesis.
University of New South Wales.
Patalano, A. L., Chin-Parker S., & Ross, B. H. (2006). The
importance of being coherent: Category coherence,
cross-classification, and reasoning. Journal of Memory
and Language, 54, 407-424.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1970). Retention of abstract
ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 83, 304308.
Regehr, G., & Brooks, L. R. (1993). Perceptual
manifestations of an analytic structure: The priority of
holistic individuation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 122, 92–114.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblance:
Studies of the internal structure of natural categories.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Australian Research Council
Discovery Grant DP0770292 to the second and third
authors.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98, 409-429.

241

