UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Link between Cognitive Control and Heuristic Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qj0k72h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cokley, Edward
Parpart, Paula
Schooler, Lael

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Link between Cognitive Control and Heuristic Processes
Edward T. Cokely (cokely@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Paula Parpart (parpart@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Lael J. Schooler (schooler@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Lentzallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
In several experiments, we demonstrate that controlled
cognition (e.g., “System 2,” as measured by the cognitive
reflection test) can give rise to seemingly intuitive judgments
(e.g., “System 1”). Experiment 2 examined a bias that occurs
when price estimates are made in the presence of unfamiliar
(disfluent) money. Paradoxically, more controlled cognition
was related to a greater reliance on disfluency as a basis for
judgment, which led to a large devaluation bias. Experiment 3
examined how the ease of company name pronunciation
(fluency)
influenced
company
profit
estimation.
Paradoxically, more controlled cognition was related to a
greater reliance on the ease of company name pronunciation
as a basis for stock profit estimations. Effects were
independent of basic working memory capacities and did not
interact with age. Results highlight the often neglected
relations between cognitive control and heuristic processes.
Results also provide some new evidence on the potential
influence of an early selection mode of cognitive control.
Keywords: judgment; decision making; aging; bias; fluency;
dual process; cognitive reflection; heuristic; working memory

Dual System Theories
Drawing on various dual process theories, researchers have
posited a general theoretical framework describing the
interplay of two fundamental cognitive systems (Evans,
2008; Sloman, 1996; Stanovich and West, 2000). The
intuitive “System 1”—sometimes referred to as “the
heuristic system”—is said to involve automatic,
contextualized, heuristic, affective, and associative
processes, which rapidly give rise to impressions
(Kahneman, 2003). In contrast, “System 2” is said to rely
on effortful, decontextualized, abstract, serial processes, that
either use rule-based mechanisms (such as logic) to compute
responses or otherwise monitor and adjust the output of
“System 1” (for a review see Evans 2008).1 Although this
general framework has met with strong criticism (e.g.,
arguments that the framework is internally inconsistent and
too imprecise to make meaningful predictions; see
Gigerenzer & Regier, 1996), the interplay of the two
systems has been widely used to organize and explain
findings in the judgment and decision making literature
(Evans, 2008; Kahneman, 2003).
1
The exact nature of the interplay of the systems is debated.
Dynamics are commonly taken as default-interventionist (i.e., one
process monitors and corrects the other) or parallel-competitive
(i.e., both processes compute independent outputs) (Evans, 2008).

Cognitive Abilities and Decision Making Key evidence
used in support of a general dual systems theory is the
correlation between cognitive abilities and superior
reasoning, judgment, and decision making (Stanovich &
West, 2000). Theoretically, it is often assumed that the link
between abilities and decision making results from the fact
that more able individuals have more cognitive resources
available, enabling the computation of more normative
decisions via logical and normative processes (“System 2”).
Indeed, “the notion that System 2 is in some sense rulebased is compatible with the proposals of most dual process
theorists” (p. 261, Evans 2008). For example, Stanovich
and West (2000) have noted that “high analytic intelligence
may lead to task construals that track normative rationality”
(p. 662) and that “normative responses are computationally
more complex, and only those people with the requisite
computational power are able to compute them” (p. 706).
Specifically, “System 2” is said to be constrained by limited
working memory resources wherein larger working memory
capacities are necessary for the inhibition of inappropriate
heuristics (“System 1”) and/or the representation of more
abstract, normative decision processes (“System 2”).
Elaborative heuristic search Recent research indicates that
the relationships between decision making (i.e., risky
choices) and cognitive abilities (e.g., working memory,
numeracy, cognitive reflection) can result from differences
in heuristic-type exploration and representation of the
problem space, rather than the use of more normative
decision strategies. Specifically, protocol analysis revealed
that normative decisions were strongly related to
participants’ more elaborative heuristic search processes2
(e.g., verbalized considerations of more diverse aspects of
differences in lotteries), which fully mediated the
relationships between cognitive ability measures and
normative choices (Cokely & Kelley, 2009). Indeed, fewer
than 5% of the participants verbalized processes consistent
with normative computations although most of the
participants made normative choices. These results echo
well established findings relating heuristic search processes
to deliberative cognition in expertise. For example, superior
move selection in chess results, in part, from increased rates
2

In this paper, Heuristic search refers specifically to Herbert
Simon’s notion of heuristics as problem solving processes that rely
on selective (i.e., non-exhaustive) problem space search.

1

2926

and depths of deliberative heuristic search (Gobet &
Charness, 2006). Cokely and Kelley (2009) further
hypothesized that the relationship between superior
performance and cognitive abilities may often result, at least
in part, from more elaborative encoding (Cokely, Kelley, &
Gilchrist, 2006) and more heuristic search processes (see
also reflectiveness, Baron, 1985).
In the current experiments, we sought to provide new
evidence on the relationship between the use of cognitive
control (i.e., “System 2”) and elaborative heuristic search
processes. We hypothesized that in environments in which
multiple diagnostic cues were available, more controlled
processes (“System 2”) would lead to more normatively
justifiably judgments, as is typically found in the literature.
In contrast, however, in environments in which few if any
diagnostic cues were available, we hypothesized that more
controlled processing (“System 2”) could be paradoxically
related to a greater reliance on heuristic processes (normally
ascribed to “System 1”). Accordingly, we hypothesized that
in some environments more cognitive control (“System 2”)
could be related to non-normative biases.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to show that in environments
with both diagnostic and non-diagnostic cues, controlled
processes can be associated with more normatively
justifiable judgments as a result of more elaborative
heuristic search processes (Cokely & Kelley, 2009).
Previous research has revealed that consumer judgments
regarding the value of an item (e.g., an Mp3 music player)
can be influenced by the balance of automatic and
controlled processing. When participants were induced to
use more controlled processing they were more likely to
notice diagnostic information about an Mp3 player and
adjust their judgments of its value accordingly (Alter &
Oppenheimer, 2006). As a conceptual replication, we
hypothesized that individual differences in the tendency to
use controlled processing would also be associated with
differences in willingness-to-pay judgments. That is, if more
use of controlled processing (as measured by the cognitive
reflection test, which is designed to measure differences in
System 2 versus System 1 processes; see materials) predicts
more elaborative heuristic search these participants should
be more likely to encode the presence of diagnostic cues
(e.g., high storage capacity, uncommon durability) making
them more willing to pay a higher price for the high quality
Mp3 player. In contrast a lower use of controlled processing
should be associated with a lower likelihood to encode the
presence of diagnostic cues and thus should produce a
greater influence of the non-diagnostic cue on judgments
leading to lower willingness-to-pay judgments.
Participants Forty-six participants (M = 24.0 years) were
recruited at the Max Planck Institute for Human
Development (Berlin). Participants received 10€ for their
first hour of participation and 7€ for every hour thereafter.

Materials & Procedure Participants first completed the
cognitive reflection test (CRT)—an instrument designed to
measure differences in a participant’s tendency to rely on
more controlled (“System 2”) versus automatic (“System
1”) processing (Frederick, 2005). Participants next read a
technical review of a high-quality Mp3-player that
contained both diagnostic cues (e.g., large music storage
capacity, high durability) and a non-diagnostic cue (i.e. a
picture of an incompetent-looking person). Lastly,
participants made a price estimation judgment indicating the
amount of money they would be willing to pay for such an
Mp3 player.3
Results & Discussion Median splits4 were computed to
define lower (M = .67, SD = .49) and higher (M = 2.39, SD
= .50) cognitive reflection groups. An analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with cognitive reflection group (lower, higher) as
a between-subjects variable revealed a moderate sized
significant difference in willingness-to-pay judgments, F (1,
44) = 3.9, p = .05, ηp2 = .08. As predicted, lower reflection
was associated with lower willingness-to-pay judgments (M
= €72.4, SD = €56.1) as compared to higher reflection (M =
€105.5, SD = €55.1). Results are consistent with data from
Alter and Oppenheimer (2006) indicating that the use of
more controlled processing can be related to a greater
detection and use of diagnostic cues for judgment (e.g.,
quality of Mp3 player), while the use of more automatic
processing can be related to a higher reliance on a highly
salient non-diagnostic cue (i.e., a picture of an incompetent
looking advisor). Results are also consistent with an
elaborative heuristic search hypothesis, indicating that
higher cognitive reflection can be associated with more
elaborative information search and encoding processes in

3

We used the same materials used in Alter and Oppenheimer
(2006), translated into German.
4
Because the CRT is a relatively new, very short instrument
(three item test), its psychometric properties are not well
understood. A priori we decided to use median splits for data
analysis as this allowed for conservation of power without
unnecessary assumptions (e.g., a critical assumption is that test
scores are roughly monotonically increasing, i.e., that CRT scores
are at least ordinal). In all studies, median splits in younger adults
included lower (0-1 CRT scores) and higher (2-3 CRT scores)
groups. Median splits in older adults included lower (0 CRT
scores) and higher (1-3 CRT scores) groups. There are potential
concerns using different cut off points for younger and older CRT
groups; however, following our a priori data analysis plan
circumvented issues that would arise from alternative analyses
(e.g., CRT scores were differentially distributed in younger and
older adults). Additional analyses indicate that in both the current
lower and higher CRT groups, younger and older adults showed
similar differences in working memory capacity scores (about 1.5
standard deviations). Additional exploratory analyses of
Experiments 3a & 3B using a regression framework also provided
evidence of the reliability of median split analyses and suggested
that the monotonic assumption is valid with respect to some
judgments (i.e., stock profit estimations).

2

2927

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was designed to show that in certain
environments controlled cognition (“System 2”) could result
in non-normative judgment biases. Specifically, previous
research has revealed a surprising bias wherein money that
is less familiar, but still regarded as genuine, will tend to be
seen as less valuable than more familiar money. When
participants were asked to judge the purchasing power (e.g.,
how many pencils could one buy) of some amount of money
(e.g., a dollar) they tended to estimate that purchasing power
was lower when the question was presented along with a
picture of unfamiliar money (i.e., a one dollar coin) than
when presented with a picture of familiar money (i.e., a one
dollar bill) (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2008). Theoretically, this
difference is the result of an unconscious inference based on
one’s subjective un-ease of information processing, e.g.
disfluency, which leads people to dislike and devalue the
unfamiliar currency. We hypothesized that this seemingly
automatic judgment asymmetry could depend on the extent
to which participants attended to and elaboratively encoded
the presence of the disfluent currency. High cognitive
reflection scores could be associated with a more detailed
representation of the disfluent and fluent money and thus
may be associated with a larger judgment asymmetry (bias).
Moreover, we were interested in whether this effect would
rely primarily on heuristic search and elaboration or if it was
critically constrained by cognitive capacity. In order to test
this we examined both younger and older adults (as normal
cognitive aging is known to be associated with large
declines in domain general working memory and reasoning
capacities) predicting that elaborative heuristic search could
be relatively independent of capacity (Frederick, 2005).
Participants Ninety-four participants, both younger (N =
60; M= 25.0 years, range of 19 – 31 years) and older adults
(N = 34; M= 70.0 years, range of 63 – 74 years) were tested
at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development (see
Exp. 1 for payment details). One older participant and two
younger participants were excluded because they indicated
they were familiar with the rare coin.
Five older
participants were excluded because they indicated they were
unfamiliar with the 10 Euro bill. One participant did not
complete the cognitive reflection test.
Procedure & Materials Participants first completed the
cognitive reflection test. Next, participants completed a
paper-and-pencil questionnaire with an instruction to make
estimations about “how many of each of the items listed
below could be purchased with 10 Euros.” Half of the
participants received a questionnaire with a picture of a
5

See Alter & Oppenheimer (2006) for causal evidence that
higher cognitive reflection primarily involves increasing use of
diagnostic information.

commonly used 10 Euro bill (in circulation since 2002),
while the other half was presented with a picture of a rare 10
Euro coin. Both images were featured prominently near the
top right corner of the paper, to the right of the instructions
(see Alter & Oppenheimer, 2008). Below the instructions
(and picture) was a list of 10 inexpensive items (e.g.,
gumballs, pencils, etc.) with empty boxes for the reporting
of participants’ estimations. Finally, on a separate sheet of
paper participants were asked to rate familiarity and
genuineness of the currency presented on the questionnaire.
Asymmetry Scores (Familiar - Unfamiliar)

consumer judgments. Further process tracing research is
needed to more precisely identify search parameters. 5

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15

low

0.1

high

0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1

young

old

Figure 1: Y-axis represents asymmetry scores (familiarunfamiliar), which indicate the strength of the devaluation of
disfluent money. Error bars are the standard error of the mean.
Results & Discussion Median splits4 on cognitive reflection
test scores were computed for both younger (lower, M = .33,
SD = .48; higher M = 2.42, SD = .50) and older adults
(lower M = .00, SD = .00; higher M = 1.55, SD = .73). Next,
following Alter & Oppenheimer (2008) mean item estimates
(i.e., the estimated number of objects that could be
purchased for each item type) were transformed into zscores representing differences in relative purchasing power
on the same scale. We next computed asymmetry scores
(familiar condition-unfamiliar condition) for all item means,
which served as an indicator of the strength of the effect—
i.e., the extent to which familiar currency was rated as more
valuable than unfamiliar currency. An ANOVA with
cognitive reflection (lower, higher) and age (younger, older)
as between-subjects variables and the z-scored asymmetries
as dependent variable revealed a main effect of cognitive
reflection, F (1, 36) = 5.95, p = .02, ηp2 = .14. Age did not
interact with cognitive reflection (F < 1). Lower cognitive
reflection was associated with little-to-no asymmetry
(younger M = .07, SD = .34; older M = -.02, SD = .24) while
higher reflection was associated with a large asymmetry
(younger M = .23, SD = .19; older M = .23, SD = .25)
(Figure 1). Results indicate that (1) the use of more
controlled processes was paradoxically associated with the
use of the heuristic for judgment (and thus a bias in this
environment) and (2) that the size of the asymmetry was
largely independent of working memory capacity (primarily
reflecting encoding processes).

Experiment 3
Experiment 3 was designed to show that in certain
environments more reliance on seemingly automatic and
3

2928

Experiment 3a
Participants Eighty participants, both younger (N = 46, M=
24.0 years, range of 20 - 35 years) and older adults (N = 34,
M= 70.0 years, range of 63 – 74 years) were recruited at the
Max Planck Institute for Human Development (Berlin) and
were paid for participation (see Exp. 1). Ten participants
were excluded: Seven older participants did not complete
the stock profit estimation task; two participants responded

6

This hypothesis was developed following the analysis of the
younger control condition data but before the analysis of the data
from either (1) the older adults or (2) younger adults in the browfurrowing condition.
7
A combined analysis including all data (Exp 3a & 3b), using
both median splits or a regression framework, was consistent with
the presented results and theoretical interpretations.

null to every item; one participant did not complete the
cognitive reflection task.
Materials & Procedure Participants first completed the
cognitive reflection test. Participants were then presented
with a list of 30 fictitious German company names8 and
were instructed to estimate the changes in stock value over
the last 12 months (estimated percent change). The only cue
for judgment that was provided was the company name,
which systematically varied in its ease of pronunciation (e.g.
Flinks v. Ägädux).
Stock profit estimations: young and old adults
Use of fluency (fluent-disfluent)

intuitive judgment processes (i.e., one’s use of fluency as a
cue for judgment) can reflect controlled cognition.
Judgments are known to be influenced, sometimes
dramatically, by cognitive fluency. For instance, the relative
ease of company name pronunciation (fluency) influences
participants’ estimates of a company’s stock profitability
(Alter & Oppenheimer, 2006). This effect has been
observed for past profit estimates of fictional companies and
has also been seen in the trading behavior of US companies
during initial public offerings. Theoretically, influences of
fluency on judgment in these types of financial decisions are
assumed to reflect (1) an attempt to make sense out of very
complicated material with only non-diagnostic information
being available and (2) an unconscious inference whereby
more fluently processed information is perceived as both
more familiar and more affectively pleasant (Alter &
Oppenheimer, 2006).
We hypothesized that in the current environment the
degree to which one relies on fluency would depend
critically on one’s use of controlled processing. While dual
systems theory predicts that higher reflection should be
associated with equal or less reliance on fluency for
judgment, we hypothesized that in the absence of other
diagnostic cues more controlled processing (“System 2”) of
the available cue should lead to a more detailed
representation of that cue (as in Experiment 2), and thus
more reliance on fluency as a heuristic cue.6 Hence, higher
reflection could promote a finer-grained sense of the ease of
name pronunciation which could then be reflected in
judgment. As in Experiment 2, we hypothesized that
influences of cognitive reflection (i.e., elaborative search
processes) were likely to be independent of domain general
cognitive capacity. Therefore, higher reflection participants
were expected to show more reliance on fluency regardless
of their age. For ease of explication the experiment is
presented in two parts (note: the same younger participant
control group is used for both experiments):7 Experiment 3a
examined the use of fluency with cognitive reflection and
aging; Experiment 3b directly manipulated cognitive
reflection in younger adults.

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

low
high

young

old

Figure 2: Y-axis represents the total use of fluency (fluentdisfluent). Error bars are the standard error of the mean.

Results & Discussion Ten independent raters—all of whom
were native German speakers—were asked to rate the ease
of pronunciation of each of the 30 fictitious German
company names on a 3 point scale from easy to difficult.
The easiest eight names to pronounce (top quartile) were
operationalized as fluent names while the hardest eight
names to pronounce (bottom quartile) were operationalized
as disfluent names. A total fluency use score was computed
as the difference in profit estimations for the fluent
company names minus the disfluent company names.
Median splits4 were performed on cognitive reflection
scores for both younger (lower M = .67, SD = .49; higher M
= 2.4, SD = .50) and older adults (lower M = .00, SD = .00;
higher M = 1.55, SD = .73).
An ANOVA with cognitive reflection (lower, higher) and
age (younger, older) as between-subjects variables revealed
a moderate sized significant effect of cognitive reflection on
fluency use, F (1, 66) = 5.2, p = .03, ηp2 = .07. Age did not
interact with cognitive reflection (F < 1) (Figure 2).
Independent of age, lower cognitive reflection scores were
associated with less fluency use (younger M = 44.44, SD =
82.05; older M = 59.33, SD = 90.23) while higher reflection
scores were associated with more reliance on fluency
(younger M = 109.29, SD = 94.60; older M = 98.89, SD =
78.2). In a task environment in which fluency was the only
available cue (i.e., the only available cue designed to
systematically vary) higher cognitive reflection (System 2)
was paradoxically associated with more reliance on the use
8
The company names were German-style transformations of the
company names used in Alter and Oppenheimer (2006).

4

2929

of the heuristic cue (i.e., fluency) as a basis for judgment.
This pattern was independent of age, suggesting that results
primarily reflect elaborative heuristic search (rather than
capacity).

Experiment 3b
In Experiment 3b we sought to causally increase controlled
processing thereby increasing participants’ reliance on
fluency as a basis for judgment. We manipulated controlled
processing by instructing half of the participants to furrow
their brows while completing the stock profit estimation
task. This facial expression is consistent with the exercise of
cognitive effort and has been shown to induce more
reflective processing (Alter & Oppenheimer et al., 2007).
Participants Ninety-two younger adults (M= 24.3 years,
range of 18 - 35 years) participated in the study at the Max
Planck Institute for Human Development (Berlin) and were
paid for participation (see Exp. 1).
Materials & Procedure Materials and procedure were the
same as in Exp. 3a except that half of the participants were
instructed to furrow their brows during estimation.

Use of fluency (fluent-disfluent)

Stock profit estimations: young adults
140
120
100
80

low

60

high

40
20
0

Control

Brow

Figure 3: Y-axis represents the total use of fluency (fluentdisfluent). Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.
Results & Discussion A median split was performed on
cognitive reflection scores (lower M =.58, SD = .50; higher
M = 2.38, SD = .50). Fluent names and total reliance on
fluency were computed as in Experiment 3a. An ANOVA
with the total use of fluency (fluent-disfluent) as dependent
variable and cognitive reflection (lower, higher) and
condition (control, brow-furrowing) as between-factors
revealed a significant interaction between cognitive
reflection and condition, F (1, 86) = 7.64, p =.007, ηp2 = .08
(see figure 3).9 In the control condition there was a clear
difference between the lower reflection group’s use of
fluency (M = 44.44, SD = 82.05) as compared to the higher
reflection group’s use of fluency (M = 109.29, SD = 94.59).
9
Analyses also controlled for working memory span (operation
span) and numeracy scores, which were included as covariates.
Unreported analyses indicated that neither operation span nor
numeracy significantly influenced condition or fluency use.

In the brow-furrowing condition there was a reversal of this
pattern such that lower reflection was associated with more
use of fluency (M = 93.69, SD = 95.55) whereas higher
reflection was associated with less reliance on fluency (M =
55.00, SD = 89.25). An ANOVA next examined the change
in use of fluency for lower reflection individuals revealing a
significant increase in use of fluency, F (1, 46) = 4.76, p =
.03, ηp2 = .09. These results suggest that the furrowing of
one’s brow caused lower reflection individuals to increase
their reliance on fluency, consistent with a capacity
independence hypothesis. Although unexpected, the higher
reflective group showed a non-significant trend toward
lower reliance on fluency in the brow furrowing group, F (1,
38) = 2.65, p = .11, ηp2 = .06. We speculate that this may
reflect the influence of even more extensive and
idiosyncratic heuristic search processes by higher reflection
individuals (e.g., “the name sounds good but actually this
sounds a bit like a financial company which is not good”).

General Discussion
In three experiments we demonstrate that seemingly
intuitive judgments sometimes reflect controlled processing.
In an environment with multiple diagnostic cues, controlled
processing tended to be associated with more normatively
justifiable judgments. In an environment in which few if
any diagnostic cues were available, controlled processing
was related to a judgment bias. Although conventionally
paradoxical, results remind us that mechanisms of
controlled cognition—which are often assumed to involve
more normative, rule based processes (“System 2”)—can
also rely on heuristic search processes (often associated with
“System 1”).
Modes of Cognitive Control The common dual systems
characterization of the interplay between automatic and
controlled decision making processes emphasizes late
correction cognitive control. When controlled processes
(“System 2”) do not compute an answer they are assumed to
primarily operate by monitoring and then adjusting or
correcting the output of automatic processes (Kahneman,
2003). However, cognitive control can also use early
selection mechanisms wherein cognitive control (“System
2”) is used to generate goals, strategies, and mental contexts
that can qualitatively alter the output of automatic processes
(“System 1”) (see Cokely & Kelley, 2009). As seen in the
current experiment, by changing the way one thinks about a
problem (i.e., by encoding more detailed representations or
searching for more information before making a judgment),
one can change intuitions.
Cognitive Abilities and Early Selection We hypothesize
that the tendency to more elaboratively search and represent
task environments may result from transfer of metacognitive
skills that are valuable in memory, strategy adaptivity, and
skill acquisition. Of note, strategic processes can cause large
differences in basic cognitive capacities, such as the
capacity to monitor and control interference in memory
(Cokely, Kelley, & Gilchrist, 2006). By elaboratively
encoding task contents before making judgments, high
5

2930

reflection individuals may be more likely to develop more
nuanced task representations in long-term memory. Greater
encoding into long-term memory should then free
attentional resources, which—together with a more precise
representation—should allow better cognitive monitoring.
Such a mechanism might account for the finding that high
ability individuals often fail to show normative judgment on
initial choices (i.e., between-subjects), although normative
choices emerge upon additional trials (i.e., within-subjects)
(Stanovich & West, 2008).
Implications for the cognitive reflection test The
relationship between cognitive reflection and judgment was
largely independent of age.4 On average older adults had
lower working memory capacity scores, F (1, 114) = 22.45,
p = .001, ηp2 = .17, yet had similar judgments in
Experiments 2 and 3. This provides new evidence of
discriminant validity for the cognitive reflection test, which
seems to uniquely predict cognitive processes (e.g.,
elaborative heuristic search) and thus is not only a measure
of skill or capacity (Frederick, 2005). Process-level data
from a separate unreported study of older adults also
supports the assumption that the cognitive reflection test can
measure differences in search processes: Higher cognitive
reflection scores were predicted by the total time spent on
the cognitive reflection test controlling for one’s general
task pace (operationalized as the total time spent completing
an unrelated simple demographics task), F (2, 55) = 5.26, p
= .03, R2change = .09.

Conclusions
Herbert Simon defined heuristics as problem solving
processes that involve selective search (Simon, 1990).
Because most real-world problems are computationally
intractable—as optimal solutions cannot necessarily be
computed by our minds or machines—heuristic processes
can be essential problem solving tools for both ill-defined
(e.g., stock selection) and well-defined problems (e.g.,
chess). Accordingly, we often must rely on, and may benefit
from, problem solving heuristics that range from easy to
effortful—a fact that is largely neglected in discussions of
the general dual systems framework.10
In the current experiments, we sought to provide vivid
examples of how even seemingly intuitive judgments can
sometimes reflect cognitive control. Results further
document the link between cognitive control (“System 2”)
and heuristic use, providing more converging evidence that
there is no “the” heuristic system (an admittedly disfluent
phrase that we expect might trigger some of the types of
elaborative encoding processes that can characterize
controlled cognition). Experiments also provide new
evidence extending the elaborative heuristic search
hypothesis and reveal the presence of an early selection
mode of cognitive control in judgment. Finally, given that
judgment involves the complex interplay of persons,

processes, and task environments, the current experiments
serve as an illustration of the role that individual differences
can play in testing and refining theory.

Acknowledgements
We thank Adam Alter and Danny Oppenheimer for
feedback and materials, and Gregor Caregnato and the ABC
research group for data collection and research support.

References
Alter, A. L., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2008). Easy on the
mind, easy on the wallet: Effects of fluency on valuation
judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 15, 985990
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N, & Eyre, R. N.
(2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive difficulty
activates analytic reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General,136, 569-576.
Alter, A. L., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2006). Predicting
short-term stock fluctuations by using processing fluency.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103,
9369-9372.
Cokely, E.T., & Kelley, C.M. (2009). Cognitive abilities
and superior decision making under risk: A protocol
analysis and process model evaluation. Judgment and
Decision Making, 4, 20-33.
Cokely, E.T., Kelley, C.M., & Gilchrist, A.H. (2006).
Sources of individual differences in working memory:
Contributions of strategy to capacity. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 13, 991-997.
Evans, J. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of reasoning,
judgment, and social cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 59, 255-278.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive Reflection and Decision
Making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 24-42.
Gigerenzer, G., & Regier, T. (1996). How do we tell an
association from a rule? Comment on Sloman (1996).
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 23-26.
Gobet F. & Charness, N. (2006) Expertise in chess. In K. A.
Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Feltovich, and R. R. Hoffman,
R. R. (Eds.). Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert
performance (pp. 523-538). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and
choice - Mapping bounded rationality.
American
Psychologist, 9, 697-720.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 3–22.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–665.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2008). On the relative
independence of thinking biases and cognitive ability.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 672695.

10
See Evans’ (2008; Kahneman & Frederick, 2002) for some
discussion of the roles of heuristic-type processes in “System 2”.

6

2931

