UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Partial Position Transfer in Categorical Perceptual Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2z00p9vw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gerganov, Alexander
Goldstone, Robert
Grinberg, Maurice

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Partial Position Transfer in Categorical Perceptual Learning
Alexander Gerganov (agerganov@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University
21 Montevideo St., 1618 Sofia, Bulgaria

Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 East Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Karni & Sagi, 1991). Another position is that only the

Abstract
Two experiments are reported. The first shows incomplete
transfer of explicit categorical learning at a distance of 4.5
degrees of visual angle and the second is a control experiment
with a non-learning task. The results suggest that some early
visual plasticity takes place even in a simple, explicit
categorical learning task. We claim that perceptual learning is
a much more common phenomenon than believed before and
that it plays an important role in everyday tasks including
higher-level learning.
Keywords: perceptual learning; categorization; translation
invariance

Introduction
Perceptual learning is often defined as performance
improvement in simple discrimination tasks that involve
neural structures dedicated to low-level perceptual
processing. For the visual modality such tasks are Vernier
discrimination, line orientation discrimination, and simple
pattern recognition. Due to the nature of these tasks,
participants rarely report any explicit strategy change over
the course of improvement, thus perceptual learning is
considered to be implicit. The assumption for implicitness
of perceptual learning, however, is more or less intuitive and
presumed on the basis of the specific nature of the learning
tasks that are used. In real life pattern recognition, line
discrimination and other similar visual tasks are usually
small parts of more complex cognitive tasks like
categorization for example. Categorization is a versatile task
that spans perceptual tasks such as identification and
segmentation as well as higher-level reasoning and
cognitive strategies. As such, categorization is a good task
to investigate what is the role of perceptual learning in a
complex task in which explicitness, complexity and other
parameters can be varied so that we can better understand
the interaction between perceptual and conceptual
processes.
A point of disagreement among researchers is the exact
locus of perceptual learning. One view is that perceptual
learning results from long-lasting changes that occur at a
relatively early stage in information processing from
sensory registration to decision making (e.g. Fahle, 1997;

projections from the low perceptual level to higher cognitive
levels change in the course of learning, with the early visual
representations remaining constant (Dosher & Lu, 1999).
One reason for this debate is that different tasks lead to
results that contradict each other. Another reason, however,
could be that the notions of “low-level perception” or
“higher-level decision making” are seldom grounded in real
brain structures. For vision, where the sensory pathways are
relatively well understood, any theory or model about lowlevel perception could attempt to relate directly to concrete
structures like V1, V4, inferotemporal cortex, etc.
Experimental evidence for the functions of these structures
comes from neurophysiological as well as behavioral
studies. The translation invariance paradigm supplies a
behavioral approach to testing the particular level of neural
structures involved in a perceptual learning task (Notman,
Sowden & Özgen, 2005; Sowden, Rose & Davies, 2002).

Translation invariance– theoretical rationale
The translation invariance paradigm is based on our
contemporary knowledge about the visual pathways and the
cellular structures involved in early visual information
processing. The receptive fields of neurons in the visual
pathways vary in size with the tendency to become larger in
the higher visual areas (see Figure 1).

1828

Anterior inferotemporal
(≈20о diameter)
Posterior inferotemporal
(≈10оdiameter)
V4
V2
V1 (≈1о diameter)

Figure 1: Receptive field size of neurons found in different
parts of the visual pathways (not drawn to scale)

Neurons in V1 have receptive fields of only 1-2 degrees of
visual angle, V4 is characterized by cells with larger
receptive fields (4-5 degrees) and neurons in the
inferotemporal cortex can have receptive fields of 10-20
degrees.
Translation invariance tests if successful learning,
achieved in a particular location in the visual field,
continues to be shown when the same stimuli are presented
at another location (see figure 2). In this paradigm,
participants are asked to look at a fixation point in the center
of a screen while stimuli are presented for 100ms in the
parafoveal vision. Given that 100ms is not sufficient time to
initiate a saccade (Saslow 1967), only a small, specific
region of the retina is stimulated. When performance meets
a predefined criterion, the same stimuli are presented at a
new location in the visual field. Theoretically there are three
possible outcomes. The performance could remain the same
as before the shift, indicating that the learning is invariant to
translation over the retina. The performance could drop to
its initial, pre-training level, indicating that the learning is
position specific. Finally, there could be partial transfer of
the learning if performance declines somewhat at the new
location, but not to its initial level.

discrimination (Dill & Fahle, 1997) and other. This is
interpreted as evidence for a very early locus (V1-V4) of
perceptual learning (but see Mollon and Danilova, 1996 for
criticisms of this assumption.

Training
position

Transfer
position

4 degrees
pITC
V4
V2
V1

Figure 3: Translation invariance vs. position specificity of
learning. Distance between the training and transfer
positions related to the size of receptive fields of different
types of cells.
Studies show that the degree of translation invariance
depends on several factors: the symmetry between the
training and transfer locations – translation invariance was
found for symmetric transfer positions around the fovea
(both on the X and Y axis) but not for asymmetric positions;
the complexity of the task – the more complex and
demanding the learning task, the more position-specific the
learning is; the distribution of attention resources; and the
previous exposure of the participants to parafoveal tasks(see
Dill, 2002 for a review).

Training position
Transfer position

Foveal vision (≈2о diameter)

Experiments

Parafoveal vision
(≈10о diameter)

Figure 2:Translation invariance paradigm – the visual field
and presentation of stimuli at particular locations.
Given the systematic relation between receptive field size
of neurons and their cortical location, these three outcomes
provide evidence for the location of visual structures that
take part in the learning process. In the first scenario, where
full transfer is observed, the receptive fields of the involved
structures should cover both the training and the transfer
location, indicating neural change at the level of posterior
Inferotemporal cortex or later. If there is no transfer at all,
probably the learning occurred at a neural level comprising
neurons with smaller receptive fields than the distance
between the training and transfer locations (see figure 3),
implicating an earlier site of plasticity.
There are many studies that have found no transfer or
partial transfer of learning for simple tasks like Vernier
discrimination (e.g. Fahle, Edelman & Poggio, 1995), line
orientation discrimination (Shiu & Pashler, 1992) pattern

In order to systematically test the perceptual learning
component in categorical learning, we started with the
simplest possible experiment, which acts as a baseline for
further studies. The task was relatively simple (completing
the experiment took between several minutes and half an
hour); learning was fully explicit (manipulated by the
instructions and tested in a post-study questionnaire). If
explicit categorical learning involves only areas above V4,
learning should be fully translation invariant.

Experiment 1
Method In this experiment we tested transfer performance
as a function of the distance from the training location. Two
transfer locations (at distances of 2 and 4.5 degrees of visual
angle) were compared to the training location (control
condition). We measured performance as the percent of
correct responses and the response time for giving an
answer (within-subject dependent variables). The order of

1829

presentation of the control and two training conditions was
fully counterbalanced.

Training
position

Transfer at
4.5 degrees

Transfer at
2 degrees

Figure 4:Training and testing locations.
The training position was located 2.5 degrees to the top and
to the left from the fixation cross. The tested transfer
locations were shifted by 2 and 4.5 degrees of visual angle
from the training position. All three positions were at the
same distance from the fixation cross and were not
symmetric in any way (Figure 4).

3 grid (see Figure 5). The line segments were 2 pixels wide
(approximately 0.05 degrees of visual angle) and the points
were with diameter 3 pixels. The overall stimulus was 80
pixels high and 80 pixels wide (corresponding to
approximately 2 degrees of visual angle). There were four
basic stimuli which were distorted by adding a random line
to the stem. The random lines were added to all possible
places except if the added line resulted in any closed parts or
detached lines. Categories were defined by a pair of
overlapping lines shared by category members(see Figure
5). Participants were given at random one of two different
categorization rules in order to avoid possible effects that
were specific for the selected characteristic element.
Participants in the experiment always saw one object at a
time, composed of 5 lines (a four-line basic object plus a
randomly added line). For every participant there were two
categories and the same categorization rule remained
throughout the whole experiment. The stimuli were
presented on a white screen.
Category 1

Participants Participants in the study were undergraduate
students at New Bulgarian University, who were recruited
with print ads spread around the university and were paid
for participation in the study. 24 participants finished
successfully the training phase and were tested for
translation invariance of learning. One outlier was excluded
from the analysis because of a very low score (55%) in the
control position. All other participants scored above 85% in
the control position.
Apparatus For the translation invariance paradigm we used
a Tobii 1750 remote eye tracker to ensure that participants
were looking at the fixation cross in the center of the screen.
The Tobii 1750 eye tracker provided a gaze sample every 20
ms and an E-prime 1.2 script checked in real time if the gaze
was indeed at the fixation cross. Participants had to look
continuously at the cross for 200ms for the stimulus
presentation to be triggered. The eye tracker also checked
that the viewing distance was between 58 and 62 cm. When
these rules were satisfied, the cross disappeared from the
screen and at the same time the stimulus appeared for
100ms at the appropriate location. Participants’ responses
and reaction times were collected using a Serial Response
Box (SRBox), which guaranteed very low error in reaction
time estimation (<1ms). Stimuli were presented on a 17’
TFT screen (with a matrix response time of 25 ms) built in
the Tobii 1750 eye tracker. We used the native screen
resolution - 1280x1024.
Stimuli The stimuli were constructed in a fashion similar to
Pevtzow and Goldstone’s (1994) stimuli – they were
composed of black line-segments connecting dots on a 3 by

Category 2

Characteristic
elements for
category 1 and 2
Figure 5: Stimuli – four basic stimuli and the characteristic
elements
Procedure Participants were seated in front of the eye
tracker (at 60 cm viewing distance from the screen) and
were told that they would take part in an experiment
studying cognitive processes during learning. They were
given instructions about their task (categorization) and were
shown four sample stimuli with the characteristic elements
marked (the marked elements were different from the actual
ones used throughout the study). The participants were told
that during the experiment they would have to find by
themselves which correct characteristic elements determined
the categorization, but that the elements would be the same
throughout the whole experiment. After reading the
instructions, participants were briefly familiarized with the
stimuli and the way of presentation – participants were
asked to look at the fixation cross in the center of the screen
and when their gaze was at the cross, a stimulus was
presented for 100ms at the training position and then

1830

disappeared (there was no mask after it). During the
familiarization, participants did not try to categorize the
objects. They observed them passively. After the
familiarization, participants were told they would have to
categorize each object into either Category “1” or “2” by
pressing the labeled buttons on the SRBox. After pressing
the desired button, they received immediate feedback as to
whether their choice had been correct or wrong and their
cumulative percent correct.
Trials were organized in blocks of 20. Participants had to
score at least 90% correct answers during the 20 trials in
order to continue to the next phase of the experiment. The
percent of correct answers was computed after each trial and
was displayed as feedback. After 20 consecutive trials, the
participants were presented an additional message with their
overall results for the last 20 trials. This message marked the
end of a block and the beginning of the next one (the
percent of correct answers was computed for each block).
When participants reached above 90% correct answers for
a block of 20 trials, they were congratulated and were told
they had passed the first part of the experiment and that they
would continue the same task with the same rules and
objects, but the objects were to be presented at different
places on the screen. After this instruction there were three
blocks of 20 trials each, every block was presented at one of
the three locations (training position, 2 degrees transfer and
4.5 degrees transfer). The order of presentation was fully
counterbalanced across subjects – for 3 positions there were
6 possible combinations and every participant was randomly
assigned to one of the 6 combinations.
At the end of the experiment, the participants were asked
about their strategies and if they said they were looking for a
diagnostic part, they were asked to draw it.

Results
The post-experiment questionnaire showed that all but one
of the participants were able to explicitly define their
categorization strategy - looking for the presence of a
diagnostic part in the objects and draw the characteristic
element for which they were looking. Thus, the learning was
indeed explicit.
The mean percent of correct responses in all conditions
was above 90% (see Table 1 for details). Still, a Repeated
Measures ANOVA showed there was a significant
difference between conditions: F (2, 46) = 7.813; p<0.001;
ηp2 = 0.254;
A Pairwise comparison of the means (with Bonferroni
adjustment) showed that there was no difference between
the control position and the 2 degrees transfer position
(p=0.647). There was difference between the control and
4.5 degrees transfer positions (p < 0.05) and between the 2degrees-transfer position and the 4.5-degrees-transfer
position (p < 0.05).
Difference between the conditions was also found in the
reaction times. Repeated Measures ANOVA showed slower
reaction time for the 4.5-transfer-position: F (2, 46) = 3,476;
p < 0.05; ηp2 = 0.249.

Table 1: Mean percent of correct responses per condition.
Position
Control
Transfer
2 degrees
Transfer
4.5 degrees

Mean,
%
97.1

Std.
Error
0.8

95.6

1.3

91.9

1.7

A Pairwise comparison (with Bonferroni adjustment)
between the means shows that only the difference between
the 2-degrees and 4.5-degrees conditions was significant:
p<0.05; see Table 2 for mean RTs.
Table 2: Mean reaction time per condition.
Position
Control
Transfer
2 degrees
Transfer
4.5 degrees

Mean,
ms
830

Std.
Error
54

791

54

919

66

d’ was also computed as a more reliable, criterionindependent measure than the percent correct responses –
the general pattern of results was the same for d’.

Discussion of Experiment 1
Results from Experiment 1 showed partial transfer of
learning for the 4.5-degrees condition - there was a
significant difference (in terms of both correct responses
and response time) between the control position and the
further transfer position (4.5 degrees shift). This could be
interpreted as evidence that lower-level visual structures
(V2-V4) play a role in the changes that occur during
learning even in this simple category learning scenario.
Another explanation, however, could be connected to
selective spatial attention (Dill, 2002). One natural way to
control for attention would be to randomize the presentation
of objects during the testing phase on a trial-by-trial basis.
This, however, would have considerably altered the task
during the testing phase (since there was only one location
during the learning phase) and affect the overall
performance for all locations (as pretests hinted). For similar
reasons O’Toole and Kersten (1992) trained participants
with two patterns at two different locations and indeed
found that attention could explain positional specificity of
learning in their case. Since such training would have made
the task much more complex, we chose a different approach.
A second experiment was performed to determine what the
role of selective spatial attention is in a similar, but nonlearning task.

1831

Experiment 2
The second experiment was a control one, which aimed to
rule out selective spatial attention as possible explanation of
the results from Experiment 1. The experiment was identical
to the previous one with only the instruction changed participants were shown a characteristic element and were
given the simple task to press Button 1 if the element was
present in an object and Button 2 if it was not. This task
imitated the strategy that all of the participants in
Experiment 1 had reported but did not involve any learning.
Different characteristic elements were given to different
subjects at random. Everything else remained the same as in
Experiment 1. If spatial attention was the explanation of the
results from Experiment 1, then the same pattern should be
observed in Experiment 2.
.
Participants 22 participants were recruited from the same
pool as in Experiment 1.

Repeated Measures ANOVA showed slower reaction time
for the 4.5-transfer-position: F (2, 42) = 15.248; p < 0,001,
ηp2= 0.42

Discussion of Experiment 2
The results from Experiment 2 showed no statistically
significant difference for the percent of correct responses
(unlike Experiment 1) but significant delay in the response
time for the 4.5 degrees transfer (as in Experiment 1).
Correct responses, %
100

95

90

Results

85

Participants achieved 90% correct answers very quickly
(usually in the first block). Thus, this task involved no
learning as intended. There was no significant difference
between the control and transfer positions (see Table 3).

Control
Transfer
2 degrees
Transfer
4.5 degrees

Mean,
%
96.8

Std.
Error
1.07

98

0.78

95

1.14

80

The overall model (with Greenhouse-Geiser correction)
showed a trend: F (2, 42) =2.558; p=0.109, ηp2 = 0.109 but
only because of the difference between the two transfer
positions (the control being in the middle). Indeed, the
Pairwise comparison (with Bonferroni adjustment) showed
no difference between either of the transfer positions and the
control one: p = 0.512 for the difference between the
control and the 2-degrees-transfer position and p = 0.741 for
the key comparison between the control and 4.5 degrees
transfer, which was significant in Experiment 1. The
reaction times, however, showed a similar pattern to the
results in experiment 1 (see Table 4).

Control
Transfer
2 degrees
Transfer
4.5 degrees

Mean,
ms
644

Std.
Error
32

643

28

744

35

Transfer 2

Transfer 4.5

It is worth mentioning that the overall response times were
much faster in the second experiment (see Figure 6), which
is consistent with the accuracy results in indicating that the
task was easier. Although the task imitated the strategy
reported by participants in Experiment 1 (i.e. when a
characteristic part is present press Button 1, when it is not –
press Button 2) the faster response times show that the
categorization task involved some additional cognitive
processing.
Reaction time, ms
1000
900

Categorization
learning task
(Experiment 1)
Non-learning task
(Experiment 2)

800
700

Table 4: Mean response time per condition.
Position

Control

Figure 5: Percent correct answer for the control and two
transfer positions, for experiment 1 and experiment 2

Table 3: Mean percent of correct responses per condition.
Position

Categorization
learning task
(Experiment 1)
Non-learning task
(Experiment 2)

600
500

Control

Transfer 2

Transfer 4.5

Figure 6: Reaction times (in ms) for the control and two
transfer positions, for experiment 1 and experiment 2

1832

General Discussion
The first experiment showed some evidence for involvement
of low-level structures (as low as V2-V4, but not V1) in the
category learning which supports and builds on previous
findings (Sowden & Notman, 2005). Selective spatial
attention could be another explanation for these results. The
second experiment, however, showed that there was no
effect of attention on position performance (in the percent
correct responses) for a non-learning but otherwise identical
situation. The delay in response time for the 4.5 transfer was
similar to the observed in Experiment 1 and this effect could
indeed be caused by selective spatial attention. The
percentage of correct responses, however, did not match the
pattern from Experiment 1, indicating that in addition to
attention, spatially restricted perceptual learning is
occurring. One possible interpretation of these results is that
the learning process actually occurs simultaneously at
different perceptual stages. Indeed previous research
(Pevtzow & Goldstone, 1994) has shown the formation of
perceptual detectors in categorical learning. Interestingly,
neurophysiological studies have shown the formation of
similar diagnostic shape detectors in the inferotemporal
cortex of monkeys (Baker, Behrmann & Olson, 2002).
Given that the current category learning task seems to
involve structures even lower (i.e. earlier in the information
processing stream) than IT, this supports the idea that
several low-level perceptual layers are altered in parallel
during perceptual learning.
Contemporary perceptual learning models tend to assume
that learning happens at one particular stage of processing.
A recently suggested computational model, however, shows
how learning at different perceptual stages can occur
simultaneously (Gerganov, Grinberg, Quinn & Goldstone,
2007).
In conclusion, Experiment 1 explored the question of
whether category learning involves strategic, high-level
changes to the weighting given to stimulus components, or
lower-level changes to how stimuli to be categorized are
perceived. If one grants the logic of translation invariance
(e.g. lower-level perceptual processes show more position
sensitivity because early visual pathways are served by
detectors with narrow receptive fields), then our results
suggest that category learning does alter relatively low-level
perceptual processes.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by U.S. Department
of Education, Institute of Education Sciences Grant
R305H050116 and National Science Foundation Grant
0527920.

Dill, M. (2002). Specificity versus Invariance of Perceptual
Learning: The Example of Position. In Perceptual
Learning edited by Manfred Fahle, Tomaso Poggio
Dill, M., & Fahle M. (1997) Limited Translation Invariance
of Human Visual Pattern Recognition. Perception and
Psychophysics, 60, 65-81.
Dosher, B. A., & Lu, Z.-L. (1999). Mechanisms of
perceptual learning. Vision Research, 39, 3197–3221.
Fahle, M. (1997). Specificity of learning curvature,
orientation, and vernier discriminations. Vision Research,
37, 1885–1895.
Fahle, M., Edelman, S.,& Poggio, T. (1995). Fast perceptual
learning in hyperacuity. Vision Research, 35, 3003-3013
Gerganov, A., Grinberg, M., Quinn, P. C., & Goldstone, R.
L. (2007). Simulating conceptually-guided perceptual
learning. In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Trafton (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 287-292). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Karni, A., & Sagi, D. (1991). Where practice makes perfect
in texture discrimination: Evidence for primary visual
cortex plasticity. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 88, 4966–4970.
Mollon, J. D., & Danilova, M. V. (1996). Three remarks on
perceptual learning. Spatial Vision, 10, 51-58.
Notman, L., Sowden, P.T., & Özgen, E. (2005). The nature
of
learned
categorical
perception
effects:
a
psychophysical approach. Cognition, 95, B1-B14.
O'Toole, A. J., & Kersten, D. J., 1992, Learning to see
random-dot stereograms. Perception, 21, 227–243
Pevtzow, R., & Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Categorization and
the parsing of objects.Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 717722). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Saslow, M. G. (1967) Latency for saccadic eye movement.
Journal of the Optical Society of America, 57, 1030–
1033.
Shiu, L., & Pashler, H. (1992). Improvement in line
orientation discrimination is retinally local but dependent
on cognitive set. Perception and Psychophysics, 52, 582588
Sowden, P.T., Rose, D., & Davies, I.R.L. (2002). Perceptual
learning of luminance contrast detection: specific for
spatial frequency and retinal location but not orientation.
Vision Research, 42, 1249-1258.
Sowden, P. T., & Notman, L. A. (2005). Categorical
Perception: Categorisation Dependent Perceptual
Learning [Abstract]. Journal of Vision, 5, 865,865a

References
Baker, C. I., Behrmann, M., & Olson, C. R., 2002. Impact
of learning on representations of parts and wholes in
monkey inferotemporal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 5,
1210-1216.

1833

