UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Persistence of Hypotheses in Schizotypy: When Red Remains Orange for a While.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tg439fx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Beltran, David
Fumero, Axit
Navarrete, Gorka
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Persistence of Hypotheses in Schizotypy: When Red Remains Orange for a While
Isabel Orenes (iorenes@ull.es), Gorka Navarrete (gnavarga@ull.es), David Beltrán (dbeltran@ull.es),
Ascensión Fumero (afumero@ull.es) & Carlos Santamaría (csantam@ull.es)
Department of Psychology, Universidad de La Laguna
La Laguna, S/C de Tenerife 38205 Spain

Abstract
The Bias Against Disconfirmatory Evidence (BADE) is the
tendency to maintain a belief against opposite information
and is one of the mechanisms that has been linked with the
formation and maintenance of delusion in schizophrenia.
The goal of this study was to assess this tendency in a
nonclinical population with high schizotypy (classified
according to SPQ, Spanish version). For this purpose, we
devised a new and more sensitive measure than the
traditional one; capable of measuring tiny traces of BADE
in schizotypy. Two experiments were carried out to verify
this. In Experiment 1, with a traditional instrument to
measure the BADE in schizophrenia, we did not find
significant difference between groups. In Experiment 2,
BADE was measured with our new task. Reaction time (RT)
analyses showed significant differences between high and
low schizotypal participants. This result highlights the
similarities between both, schizophrenic disorder and
schizotypal trait, with respect to the presence of BADE. It
also illustrates how suitable our instrument is to study this
phenomenon in a nonclinical population.
Keywords: BADE; Delusion; Schizophrenia; Schizotypy;
Assessment.

Introduction
“Don Quixote: Look there, friend Sancho Panza, where thirty or more
monstrous giants rise up, all of whom I mean to engage in battle and slay, and
with whose spoils we shall begin to make our fortunes
Sancho Panza: What we see there are not giants but windmills
Don Quixote: Those are giants, and if you are afraid, away with you out of
here and betake yourself to prayer, while I engage them in fierce and unequal
combat."
Miguel de Cervantes, 1605

Don Quixote ended up seriously wounded, not by giants
but, as his server and friend warned him, by crashing against
windmills. This literary example sets pretty well the topic of
the present study: delusions, their maintenance against
evidence, and their detection in non-clinical population.
Delusion is the persistence of an erroneous belief,
sometimes bizarre (e.g., the paranoia), which is false or
implausible, that is, whose content does not reflect the
reality to which it refers. Like other clinical manifestations
in schizophrenia, delusion is also present in other clinical

illnesses (e.g., neurological disorders, substance abuse,
depression, Alzheimer's disease).
Positive symptoms (delusion and hallucination) in
schizophrenia have been associated with a cognitive
tendency to accept evidence that is consistent with patient’s
beliefs (Bias Against Confirmatory Evidence BACE), while
ignoring it when inconsistent (BADE; Freeman et. al., 2002;
Garety, Hemsley & Wessely, 1991; Garety & Freeman,
1999; Garety et al., 2001). Many studies have corroborated
these tendencies in schizophrenic patients (Moritz &
Woodward, 2006; Woodward et al., 2004; Woodward,
Moritz & Chen, 2006). In the traditional tasks, drawings or
sentences are sequentially presented and increasingly
disambiguated towards plausible scenarios, and participants
are asked to rate the plausibility of several interpretations
for a particular scenario. The BADE shows up when the
patients continued to endorse their initial beliefs, even in the
face of evidence that disconfirmed these beliefs.
Healthy people displaying schizotypy show a large number
of the cognitive biases described in schizophrenic patients
but in a lower degree: Jumping to Conclusion, False Alarms
with High Confidence, deficit in Theory of the Mind, and in
Semantic Memory (Gray & Snowden, 2005; Kiang &
Kutas, 2005; Langdon & Coltheart, 1999; Laws & Bhatt,
2005; Lipp, Siddle & Arnold, 1994; Sellen, Oaksford &
Gray, 2005). Furthermore, there are some indices of
abnormal Dopaminergic activity in schizotypy, which has
longer been argued to account for the positive
manifestations in schizophrenia (Cohen & ServanSchreiber, 1992; Cohen, Braver & O´Reilly, 1996; Perlstein
et al., 2001). Because of these similarities, some
schizophrenic symptoms are now considered a continuum
that can be evaluated and studied in schizotypy. From this
point of view, the evaluation of schizotypy has fundamental
advantages. First, it allows for the study of the same
phenomena without the inherent limitations of the use of
patients, and second, it permits evaluating the at-risk
population to achieve an early intervention (Jones et al.,
2000).
In this study, we assessed the BADE in schizotypy, which
has been related to the formation and maintenance of
delusions. Ordinarily, a discrete measure has been used to
test the BADE: the conscious judgment on the certainty that
the participants have in their previous beliefs in the face of
evidence that disconfirmed these beliefs.

1810

Many studies have demonstrated that schizophrenic patients
maintain incorrect initial responses with great confidence.
However, this task may be inefficient in a nonclinical
population since normal people are likely not to maintain
beliefs that overtly contradict the evidence. For example,
only a schizophrenic patient will maintain that mills are
giants. Although Buchy et al (2007) evaluated whether this
extends to a nonclinical sample scoring high on a schizotypy
scale. The participants were sequentially presented with
three sentences that increasingly disambiguated the true
content of a delusion-neutral scenario and were asked to rate
the plausibility of four interpretations for this scenario.
Relative to low schizotypy participants, high schizotypy
participants continued to endorse their initial beliefs, even in
the face of evidence that disconfirmed these beliefs.

(N=30) and low-schizotypal participants (N=27). 44 females
and 13 males composed the sample. There was no statistical
difference in sex between both groups (χ2(1)=0.10,
p=0.921). The mean age was 21 (SD=2.9) years, range 1840 years.

The Reaction Time has showed being a sensitive measure in
Cognitive Science. For that reason, our purpose was to use
the time taken by the participants to change their original
beliefs according to external evidence as a fine-grained
measure of the BADE, and found differences in that
measure between high and low schizotypal people. Our new
paradigm makes use of the same principle utilized in the
traditional measures of the BADE. It starts with an
ambiguous situation (an ambiguous color; e.g. one between
blue and green) which gradually disambiguates. However,
the participants are not asked to rate the plausibility of each
interpretation but simply to indicate when the color changes
from their original interpretation, if it is the case (e.g. the
participants said the color was blue, they are asked to give a
response as soon as they perceive it change into a different
color). As a consequence, we obtain a constant and simpler
measure (time to color change perception in milliseconds),
which can be more sensitive to detect the BADE in
nonclinical population.

We used a closure task (Moritz & Woodward, 2006), where
a sequence of picture fragments was used instead of
complex scenarios. For each trial, over a sequence of eight
pictures, a common object (e.g., an elephant) was made
increasingly visible (i.e., more features were added to the
picture), and it was thus disambiguated. At each stage,
interpretations of what the picture might depict were rated
on a 5-point scale (dismissed, unlikely, possible, likely,
positive decision). As soon as a decision was made, the trial
ended.

In order to verify the utility of these two measurements (the
classic measure based on judgments of confidence and the
new task based on reaction-time), we carried out two
experiments: in Experiment 1, we used the classic discrete
measure, and in Experiment 2, the new continuous measure.
The hypothesis was that the continuous measure would be
more sensitive to detect the subtle BADE tendency present
in schizotypal participants.

Experiment 1:Closure task in Schizotypy
The aim of the Experiment 1 was to test whether the high
schizotypy group tended to maintain a hypothesis despite
contradictory evidence (BADE) with a Closure task.

Method
Participants. From a total of 371 psychology students that
were assessed with The Schizotypy Personality
Questionnaire (SPQ; Raine, 1991) we chose a sample
scoring over 90th percentile or below 10th percentile,
dividing it into two groups: high-schizotypal participants

Instruments. The SPQ is a self-report questionnaire for the
assessment of schizotypal personality disorder according to
the DSM-III-R criteria (American Psychiatric Association,
1987). The internal consistency of the SPQ is 0.91 (the
subscales mean is 0.74), and the test-retest reliability is 0.82
(Raine, 1991).
Closure task

Procedure and materials. Participants were given 14
experimental trials following a training block. All trials
consisted of a sequence of eight stages, each showing a
common object in decreasing degrees of fragmentation: new
object features were added to each new picture until the
entire object was displayed at the final stage. The objects
were depicted as post-edited simple black-and-white
drawings (experimental trials: float/raft, elephant, guitar,
mill, mermaid, castle, etc.). Instructions and trials were
presented on a computer running the software e-prime. The
trials were run in fixed order with half of the trials being
accompanied by cue interpretations (depending on the trial:
6–9 interpretations), which were assessed for plausibility
until a decision was reached. Plausibility ratings had to be
given on a five-point Lickert scale (1=dismissed, 2=
unlikely, 3=possible, 4=likely, 5= positive decision). Once a
decision (i.e., rating=5) was reached, the next trial (i.e., first
fragment of new picture) was initiated. No feedback was
provided about incorrect judgments. Only one of the
interpretations eventually proved to be correct. In the
remaining trials, no cue interpretations were provided, and
the participants were instructed to create their own
interpretations at each stage, which were subsequently rated
for plausibility. If an interpretation was dismissed at any
given stage (i.e., rating=0), it still had to be re-evaluated at
all remaining stages. Again, the next trial was initiated once
a decision was reached.

1811

Results and discussion
The mean and standard deviation in the SPQ scale for the
total population (N=361) was 23.48(9.84), for high
schizotypy 42.08(5.62) and for low schizotypy 8.73(2.28).
The analyses did not yield any significant difference
between high-schizotypal and low-schizotypal groups,
either for BADE (F(1,55)=0.790; p=0.378; d=0.238) or
BACE ((F(1,55)=0.004; p= 0.951; d=0.017). However, a
tendency for BADE existed in the high schizotypal group (0.669(0.623)) compared to the low schizotypal group (0.817(0.620)). Buchy et al., (2007) conducted an experiment
with the same procedure using stories and they found
differences between both groups with a tail. However, while
a story may be given a more subjective interpretation,
drawings can be interpreted more objectively. This results
might reflect the lack of sensitivity of the task used to detect
the BADE in this population.

Experiment 2:
Decision-Time Task in Schizotypy
The aim of the experiment 2 was to test whether the high
schizotypy group tended to maintain a hypothesis despite
contradictory information (BADE) with a new paradigm.

Method
Participants. The participants were the same as in
Experiment 1. Both experiments were conducted in the
same session separated by a break.
Procedure and materials. A normative study was carried
out in order to select the materials, i.e. sharp and ambiguous
colors, which were presented to 57 new students from the
same population. A total of 72 trials were presented to these
participants, 18 trials were sharp colors and 54 ambiguous.
Each trial showed a circle with two color names at the right
and left of the figure. The participants' task was to choose
the color of the circle, and then estimate the confidence of
their responses in a Lickert scale from 1 to 5. The
percentage of participants that selected the correct color was
99.33% for the sharp colors and 84.91% for the ambiguous
colors; while the average of the confidence on the sharp
colors was 4.05 and 4.68 on the ambiguous colors.
Significant differences were found between the two types of
colors in the percentage of accuracy (Wilcoxon: z =-3.246,
p = 0.001) and in the confidence (Wilcoxon: z =-2.735, p=
0.006). The selection criterion for sharp and ambiguous
colors was to maximize accuracy, while obtaining the
biggest difference in confidence between both. Based on the
results of the normative study, 6 sharp colors (yellow, blue,
orange, red, green and purple) and their corresponding
ambiguous were selected. Each color was paired with

another, and we distinguished four different conditions:
Ambiguous-colors gradual-change, Sharp-color gradualchange, Sharp-color radical-change, and No-change.
In the Ambiguous-color gradual-change condition, each
color appeared twice in combination with another one (bluegreen, blue-purple, green-yellow, yellow-orange, orange-red
and red-purple). As the animation for each pair of colors
started from both poles, we obtained a total of 12 items for
this condition. The same pairs of colors were presented in
the Sharp-color gradual-change condition, with the
difference of using a sharp color to start the animation. Our
key condition was the Ambiguous-color gradual-change
condition because in that case the participants' initial
decision could be perceived by themselves as a personal
decision, and also because the traditional measures of
BADE made use of ambiguous stimuli. However, we
included the Sharp-color gradual-change condition to
control if the ambiguity of the initial information used in the
closure task was necessary for BADE to show up. We
included the sharp-color radical-change condition as a
control condition to check that the participants were
detecting the changes. Each color was paired with another
that allowed for the radical change (purple-yellow, redgreen and blue-orange). Each pair began once by each pole
resulting in 6 trials. All the previous conditions implied a
change and that could lead to an automation of responses.
For this reason, we created a No-change condition. There
were 6 trials (purple, yellow, red, blue, green and orange),
which remained the same color, but with different tones.
The whole task consisted of 36 experimental trials preceded
by the training block. Each trial had two parts. First, a circle
and two names of possible colors on its right and left
appeared on screen and participants had to choose the color
of the circle by pressing the corresponding key in the
keyboard. After choosing the color, the circle remained up
to 10 seconds on the screen. Throughout this time, the
subject's task was to press the key only if the color changed
(Figure 1).
Task 1: What colour is the circle?

Task 2: Press only if the colour changes
Figure 1: Decision-Time Task. People saw the first figure
and they chose the color, then a film started to change the
colour and people had to press when colour changed.

1812

Results and discussion

Regarding response 2, we examined the length of time the
participants maintained their first hypothesis for each color
(see Figure 2). In the sharp-color radical-change condition,
there were no significant differences between lowschizotypy (5291(743) ms.) and high-schizotypy (5490(400)
ms.) groups, F (1,53) = 1.615, p = 0.209, d = 0.348. In the
sharp-color gradual-change condition, the average of the
low schizotypy group was 5962(657) ms. and 6285(810)
ms. for the high schizotypy. The difference was marginally
significant, F (1,53) = 2.961, p = 0.091, d = 0.440.
Finally, for the ambiguous-color gradual-change condition,
the average of the low-schizotypy group was 5003(681) ms.,
and 5451(604) ms. for the high-schizotypy group. As we
predicted, the high-schizotypal participants took longer to
change their initial hypotheses than the low-schizotypal
participants in this condition, F(1,53)=6.801, p=0.012,
d=0.70. In general, the high-schizotypy participants tended
to maintain their hypotheses longer in all conditions (even
though we have controlled for speed differences with the
covariate). We found significant differences between groups
in the ambiguous-color gradual-change condition, and a
nearly significant tendency in the sharp-color gradualchange condition. Two possible accounts for the difference
being more apparent with the ambiguous starting color are:
first, an ambiguous situation could facilitate the persistence
of the initial hypothesis as it can be felt by the participant as
a personal decision, and this circumstance might have make
them harder to inhibit this first belief. Second, the
ambiguous stimuli changed more quickly than the sharp
stimuli, giving not enough time for inhibition to occur in
high-schizotypal participants.

Time (in milliseconds)

6500

Numerous studies have shown that the schizophrenic
patients and high-schizotypal participants are slower in
several tasks (see, Lipp, Siddle & Arnold, 1994). For this
reason, we analyzed the reaction time for response 1, where
the participants had to respond as quickly as possible to the
initial color presented. This can be taken as an independent
measure of speed. Three subjects were eliminated because
they erred in more than one third of the items (two from the
high-schizotypal group and one from the low-schizotypal
group). The results showed no significant difference
between the groups (all F's <1). However, we used this
previous measure as a covariate for further analyses.

High
Low

6000

*
*

5500
5000
4500
Radical

Sharp

Ambiguous

Figure 2: Mean Reaction Times for the Change of
Hypothesis in the three conditions. Asterisk indicates
significant differences (p<.05) between the two groups.

General discussion
The goal of the present study was to explore one of the
possible cognitive pillars of schizophrenic delusion. A well
established finding in this field is that schizophrenic patients
are reluctant to change their previous hypotheses in the face
of contrary evidence. If this bias is reflecting the functioning
of a general cognitive mechanism (such as lack of inhibition
of previous information), it would be possible to find some
slight traces of it in non-clinical population with a
predisposition to schizophrenia. In this case we used
psychometric schizotypal participants and presented a new
paradigm that proved itself sensitive enough to capture the
phenomenon in that population.
For this purpose we checked if BADE was present in the
schizotypy population and compared the sensitivity of the
discrete traditional measure and the new paradigm we
introduced in this non-clinical population. The lack of
robust results supporting the presence of BADE in
schizotypia might have been interpreted as if this cognitive
bias were exclusive of clinical schizophrenia. However, it
seems that the problem with the traditional instruments was
not the absence of BADE but their lack of sensitivity to
detect small traces of this bias. The new instrument should
help us advance in the study of the delusion avoiding the
difficulties posed by the schizophrenic patients.
We ran two experiments. In Experiment 1 we used a
traditional instrument for measuring the BADE in
schizophrenics and failed to find any significant difference
between high and low schizotypy participants, while the
tendency went in the predicted direction. The difference
between Buchy’s study and ours could be explained by the
difference in material (stories vs. drawings). In Experiment
2, we tried to maximize precision with a much more
sensitive chronometric measure, and with the advantages of
non-continuous responses and a very simple stimuli –
colored circles–, we found significant differences between
high and low schizotypy groups. The same participants

1813

carried out both experiments but we only found differences
in experiment 2. It is obvious then that the TR measure is
more adequate to find differences in a non-clinical
population. In general, the high-schizotypal participants
presented a tendency to maintain the initial hypothesis on all
conditions, but we found significant differences between
groups only in the ambiguous-color gradual-change
condition. The closure task always presents the ambiguous
stimulus and they are related with a personal interpretation
and bigger resistance to change.

deficits, medication), and also, it might allow evaluating the
at-risk population to achieve an early intervention (Jones et
al., 2000).

As this is the first work with this paradigm, further
replications are needed to substantiate the results, not only
with high-schizotypal participants, but also with other
psychological disorders and schizophrenia. However, the
results are promising and our paradigm, as it is based upon a
simple judgment, calls for basic cognitive mechanisms and
can be used for further analysis of the nature of delusion.
One of the future research lines could be the study of
inhibition in high schizotypal participants. Schizophrenic
patients present a Dopaminergic-activity deficit related to
the inhibition and maintenance of information in working
memory (Cohen & Servan-Schreiber, 1992; Cohen, Braver
& O´Reilly, 1996; Perlstein et al., 2001). In particular, it
seems they have difficulties inhibiting the active
information, which interferes with the processing of the new
incoming information (See Computational Models in
schizophrenia about how dopamine could be underlying the
schizophrenia symptoms, Rolls et. al., 2008). Also, Kiang &
Kutas, (2005) used a priming task and found that highschizotypal participants were unable to maintain the prime
in working memory, so that it exerted no influence over the
target. In their experiment, high-schizotypal participants
tended to react equally fast to three conditions, with the
prime and target related, indirectly related or non-related. In
contrast, the low-schizotypal group showed differences in
the processing between related and unrelated targets.

References

In fact, the inability to inhibit and maintain information in
working memory has been observed in a plethora of tasks,
including some in the social field as that of the Theory of
Mind (Langdon & Coltheart, 1999) where these authors
found that the high schizotypy group took more time to
distinguish between what the subject and a second observer
are seeing than the low schizotypy group, which seems to
reflect a difficulty to inhibit their own point of view of the
situation.
In sum, we have designed a new paradigm which could be
more sensitive to measure the BADE in a non-clinical
population. We found the presence of the BADE in people
with high schizotypy, a mechanism that could be related to
delusion. This result corroborates numerous studies about
the concept of health and illness, which could be seen as a
continuous. It might facilitate the study of schizophrenia and
numerous symptoms with non-clinical population and
without the problems that patients present (general cognitive

Acknowledgments
Research reported in this paper has been supported by grant
SEJ2006-14714 from the Spanish Government and by grant
1802390701 from the Universidad de La Laguna.

Buchy, L. (2006) The Contribution of a Cognitive Bias
against Disconfirmatory Evidence (BADE) to Delusional
Ideation in Schizotypy. Unpublished PhD Thesis. Simon
Fraser University. Burnaby, BC.
Buchy, L., Woodward, T.S., &Liotti, M. (2007). A
cognitive bias against disconfirmatory evidence (BADE) is
associated with schizotypy. Schizophrenia Research, 90,
334-337.
Cohen, J.D., & Servan-Schreiber, D., (1992). Context,
cortex, and dopamine: a connectionist approach to behavior
and biology in schizophrenia. Psychological Review, 99,
45–77.
Cohen, J.D., Braver, T.S., &O´Reilly, R.C. (1996). A
computational approach to prefrontal cortex, cognitive
control and schizophrenia: Recent developments and current
challenges. The Royal Society of London, 351, 1515-1527.
Freeman, D., Garety, P. A., Kuipers, E., Fowler, D.,
&Bebbington, P. E. (2002). A cognitive model of
persecutory delusions. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 41, 331-347.
Garety, P.A., & Freeman, D. (1999). Cognitive
approaches to delusions: A critical review of theories and
evidence. British journal of clinical psychology, 38, 113154.
Garety, P.A., Kuipers, E., Fowler, D., Freeman, D.
&Bebbington, E. (2001).A cognitive model of the positive
symptoms of psychosis. Psychological Medicine, 31, 189195.
Garety, P.A., Hemsley, D.R., &Wessely, S. (1991).
Reasoning in deluded schizophrenic and paranoid patients.
Biases in performance on a probabilistic inference task.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177, 194-201.
Gray, N.S., & Snowden, R.J., (2005).The relevance of
irrelevance
to
schizophrenia.
Neuroscience
and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 29 (6), 989–999.

1814

Jones, L. A., Cardno, A. G., Murphy, K. C., Sanders, R.
D., Gray, M. Y., & McCarthy, G. (2000). The Kings
Schizotypy Questionnaire as a quantitative measure of
schizophrenia liability. Schizophrenia Research, 45, 213221.
Kiang, M., &Kutas, M. (2005). Association of schizotypy
with semantic processing differences: An event-related
brain potential study. Schizophrenia Research, 77, 329-342.
Langdon, R., &Coltheart, M., (1999). Mentalising,
schizotypy, and schizophrenia. Cognition, 71 (1), 43–71.
Laws, K.R., & Bhatt, R., (2005).False memories and
delusional ideation in normal healthy subjects. Personality
and Individual Differences, 39, 775–781.
Lipp, O. V., Siddle, D. A. T. & Arnold, S. L. (1994).
Psychosis proneness in a non-clinical sample II: a multiexperimental study of "intentional malfunctioning".
Personality and Individual Differences, 17(3), 405-424.
Moritz, S., & Woodward, T. (2006).A generalized bias
against disconfirmatory evidence in schizophrenia.
Psychiatry Research, 142, 157-165.
Perlstein, W.M., Carter, C.S., Noll, D.C., & Cohen, J.D.
(2001). Relation on prefrontal cortex dysfunction to
working memory and symptom in schizophrenia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1105-1113.
Raine, A. (1991). The SPQ: a scale for the assessment of
schizotypal personality based on DSM-III-R criteria.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 17, 556-564.
Rolls, E.T., Loh, M., Deco, G., & Winterer, G.
(2008).Computational models of schizophrenia and
dopamine modulation in the prefrontal cortex. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 9, 696-709
Sellen, J.L., Oaksford, M., & Gray, N.S. (2005)
Schizotypy and Conditional Reasoning. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 31(1), 105-116.
Woodward, T. S., Moritz, S., & Chen, E. (2006). The
contribution of a cognitive bias against disconfirmatory
evidence (BADE) to delusions: A study in an Asian sample
with first episode schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
Schizophrenia Research, 83, 297-298.
Woodward, T. S., Moritz, S., Cuttler, C.C., & Whitman,
J., (2004). A generalized cognitive deficit in integrating
disconfirmatory evidence underlies delusion maintenance in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 67, 79.

1815

