UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pieron’s Law holds in conditions of response conflict

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/234935qs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gurney, Kevin
Ingram, Leanne
Stafford, Tomer

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Piéron’s Law holds in conditions of response conflict
Tom Stafford (t.stafford@shef.ac.uk)
Kevin Gurney (k.gurney@shef.ac.uk)
Leanne Ingram (leanne.ingram@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TP UK

Stroop processing

Abstract
We show that the effect of stimulus colour-intensity on reaction times in the Stroop task is additive with the effect of
Stroop condition. This establishes that the psychophysical relationship between stimulus intensity and response time known
as Piéron’s Law holds for colour processing, and that it can
hold in cognitive tasks under conditions of response conflict,
not, as hitherto demonstrated, merely for simple and perceptual choice tasks. Computational modelling shows that existing single stage models of the Stroop task provide an adequate
account of these results, in contradiction to the assumption that
additive factors imply independent processing stages. Keywords: Decision making; Piéron’s Law; Response conflict;
Stroop task; Colour saturation; Additive Factors.

Introduction
Modelling decision making
All behaviours, however simple, must be the result of a decision process. Looking at decision making and building
mathematical models which account for choice reaction times
and error rates has a long history within psychology (Luce,
1986). The diffusion model (Ratcliff, 1978; Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008) is perhaps the preeminent example of a model
from this tradition. Ratcliff has suggested that, for two alternative forced choice (2AFC) tasks, the diffusion model
is the only account which can explain the distribution of
reaction times (RTs) for correct responses, as well as the
speed and distribution of incorrect responses, under different urgency-accuracy conditions (Ratcliff & Rouder, 1998).
More recently the optimality of the diffusion model for making urgency-accuracy trade-offs in two-choice situations under conditions of uncertainty has been demonstrated (Bogacz, Brown, Moehlis, Holmes, & Cohen, 2006). A notable
feature of the diffusion model, in common with many mathematical models of decision making, is that it combines the
evidence favouring the possible choices into a single term —
termed ‘the drift’ in the diffusion model framework. There
are obvious benefits of combining evidence into a common
metric which determines which response is made and after
how long. As well as bringing analytic tractability to the
model, it should be apparent that optimal decision making
requires the trade-off of different factors influencing the decision. A common metric facilitates an optimal trade-off in
the same way that a common currency facilitates economic
communication. Gold & Shadlen (2002) outline the theoretical underpinnings of such a ‘weight of evidence’ metric and
discuss its neural instantiation.

The Stroop task (Stroop, 1935) is a paradigmatic selection
task in which a failure of attentional control leads to response
conflict (MacLeod & MacDonald, 2000). Participants are
presented with a coloured word stimulus and must respond
to the stimulus colour. The word can be neutral with respect
to the colour (e.g. the word ‘HORSE’ in red ink), or itself
be the name of a colour. Thus this cognitive element of the
stimulus (the meaning of the word) can be conflicting (e.g.
the word ‘GREEN’ in red ink) or congruent (e.g. the word
‘RED’ in red ink) with the perceptual element of the stimulus
(the physical colour).
In the conflict condition, selection involves the resolution
of a contradiction between one response based on the colour
aspect of the stimulus and a different response based on the
word aspect of the stimulus. The resolution of this conflict causes delays in responding and errors — the interference typically seen in the conflict condition of the Stroop
task. Traditionally interest in the Stroop task has focussed
on the demonstration it provides of the power of overlearnt
behaviours (in this case word-reading) to interfere with response selection. Here we are more concerned with the use
of the Stroop task as a thoroughly investigated example of decision making under conditions of stimulus conflict, in which
elements of different kinds (words and physical colours) are
involved in affecting the response.

Piéron’s Law
Piéron (1952) demonstrated that the physical intensity of a
stimulus is systematically related to the simple reaction time,
so that the average reaction time, RT , is given by
RT = R0 + kI −β

(1)

where R0 is the asymptotic RT, a fixed component of response which cannot be reduced, I is the physical intensity of
the stimulus and k and β are constants. This relation is known
as Piéron’s Law.
Piéron’s Law has been shown to hold for simple RTs across
different sensory modalities (Luce, 1986). It holds for luminance of white light, for amplitude of pure tones and even for
taste with respect to the concentration of a substance diluted
in water (Bonnet, Zamora, Buratti, & Guirao, 1999). Pins &
Bonnet (1996) have demonstrated that Piéron’s Law can hold
in choice RTs. Their experiments showed that the exponents
of the Piéson’s Law function that fit the stimulus-intensity to

2238

RT data are consistently similar within a particular modality whatever the task complexity. From this they infer that,
firstly, luminance processing continues to some critical level
which remains constant and that, secondly, the duration of
post-luminance processing must have also have been constant
and, third and finally, that the two components of processing
combine additively.
Stafford & Gurney (2004) showed that Piéron’s Law arises
naturally from a number of models of response selection.
Thus if stimulus intensity, I, is proportional to the evidence
in favour of selection, D, and RT is characterised by a riseto-threshold process then
RT ≈ R0 + kD−β

(2)

where k and β are constants which depend on the critical threshold and the particular properties of the stimulus.
D is equivalent to the momentary weight of evidence; this
is the drift rate in the diffusion model and equivalent to the
input in a simple neuron model. They go on to show that
Piéron’s Law-like functionality will result from any choice
process that relies on the linear rise of a signal to threshold.
To understand this consider Figure 1. This geometry, which is
obeyed by the diffusion model, the LATER model and simple
single-neuron decision models, produces a rise-to-threshold
time which is determined by the height of the threshold and
the rate of signal rise.
So these results show both empirically (Pins & Bonnet, 1996) and theoretically (Stafford & Gurney, 2004) that
we would expect that perceptual detection can be an important determinant of choice response times, and will follow a
Piéron’s Law-like regularity. However, because Stafford &
Gurney (2004) demonstrate that a Piéron’s Law-like relation
is a necessary consequence of any rise-to-threshold selection
process it is not clear whether perceptual detection and subsequent decision are integrated within a single stage, as Ratcliff (2001) implies, or whether perceptual detection is a separate stage which is purely additive to subsequent decision
processing as implied by Pins & Bonnet (1996) and explicitly claimed by Carpenter (2004). This is the context for the
present work, which involves investigating how choice RTs
are affected when both perceptual and cognitive elements of
a task are manipulated simultaneously.

Analysis of selection at a single stage
The current experiment involves manipulating the cognitive
and perceptual elements in a standard Stroop task. The Stroop
condition — either control, conflict or congruent — determines the putative cognitive element of the task. This is the
factor which influences whether the response decision based
on the colour of the stimulus is slowed (‘interference’) or
speeded (‘facilitation’). The perceptual element is manipulated by changing the percentage colour saturation of the
stimulus while keeping the absolute level of light constant.
The relationship between simple RT and colour-saturation
has not, to our knowledge, been directly tested before. It is

strongly predicted that this relation will follow Piéron’s Law
in the Stroop control condition, where no word is presented.
The question of interest is whether colour saturation and
Stroop condition will interact. If the perceptual and cognitive elements of the task are represented independently in
separate detection and decision stages then RTs in the three
Stroop conditions should be separated by a constant amount
across different saturation levels — in other words Piéron’s
Law should hold for each condition, and the functions that fit
the data in each condition should have similar exponents. In
the terms of the Additive Factors Method (Sternberg, 1998)
the two factors would be additive. If, on the other hand, the
representation of the perceptual and cognitive elements of the
task are combined within a single metric at a single common
stage of decision making — as in the diffusion model — then
the difference between the Stroop conditions will vary according to saturation level. In this case, although RTs might
follow Piéron’s Law within conditions, the functions would
have different exponents between conditions. There would
be an interaction of factors.
Within the terms of the diffusion model, we can assume
that the drift rate will be larger if colour saturation is higher.
If the congruency condition affects the total drift rate by a
constant amount then we can predict that, if the perceptual
and cognitive evidence is combined into a single common
metric, the difference between RTs in the control and conflict conditions will differ at different saturation levels; and,
for similar reasons, between these conditions and the congruent condition. To see why this is, simply note that the core
relationship between RT and drift is given by equation 2. Because RT is a non-linear function of D, decreases in D will
have larger effects if D is smaller. If drift is increased due to
higher colour saturation, the RT difference between the control and conflict conditions will decrease, despite the constant
change in evidence contributed by the cognitive aspect of the
stimulus. Therefore the size of the interference effect — the
difference in RT between the control and conflict conditions
— will be larger if total drift is smaller, e.g., when colour
saturation is less. Geometrically, this is shown in Figure 2.
In other words, this analysis predicts that if the colour saturation and word condition of the stimulus contribute directly
and independently to the strength of evidence for a decision,
and if these evidence values, although independent, are combined into a common metric, then the two factors will have
an interactive effect on RTs.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants: 20 University of Sheffield undergraduate
students (15 female, average age = 20.05, s.d. = 3.85)
participated in exchange for partial fulfillment of a course
requirement.
The Task: As per the conventional single-trial Stroop task,
participants were instructed to name the ink colour, not the

2239

stimulus onset
selection1

selection2

threshold

d1

accumulated
evidence

R0

d2

time
RT1
RT2

Figure 1: Geometry of selection by linear rise to threshold. Drift rates d1 and d2 produce selection times RT1 and RT2 respectively.
stimulus onset
)RT2

)RT1

threshold

accumulated
evidence

R0
)d1
)d2

time

Figure 2: Although the increases in drift rate ∆d1 and ∆d2 are of the same magnitude, (∆d1 = ∆d2 ), they result in different
increases in reaction time, so that ∆RT1 < ∆RT2 .
word, of a coloured word stimulus.
Materials: The stimulus were created using Corel Graphics
Suite (version 11.0), in 24pt AventGarde Bk BT typeface.
There were three colours of stimuli — red, yellow and blue,
and three conditions; either the word was congruent with the
colour, conflicted with the colour or was neutral with respect
to the colour (this condition used the letters ‘XXXX’ instead
of colour word). Each colour of stimuli, in each condition,
was presented at five different levels of colour saturation;
55%, 45%, 32%, 22% and 15%. Hue was kept constant
within each colour-set, and brightness was constant across
all stimuli.
Design: There were two factors, Stroop condition (control,
conflict and congruent) and stimuli intensity (at five levels of
saturation). After 9 practice trials with the lowest saturation
stimuli, the participants completed 4 blocks of trials in which
they saw all 60 possible stimuli in a random order. The total
of 240 trials was divided into two halves by a rest break.
Stimuli and Responses: All testing was conducted under constant levels of illumination. Stimuli were presented on a black
background on a PC running Windows 98 using E-Prime (version 1.1) and a ADI GD910T monitor. Subjects were positioned 45cm from the monitor, upon which stimuli subtended

at a visual angle of up to 19◦ . Trials began with the presentation of a fixation point, which was replaced by the appearance
of the stimulus after 1000ms. The stimuli remained for up to
3000ms or until a response was registered, whichever was
shorter. The interval between stimulus onset and the onset
of the participant’s vocal response was recorded by a microphone triggering the voice key of a PST Serial Response Box
(SRBox).

Results
Incorrect responses, those faster than 300ms (deemed to be
due to an irrelevant sound triggering the voice key) and those
slower than 1500ms were removed from the analysis. These
invalid trials were only 6% of the total. The mean RTs for
the colour-naming experiment are shown in Figure 3. A two
factor within-subjects ANOVA was performed. There was
a clear effect of condition (F(2,18)= 106.97 p < 0.0001).
As expected the conflict condition was slower than the control condition and the congruent condition was fastest of all.
The effect of stimulus intensity was also highly significant
(F(4,16)= 19.16 p < 0.0001); higher colour saturations were
associated with faster RTs in all three Stroop conditions.
There was, however, no interaction of colour saturation and
Stoop condition (F(8,12)= 0.433, n.s.) — as can be seen from
the graph (Figure 3) the difference between the conditions remains constant at all levels of stimulus intensity.

2240

Figure 3: Mean reaction times for different stimulus colour
saturations in all three Stroop conditions. Standard error bars
shown (n = 20).

Figure 4: Separated Stroop Task. Mean reaction times for
different stimulus colour saturations in all three Stroop conditions. Standard error bars shown (n = 28).

Table 1: Fit data for Piéron’s Law against the coloursaturation — reaction time functions in all three Stroop conditions, experiment 1.

Law in a Stroop task, and in so much is the first demonstration in a response conflict situation where the choice is based
on a single stimulus.
The lack of interaction between Stroop condition and
colour-saturation appears to suggest that perceptual salience
and cognitive salience are not combined into a single ‘response salience’ value. Additionally we can note that these
data suggest that perceptual detection is a significant factor
compared to decision, even in a cognitive task such as the
Stroop task.

Stroop condition
Control
Conflict
Congruent
∗

Correlation Coefficient
0.992 ∗
0.994 ∗
0.999 ∗
significant p < 0.0001

R0
621
697
611

β
1.83
2.37
2.34

Experiment 2: Separated Stroop
Fitting data to Piéron’s Law Following the procedure described in Stafford & Gurney (2004) we can fit Piéron’s Law
curves to the colour-saturation — RT curves in all three
Stroop conditions. Table 1 shows the Pearson’s r correlation coefficients between the empirical data and Piéron’s Law
curves of best fit, as well as the asymptotes and exponents.
Inspection of the exponents of the functions fitted to the
data averaged across individuals shows them to be very similar. It is also possible to fit Piéron’s Law functions to individual’s data in each of the three conditions. An ANOVA
on the β values of these fitted functions shows that there is
no significant difference between the conditions (F(2, 38) =
2.151, p = 0.130).

Discussion of experiment
The colour-naming experiment demonstrates that a coloursaturation to RT Piéron’s Law holds in all three basic Stroop
conditions. As far as we are aware this is the first demonstration that Piéron’s Law holds for colour-saturation. It is also
a confirmation of the finding of Pins & Bonnet (1996) that
Piéron’s Law holds for choice RTs well as simple RTs, but
using a different task. It is the first demonstration of Piéron’s

It is possible that the additivity of experiment 1 is due to the
integration of the word and colour stimuli; note that in the
conventional Stroop the word is formed from the colour patch
that varies in saturation. A version of the Stroop task, the
‘separated Stroop’, exists whereby the word and colour stimuli are not integrated, but are presented adjacent to each other.
A diminshed but reliable Stroop effect persists in these conditions (MacLeod, 1998). We conducted a second experiment,
identical in method to experiment 1 bar that the word and the
colour were presented separately immediately above and below fixation (randomly alternating). The results are shown in
Figure 4.
These data are well fitted by Piéron’s Law functions, as
shown in Table 2. An ANOVA on the exponents of the
Piéron’s Law functions fitted to the individual data shows that
there is no significant difference between the exponents for
each condition (F(2, 54) = 1.628, p = 0.206).

Discussion of experiment 2
As with experiment 1, the perceptual factor (colour saturation) and cognitive factor (Stroop condition) did not interact,
instead combining additively. This suggests that the results of

2241

experiment 1 were not due to the nature of stimulus presentation but are instead fundamental to the processing demanded
by the Stroop task.

Extending existing models of the Stroop task
Although a pattern of additive factors in the experimental data
can be trivially fitted with a simplistic two-stage model it is
also appropriate to ask if existing, continuous processing —
i.e. ‘single stage’ — models of the Stroop task can fit the
data. We show that they can. Our starting point is the Cohen, Dunbar & McClelland (1990) model of the Stroop task.
This model uses the diffusion model (Ratcliff, 1978) as a response mechanism to arbitrate between competing responses.
The ‘front-end’ of the model is built out of the simple artificial neurons of the PDP tradition (Rumelhart, McClelland, &
PDP Research Group, 1986). This early part of the model performs stimulus-response translation, reconciling the word and
colour information of the stimulus, the attentional demands of
the task instruction (“Respond based on the word, ignore the
ink colour”) and providing a locus for learning. The front-end
weights these factors in converting the stimulus inputs into
the common metric of evidence in favour of the responses.
For a detailed discussion of this model of the Stroop task and
the response mechanism see Stafford & Gurney (2007).
This model is a continuous processing model. Inputs to the
response mechanism are continuously updated as the frontend adjusts to the presentation of inputs. In this respect, then,
it is considered a ‘single stage’ model; although it may have
many architectural stages, they are a functional unit.
To address the current experiments the Cohen model (Cohen et al., 1990) is modified in this simple way only — in the
original model the word and colour inputs were represented
by 0 or 1 values. To simulate the present experiment intermediate intensity values between 0 and 1 were used for both
colour and word inputs. This reflects the corresponding variation in the strength of the inputs with varying colour saturation. Because both the word and colour inputs to the model
begin at the same time and have identical values we denote
this the ‘single stage model with locked inputs’.
Figure 5 shows the match to the experimental data.
Piéron’s Law holds for all Stroop conditions and the interference and facilitation effects are constant across saturation
conditions (see Table 3).

Table 2: Fit data for Piéron’s Law against the coloursaturation — reaction time functions in all three Stroop conditions, experiment 2.
Stroop condition
Control
Conflict
Congruent
∗

Correlation Coefficient
1.000 ∗
0.999 ∗
0.999 ∗
significant p < 0.0001

R0
595
646
593

Figure 5: Single stage model with locked inputs: simulated
reaction times for the standard Stroop task across a range of
colour intensities

Discussion of Modelling
The present results provide a specific instance of the claim
that continuous processing models can mimic discrete processing models (McClelland, 1979). This weakens our confidence that inference about the underlying architecture can
be made from data patterns consistent with factor additivity.
These result would appear to strongly contradict the assumption that word information remains unaffected by the colour
saturation.

Discussion
Primarily these data show that Pièron’s Law holds for colour
saturation and in conditions of response conflict. This demonstrates an extension of the relevance of this function beyond
the mere perceptual and into the ‘cognitive realm’. At first
glance, the data also seems to support the view that simple
decision making can, at least in some conditions, consist of
two stages, detection and decision, which combine additively.
Furthermore an analysis of a single stage response mechanism which linearly combines stimulus evidence into a common metric suggests that it cannot account for the pattern
of data in tasks like this. However the extension of existing

Table 3: Fit of Piéron’s Law against simulation data for one
stage model with locked inputs.

β
2.07
2.02
2.61

Stroop condition Correlation Coefficient
Control
1.00 ∗
Conflict
1.00 ∗
Congruent
1.00 ∗
∗
significant p < 0.0001

2242

β
1.01
1.40
0.90

models of Stroop processing shows that continuous, ‘singlestage’, models can match the empirical results. Although the
Cohen model of Stroop processing incorporates a diffusion
model response mechanism, it does this in combination with a
PDP-based stimulus processing ‘front-end’ which transforms
the inputs before they enter the response mechanism. Taken
together this model of Stroop processing matches the pattern
of empirical data, just as a two-stage model with discrete processing of detection and decision stages would. This is an illustration of the phenomenon of model-mimicry (Townsend
& Wenger, 2004) and more generally of the dangers of judging models solely by the goodness of fit to data (Roberts
& Pashler, 2000). The reason this model defies the analysis
presented in the introduction is because the PDP front-end
performs a non-linear transformation on the stimulus information before it is combined as ‘evidence’ in the response
mechanism.
The data does not allow us to choose between continuous or discrete models as more favourable, but it does seem
to suggest strongly that the representation of the word and
colour elements of the stimuli, in this paradigm, are locked.
We hypothesise that in Stroop conditions subjects’ focus of
attention is such that the representations of the colour and
word are bound together and hence colour-saturation has a de
facto influence on word-recognition — as is reflected in the
locking on the stimuli inputs in the simulations which successfully replicate the empirical data.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sarah Fox for help running the experiments, David
Lawrence & David Yates for reading drafts of this article and
Marius Usher and Eddy Davelaar for useful discussion of the
material.

References
Bogacz, R., Brown, E., Moehlis, J., Holmes, P., & Cohen, J. D. (2006). The physics of optimal decision
making: a formal analysis of models of performance in
two-alternative forced-choice tasks. Psychological Review,
113(4), 700-765.
Bonnet, C., Zamora, M. C., Buratti, F., & Guirao, M. (1999).
Group and individual gustatory reaction times and Piéron’s
law. Physiology & Behavior, 66(4), 549-558.
Carpenter, R. H. S. (2004). Contrast, probability, and saccadic latency: Evidence for independence of detection and
decision. Current Biology, 14(17), 1576-1580.
Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). On
the control of automatic processes - a parallel distributedprocessing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological Review, 97(3), 332-361.
Gold, J., & Shadlen, M. (2002). Banburismus and the brain:
Decoding the relationship between sensory stimuli, decisions, and reward. Neuron, 36(2), 299-308.
Luce, R. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organisation. New York: Clarendon Press.

MacLeod, C. (1998). Training on integrated versus separated
stroop tasks: The progression of interference and facilitation. Memory & Cognition, 26(2), 201-211.
MacLeod, C., & MacDonald, P. (2000). Interdimensional interference in the stroop effect: uncovering the cognitive and
neural anatomy of attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
4(10), 383–391.
McClelland, J. (1979). On the time-relations of mental processes: An examination of systems of processes in cascade.
Psychological Review, 86, 287-330.
Piéron, H. (1952). The sensations: Their functions, processes
and mechanisms. London: Frederick Muller Ltd.
Pins, D., & Bonnet, C. (1996). On the relation between stimulus intensity and processing time: Piéron’s law and choice
reaction time. Perception & Psychophysics, 58(3), 390400.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.
Ratcliff, R. (2001). Putting noise into neurophysiological
models of simple decision making. Nature Neuroscience,
4(4), 336-336.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (2008). The diffusion decision model: Theory and data for two-choice decision tasks.
Neural Computation, 20(4), 873-922.
Ratcliff, R., & Rouder, J. (1998). Modeling response times
for two-choice decisions. Psychological Science, 9(5),
347–356.
Roberts, S., & Pashler, H. (2000). How persuasive is a good
fit? A comment on theory testing. Psychological Review,
107(2), 358-367.
Rumelhart, D., McClelland, J., & PDP Research Group the.
(1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in
the microstructure of cognition. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Stafford, T., & Gurney, K. (2004). The role of response mechanisms in determining reaction time performance: Piéron’s
law revisited. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(6), 975987.
Stafford, T., & Gurney, K. (2007). Biologically constrained
action selection improves cognitive control in a model of
the Stroop task. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society London, Series B, 362, 1671-1684.
Sternberg, S. (1998). Discovering mental processing stages:
The method of additive factors. In D. Scarborough &
S. Sternberg (Eds.), An invitation to cognitive science:
Methods, models, and conceptual issues (2nd edition) (p.
702-863). Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Stroop, J. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Townsend, J. T., & Wenger, M. J. (2004). The serial-parallel
dilemma: A case study in a linkage of theory and method.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(3), 391-418.

2243

