UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pragmatic Aligment: The Coordination of Ironic Statements in Pseudo-Interaction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0j71w31f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Caucci, Gina
Dale, Rick
Roche, Jennifer

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pragmatic Alignment: The Coordination of Ironic Statements in Pseudo-Interaction
Jennifer Roche (jroche@memphis.edu)

Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)

Gina Caucci (gcaucci@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Building
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
Garrod & Pickering (2004) maintain that conversation is easy
because automatic alignment at various levels occurs during
conversation. Other related theories of alignment have also
been proposed for emotional/mood coordination (Hatfield,
Cacioppo, & Rapson, 1994). Many studies have evaluated
alignment effects at various linguistic levels, but have not yet
integrated pragmatic levels in these demonstrations. Two
experiments test the impact of primed irony on participant
contributions to interaction. Overall, individuals coordinate
during interaction at the level of pragmatics (Experiment 1),
and this is not explained merely by mood inducement through
content of irony (Experiment 2). We discuss findings in terms
of psycholinguistic alignment and emotional contagion.
Keywords: pragmatics; coordination; dialogue; alignment;
synchrony; irony

Introduction
Our understanding of language has often been based on
studies of single language processors (e.g., single
word/sentence production and comprehension; Bock, 1986;
Potter & Lombardi, 1990). While this is a powerful
simplifying assumption, natural language is learned and
most often occurs in the context of social interactions
(Clark, 1992). Currently, there has been a growing research
agenda to identify joint action between interlocutors during
dialogue (e.g., as compared to “monologue”). Though a
longstanding concern (e.g., Clark, 1975), this recent growth
has lead several researchers to account for the great ease
with which humans process dialogue.
For example, Garrod and Pickering (2004) have
proposed a mechanistic model of interactive alignment to
explain how effortless conversation naturally occurs. Their
model of dialogue explains how individuals maintain,
produce, and comprehend dynamic exchanges of
information. Theoretically, there is an emergence of shared
or “aligned” representations between interlocutors when
information is coordinated at various levels of linguistic
analysis. An interlocutor has the ability to process
information at many levels in order to promote
coordination with his/her conversation partner. A
fundamental assumption of this model is that the speaker
will routinely prime his/her listener at all of the levels of
analysis (e.g., phonological, syntactic, and semantic),
which creates coordination at each level. This model
proposes that priming is the root of all alignment. Once

synchronization occurs, the aligned representations may
help speakers form predictions about how to respond
during future spoken utterances. Interactive alignment
theory states that these predictions provide ways to more
efficiently produce and comprehend speech without
overloading the cognitive system. Based on this theory,
growing alignment may help individuals to coordinate
their dialogue through these shared linguistic
representations.
As it currently exists, the literature on dialogue assesses
various linguistic strategies used during conversation, but it
often fails to look at the higher levels of processing.
Specifically, there is relatively less research evaluating the
alignment of pragmatics (e.g., communication and
comprehension beyond what is explicitly stated) during
conversation. The linguistic data on its own does not always
represent the intention of the individual. For example,
Bavelas, Black, Lemery, & Mullett (pg. 6, 1986) suggest,
“We don’t always say what we mean, and often don’t mean
what we say.” Since priming is a fundamental aspect of the
theory of interactive alignment (Garrod & Pickering, 2004),
priming pragmatics should lead to alignment of that level
during dialogue. The analysis of pragmatic alignment may
contribute to further our understanding of intent, a crucial
component of daily language (Schober, 1993).
Irony is a common form of pragmatics that exists in
dialogue. When interlocutors use irony, they may provide a
number of cues related to pragmatic intent. Since the
alignment of a dialogue’s pragmatics has been scarcely
examined, the purpose of this study is to prime interlocutors
with ironic statements. Based on interactive alignment
theory, individuals should be affected by ironic primes at
the pragmatic level and thus increase the probability of
responding ironically.

Experiment 1
The purpose of the first experiment is to determine the
effect of priming of irony on coordination during a pseudoconversation.

Method
Subjects. Participants included 27 University of Memphis
undergraduate students (mean age = 19.48 years; 23
females). Twenty-six were native speakers of American
English, but one participant was a native speaker of African
Swahili. All participants reported normal to corrected vision

2335

and no hearing/speech impairments. The native speaker of
African Swahili was retained for analysis because his/her
responses reflected similar data trends as the others.

prevent any acoustic cuing of the experiment’s deception.
Of the 225 pre-recorded scripted statements, 75 comments
were randomly selected and retained for the experimental
sessions. The selected utterances were then distributed
within three blocks consisting of 25 utterances, which
differed by amount of irony (e.g., 2/3, 1/3, and 0/3). The
distributions of irony represented three different conditions,
which were expressed in terms of the higher proportion, 2/3
being in the beginning, middle, or end blocks. The three
pseudo-conversation conditions were counterbalanced
between participants.

Materials. The experiment took place in a private
laboratory room. Participants were seated at a comfortable
distance from a 20-inch iMac Computer screen. A Razor
Carcharias noise-reducing headset (headphones with
microphone) was used to present and record acoustic data.
MATLAB PsychToolbox-3 programs (Brainard, 1997)
controlled stimulus presentation and recorded participant
responses for the conversation and rating tasks.

Procedure. To begin, the participant was seated next to a
Caucasian female confederate while completing the
informed consent, but separated during the experimental
sessions. The first task consisted of a pseudo-conversation
about celebrity pictures. The participant and pseudoconfederate took turns describing each of the 15 celebrity
images (i.e., 10 statements per picture; 5 participant and 5
pseudo-confederate). Participants were informed to speak
freely during his/her turn and the pseudo-confederate would
initiate the conversation because she had been viewing the
first picture longer. After each pseudo-confederate response,
the participant received a visual and auditory prompt to
indicate his/her turn. Each pseudo-confederate statement
had a 2s delay before its presentation to imply she was
thinking about the picture and how to respond. Once the
first task was completed, the participant was asked a number
of questions (see Measures section below).
During the second task, participants were asked to code
their own comments as ironic (i.e., anything said that was in
opposition to the literal meaning), or not ironic (i.e.,
anything said that was meant literally) to increase
ecologically validity of rating their utterances. Irony
consisted of, but was not limited to sarcasm, rhetorical
questions, and/or a simile, while not irony examples
included descriptions, non-sarcastic insults and/or
agreement statements (Roberts & Kreuz, 1994). Crucially,
at the time of coding, the participant utterances with the
paired celebrity image were randomly presented to prevent
order effects.

Stimuli. The experimental stimuli consisted of fifteen
celebrity pictures collected from the 2005-2007 worst
dressed celebrity lists, from TMZ.com. All celebrity
pictures were presented on a black background in the middle
of the 20-inch computer screen. Five pre-recorded pseudoconfederate statements were scripted for each of the worst
dressed celebrity pictures in 3 different connotations,
resulting in a total of 225 pseudo-confederate productions
(i.e., neutral and two types of irony: exaggerated or
understated; Hancock, 2004; see Figure 1 and Table 1 for a
sample of the experimental pictures and statements).

Figure 1. Adjusted 590 x 915 pixel worst dressed celebrity
stimulus pictures.
Table 1. Sample of pseudo-confederate statements.
Statement
Irony

Her head looks like an olive on a
toothpick.

Not Irony

She is wearing a black jacket.

Connotation

The pseudo-confederate, a Caucasian female speaker, was
instructed to produce these expressions based on her own
understanding of each connotation. She produced 75 ironic
statements in an exaggerated and understated tone of voice
(resulting in 150 total possible ironic statements) and 75
neutral statements from a script designed for each of the
celebrity pictures (i.e., 3 types x 5 statements x 15 pictures =
225 recorded utterances). Each pseudo-confederate
utterance was equated for RMS amplitude in order to

Measures. At the end of the first task, participants were
asked if s/he: 1) perceived irony? (88.9% perceived), 2)
produced irony? (92.5% produced), and 3) produced irony
when their partner did? (74% aligned). Upon completion of
task 1 and 2, the confederate and participant were reseated
together for debriefing and asked: “Did you feel like you
were speaking with this person?” (59.3% deceived).
The participant codes were subsequently evaluated
revealing that the rating task was rather difficult for some
participants. Therefore, an expert coder re-coded each
participant response based on the definitions above (see
Table 2 for kappa scores). The codes that differed between
participant/expert rater were retained and randomly
presented to a blind rater. The kappa scores were relatively
low, but within a reasonable range of the maximum possible

2336

kappa (Bakeman & Deckner, 2007). Thus, the raters were
retrained on 10% of the existing disagreed upon statements.
The expert and blind coder recoded the remaining
statements separately. The raters together (for 100%
agreement) determined the last 2% of the responses that did
not induce agreement.

Figure 2. The probability of participant irony was highest
for the blocks with the highest concentration of pseudoconfederate irony (2/3 irony) for the middle and end
conditions.
Expert/blind coder. The Type (3) test of fixed effects
revealed a significant main effect for Condition [F(2,
10.814) = 4.894, p < .05] and Block [F(2, 30.987) = 12.296,
p < .001] with a Condition x Block interaction [F(4,
30.987)= 7.040, p < .001, see Figure 3]. Post hoc paired
comparisons of ironic statements between conditions
revealed a significantly higher probability of irony
judgments in the beginning condition relative to the end
condition (p < .05). Comparisons for block across all
conditions revealed a higher probability of ironic statements
in the middle blocks relative to the beginning (p < .01) and
end blocks (p < .05). The Condition x Block interaction
revealed that the beginning condition had a significantly
higher probability of irony judgments in the beginning and
middle blocks relative to the end block (p < .05). The
middle condition received a higher probability of ironic
statements in the middle block relative to the beginning (p <
.001). Finally, the end condition received a higher
probability of ironic statements in the end block than the
beginning and middle blocks (p < .005, p < .001,
respectively).

Table 2. Kappa, kappa max, and % kappa max between
participant (P) x expert (E) and expert x blind (B) coder.

Coder

κ

κmax

%κmax

PxE

0.6473

0.9477

68%

E x Btime1

0.3905

0.4622

84.5%

E x Btime2

0.7371

0.8817

83.5%

Results
The probability of ironic statements from the participant and
expert/blind coder ratings was evaluated via a 3 (Condition:
beginning, middle, or end) x 3 (Block: beginning, middle
and end) mixed repeated measures fixed effects model with
a CSH (compound symmetry heterogeneous) covariance
structure. Post hoc adjusted bonferroni paired comparisons
were used to evaluate any significant main effects and
interactions.
Participant Ratings. The Type (3) test of fixed effects
revealed a significant main effect for Block [F(2, 27.720) =
16.288, p < .001] and a Condition x Block interaction [F(4,
27.720) = 4.667, p < .005; see Figure 2]. The paired
comparisons for the main effect of Block revealed that the
highest probability of ironic statements occurred in the
middle block relative to the beginning (p < .001) and end
blocks (p < .05). There was a higher probability of irony
judgments in the end block compared to the beginning (p <
.005). The Condition x Block interaction revealed that the
middle condition had a significantly higher probability of
irony judgments in the middle block relative to the
beginning (p < .001) and end blocks (p < .05). Similarly, the
end condition received a higher probability of ironic
statements in the end block than the beginning block (p <
.001).

Figure 3. The probability of participant irony was highest
for the blocks with the highest concentration of pseudoconfederate irony (2/3 irony) for all conditions.
Discussion. As seen in Figures 2 and 3, coders had a higher
proportion of irony judgments than participants. This may
have been due to difficulty some participants had in
categorizing their own statements. This problem was
addressed in Experiment 2, by providing more explicit
descriptions of the categories. Regardless of the difference
between coders, the overall trends in the data provided the
same interpretation.
Experiment 1 provides evidence of pragmatic alignment
in both the participant and coder ratings. The main effect of
Condition (coder) suggests that alignment may have been
stronger at the beginning of the conversation because the
participant was primed early on in the conversation, which
allowed them to employ the effect of the prime longer than

2337

they could have in the end condition. The main effects for
Block simply represent the overall higher percentage of
ironic responses participants received during the middle of
each conversation (i.e., the means were not affected by
lower probabilities as seen in the tails of the beginning and
end conversation conditions). The effect of alignment is
most evident in the Condition x Block interaction, where an
increased probability of irony judgments occurred given a
higher concentration of ironic primes from the pseudoconfederate.

clip while the confederate was being instructed about the
task at hand in a different room.
During the second task, participants were again asked to
code their own comments as ironic. Since this task was
rather difficult for some participants in Experiment 1,
examples of each sub-category were provided for both irony
and not irony. This was done to increase the understanding
of what each category truly meant (see Table 3 for the
descriptions).
Table 3. Sub-category examples of irony [sarcasm, simile,
rhetorical question (R?)] and not irony (description, nonsarcastic insult (Insult (NS), agreement) statements.

Experiment 2
A similar theory of alignment has been proposed in the
emotion literature. Emotional contagion and mood
contagion involve shared emotion-related representations or
states. Emotional cues could promote the convergence of
other’s emotions that may similarly simplify dialogue
(Hsee, Hatfield, Carlson, & Chemtob, 1990; Hattfield,
Caciappo, & Rapson, 1993; Neumann & Strack, 2000; Bono
& Ilies, 2006). An individual’s mood may change
depending on the emotional cues related to the valence their
conversation partner’s actions and language. Research in
this domain has argued that emotional and mood contagion
occurs if the individual automatically mimics and
synchronizes with another person’s behavioral emotionrelated cues, thus converging with each other emotionally.
This theory is similar to Garrod and Pickering’s (2004)
position, in that we not only use linguistic information to
make conversation easier, but may also allow speakers to
decode pragmatic intent from the emotional cues
interlocutors may produce. Indeed, the results from
Experiment 1 may have simply been due to the alignment of
an emotion-related cue: The valence (almost always
humorous) of the ironic statements themselves. The purpose
of Experiment 2 is to examine the influence of any such
mood contagion on pragmatic alignment.

Type

Irony

Not Irony

Subjects. Participants included 16 University of Memphis
undergraduate students (mean age = 20.25 years; 11
females). All participants reported having normal to
corrected vision, and no reports of hearing or speech
impairments.

“Nice Dress,” if the dress was ugly.

Simile

She looks like a peacock.

R?

What was she thinking?

Description

She is wearing a dress.

Insult (NS)

She is ugly.

Agreement

Yeah, I agree.

Table 4. Obtained values of kappa, kappa max and % kappa
max between participant (P) x expert (E) and expert x blind
(B) coders.

Materials & Stimuli. Experiment 2 was identical to
Experiment 1, with the exception of a 2.37min comedy clip 1
that was presented before the experimental session to induce
a humorous mood. The clip was rated 6.8 on a 10-point
Likert scale (1=not funny, 10 = extremely funny).
Procedure. Before the experimental conversation task
began, the participant was asked to view a humorous video
The comedy clip used in Experiment 2 was a scene
from a popular British comedy show (“Lauren in French Class”
from The Catherine Tate Show) found on youtube.com.
(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zV1zK8zRCPo).

Sarcasm

Measures. At the end of the first task, participants were
asked if s/he: 1) perceived irony? (100% perceived), 2)
produced irony? (93.75% produced), and 3) produced irony
when their partner did? (81.25% aligned). Upon completion
of both tasks, the confederate and participant were seated
together for debriefing and asked: “Did you feel like you
were speaking with this person?” (56.2% deceived).
Identical to Experiment 1, expert and blind coders recoded each participant response based on the definitions
above (see Table 4 for kappa, kappa max, and % kappa
max).

Method

1

Statement

Coder

κ

κmax

%κmax

PxE

0.7146

0.9229

77.4%

E x Btime1

0.2196

0.3237

68%

E x Btime2

0.6787

0.8929

76%

Results
The 2 (Condition; beginning or end) x 3 (Block; beginning,
middle, and end) analysis for Experiment 2 was identical to
Experiment 1.

2338

Participant Ratings. The Type (3) test of fixed effects
revealed a significant main effect for Block [F(2, 24.299) =
4.796, p < .02] and a Condition x Block interaction [F(4,
24.299)= 15.987, p < .001, see Figure 4]. Post hoc paired
comparisons of Block revealed a higher probability of ironic
statements in middle block than the beginning (p < .05).
The Condition x Block interaction revealed that the
beginning condition had a significantly higher probability of
irony judgments for beginning and middle blocks relative to
end block (both, p < .05). Similarly, the end condition
received a higher probability of ironic statements for middle
and end blocks than beginning block (p < .005; p < .001).

Discussion. The moderate humor ratings for the video clip,
may have contributed to the non-significant effect of mood
contagion. Experiment 2 directly replicated Experiment 1,
with the exception of finding a main effect of Condition.
This suggests that the initiation of irony in the beginning
condition of Experiment 2 did not have as strong of an
effect as it did in Experiment 1. The direct replication of
Experiment 1 does suggest that regardless of the attempts to
induce mood, there was clear evidence of ironic alignment
at the pragmatic level. Participant and coder ratings were
relatively similar (see Figures 4 and 5), suggesting a more
detailed description of the subcategories was helpful.
Overall, participants coordinated their pragmatics with the
pseudo-confederate, and not simply in response to the video.

General Discussion

Figure 4. The probability of participant irony was highest
for blocks with the highest concentration of pseudoconfederate irony (2/3) for beginning and end conditions.
Expert/blind coder. The Type (3) test of fixed effects
revealed a significant main effect for Block [F(2, 24.956) =
8.353, p < .005] and a Condition x Block interaction [F(4,
24.956)= 10.366, p < .001, see Figure 5]. Post hoc paired
comparisons of Block revealed a higher probability of ironic
statements in middle block than the beginning (p < .001)
and end blocks (p = .05). The Condition x Block interaction
revealed that the beginning condition had a significantly
higher probability of irony judgments for the middle blocks
relative to end block (p < .005). Similarly, the end condition
received a higher probability of ironic statements for middle
and end blocks than beginning block (p < .005; p < .001).

Figure 5. The probability of participant irony was highest
for the blocks with the highest concentration of pseudoconfederate irony (2/3 irony) for the beginning and end
conditions.

Experiments 1 and 2 revealed that interlocutors align at the
pragmatic level. These findings are consistent with previous
research evaluating interactive alignment at other linguistic
levels (Garrod & Pickering, 2004). However, this effect is
somewhat inconsistent with current pragmatics literature.
For example, Dress, Kreuz, Link and Caucci, (2008) obtain
results that many individuals refrain from using sarcasm in
novel social situations because it has a strong negative
connotation. Yet, if a speaker successfully implements a
pragmatic goal during conversation, the listener is obligated
to decode the speaker’s intent resulting in, for example,
accepted use of irony (Anolli, 2001; Sperber & Wilson,
2004). Via alignment, the probability of responding in a
similar way should grow. The pragmatic goal implemented
in these experiments allowed the participant to adopt the
strategy of the pseudo-confederate. When participants were
highly primed for these specific pragmatic goals, s/he was
provided with a now acceptable strategy of responding.
If levels of alignment conflict, then listeners may seek to
confirm a speaker’s intent – indeed, pragmatic goals can and
do fail in daily conversation. Nevertheless, the alignment
model attempts to explain recovery from possible failures.
During conversation, individuals may self-monitor in order
to repair mistakes. If a listener does not comprehend intent,
s/he will attempt to seek further information to better align
(e.g., via clarification question; Pickering & Garrod, 2004).
For example, if a statement is not perceived as ironic, and
thus appears anomalous, a repair strategy can be enlisted to
repair the inconsistency (e.g., seeking a possible pragmatic
explanation for a literally false or unusual statement).
Such breakdowns relate directly to a limitation of the
current study. For example, pragmatic alignment may have
been hindered due to the artificial nature of the task. The
conversation scenario was perceived as non-natural by some
of the participants, but as expected, all participants
interacted with the pseudo-confederate by using agreement
statements or asking questions (e.g., responding “are you
serious? or “yeah, I agree”; cf. Holtgraves, Ross, Waywadt,
& Han, 2007). Also, upon further analysis, there were no
significant differences in the probability of producing irony
between the individuals who were deceived and not. It

2339

should be considered that by asking questions and using
agreement statements may very well be related to repair
strategies.
Many participants suggested the artificiality of the
conversation was caused by the pseudo-confederate’s
refusal to acknowledge his/her own comments. This may
have also prevented the participant from implementing
his/her own pragmatic goals, thus forcing the listener to
adopt the pragmatic rule of the pseudo-confederate. This
irregular way of interacting may have lead to moderate
effects of alignment because the participant was prevented
from dynamically implementing other conversation
strategies. In a natural conversation setting, individuals can
enlist other forms of pragmatics (e.g., humor, jokes).
Another limitation of this study was the way in which
mood contagion was evaluated. There was no effect of
contagion when mood was induced. However, there may
have been some level of emotional alignment during the
course of the pseudo-conversation. If the participants
produced similar behavioral (e.g., acoustic) cues related to
the emotional intent of the pseudo-confederate, emotional
contagion may have in fact occurred. Mood could be
evaluated before and after the experimental session to assess
if overall mood changes during the course of the study.
Therefore, further evaluation of mood may reveal
interesting relations between emotional and pragmatic
contagion.
The evidence presented in this paper suggests that in
discourse, individuals may align pragmatically to promote
interaction. Cues to pragmatic intent are likely embedded
within the linguistic aspects of conversation (e.g., lexical
alignment), but may also include mood-related cues.
Researchers should consider the interaction among all these
variables (e.g., linguistic, pragmatic, and behavioral cues
together) occurring between interlocutors. For example,
perlocutionary statements that evoke emotional cues may
help explain pragmatics-processing mechanisms of dialogue
(e.g., humor, innuendo, or arguments). Further such work
would extend our understanding of coordination into the
ecology of everyday interaction.

Acknowledgements
We thank graduate researchers Kristy Snyder-Tapp and
Emily Mathis for all of their valuable input. We also thank
undergraduate researchers Maria Rossini, Alexis Dennis,
Michael Lauderdale, Kim Hooss for all their hard work and
dedication to making this project successful.

References
Anolli, L. (2001). Humor and irony in interaction: From
mode adoption to failure detection. In Anolli, L., Ciceri,
R., & Rivera, G. (Eds). Say not to say: New perspectives
on miscommunication. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Bakeman, R. & Deckner, D. (2007). Analysis of behavioral
streams. Handbook of Research Methods in
Developmental Psychology. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishers.

Bavelas, J., Black, A., Lemery, C., Mullett, J. (1986). “I
show how you feel”: Motor mimicry as a communicative
act. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(2),
322-329.
Bock, J. (1986). Meaning, sound, and syntax: Lexical
priming in sentence production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 12, 575586.
Bono, J. & Ilies, R. (2006). Charisma, positive emotions,
and mood contagion. The Leadership Quarterly, 17, 317334.
Brainard, D. (1997). The psychophysical toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Clark, H. H. (1975). Bridging. In R. C. Schank & B. L.
Nash-Webber (Eds.), Theoretical issues in natural
language processing. New York: Association for
Computing Machinery.
Clark, H. H. (1992). Arenas of language use. Chicago:
University of Chicago, Press.
Dress, M., Kreuz, R., Link, K. & Caucci, G. (2008).
Regional variation in the use of sarcasm. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, 27(1), 71-85.
Garrod, S. & Pickering, M. (2004). Why is conversation so
easy? Trends in Cognitive Science, 8(1), 8-11.
Hancock, J. (2004). Verbal irony use in face-to-face and
computer mediated conversations. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 23(4), 447-463.
Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J., & Rapson, R. (1994). Emotional
Contagion, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Holtgraves, T., Ross, S., Waywadt, C., & Han, T. (2007).
Perceiving artificial social agents. Computers in Human
Behavior, 23, 2163-2174.
Hsee, C., Hatfield, E., Carlson, J. & Chemtob, C. (1990).
The effect of power on susceptibility to emotion
contagion. Cognition and Emotion, 4(4), 327-340.
Neumann, R. & Strack, F. (2000). “Mood contagion”: The
automatic transfer of mood between persons. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79(2), 211-223.
Pickering, M. & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 27, 169-226.
Potter, M. & Lombardi, L. (1990). Regeneration in the
short-term recall of sentences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 633-654.
Roberts, R. & Kreuz, K. (1994). Why do people use
figurative language? Psychological Science, 5, 159-163.
Schober, M. (1993). Spatial perspective taking in
conversation. Cognition, 43, 1-24.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (2004). Relevance Theory. In
Ward, G. & Horn, L. (Eds). Handbook of Pragmatics.
Oxford:Blackwell, 607-632.

2340

