UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Predicting Moral Judgments of Corporate Responsibility with Formal Decision Heuristics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1rq3s5nd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Coenen, Anna
Marewski, Julian

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Predicting Moral Judgments of Corporate Responsibility with Formal Decision
Heuristics
Anna Coenen (coenen@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Julian N. Marewski (marewski@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Abstract
We address the questions (1) how moral decision-making can
be formally modeled using established decision models and
(2) which of these models are the most accurate in predicting
moral judgments. We conducted an experiment with a
comparison task in which people had to decide which of two
companies behaved more fairly in dealing with the
consequences of the current financial crisis. We modeled
these judgments of fairness (i) using a compensatory
weighted additive model (WADD), (ii) a unit weight linear
heuristic (UWL), and (iii) a noncompensatory decision rule
(LEX). All strategies could predict people's actual decisions
above chance level for a majority of the subjects. This lends
support to the modeling approach to moral decision-making.
Keywords: moral heuristics; simple heuristics; moral
psychology; take-the-best.

Introduction
In the late summer of the year 2008, financial markets all
over the world dropped to historic lows which drove many
Western societies into the most severe financial crisis since
the Great Depression. The media, as well as public and
political discussion remained looking for the scapegoat;
eyes turned on CEOs and bankers all over the world in
trying to find an explanation of the rapidly evolving
recession. Major companies were faced with the difficult
task of justifying sudden bankruptcy, massive
rationalization programs, and job cuts.
Preserving trust in public opinion, customers, and
stakeholders became a critical point in dealing with the
difficult circumstances of plunging stock markets and
decreasing consumption. The debate about corporate
responsibilities and social justice that evolved highlights the
moral significance that the crisis management of major
companies has for a greater part of the public.
Evaluating the integrity and responsibility of companies,
banks, government, or other public institution plays a great
part in our every day dealing with morality. The current
study seeks to model the moral evaluation processes that
underlie normative judgments such as those involved in
assessing corporate crisis management.
With respect to current theories of moral decisionmaking, our study has three aims: (1) To use formal models
for describing and predicting moral decisions, (2) to spell
out the concept of moral intuitions in terms of the fast and

frugal heuristics approach to judgment and decision-making
(e.g., Gigerenzer, Todd, and the ABC Research Group,
1999), and (3) to focus on realistic normative decision
problems.
First, recent work in moral psychology has stressed the
importance of intuition for moral decision-making (Greene
& Haidt, 2002; Haidt, 2001; Hauser, Cushman, Young, Jin,
& Mikhail, 2007). According to this work, people often
make moral judgments quickly and unconsciously, without
engaging in explicit deliberative reasoning. Only after a
judgment has already been reached do they construct
reasons for their already-made decisions. If moral decisions
have little to do with our post-hoc rationalizations of them,
then this leads to the question what the processes and
reasons are that underlie moral judgments. Formal models
of moral decision-making can help to explicate the notion of
moral intuition and draw attention to the reasoning
processes involved in moral judgment (Gigerenzer, 2008).
Moreover, by building formal models of people’s judgment
processes the precision and predictive power of
corresponding theories can be increased, which in turn can
foster cumulative theory building and, in doing so, aid
scientific progress (for an overview of some of the
advantages of formal modeling, see Marewski & Olsson,
2009). To our best knowledge, up to today there are not
many attempts to study moral judgments in terms of formal,
cognitive decision models. In this study, we therefore aim at
testing the ability of different models to predict moral
decisions.
Second, one way of spelling out the fast and intuitive
nature of moral judgments is to understand them as being
produced by simple rules of thumb, or heuristics
(Gigerenzer, 2007, 2008; Sunstein, 2005). The fast and
frugal heuristics research program has shown that such
heuristics can successfully predict people’s decisions when
they answer questions about matters of fact, for instance,
when inferring which of two cities is larger, or when
making estimates about some other objective criterion (e.g.,
Bergert & Nosofsky, 2007; Bröder & Gaissmaier, 2007; von
Helversen & Rieskamp, 2008; Mata, Schooler, & Rieskamp,
2007; Rieskamp & Hoffrage, 2008; Rieskamp & Otto, 2006;
for a recent overview see e.g., Marewski, Galesic,
Gigerenzer, 2009). Here, we study if and how some wellknown examples of these heuristics and related earlier

1524

models (see e.g., Dawes, 1979; Dawes & Corrigan, 1974;
Payne, Bettman & Johnson, 1993) can predict normative
decisions. The models include a lexicographic decision rule
(LEX), a unit weight linear heuristic (UWL), as well as a
more complex weighted additive model (WADD).
Third, in studying moral decision making, we focus on
real-world decision problems rather than constructed moral
dilemmas. Frequently, research in experimental moral
psychology makes use of artificial situations, such as trolley
problems, to study moral decision-making (Greene & Haidt,
2002; Greene, Sommerville, Nytrom, Darley, & Cohen,
2001; Mikhail, 2007). These dilemmas portray situations of
a kind that many people are most likely to be unfamiliar
with. For example, presumably very few people have ever
been confronted with a situation where they had to decide
whether to let four people die who are lying on a train track,
or whether to redirect an oncoming train to save them and,
in doing so, kill one other person. (This is a standard trolley
dilemma.) However, moral judgment needs to be
understood as an ability that is to a great extend shaped by
the natural (i.e., social) environment of a person; only if the
decision problems used for studying moral judgments are
familiar to the participants, people can rely on their every
day moral intuitions. In our study, we therefore chose
examples of problems that people also encounter in the real
world, such as the evaluation of corporate justice and
responsibility.
In what follows, we will first present the three models that
we tested. In an experiment, we will then evaluate each
model’s performance in predicting participants’ moral
judgments about the fairness of companies’ behavior.

order, starting with the cue that is considered most
important for judging a company’s behavior and ending
with the least important one. In our case, this cue order was
obtained by asking all participants to rank all cues in the
order of their importance for assessing a company’s
fairness.
We predicted the judgments that participants made using
three decision models. These include two compensatory
models that take all cues into consideration and allow for
making trade-offs between different cues by adding all of
them up. This means that these models in principle allow for
a low value on one cue to be compensated by a higher value
on another cue. The two compensatory models are the
weighted additive model, here referred to as WADD
(sometimes also called Franklin’s Rule, see Gigerenzer et
al., 1999), and a unit weight linear heuristic labeled UWL
(for related models see e.g., Dawes & Corrigan, 1974;
Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). The third model does not
allow for making trade-offs between cues; it is a
noncompensatory lexicographic decision rule that considers
one cue at a time and bases its decision on only one cue
(LEX; see e.g., Payne et al., 1993). This model closely
resembles the well-known take-the-best heuristic
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) that has been proposed in
the fast and frugal heuristics framework as a strategy for
making inferences about objective criteria.
Note that we chose these models because they are
important representatives of the class of strategies that is
studied in the fast and frugal heuristics research program
and beyond. However, we do not mean for these strategies
to represent the exhaustive set of possible strategies one
could envision for moral decision-making. Rather, we see
them as a good starting point for investigating the
performance of formal models in predicting moral
judgments.

Model Introduction
All models were tested using a two-alternative forcedchoice task in which subjects had to decide which of two
companies makes the fairer decisions. For instance, one task
was to decide whether company A or company B behaved
more fairly in dealing with the consequences of the financial
crisis: To compensate for their diminishing returns,
company A decided to dismiss one third of its employees,
while company B drastically raised its prices and installed
new fees for previously free services.
We assume that for deciding which company is acting
more fairly people use a range of criteria, or cues, to
evaluate the companies’ behavior. For example, a person
could ask herself whether a company's decisions harm a
large number of people, or whether they damage the
environment, or whether they harm a peer or family
member. For each company, these cues can take different
cue values, that is, they can either speak in favor of the
company (positive cue value), against the company
(negative cue value), or be unknown (neutral cue value).
Additionally, cues have different cue validities. Cue
validities represent the importance a cue has for a person
when she is asked to assess a company’s decisions. In our
study, cue validities were subjective ratings of the cues.
From these validities, cues can also be brought into a cue

Weighted Additive Model: WADD
The WADD model integrates all cues and their validities to
determine which of two alternatives (here: companies)
should be chosen. Specifically, it calculates a weighted cue
sum for every alternative, and decides for the alternative
with the larger cue sum. To compute the cue sum, positive
and negative cue values are multiplied by their respective
validities:
n

"a v ,
i i

(1)

i=1

!

where n is the number of cues, a is the cue value (-1 for
negative, 0 for neutral, and 1 for positive), and v is the cue
validity.
When two companies are compared, WADD thus
proceeds as follows:
(1) For each company, calculate the weighted cue sum.
(2) Decide for the company with the higher cue sum.

1525

Unit weight Linear Heuristic: UWL

Method

Like WADD, the unit weight linear heuristic integrates all
cues into a judgment by adding them. It simplifies the task
by weighing each cue equally (hence unit weight) and by
ignoring cue validities.
It adds all positive and negative cue values for each
alternative and decides for the company with the larger cue
sum:

Participants 40 participants (24 female) were recruited via
the subject pool of the Max-Planck-Institute for Human
Development and paid 16 € (approx. $21) for participation.
Ages ranged from 20 to 35 (mean age 25 years, SD = 3.4).

n

"a ,
i

(3)

i= i

where a is either -1 (negative cue value) or 1 (positive cue
value). The strategy decides as follows:

!

(1) For each company, compute the sum of negative and
positive cues.
(2) Decide for the company with the higher cue sum.

Lexicographic Decision Rule: LEX
Unlike WADD and UWL, this heuristic does not by itself
take all cues into account, but operates sequentially and uses
only one cue at a time, considering cues in the order of their
validity. It bases its decision on the first cue that
discriminates between the alternatives (companies), that is,
the first cue that favors one of them. A cue discriminates
between two companies if one of them has a positive cue
value and the other has not (i.e., the other cue either has a
negative or a neutral cue value). The strategy then favors the
company with the positive cue value. This heuristic thus
proceeds as follows:
(1) Look up cues in the order of their validity, starting with
the cue with the highest validity.
(2) Stop when the first cue is found that discriminates
between the companies.
(3) Choose the company that this cue favors.

Experiment
We pitted these models against each other in an experiment.
In our study, participants completed two computer-based
two-alternative forced choice tasks (henceforth: choice
tasks) with two types of companies, airlines and automobile
companies. Pairs of airlines and automobile companies were
created by exhaustively pairing all airlines, and automobile
companies, respectively, with each other. For each pair of
companies, participants indicated which one they thought
made fairer decisions. Subsequently, they completed a
computer-based cue task in which they evaluated the
companies’ cue values on a range of cues. Finally, in a
questionnaire-based cue rating task, they were asked to rank
and rate the cues from the cue task in terms of their
importance for assessing the fairness of the companies’
decisions. We modeled participants’ judgments in the
choice task using their answers in the cue task and the cue
rating task. For each participant, we tested which of the
three decision strategies predicted her judgments best.

Procedure In the choice task, participants were presented
two collections of short newspaper excerpts, each one
involving one company. These excerpts described how the
company dealt with the current financial crisis.
Specifically, we collected newspaper articles about six
airlines and seven automobile companies from the largest
German economic newspaper “Handelsblatt” by searching
for all articles from the past eight months (January 2008
until July 2008) containing the tags “Luftfahrtbranche”
(airline industry) and “Automobilindustrie” (automobile
industry). For each company, we then picked those excerpts
which most accurately described the decisions that this
company made to deal with the current challenges in that
industry. We were mostly interested in excerpts that we
assumed to be relevant for the reader’s moral intuitions
about the companies, such as personnel politics, pricing,
safety, and environmental issues. To avoid for name
recognition and prior knowledge about a company to
influence our participants’ perceptions of the companies’
behavior, we made companies’ names anonymous in the
excerpts we used for the choice task.
In the choice task, all airlines and automobile companies
were exhaustively paired. This yielded 15 comparisons
between airlines, and 21 comparisons between automobile
companies. In each comparison, for each company the
relevant excerpts were shown. The excerpts appeared in
random order on the left and right half of a computer screen.
Participants were asked to decide which company they
thought behaved more fairly by pressing one of the
designated keys on the right or left side of the keyboard (‘p’
and ‘q’) with their left and right index finger, respectively.
In the subsequent cue task, all newspaper excerpts for
each company from the choice task were presented again
(for each company the relevant excerpts at a time), and
participants were asked to answer 32 questions about each
company (e.g., "Could this harm a family member of
mine?"). Each question tapped one cue. Participants could
answer with 'yes', 'no', or 'don't know’ by pressing the
designated keys (‘p’, ‘q’, and Space). Excerpts for the
companies were presented in a random order.
In a questionnaire-based cue rating task, subjects were
then asked to rate (between 0 and 100) and to rank (from 1
to 32) the cues from the cue task according to how
important they considered them for deciding which
company behaved more fairly.

1526

Figure 1: Triplets of bars represent the proportions of correctly predicted decisions, computed for WADD, UWL, and LEX,
separately for each participant.
Analyses One subject was excluded from the data set for
having submitted a questionnaire with several missing and
duplicate rankings and a complete mismatch between cue
ratings (validities) and rankings (cue order).
To compare the performance of WADD, UWL, and LEX
in predicting participants’ decisions, for each model we
calculated the proportions of correctly predicted decisions
per participant. We will refer to these proportions of
decisions made in accordance with a model as a model’s
accordance rate.
To model WADD, we determined the weighted cue sums
of each company by multiplying the cue validities from the
cue rating task with the cue values obtained from the cue
task. To implement UWL, we simply added up all positive
and negative cue values for each company as cue sum. LEX
was modeled using the cue values from the cue task and the
cue order from the cue rating task.

Results
Figure 1 shows the results for all subjects. Triplets of bars
represent the proportions of correctly predicted decisions,
computed for WADD, LEX, and UWL, separately for each
participant. For most subjects, the accordance rates of all
three models lies above the chance level of .50; that is,
above the proportions of decisions one would expect a
model to predict if participants engaged in random guessing.
For 13 participants, WADD made the most accurate
predictions, 9 participants were best described by UWL, and
for 8 participants, LEX proved to be most accurate. Nine
participants were equally well described by at least two of
the tested strategies.

Discussion
We examined if people's moral decisions can be modeled
formally using two compensatory models and one
noncompensatory decision heuristic. All tested models

could successfully predict a large number of normative
judgments made in a two-alternative forced-choice task.
Our results show that normative judgments can be
predicted with formal models of decision-making. They
lend support to the modeling approach to moral decisionmaking.
Another observation we made is that although WADD
made the best predictions for most participants, there were
also participants that were best described by UWL or LEX.
Such inter-individual differences in strategy use are
commonly observed in when studying how people make
decisions about objective criteria (see Bröder & Gaissmaier,
2007; Cokely & Kelley, 2009; Mata, Schooler, & Rieskamp,
2007; Pachur, Bröder, & Marewski, 2008). Recently, Feltz
and Cokely (2008) could show that individual differences
also exist in people’s moral intuitions when they are
confronted with questions about freedom and responsibility.
Our findings complement this previous work.
One important caveat of the current modeling is that the
number of cues to be rated in terms of their validity was
considerably large (32 cues). As a result, participants’ cue
ratings were most likely prone to some error. One may
speculate whether such errors would have hurt the
performance of LEX more than that of the other two
strategies, which may not depend as much as LEX on that
participants’ cue ratings mirror exactly their decisions.
Moreover, since LEX was the only lexicographic strategy
tested in this study, there remains ample room to explore the
performance of other noncompensatory strategies for
predicting moral judgment.

Conclusion
In this paper, we have taken a step towards formally
modeling moral judgments. We showed that one complex
decision strategy and two simple decision heuristics could
successfully predict the judgments of a majority of

1527

participants. Another finding was that there are interindividual differences in the strategies that people use to
make normative judgments. Further research should focus
on testing more decision models for moral judgments and
explore how these individual differences emerge.

References
Bergert, F. B., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2007). A response-time
approach to comparing generalized rational and take-thebest models of decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 107–
129.
Bröder, A., & Gaissmaier, W. (2007). Sequential processing
of cues in memory-based multi-attribute decisions.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 895–900.
Cokely, E.T., & Kelley, C.M. (2009). Cognitive abilities
and superior decision making under risk: A protocol
analysis and process model evaluation. Judgment and
Decision Making, 4, 20-33.
Dawes, R. M. (1979). Robust beauty of improper linearmodels in decision-making. American Psychologist,
34(7), 571-582.
Dawes, R. M., & Corrigan, B. (1974). Linear models in
decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 81, 95–106.
Feltz, A., & Cokely, E. T. (2008). Do judgments about
freedom and responsibility depend on who you are?
Personality differences in intuitions about compatibilism
and incompatibilism. Consciousness and Cognition, 18,
342-350.
Gigerenzer, G. (2007). Gut feelings: The intelligence of the
unconscious. New York: Viking Press.
Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Moral intuition = fast and frugal
heuristics? In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.), Moral
psychology vol. 2: The cognitive science of morality.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650–669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1999). Fast and frugal
heuristics: The adaptive toolbox. In G. Gigerenzer, P. M.
Todd, & the ABC Research Group, Simple heuristics that
make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Greene, J. D., & Haidt, J. (2002). How (and where) does
moral judgment work? Trends in Cognitive Science, 6,
517-523.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, B. R., Nytrom, L. E., Darley, J.
M., & Cohen, J. D. (2001). An fMRI investigation of
emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293,
2105-2108.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A
social intuitionist approach to moral judgment.
Psychological Review, 108, 814-834.

Hauser, M., Cushman, F., Young, L., Jin, R. K., & Mikhail,
J. (2007). A dissociation between moral judgments and
justifications. Mind & Language, 22, 1-21.
Helversen, B. von, & Rieskamp, J. (2008). The mapping
model: A cognitive theory of quantitative estimation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137, 73–
96.
Marewski, J. N., Galesic, M., & Gigerenzer, G. (2009). Fast
and frugal media choices. In T. Hartmann (Ed.), Media
choice: A theoretical and empirical overview (pp. 107128). New York & London: Routledge.
Marewski, J. N., & Olsson, H. (2009). Beyond the null
ritual: Formal modeling of psychological processes.
Journal of Psychology, 217, 49–60.
Mata, R., Schooler, L. J., & Rieskamp, J. (2007). The aging
decision maker: Cognitive aging and the adaptive
selection of decision strategies. Psychology and Aging,
22, 796–810.
Mikhail, J. (2007). Universal moral grammar: Theory,
evidence and the future. Trends in Cognitive Science, 11,
143-152.
Pachur, T., Bröder, A., & Marewski, J. N. (2008). The
recognition heuristic in memory-based inference: Is
recognition a non-compensatory cue? Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 183–210.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (2008). Inferences under time
pressure: How opportunity costs affect strategy selection.
Acta Psychologica, 127, 258–276.
Rieskamp, J., & Otto, P. (2006). SSL: A theory of how
people learn to select strategies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 135, 207–236.
Sunstein, C. R. (2005). Moral heuristics. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 28, 531-573.

1528

