UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preventative Scope in Causation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rw0q6hm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Carroll, Christopher
Cheng, Patricia

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preventative Scope in Causation
Christopher D. Carroll (cdcarroll@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA

Patricia W. Cheng (cheng@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, UCLA
Abstract

generative cause and a broad preventer whose preventative
scope includes all of the generative causes of the effect.
Preventative scope can be inferred by observing the
frequency of the effect as a function of its causes and the
preventer. Even in the simplest situation where only one
generative cause is known, a broad preventer and a narrow
preventer predict different patterns of covariation between
the generative cause, the preventer, and the effect. To see
why, consider the influence of the preventer when the
generative cause is absent. When an effect occurs in the
absence of a known cause, its occurrence is often attributed
to one or more unknown or unobserved causes (Hagmayer
& Waldmann, 2007; Luhmann & Ahn, 2007; Saxe,
Tenenbaum, & Carey, 2005). By definition, a broad
preventer stops these unknown causes from producing the
effect, and a narrow preventer does not. Broad prevention
should influence the frequency of the effect even when the
generative cause is absent, whereas narrow prevention
should not do so.
More formally, for causes and effects that are binary
(either present or absent), it is possible to derive the
probability of the effect as a function of the generative
cause, the preventer, and the preventative scope of the
preventer. We do so by adopting the assumptions in Cheng
(1997) and adding the assumption of preventative scope.
Letting pc be the causal power of the generative cause, pp be
the causal power of the preventer, and pa be the causal
power of the causal background (representing causal power
and frequency of the unknown causes of the effect in the
current context), we obtain the equations for broad
prevention and narrow prevention that are shown in Table 1.

Some preventers only stop an effect when it is being produced
by certain causes. For example, nasal spray prevents
headaches caused by a cold but not headaches caused by
dehydration or stress. Thus, preventers differ in preventative
scope: the range of circumstances across which a preventer
operates. An experiment indicated that people are sensitive to
differences in preventative scope and that participants are
more likely to generalize prevention when the preventer has a
broad preventative scope. Additional evidence suggested that
people take preventative scope into account when attempting
to explain how prevention operates.
Keywords: causality; causal power; prevention; hidden
causes

Preventative Scope
What does it mean for one thing to prevent another? While
many models of causal reasoning include prevention (e.g.,
Cheng, 1997; Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005), few studies
have examined how well prevention in these models
corresponds to everyday notions of prevention. One aspect
of prevention that is found in everyday reasoning but poorly
represented in formal models is preventative scope: the
range of circumstances across which the preventer works.
We define preventative scope relative to the causes of the
effect. A preventer with a broad preventative scope stops
the effect no matter what the cause. A preventer with a
narrow preventative scope stops the effect only when
certain causes are responsible for producing the effect. The
difference between broad prevention and narrow prevention
can be illustrated by contrasting the influences of aspirin
and nasal spray on headaches. Aspirin prevents headaches
caused by colds, headaches caused by dehydration, and
headaches caused by stress. Nasal spray prevents headaches
caused by colds, but not headaches caused by dehydration
or stress. Thus, aspirin has a broad preventative scope and
nasal spray has a narrow preventative scope.
An experiment was conducted to investigate preventative
scope. The goals of the experiment were to determine (1)
whether people are sensitive to preventative scope, (2) how
preventative scope is generalized to situations where there is
a novel generative cause, and (3) how people interpret or
explain preventative scope.

Table 1: Probability of effect as a function of cause c and
preventer p
broad prevention

Broad and narrow prevention
In the current investigation, we restrict ourselves to the
extremes of preventative scope: we contrast a narrow
preventer whose preventative scope includes only a single

833

narrow prevention

P(e|~c,~p)

pa

pa

P(e|c,~p)

p a  p c− p a p c

p a  p c− p a p c

P(e|~c,p)

p a 1− p p 

pa

P(e|c,p)

p a 1− p p 
 pc 1− p p 
− pa pc 1− p p 

pa
 pc 1− p p 
− pa pc 1− p p 

The differences between the formulas for broad and
narrow prevention arise because only a broad preventer
reduces the probability of the effect when the effect is
produced by an unknown cause in the causal background.
As long as the effect occurs in the absence of the
generative cause (i.e., pa > 0), narrow prevention and broad
prevention make different predictions. For a narrow
preventer, the preventer does not influence the probability of
the effect when the generative cause is absent [P(e|~c,~p) =
P(e|~c,p)]. When the preventer is broad, however,
the preventer reduces the probability of the effect even when
the generative cause is absent [P(e|~c,~p) > P(e|~c,p)].
One goal of the current investigation is to test whether
people are sensitive to the differences between broad
prevention and narrow prevention. Do people notice these
differences, and are these differences used to make
inferences about preventative scope? In the current
experiment, we showed participants some data and
manipulated whether it was consistent with broad or narrow
prevention. Then we tested inferences about preventative
scope by asking whether the preventer would stop the effect
when it is caused by a novel generative cause.

explanation underlies the narrow preventative scope of nasal
spray (see Figure 1). A cold causes sinus inflammation and
sinus inflammation causes headaches. Nasal spray reduces
sinus inflammation, and thus prevents colds from producing
headaches. Other causes (e.g., dehydration) produce
headaches through other means and are unaffected by nasal
spray. This explanation sits well with the intuition that a
narrow preventer interrupts or blocks the mechanism
(instantiated as a mediating variable) through which the
cause produces the effect.
On the other hand, broad prevention may suggest another
causal explanation: a broad preventer may act directly upon
the effect. Existing models of causal reasoning can represent
broad prevention in this manner (e.g., Cheng, 1997).
If people are sensitive to preventative scope, then
inferences about preventative scope may determine which of
these explanations someone prefers. The analysis above
suggests that people shown narrow prevention will be more
likely to endorse an explanation that involves mediation.

Method
Participants were given a cover story and then presented
with observations. We manipulated whether the
observations were consistent with broad or narrow
prevention. Participants were then asked a series of
questions intended to reveal the circumstances under which
they expected the preventer to be effective and how they
interpreted the prevention.

Interpreting broad and narrow prevention
The differences between broad and narrow prevention beg
an explanation: why do some preventers stop the effect
regardless of the cause while others do not? Narrow
prevention seems to be especially problematic. How is it
possible for a narrow preventer to stop one cause from
producing the effect but not others?
One explanation proposes that the generative cause and
the narrow preventer both influence the effect through a
common mediating variable. That is, the generative cause
causes a mediating variable that in turn causes the effect.
The narrow preventer also acts upon the mediating variable
rather than acting upon the effect directly. This sort of

Participants
Forty undergraduates at the University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA) participated to obtain course credit in a
psychology course.

Materials
Data generated for the narrow prevention condition and
the broad prevention condition are shown in Table 2. There
were fifty observations for each possible combination of the
generative cause and preventer. The broad prevention data
were generated by setting setting pc=.75, pp=.5, and pa=.1
and applying the broad prevention equations. The narrow
prevention data were generated by setting pc=.75, pp=.625,
and pa=.1 and applying the narrow prevention equations.
The narrow preventer had a higher causal power (.625)
than the broad preventer (.5) in order to control for the
overall efficacy of the preventer. That is, these causal
powers were chosen so that the narrow preventer and broad
preventer were equally effective after collapsing over the
presence and absence of the generative cause. In each
condition, the effect occurred 50 / 100 times when the
preventer was absent and 25 / 100 times when the preventer
was present. This control was necessary to exclude some
alternative explanations for the predicted results. For
example, the overall efficacy of the preventer might be used
as a heuristic to infer the number of variables mediating a

Figure 1: A potential explanation of narrow prevention.
White arrows indicate generative causation. Black arrows
indicate prevention.

834

causal relationship. If so, then participants may prefer
explanations with mediation when the overall efficacy of the
preventer is low. Similarly, the generalization of prevention
to novel causes might depend on the overall efficacy of the
preventer. By controlling for the overall efficacy of the
preventer, we were able to exclude these explanations and
isolate the influence of preventative scope.

The second cover story dealt with the influence of
vitamins on athletic performance.

Procedure
We manipulated the type of prevention within-subjects, so
each participant read the two cover stories over the course
of the experiment. The pairings between experimental
condition and cover story were counterbalanced across
participants.
Before beginning the experiment, participants were given
some practice interpreting causal graphs. Participants were
shown an example causal graph that involved simple
causation, and the features of the graph were explained.
Throughout the experiment, green arrows in causal graphs
denoted generative causation and red arrows denoted
preventative causation.
In the learning phase, participants first read the cover
story. Then, before viewing any data, participants were
shown a causal graph that summarized the information in
the cover story and previewed a question that they would be
asked later (see Figure 2 for an example). The graph showed
the generative cause producing the mediating variable, the
mediating variable producing the effect, and a node
representing other causes producing the effect. A node for
the preventer was shown with a question mark and no causal
links, and participants were told that they would be asked to
figure out how the preventer fit into the explanation.
Participants viewed data from four clinical trials for four
different treatments: one where only the preventer was
administered, one where only the generative cause was
administered, one where both the generative cause and

Table 2: Frequency of the effect as a function of the
generative cause c, preventer p, and experimental condition
broad prevention

narrow prevention

~c,~p

10 out of 50

10 out of 50

c,~p

40 out of 50

40 out of 50

~c,p

5 out of 50

10 out of 50

c,p

20 out of 50

15 out of 50

There were two cover stories that asked the participants to
imagine themselves as researchers at a medical company.
Each cover story first introduced an effect. Participants were
then told that they would research how two candidate
variables influenced the occurrence of the effect. A
colleague at the research company was said to have
investigated one of these candidate variables (the generative
cause) and found that it produced the effect indirectly via
another variable (the mediating variable). That is, the
generative cause caused the mediating variable, and the
mediating variable caused the effect. The mediating variable
was described as rare and poorly understood. No
information was given about the other candidate variable
(the preventer), so participants did not know whether or
how it influenced the effect prior to viewing the data.
Finally, each cover story was associated with a novel cause
that produced the effect. The novel cause was not mentioned
in the cover story, but was used later in the experiment to
test the generalization of the preventer. One of the cover
stories is provided below:
Imagine that you work for a drug company that
develops headache medications. The company has
asked you to investigate pane fruit and asmine juice. In
the rainforest, people eat pane fruit and drink asmine
juice because they are quite delicious. However, you
are more interested in understanding the effects of
eating pane fruit and drinking asmine juice on
headaches.
You were talking to a colleague who mentioned
that she has also done research on pane fruit. In her
research, she found that pane fruit causes the release of
neurotransmitter X and that neurotransmitter X causes
headaches.
You don't know much about
neurotransmitter X because it is rarely found in the
brain.

Figure 2: Example graph provided to participants to
summarize the information learned in the cover story and to
preview a question about how the preventer (asmine juice)
fit into the explanation

835

Figure 3: An example of a clinical trial. Each person in the clinical trial is represented by a cartoon face. The type of
cartoon face indicates whether or not the person exhibits the effect.
preventer were administered, and one where neither the
generative cause nor the preventer were administered. As
shown in Figure 3, the data were presented through displays
containing cartoon faces (following Buehner, Cheng, &
Clifford, 2003). Each cartoon face represented a person in
the clinical trial, and the type of cartoon face (happy face or
sad face) indicated whether the person exhibited the effect.
At the beginning of each clinical trial, 10 out of 50 people
entering the trial exhibited the effect. Then the people in the
trial were given a treatment, and the experiment showed
how many people exhibited the effect at the end of the trial.
The number of people exhibiting the effect at the end of the
clinical trial depended on which candidate causes were
present and on the experimental condition in accordance
with Table 2.
Both before and after viewing the data, participants were
told that the results had been replicated in much larger
studies, and that they should consider any differences in the
frequency of the effect to be reliable.
Participants were also provided with a summary of the
clinical trials. The summary showed the frequency of the
effect at the end of each clinical trial. The participants were
encouraged to refer back to the summary as much as
necessary.
In the inference phase, we measured the participants'
beliefs about the candidate causes with counterfactual
questions. One question assessed the causal power of the
generative cause. For this question, participants were asked
to suppose that there were 100 people who were not
exposed to the generative cause or the preventer and who
did not exhibit the effect. They were then asked how many
of those people would have exhibited the effect had they
been exposed to the generative cause.
To assess inferences about preventative scope, we
constructed three preventative counterfactuals. Each
counterfactual assessed the effectiveness of the preventer
among a group of 100 people who exhibited the effect, but
the likely cause of the effect varied between questions. In
the prevent|known counterfactual, the group had been
exposed to the known generative cause (e.g., “Suppose there
are 100 people who ate pane fruit and have headaches”). In

the prevent|unknown counterfactual, the group had NOT
been exposed to the generative cause (e.g., “Suppose there
are 100 people who did NOT eat pane fruit but who have
headaches”). Finally, in the prevent|novel counterfactual,
the group had been exposed to a novel cause of the effect
(e.g., “Suppose there are 100 people who recently stopped
drinking coffee. They have been experiencing caffeine
withdrawal and have headaches.”). In each case, participants
were asked to predict how many of the group would have
exhibited the effect if they had also been exposed to the
preventer (e.g., “If they had [ALSO] drank asmine juice,
how many of them still would have had headaches?”).
Although the prevent|known and prevent|novel questions
left open the possibility that some of the effects were due to
unknown or unmentioned causes, it is likely that many of
the effects were due to the mentioned generative cause.
Finally, participants were asked to choose between two
causal explanations in order to explain the observed data.
The choice was presented as a choice between two causal
graphs (see Figure 4). In one causal explanation, the
preventer directly reduced the likelihood of the effect. In the
other causal explanation, the preventer reduced the
likelihood of the effect indirectly by preventing the
mediating variable. Participants were also asked to explain
why they chose the graph that they chose. These
explanations were primarily intended to encourage
reflection and were not formally analyzed.

Results
As expected, the answers to the counterfactual regarding
the generative cause were similar across conditions.
Participants in the broad prevention and narrow prevention
conditions expected the generative cause to produce the
effect for an average of 63.5 (SD=20.2) and 63.9 (SD=23.9)
people respectively.
For the preventative counterfactual questions, participants
were asked to estimate the number of cases where the effect
still would have been present even if the group had been
exposed to the preventer. By subtracting a participant's
answer from 100 (i.e., the number of people in the group
who had exhibited the effect), we obtained the participant's

836

Figure 4: The two causal graphs that participants were asked to choose between.
estimate of the number of cases that would have been
prevented by the preventer. The results of these calculations
are shown in Figure 5 for each of the preventative
counterfactuals. When the effect occurred in the presence of
the generative cause, participants in both conditions
expected the preventer to reduce the occurrence of the
effect. However, when the effect occurred in the absence of
the generative cause or when the effect occurred due to a
novel cause, the broad preventer was expected to be more
influential than a narrow preventer.
The choices for the causal graphs are shown in Figure 6.
Participants explaining narrow prevention were more likely
to select the causal explanation where the preventer acted
upon the mediating variable.
A multivariate ANOVA was performed with prevention
condition (narrow or broad) as the independent variable.
The dependent variables were the responses to the
counterfactuals (known generative, prevent|known, prevent|
unknown, and prevent|novel) and the forced choice between
the graphical explanations. As expected, there was no effect

of prevention condition on the generative counterfactual,
F<1, p=.82. The experimental condition also did not
significantly influence responses to the prevent|known
counterfactual, F<1, p=.83. Since the causal power of the
preventer was higher in the narrow prevention condition
than in the broad condition (.625 vs .5), one might have
expected the narrow preventer to be more effective than the
broad preventer when the generative cause is present. The
predicted difference was relatively small, however, so there
might have been too much noise in the data to detect it.
Statistical tests also confirmed that participants predicted
more prevention in the broad prevention condition for
prevent|unknown counterfactual, F(1,78)=62.61, p<.001 and
prevent|novel counterfactual, F(1,78)=63.69, p<.001.
Additionally, the increased preference for the graph with
mediation in the narrow prevention condition was
significant, F(1,78)=6.49, p<.05.

proportion choosing mediation

0.8

100

# prev ented (out of 100)

90

prevent| known
prevent| unknown
prevent| novel

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0
broad

broad

narrow

narrow

prevention condition

prev ention condition

Figure 6: Preferred causal graph. This shows the
proportion of participants who chose the explanation
where the preventer stopped the mediating variable over
the explanation where the preventer acted directly on the
effect.

Figure 5: Participant estimates of the number of
headaches that would have been prevented had the group
been exposed to the preventer.

837

2006). These inferences are usually interpreted as
reflections of causal assumptions, such as the assumption
that every effect has a cause. Although additional research is
needed, inferences about a mediating variable may reflect
causal assumptions about the nature of narrow prevention.
Another possibility is that these assumptions reflect a
preference for simple explanations (Lombrozo, 2007).
In conclusion, people can infer preventative scope from
observations, and preventative scope influences further
inferences. By default, narrow prevention is not generalized
to circumstances where the effect is produced by novel
causes. Finally, narrow and broad prevention are
differentially compatible with different causal explanations.

Discussion
The answers to counterfactual questions indicated that
participants distinguished between broad and narrow
prevention. Most notably, broad preventers were more
likely to be generalized to situations where the generative
cause was absent but where the effect occurred for some
other reason. This pattern was found both when the cause of
the effect was unknown and when the likely cause of the
effect was a novel generative cause. Despite only observing
one generative cause of the effect, participants distinguished
between narrow and broad prevention by observing the
influence of the preventer in the absence of the generative
cause.
The graph choices suggest that participants believe that
narrow prevention and broad prevention are associated with
different causal explanations. When shown data consistent
with narrow prevention, participants were more likely to
endorse the causal explanation that involved mediation.
However, the exact nature of this preference is unclear.
Since participants were forced to choose between two
explanations, their preference could be interpreted as either
an endorsement of the chosen explanation or a rejection of
the other explanation.
Furthermore, there are other explanations that were not
considered in the current experiment. For instance, the
narrow prevention data can be produced when the
combination of the preventer and the generative cause is
treated as a conjunctive preventer of the effect. There are
also other explanations involving unobserved variables that
were not considered here. Additional research is needed to
describe people's preferences more completely.
Still, it is also worth noting that the causal explanation
with mediation contained a causal relationship that was not
directly supported by any evidence (i.e., the preventer
preventing the mediating variable). Despite this, a strong
majority of participants in the narrow prevention endorsed
that explanation. This raises the possibility that people make
inferences about unobserved mediating variables after
observing narrow prevention. Other studies have identified
related inferences about unobserved or hidden causes (e.g.,
Hagmayer & Waldmann, 2007; Luhmann & Ahn, 2007;
Saxe, Tenenbaum, & Carey, 2005; Schulz & Sommerville,

References
Buehner, M. J., Cheng, P.W., & Clifford, D. (2003).
Covariation to causation: A test of the assumption of
causal power. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 29 (6). 1119-1140.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction, Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334-384.
Hagmayer, Y., & Waldmann, M.R. (2007). Inferences about
unobserved causes in human contingency learning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60 (3),
330-355.
Lombrozo, T. (2007). Simplicity and probability in causal
explanation. Cognitive Psychology, 55 (3), 232-257.
Luhmann, C. & Ahn, W.-k. (2007). BUCKLE: A model of
unobserved cause learning. Psychological Review, 92 (3),
657-677.
Novick, L.R., & Cheng, P.W. (2004). Assessing interactive
causal influence. Psychological Review, 111, 455-485.
Saxe, R., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Carey (2005). Secret agents:
inferences about hidden causes by 10- and 12-month-old
infants. Psychological Science, 16 (12), 995-1001.
Schulz, L.E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play
dice: Causal determinism and children's inferences about
unobserved causes. Child Development, 77 (8), 427-442.

838

