UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Proactive and reactive strategies in interruption handling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3v6761js

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Velichkovsky, Boris

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Proactive and Reactive Strategies in Interruption Handling
Boris B. Velichkovsky (boris.velichkovsky@psy.msu.ru)
Department of Psychology, Moscow State University
Mokhovaya st. 11 bld. 5, 125009 Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Two interruption handling strategies were distinguished based
on experimental data. Reactive strategy implies an immediate
switch from the main task after the onset of interruption.
Proactive strategy relies on investing additional processing in
the creation of a stable, interference-resistant representation of
the main task. It is shown that in the though proactive strategy
is associated with longer transition from the main to the
additional task, it can also lead to quicker additional task
execution and main task resumption. It is concluded that
proactive strategy can be more effective in the long run.
Selection of an appropriate interruption handling strategy is
determined by the perceived cognitive complexity of the
interruption episode.
Keywords:
interruptions;
strategy;
interference; working memory; resumption.

representation;

Introduction
Interruptions are inescapable in modern life. This obvious
truth makes the study of interruption effects especially
important. Indeed, interruptions are assumed to exert
pronounced influence on human performance as well as on
affective experience (Zijlstra, Roe, Leonova, & Krediet,
1999; Kapitsa & Blinnikova, 2003). The consensus is that
this influence is largely negative, although the experimental
evidence is somewhat ambivalent (Burmistrov & Leonova,
2003). In studies of office workers, interruptions were
shown to slow the performance down, raise the number of
errors, produce fatigue and lead to negative affect (Bailey,
Konstan, & Carlis, 2000). In human factors literature,
interruptions are made responsible for incidents with severe
consequences (Dismukes, Young, & Sumwalt, 1998).
Consequently, discovering the mechanisms by which
humans manage to handle interruptions more or less
effectively is of considerable theoretical and practical value.
One important question in this respect is to what extent
the subject is actively involved in the transition between the
main (interrupted) and the additional (interrupting) tasks.
Does this transition proceed in an automatic manner,
triggered by the interruption, or is it actively controlled by
the subjects? It will be shown in the present study that
possibly both accounts are true as two distinct modes (or
strategies) of transition between main and additional tasks
can be distinguished based on experimental data. The
reactive strategy consists in an immediate switch to the
additional task, seemingly without any active preparation.
This is a quick way to handle an interruption which can be
counter-productive in the long run. For the proactive
strategy it is assumed that, before the transition occurs, time
and resources are invested in some form of preparatory

cognitive-behavioral activity, which, for example, can be
aimed at making the mental representation of the main task
less susceptible to interruption-induced interference. Thus,
the proactive strategy can be more effective overall, even if
it takes more time and effort initially.
How is an appropriate interruption handling strategy
selected? One possible answer is that this is governed by the
perceived cognitive complexity of an interruption episode.
The more complex an interruption episode is, the more
actively the subject will control the interruption handling
process. Here, an ecologically valid study of interruption
effects is reported, in which subjects were provoked to use
either the proactive or the reactive interruption handling
strategy by manipulating the level of cognitive complexity
of the main task. By manipulating the complexity of the
additional tasks, it was also possible to test whether each
strategy has a predicted effect on performance during
interruption handling.
According to the above description of different
interruption handling strategies, several testable predictions
about the effects of manipulating the complexities of the
interrupted and the interrupting tasks can be derived:
(H1) It can be assumed that subjects used the proactive
strategy while switching from complex main tasks (high
workload) and the reactive strategy while switching from
simple main tasks (low workload). As the proactive strategy
takes more time to implement, the time to switch from the
interrupted to the interrupting task should be greater in the
conditions with complex main tasks.
(H2) Also, due to having a more efficient main task
representation, the proactive strategy may lead to a more
efficient processing of the additional task itself.
(H3) As the proactive strategy leads to a more effective
storage of main task representation, in the condition with
complex main tasks we may expect their quicker
resumption.
(H4) It can be expected that in the most taxing
experimental condition (complex main task paired with
complex additional task) interruption handling will be at
least as effective as in other – arguably more simple conditions. This is because in this case the very effective
proactive strategy should neutralize possible negative effects
on performance.
(H5) In cases with complex main tasks, there should exist
an inverse relationship between the time to “enter” the
interruption and the time to “exit” the interruption. It is
characteristic of the proactive strategy that additional time
investment in the interruption preparation phase pays off
through easier resumption of the main task after the
interruption is over. On the contrary, in cases where the

2268

Alert
(Ta)

Completion of
interrupted
operation
(optional, Tc)

Switching
to
ICQ
(Tsi1)

Switching
to
additional
task (Tsa)

Switching
to
ICQ
(Tsi2)

Switching
to main
task
(Tsm)

First action
after
switching
back (Tf)

Next
operation
(Tn)
Time

TS

TAT

TSBF
TSB

Figure 1: Time course of an interruption episode.
reactive strategy will be selected more often (simple main
tasks), there should be no such relationship because there is
no causal link between the amounts of processing before
and after the interruption.
(H6) For the reactive strategy it is expected that the time
needed to resume the main task after the interruption is over
will be positively associated with the duration of the
additional task. In the absence of an interference-resistant
representation of the main task, longer additional tasks have
more chances to disrupt working memory main task
representations, thus forcing the subject to build it anew. In
the case of the proactive strategy the duration of the
additional task does not influence the length of main task
resumption, presumably because a stable, interferenceresistant representation of the main task context was formed
and stored securely before the execution of the additional
task has begun.
(H7) In the present study, the collection of behavioral
indices was backed up by recordings of eye-movement
activity. It was expected that in the case of the proactive
strategy there will be a correspondence between spatial
characteristics of eye movements in the preparation and the
resumption phase of interruption handling. This would
reflect the fact that one manifestation of the proactive
strategy is the extraction of visual cues before the transition
to the additional task, which are later re-used in re-creating
the context of the main task after the interruption is over.

Method
Subjects
42 third year students of psychology from several Moscow
universities took part in the study (40 female). Age ranged
from 17 to 32 years with mean age equal to 19.8 years. All
participants got comparable amounts of computer training
during their studies. Part of the subjects got partial course
credit in exchange for participation.

Tasks
The main task consisted in editing a 30-page long scientific
psychological text according to editor’s remarks inserted
into it. The editing was done with the use of MS Word
software. Each remark consisted of an opening and a closing

tag embracing the text part to be edited. The opening tag
specified the type of the editing operation to be performed
as well as some additional information. There were two
types of editing operations: cognitively simple and
cognitively complex. Simple editing operation consisted in
changing the font of the text embraced between the tags
(either to bold, or to underscored, or to italic), which
required highlighting the relevant text part and pressing the
corresponding button on the MS Word toolbar. Complex
editing operation consisted in relocating a text paragraph
through “cut-and-paste” procedure (the target location was
specified in the opening tag). It was assumed that relocating
text parts involved more cognitive workload because it
strains the working memory to a much greater extent than
changing the font does. The simple editing operations were
distributed uniformly through the text with approximately 3
operations for one page. There were eight complex editing
operations, distributed uniformly through the text.
The additional tasks consisted in answering questions
about air tickets with the help of a specialized website
(http://www.pososhok.ru). There were two types of possible
questions: cognitively more simple and cognitively more
complex. The simple problems involved the decision
whether there existed a flight complying with pre-specified
characteristics, which would be cheaper than some threshold
(for example, “Is there a flight from Moscow to Amsterdam
on 27th July 2009 which is cheaper than 400 USD?”).
Cognitively complex problems involved the decision
whether one of two possible flight routes between two cities
is cheaper than another (for example, “Is it true that flying
from Moscow to Amsterdam via Frankfurt on 27th July 2009
is cheaper than flying from Moscow to Amsterdam via
Stockholm, same day?”). All questions were formulated in a
way that allowed a “yes” or “no” answer. The simple
questions required getting a list of flights complying with
the specified criteria and comparing the price of the
cheapest flight with a threshold. The complex questions
required finding two pairs of flights (one pair for each of the
alternative flight routes), mentally calculating the price
totals for each pair and comparing the totals. Obviously, the
complex additional task required much more processing
than the simple additional task did. On the whole, the
subjects perceived the experimental tasks as being
representative of modern office activities.

2269

Design
A 2x2 within-subject design was used, with factors
“interrupted operation complexity” (OCOMPLEXITY) and
“interruption complexity” (ICOMPLEXITY). There was
one interruption episode for each combination of factor
levels. The order of experimental conditions was
counterbalanced across participants according to a Latin
square. The interruptions were triggered manually when the
subject reached specific locations in the edited document. In
the document, the locations were distributed uniformly.

Procedure
The subject worked in a separate room. The screen output of
the subjects’ PC was made visible via a TV screen to the
experimenter, who was seated in an adjacent control room.
The experimenter’s PC was connected to the subject’s PC
via an Ethernet network. ICQ 5.1 instant messaging
software was installed on both computers, so that the
experimenter could send interrupting messages specifying
the additional task to be performed when the subject reached
specific points during the execution of the main task.
Subject’s interactions with the computer were recorded into
a video file with the help of Morae usability software. A
second experimenter was present in the experimental room
to monitor the eye-tracking hardware.
At the beginning of the study, the subject was instructed
in the use of the text editing software, instant messaging
software and air ticket search website. Afterwards, the
eyetracking headset was put on, calibration procedure was
executed and the subject started the execution of the main
task. The subject was interrupted by the experimenter in the
control room when he was in the middle of performing an
editing operation. No specific instruction was given to the
subjects whether they should switch to the interruption
immediately. After having left the text editor and read the
interruption message in the ICQ window, the subject
switched to the Web browser and performed the additional
task. After the subject solved the problem posed by the
additional task, he switched back to the ICQ window,
selected a smiley corresponding to “yes” or “no” answer
from a list of smileys provided by the ICQ application, send
it to the experimenter and switched back to the main task.
All subject’s interactions with the computer were designed
in a way that only the computer mouse had to be used.
In the course of the experiment, the subject was
additionally interrupted by the second experimenter to recalibrate the eye-tracking hardware. The re-calibration
interruptions never occurred during the execution of an
editing operation or during a “regular” interruption. There
were about 6-8 such re-calibration episodes pro subject
which usually took no longer than 5-10 seconds. The
execution of the experimental tasks took about 30-35
minutes.

Measures
The videos of subjects’ interactions with computer were
analyzed and timestamps for critical transition points during

every interruption were extracted manually. The transition
points of interest and their positions in the structure of the
interruption are presented in Figure 1. The durations of
critical time intervals, which were used as dependant
measures, were computed on the basis of these timestamps.
The durations computed are presented in Table 1 and
graphically in Figure 1. From the eye movement data, mean
saccadic amplitude immediately before the interruption
(during the [Tsi1 – Tc] time interval) and immediately after
the interruption (during the TSBF and TSB intervals) were
calculated as a measure of spatial properties of eye
movements. The total time of work on the experimental
tasks was computed and used as a measure of computer
proficiency.
Table 1: Time intervals within the course of an interruption
used as dependent measures.
Duration
TS

TAT
TSBF
TSB

Description
Time to switch from the main
task after the onset of
interruption
Time to perform the additional
task
Time to resume action after
switching back to the main task
Time till the beginning of the
next editing operation after
returning back to the main task

Calculation
Tsi1 - Ta

Tsi2 - Tsa
TSf - Tsm
Tn - Tsm

Eye Movements Registration
An EyeLink I eye-tracking system with 250 Hz sampling
rate was used. Eye movements for only the right eye were
registered.

Results
Complexity Effects
To test the predictions H1 through H4, 2x2 repeated–
measures ANCOVAs were performed on TS, TAT, TSBF
and TSB with the total time of work controlled. Marginally
significant main effects of OCOMPLEXITY were obtained
for TS (F(1,41) = 3.2; p = 0.081), TAT (F(1,42) = 3.26; p =
0.078) and TSBF (F(1,41) = 3.95; p = 0.054). Simple main
tasks led to shorter TS intervals than did complex main
tasks. On the contrary, simple main tasks caused longer
TAT and TSBF intervals. Significant main effects of
ICOMPLEXITY were obtained for TSBF (F(1,41) = 6.31; p
< 0.02) and TSB (F(1,41) = 10.0; p < 0.01). It took the
subjects longer to resume activity after simple interruptions,
but the next editing operation was performed later after
complex interruptions. A significant OCOMPLEXITY ×
ICOMPLEXITY interaction was obtained for TSBF
(F(1,40) = 6.1; p < 0.02). The time to resume activity in the
main task after the interruption was maximal in the
condition with simple main task and simple additional task
(Figure 2).

2270

Table 2. Spearman correlation coefficients between the durations of time intervals, blocked by experimental condition.

Simple
interruption

TS
TAT
TSBF

Complex
interruption

TS
TAT
TSBF

TAT
0.04

Simple operation
TSBF
0.05
0.35*

-0.21

TSB
0.43**
0.21
0.55**

TAT
0.09

0.09
0.3?
0.4**

0.15

-0.17
0.13

Complex operation
TSBF
-0.29?
0.01

-0.23
-0.11

TSB
-0.49**
0.2
0.16
-0.44**
0.03
0.12

** - p < 0.01, * - p < 0.05, ? - p < 0.1

Simple interruption

Complex interruption

4
sec

3
2
1
0
Simple operation Complex operation

movement activity) during TS, TSBF and TSB time
intervals were submitted to an ANCOVA with factors
OCOMPLEXITY and ICOMPLEXITY while controlling
for the total working time. No effects were found.
Additionally, mean saccadic amplitudes during TS were
correlated with mean saccadic amplitudes during TSBF
and TSB, blocked by experimental condition (see Table
3). In the conditions with simple main task, there were no
relationships between the spatial characteristics of
saccades before and after the interruption. On the
contrary, in the cases with complex main tasks, there was
a marked correspondence between the spatial
characteristics of eye movement activity before and after
the interruption.

Figure 2: Time to resume activity after the interruption as
a function of editing operation complexity and
interruption complexity.

Table 3: Spearmen correlation coefficients between mean
saccadic amplitude during TS, and TSBF and TSB,
blocked by experimental condition.
Simple operation
TS/TSBF TS/TSB

Correlational Analysis
An additional correlational analysis was run in order to
assess the validity of predictions H5 and H6. TS, TAT,
TSBF and TSB intervals were correlated using Spearman
correlation coefficient, blocked by experimental
condition. The results of the analysis are presented in
Table 2. In the condition with simple main task and
simple additional task, positive associations were found
between TS and TSB, TAT and TSBF, and TSBF and
TSB. In the condition with simple main task and complex
additional task a positive relationship was found between
TSBF and TSB, as well as a marginally positive
relationship between TAT and TSB. For both conditions
with complex interrupted operation, only TS and TSB
were negatively related. Additionally, there was a
marginally significant negative relationship between TS
and TSBF in the condition with complex main task and
simple additional task.

Eye Movements Analysis
In this analysis, prediction H7 was tested. Mean saccadic
amplitude (a measure of spatial characteristics of eye-

Simple
interruption
Complex
interruption

Complex operation
TS/TSBF TS/TSB

0.26

0.0

0.51**

0.44**

0.05

0.0

0.46**

0.51**

** - p < 0.01

Discussion
In the present study it is assumed that the proactive
strategy of interruption handling implies the creation of a
stable, interference-resistant representation of the main
task prior to switching to the additional task, as well as
securing that this representation can be effectively
restored after the interruption is over (Oulasvirta &
Saariluoma, 2006). The concept of the proactive strategy
of interruption handling used here is especially motivated
by the studies by Leonova (2003) and Velichkovsky,
Blinnikova, & Kapitsa (2007). In the first study it was
shown that with progressing complexity of interruptions
automatic processing with the dominance of parallel

2271

processing mode is replaced by controlled processing with
the dominance of sequential processing mode. In the
second study, which employed a design that was similar
to the one used here, it was shown that in the cognitively
simple case of a simple interrupted operation the time
needed to perform the additional task was much greater
than in the case of other, cognitively much more taxing
conditions. This finding motivates the conclusion that in
such apparently very simple interruption episodes subjects
immediately switch to the additional task without
investing processing ressources in forming a compact
main task representation and moving it to a secure store
(reactive strategy). Therefore, both the main and the
additional task are represented simultaneously in the
working memory, where they interfere, reducing
performance.
In the present study, the complexity of main task was
the only factor determining perceived cognitive
complexity of experimental interruptions. Thus, it was
assumed here that by manipulating the complexity of the
main task it was possible to provoke the use of a either the
proactive or the reactive strategy. Empirical tests of the
predictions H1-H3 showed that, indeed, the assumed use
of the reactive strategy was associated with quicker
transition to the interruption (main effect of
OCOMPLEXITY on TS), but also with longer time on
interruption (main effect of OCOMPLEXITY on TAT)
and slower resumption times after the interruption was
over (main effect of OCOMPLEXITY on TSBF). This
pattern of results is indicative of the different interruption
handling strategies.
The time to re-orient oneself in the previously
interrupted main task (TSBF) can be taken as an index of
stability of main task representation formed with the help
of the proactive and the reactive strategy.
Characteristically, no significant performance decrement
was found in the cognitively most taxing experimental
condition, which should led to less stability and more
interference. This indicates that the proactive strategy can
be associated with the use of a more stable main task
representation. Paradoxically, the least effective reorienting was found in the presumably easiest case of
simple main task paired with simple interruption. This
means that unless an interference-resistant representation
of the main task is formed by the means of proactive
strategy, possible unanticipated difficulties during the
processing of the additional task can easily destroy the
working memory representation of the main task used
with the reactive strategy. The question arises why it is
not the condition with simple main task and complex
additional task which produces the largest negative effect,
because complex interruptions arguably mean more
working memory load and should damage the main task
representation to a larger extent. It can be speculated that
the subjects can use the time interval between reading the
interruption requirements and actually beginning to work
on the interruption for a partial implementation of the

proactive strategy (safeguarding the main task
representation).
The successful tests of predictions H5 and H6 largely
support previous conclusions. It was indeed found that in
cases, in which the use of a proactive strategy can be
assumed, more intensive preparation leads to more
effective resumption of the interrupted task after the
interruption is over. On the other hand, the assumed use of
the reactive strategy is characterized by the instability of
the main task representation. This instability is reflected
in the presence of a positive association between the
duration of the interruption and the resumption time. A
longer interruption means heavier working memory load,
more decay and more possibilities for unexpected
hindrances to occur. Taken together, these factors can
damage or even destroy the main task representation
provided (as is assumed by the notion of the reactive
strategy) it is not held in a secure memory store.
It is also possible that subjects who use the proactive
strategy actively extract and encode salient cues during
the interruption preparation, which can be used to help to
restore the main task context after the interruption is over
(Altmann & Trafton, 2004). For visual cues this means
that under the use of the proactive strategy the spatial
distribution of eye movements immediately before and
immediately after the interruption should be similar (that
is, before the resumption of the main task begins the
subject visually revisits the same locations he was
attending to while leaving the main task, prediction H7).
Indeed, such correspondence of eye-movement activity
was found for the proactive strategy, and, equally
important, it was absent for the reactive strategy. This
differential result reproduces the pattern found previously
and is exactly what is expected on the basis of
differentiation between interruption handling strategies.
The results obtained in the present study extend some
findings from the task switching paradigm (Monsell,
2003). There, it has often been shown that giving the
subjects enough time to prepare for the execution of a new
task substantially reduces the overhead associated with
the switching (Rogers & Monsell, 1995). Usually, this
result is taken as an evidence for the existence of
endogenous control processes that govern the transition
between different tasks. It can be assumed that in the case
of the proactive strategy such higher-order control
processes are employed voluntary to raise the overall
efficiency of interruption handling.
Several methodological concerns should be noted. First,
there were only 4 interruptions pro subject, which was
dictated by the realistic nature of the experimental tasks.
An attempt was made to compensate for the lowered
internal validity of the study by using a relatively high
number of subjects (more than 40). It remains to be seen
whether the results obtained will be confirmed as more
data is accumulated within the proposed paradigm.
Second, the complexity of the main task could be
confounded with practice effects (there were almost 100

2272

simple editing operations as opposed to only 8 complex
ones). However, such intensive practice generally should
lead to better performance. The results suggest that,
contrary to this expectation, simple main tasks were
associated with reduced performance. Third, as mentioned
in Procedure section, the subjects were additionally
interrupted up to 8 times during the course of the
experiment in order to re-calibrate the eye-tracker. While
such interruptions could render the experimental
interruptions less important, they involved absolutely no
activity from the subjects and were considered by them as
rest breaks. It can be argued that even if the re-calibration
breaks influenced handling of interruptions, they did it in
a uniform way, which is supported by the fact that
predicted differences were found between the complex
and simple interruption episodes despite their presence.

Conclusions
Although it is undisputable that interruptions can have
detrimental effect on performance, it seems that applying
the proactive strategy can help individuals to “survive
interruptions” (Oulasvirta & Saariluoma, 2006). It was
shown that the proactive strategy takes more time to
switch from the main to the additional task, but is also
associated with more effective processing of the
additional task and main task resumption. The data
suggest that the proactive strategy implies forming a
stable, interference-resistant representation of the main
task, which allows it to be very effective under
cognitively demanding conditions.
On the contrary, the reactive strategy can be described
by a quicker transition from the main to the additional
task, but the additional task itself as well as the
resumption of the main task would take longer in this
case. There are indications that subjects using the reactive
strategy rely on simultaneous representing both the main
and the additional task in the working memory. Such
setup, superficially very time-effective, is prone to
interference and error, and can lead to performance
decrements. Thus, the selection of interruption handling
strategy seems to be guided by a simple tradeoff – either
quick processing of interruptions with potential negative
effects or more time-consuming processing with more
predictable results.
The distinction between the proactive and the reactive
strategies renders the process of interruption handling as
being a complex and a highly adaptive one. It can involve
mechanisms of executive control which secure stable
performance under the demanding conditions of following
several goals at once. The proactivity individuals show in
handling interruption episodes reveals that potentially
humans are able to withstand the detrimental effects of
even most taxing interruptions, provided that they use an
appropriate interruption handling strategy and are assisted
through specialized technical means. Thus, studying
interruption handling strategies can help in achieving the

ultimate goal of interruptions being processed effectively
and less effortfully.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant #08-06-00284a
from Russian Foundation for Basic Research.

References
Altmann E.M., Trafton J.G. (2004). Task interruption:
resumption lag and the role of cues. Proceedings of the
26th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Bailey B.P., Konstan J.A., Carlis J.V. (2000). Measuring
the effects of interruptions on task performance in the
user interface. IEEE Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics. Piscataway: Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.
Burmistrov I.V. & Leonova A.B. (2003) Do interrupted
users work faster or slower? The micro-analysis of
computerized text editing task. In J. Jacko & C.
Stephanidis (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction:
Theory and Practice - Proceedings of HCI
International 2003, Vol. 1. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Dismukes K., Young K., Sumwalt R. (1998). Cockpit
interruptions and distractions: Effective management
requires a careful balancing act. ASRS Directline., 10
(3), 4–9.
Kapitsa M.S. & Blinnikova I.V. (2003). Task performance
under the influence of interruptions. In Hockey G.R J.,
Gaillard A.W.K. & Burov O. (Eds.), Operator
functional state. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Leonova A.B. (2003). Functional status and regulatory
processes in stress management. In Hockey G.R J.,
Gaillard A.W.K. & Burov O. (Eds.), Operator
functional state. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Monsell S. (2003). Task switching. Trends in cognitive
science, 7, 134-140.
Oulasvirta A., & Saariluoma P. (2006). Surviving task
interruptions: Investigating the implications of longterm working memory theory. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 64 (10), 941-961.
Rogers, R.D., & Monsell, S. (1995). The costs of a
predictable switch between simple cognitive tasks.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124,
207-231.
Velichkovsky B.B., Blinnikova I.V., Kapitsa M.S. (2007).
Effects of task switching on interruption handling in
text editing In S. Vosniadou, D. Kayser, A. Protopapas
(Eds.). Proceedings of EuroCogSci07: The European
Cognitive Science Conference. Hove, UK: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Zijlstra F.R.H., Roe R.R., Leonova A.B. & Krediet I.
(1999). Temporal factors in mental work: Effects in
interrupted activities. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 72, 163-185.

2273

