UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probabilistic relational categories are learnable as long as you don’t know you’re learning
probabilistic relational categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vb0k1gs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hummel, John E.
Jung, Wookyoung

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probabilistic relational categories are learnable
as long as you don’t know you’re learning probabilistic relational categories
Wookyoung Jung (jung43@cyrus.psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

John E. Hummel (jehummel@cyrus.psych.uiuc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 603 E. Daniel Street
Champaign, IL 61820 USA

Abstract
Kittur, Hummel and Holyoak (2004) showed that people have
great difficulty learning relation-based categories with a
probabilistic (i.e., family resemblance) structure. We
investigated three interventions hypothesized to facilitate
learning family-resemblance based relational categories:
Naming the relevant relations, providing a hint to look for a
family resemblance structure, and changing the description of
the task from learning about categories to choosing the
“winning” object in each stimulus, which was predicted to
encourage subjects to form an invariant higher-order relation.
We crossed these variables orthogonally in a factorial design.
Of the three, the change in task description had by far the
greatest impact on subjects’ ability to learn probabilistic
relation-based categories. For subjects in the category
learning task, naming the relations and the “no single
relation” clue both improved performance individually, but in
combination, they substantially impaired learning. These
results suggest that the best way to learn a probabilistic
relation-based category is to discover a higher-order relation
that remains invariant over the category’s exemplars.
Key words: Relational category learning; family
resemblance; higher-order relations; relational invariants.

One of the most robust findings in the vast literature on
category learning is that people are capable of learning
categories with a family resemblance structure, in which
every member of the category shares some features with
every other member, but no single feature is shared by all
category members (e.g., Bruner, Goodnow, & Austin, 1956;
Kruschke, 1992; Kruschke & Johansen, 1999; Medin &
Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1992; Rosch & Mervis, 1975;
Shiffrin & Styvers, 1997; Smith & Medin, 1981). The
“prototype” effects that result from such learning (such as
our ability to learn a category prototype from the exemplars
without ever seeing the prototype itself) are so robust that
they led Murphy (2002) to quip that any category learning
experiment that fails to demonstrate prototype effects is
suspect. It is hardly possible to teach a course in cognitive
science without talking about prototype effects: They are
among the most ubiquitously observed and widely accepted
effects in cognitive psychology.

In reviewing the literature on prototype effects, Kittur,
Hummel and Holyoak (2004) noticed that all the studies
reporting prototype effects used category structures defined
by their members’ features. For example, if the categories to
be learned were fictional animals then they might be defined
by features such as the shape of the head, the shape of the
tail, etc. Similarly, the vast majority of models of category
learning and categorization assume that we represent
categories and exemplars as lists of features and assign
exemplars to categories by comparing their features (see
Kittur et al. for a review). As Kittur et al. observed, this
reliance on feature-based categories is a limitation inasmuch
as many natural concepts and categories are based, not
exclusively on features, but also on relations, including both
relations between the features of an exemplar (e.g., the seat
and back of a chair need to be in a particular spatial relation
to serve as a chair) and relations between the exemplar and
other objects (e.g., the category conduit is defined by a
relation between the conduit and the thing it carries; the
category barrier is defined by the relation between the
barrier, the thing to which it blocks access and the thing
deprived of that access; even such a basic category as
mother is defined by a relation between the mother and her
child) (see Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Pirolli & Anderson,
1985; Ross, 1987). Relational categories also play a central
role in mathematics and science (e.g., denominator, result,
carnivore, pressure, magnetic, attraction; Anggoro, Gentner,
& Klibanoff, 2005).
The importance of relational categories in human
cognition, in combination with their under-representation in
one of the largest literatures in cognitive psychology, led
Kittur et al. (2004) to pose the following simple question:
Can we observe prototype effects with relational, rather than
feature-based, categories? That is, if the categories to be
learned are defined by the relations between the exemplars’
features, rather than the literal features themselves, can
human subjects learn categories with a family resemblance
structure? And if they do, what will the resulting prototypes
be like? Kittur et al. never got an answer to the second
question because the answer to the first question turned out
to be a resounding No: Using a 2 X 2 design crossing
category structure (family resemblance, in which no single

1042

feature or relation always predicted category membership,
vs. deterministic, in which one feature or relation remained
invariant across all exemplars of a category) with defining
property (exemplar features vs. relations between those
features), Kittur et al. found that subjects in the
relational/family resemblance condition found category
learning much more difficult than subjects in the other
conditions (an effect that Kittur, Holyoak & Hummel, 2006,
used ideal observer analysis to demonstrate could not be
attributed to the formal difficulty of the task itself); indeed,
the majority of the subjects in the relational/family
resemblance condition failed to reach criterion even after
600 trials of learning.
Kittur at al. (2004) interpreted their finings in terms of the
LISA model of schema induction (Hummel & Holyoak,
2003). Specifically, Kittur et al. reasoned that if a relational
category is represented as a schema, as has been proposed
by others (e.g., Barsalou, 1993; Gentner, 1983; Holland,
Holyoak, Nisbett, & Thagard, 1986; Keil, 1989; Murphy &
Medin, 1985; Ross & Spalding, 1994), and if schemas are
learned by a process of intersection discovery, in which a
schema is learned from examples by keeping what the
examples have in common and discarding details on which
they differ (as proposed by Hummel and Holyoak, 2003; see
also Doumas, Hummel & Sandhofer, 2008)1, then learning
probabilistic relational categories ought to be extremely
difficult because the intersection of the examples is the
empty set (i.e., there is no single relation shared by all
category members).
Although Kittur et al.’s (2004) data are consistent with
their conclusions, there are several other reasons why
probabilistic relational categories might be hard to learn
from examples. In the research reported here, we sought to
better understand the difficulty of learning relational
categories with a family resemblance structure by
investigating circumstances that might make them easier to
learn. Specifically, we tested three not-mutually-exclusive
hypotheses about what makes family resemblance relational
categories difficult to learn. We evaluated these hypotheses
using a 2 X 2 X 2 crossed factorial design.
Following Kittur et al. (2004), each of our exemplars was
composed of two shapes: a square and a circle (Kittur et al.
used an octagon rather than a circle, and they placed their
stimuli on a background designed to resemble a “computer
chip” whereas we did not, but the stimuli are otherwise
isomorphic). In each exemplar, one of the two shapes was
larger than the other, one was darker than the other, one
was in front of the other, and one was above the other. In the
prototype of category A (never seen by subjects), the circle
was larger, darker, above and in front of the square; in the
prototype of category B, the square was larger, darker,
above and in front of the circle. In any given exemplar seen
by a subject, exactly three of these relations were shared
1. Doumas, Hummel, & Sandhofer (2008) predict that intersection
discovery is essential, not only to learn entire relational schemas,
but also to acquire basic relations, such above and larger-than.

with the prototype of the exemplar’s category and one was
shared with the exemplar of the opposite category (e.g., an
exemplar of A might have the circle larger, darker and
above [A-prototype relations] but behind [a B-prototype
relation] the square).
The first hypothesis we explored is that people are simply
biased toward learning based on features rather than
relations. To test this hypothesis, one factor varied whether
the instructions to subjects explicitly stated which (and
therefore that) relations were relevant to category
membership. To the extent that the results of Kittur et al.
(2004) reflect a bias against using relations for
categorization, naming the relations should facilitate
category learning
The second hypothesis we tested was that, rather than
being unable to learn relational categories with a family
resemblance structure (as Kittur et al., 2004, concluded),
people are simply biased against assuming that relational
categories will have a family resemblance structure. That is,
faced with relational categories, perhaps people simply
assume that those categories will have some defining (i.e.,
deterministic; invariant) relation—for example, an essence
(see Keil, 1989; Medin & Ortony, 1989)—that is shared by
all members of the category, and that this assumption
caused Kittur et al.’s subjects to adopt a suboptimal learning
strategy. To test this hypothesis, the second factor varied
whether a clue was given. In the clue condition the
instructions explicitly informed subjects that no single
property would always work as the basis for categorizing
the exemplars. In the no clue condition, no such clue was
provided. To the extent that subjects are biased against
assuming a family resemblance category structure given
relational categories, providing this clue should help them to
adopt a more appropriate learning strategy, especially when
the relations were also named.
Our final hypothesis started with Kittur et al.’s (2004)
conclusion: If it is difficult to learn relational categories that
have a family resemblance structure, then anything that
encourages subjects to discover and predicate a property—
e.g., a higher-order relation over the first-order relations—
that does remain invariant across all members of a category
ought to substantially improve relational category learning
(since the categories, although probabilistic in the first-order
relations, would now be deterministic in the higher-order
relation). To test this hypothesis, in the categorize condition,
subjects were instructed to learn the category of each
stimulus, as in Kittur et al. In the who’s winning condition,
we told subjects they would see displays consisting of a
circle and a square, and that in each display “either the
circle is winning or the square is winning,” and that their
task was to figure out which one was winning. In all other
respects, the who’s winning task was identical to the
categorize task: In any stimulus that would be categorized as
a member of category A, the circle was “winning”, and in
any stimulus that would be categorized as a B, the square
was “winning.”

1043

The “who’s winning” task could encourage subjects to
discover an invariant that holds across all members of a
“category” (even though subjects in this condition did not
know they were learning categories) in at least two ways.
First, subjects might semantically “mark” the “winning”
role of each relation (e.g., the larger role of larger, the
darker role of darker, etc.) and then notice, at the level of
semantic features, that either the circle or square has more
“winning features,” effectively changing the “who’s
winning” task from a relational judgment to a featural one
(namely, “which shape is currently bound to more ‘winning’
features?”; see Hummel & Holyoak, 2003). Alternatively,
the “who’s winning” task could activate schemas
participants have for situations in which one person or team
wins and another loses; such a schema might encourage
subjects to predicate a higher-order relation of the form
“more winning relations on the circle/square,” which would
remain invariant over members of a category. In either case,
even though no (nominally relevant) first-order relation
would remain invariant over all members of a category, at
least one feature or higher-order relation would. If the
presence vs. absence of an invariant is key to the learnability
of relational categories (as concluded by Kittur et al., 2004),
then subjects in the who’s winning condition might learn
faster than subjects in the categorize condition.

Method
Participants. A total of 154 subjects participated in the
study for course credit. Each participant was randomly
assigned to one of the eight conditions.

Design. The experiment used a 2 (relations named vs. not
named) X 2 (clue vs. no clue) X 2 (categorize vs. who’s
winning task) between-subjects design.
Procedure. Participants were given different instructions
based on the condition to which they belonged. After
indicating that they fully understood the instructions,
participants proceeded to the learning phase. Trials were
presented in blocks of 16, with each exemplar presented in a
random order once per block. In the categorize condition,
subjects were instructed to press the A key if the stimulus
belonged to category A and the B key if it belonged to B; in
the who’s winning condition, they were instructed to press
the A key if the circle was winning and the B key if the
square was winning (i.e., the stimulus-response mapping
was identical across tasks, since in all members of A the
circle “wins” and in all members of B the square “wins”).
Each exemplar remained on the screen until the participant
responded. Responses were followed by accuracy feedback
(i.e., the correct category label). The experiment consisted
of 60 blocks (960 trials) and continued until the participant
responded correctly on at least fourteen of sixteen trials
(87.5% correct) for two consecutive blocks or until all 60
blocks had transpired, whichever came first. At the end of
the experiment, participants answered a debriefing
questionnaire that queried them about the strategies they
used during the experiment.

Results

Materials. Subjects were first given instructions to
categorize the stimuli (categorize condition) or decide
whether the circle or square was winning (who’s winning
task), which either named the relevant relations (relations
named) or not (not named) and either provided the “no
single property will always work” clue (clue condition) or
not (no clue).
After the instructions, all conditions were identical. On
each trial following the instructions, an examplar consisting
of a gray circle and a gray square appeared in the middle of
the computer screen. The properties of the exemplars were
determined by a family resemblance category structure
defined over the relevant first-order relations. The
prototypes of the categories were defined as [1,1,1,1] for
category A and [0,0,0,0] for B, where [1,1,1,1] represents a
circle larger, darker, on top of, and in front of a square and
[0,0,0,0] represents a circle smaller, lighter, below and
behind a square. Exemplars of each category were made by
switching the value of one relation in the prototype (e.g.,
category A exemplar [1,1,1,0] would have the circle larger,
darker, on top of and behind the square). Two variants of
each logical structure were constructed by varying the
metric properties size and darkness, respecting categorical
relations larger and darker, resulting in eight exemplars per
category.

Trials to criterion. Since our primary interest is the rate at
which participants learn the categories, we report our data
first in terms of trials to criterion. These analyses are
conservative (i.e., biased against our hypotheses) in the
sense that participants who never learned to criterion were
treated as though they reached criterion on the last block.
Figure 1 shows the mean trials to criterion by condition. A 2
(relation name vs. no name) × 2 (clue vs. no clue) × 2
(categorize vs. who’s winning) between-subjects ANOVA
revealed a main effect of task [F(1, 145) = 25.826, MSE =
2,267,729, p < 0.001], reflecting the fact that participants
took reliably fewer trials to reach criterion in the who’s
winning task (M = 211, SD = 261) than in the categorize
task (M = 453, SD = 339). No other main effects were
statistically reliable. However, here was a reliable
interaction between relation naming and clue, indicating
that the effect of providing the clue was more pronounced
for relation not named than for relation named [F(1, 145) =
5.98, MSE = 525,066, p < 0.05]. Finally, there was a reliable
three-way interaction between relation name, clue, and task
[F(1, 145) = 4.10, MSE = 359,946, p < 0.05]. As shown in
Figure 1, relation naming interacted with the clue differently
across the two tasks. With the who’s winning task, the effect
of the clue was roughly equivalent to the effect of naming
the relations, with each reducing trials to criterion. By
contrast, for participants given the categorize task, naming
the relations without providing the clue and providing the
clue without naming the relations were both beneficial

1044

Trials to criterion

700
600
500

No naming
Naming

400
300
200
100

No clue

had not yet reached criterion by that block. Participants who
survived to block 60 never reached criterion.) As shown in
Figure 2, a higher proportion of participants reached
criterion in the who’s winning condition than in the
categorize condition, and they did so much faster.
1

Proportion of survivors

relative to doing neither (i.e., there were trends such that
trials to criterion were lower in both the relations named, no
clue and categorize and the relations not named, clue, and
categorize conditions than in the relations not named, no
clue and categorize condition, although these trends did not
reach statistical reliability in our sample); but both naming
the relations and providing the clue together did not
facilitate category learning, and in fact the trend went in the
opposite direction (i.e., trials to criterion tended toward
being greater in the relations named, clue and categorize
condition than in the relations not named, no clue and
categorize condition).
Of particular interest is the fact that the condition that
gave rise to the worst performance with the categorize task
(and overall)—specifically, the relation named and clue
condition, with only 50% of participants learning to
criterion (and a mean of 623 trials to criterion)—gave rise to
the best performance with the who’s winning task (and
overall), with 95% of participants learning to criterion (and
a mean of 160 trials to criterion). We address the possible
reasons for this effect in the Discussion.

Categorize task
Who's winning task

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
1

7 13 19 25 31 37 43 49 55

Figure 2. Proportion of survivors per block for each task.
Response Times. Since participants in the categorize,
relations named, and clue condition required so many more
trials to reach criterion than participants in the who’s
winning, relations named and clue condition, we also
analyzed these conditions in terms of participants’ mean
response times on individual trials in order to gain insight
about the strategies participants in these two conditions may
have adopted. Response times in the relations named, clue
and categorize condition (M = 1.69 s) were reliably shorter
than those in the relations named, clue and who’s winning
condition (M = 3.31 s) [t(35) = -4.45, p < 0.001]. The
reasons for this speed-accuracy tradeoff are addressed in the
Discussion.

Clue

Discussion

Trials to criterion

700
600
500

No naming
Naming

400
300
200
100

No clue

Clue

Figure1. Mean number of trials required by subjects in each
task to reach criterion. Top and bottom figure correspond to
the categorize and the who’s winning tasks, respectively.
Survival function. We also analyzed how many
participants reached criterion by the end of each block. The
resulting survival functions for the who’s winning and
categorize conditions are shown in Figure 2. (A
participant’s having “survived” on a given block means they

Kittur et al. (2004) showed that people find relational
categories with a probabilistic (family resemblance)
structure disproportionately difficult to learn relative to
featural categories with a family resemblance structure or
relational categories with a deterministic structure. They
interpreted this effect in terms of people invoking schema
induction (via intersection discovery) when faced with
relationally-defined categories, an approach that yields
useful relational schemas (Doumas et al., 2008; Hummel &
Holyoak, 2003) and succeeds with deterministic category
structures, but fails catastrophically with family
resemblance category structures.
We sought to better understand this phenomenon by
investigating conditions under which people might succeed
at learning relational categories with a (nominally) family
resemblance structure. Our results showed that recasting
category learning as a “who’s winning” task substantially
improved participants’ ability to learn relational categories
with a family resemblance structure. Faced with the “who’s
winning” task, other factors that might sensibly be expected
to improve learning—specifically, naming the relevant
relations and informing participants that no single relation

1045

will work every time—seemed to improve performance
(although not all these trends were statistically reliable in
our data). Surprisingly, however, when combined, these
factors did not improve the learning of participants charged
with the (formally equivalent) task of categorizing the
stimuli: Although each factor individually seemed to
improve learning of our probabilistic relational categories,
when combined they substantially impaired learning.
The reasons for this trend toward an impairment of
learning in the relations named, clue and categorize
condition relative to the relations not named, no clue and
categorize condition are not entirely clear, but it is
consistent with the pattern that would be expected if
participants in the relations named, clue and categorize
condition were attempting to categorize the exemplars based
on their features (i.e., the absolute size and darkness of the
circle and square) rather than the relations between them.
This conclusion is supported by the fact that response times
were fastest in the relations named, clue and categorize
condition (1.69 s per trial) and slowest in the relations
named, clue and who’s winning condition (3.31s per trial),
as though participants in the former condition were
responding on the basis of readily perceptible features
whereas those in the latter were actively seeking unseen
higher-order invariant properties or relations. A post-hoc
analysis of participants’ end-of-experiment self-reports also
supports this conclusion: In their descriptions of the
strategies they used during the experiment, participants in
the relations named, clue and categorize condition named
stimulus features (e.g., “dark”, “large”, etc.) rather than
dimensions (“darkness”, “size”) or relations (“darker”,
“larger”) more often than participants in any of the other
conditions (19 times vs. a mean of 8.29 times [SD = 4.39]
across the other conditions).
These patterns suggest that participants in the relations
named, clue and categorize condition may have simply
abandoned the use of the first-order relations (larger, darker,
above and in front) as the basis for categorization and, rather
than discovering a useful higher-order relation, simply
retreated to a strategy based on the exemplars’ features. At
the same time, however, it remains unclear why only the
participants in this condition would resort to this
maladaptive strategy, especially given the absence of
evidence that even participants in the relations not named,
clue and categorize condition did not resort to this strategy:
These latter participants were not even informed that the
relations would be important to the task, and yet they show
greater evidence of using them than the participants who (in
all other respects treated equivalently) were told outright to
pay attention to the relations. Perhaps being told what the
relevant relations were, in combination with the clue that no
single one of them would work every time, had the
counterproductive (and counterintuitive) effect of helping
these participants know which relations to ignore in their
categorizations. Additional experiments will be required to
answer this question.

More important for our current purposes is the fact that,
as predicted, changing the task from a category learning task
to a “who’s winning” task substantially improved our
participants’ ability to discover what separated stimuli
requiring an “A” response (i.e., members of category A or,
equivalently, stimuli in which the circle was “winning”)
from those requiring a “B” response. Importantly, this
improvement obtained even though the formal task—i.e.,
the specific stimulus-response mappings—were identical
across the categorize and who’s winning conditions. This
improvement is consistent with the idea that the “who’s
winning” task encouraged participants to search for a
relational invariant that remained constant across all
members of a category. Our data do not allow us to know
whether the invariant participants discovered was some sort
of higher-order relation (e.g., “the majority of the first-order
relations support such-and-such”) versus a re-representation
of the first-order relations in terms of semantic primitives
permitting a more feature-based approach to deciding
whether the circle or square was “winning”. It is also
unclear to what extent the “who’s winning?” task improves
performance simply by somehow making the first-order
relations more meaningful.
These questions are the subject of ongoing research. But
regardless of which (if any) of these possibilities turns out to
be the case, the findings reported here are consistent with
Kittur et al.’s (2004) conclusion that learning a relational
categorization is greatly facilitated by the discovery of an
abstract invariant of some sort that holds true across all
members of a category. As such, our data support the idea
that relational category learning may entail some form of
intersection discovery.
Our findings also suggest that the traditional format of the
laboratory category learning task may, for some reason,
inhibit the discovery of the invariants necessary for
intersection discovery to succeed. Instead other tasks (such
as our “who’s winning?” task) may be better suited to this
purpose: It appears that probabilistic relational categories
may be more learnable if you don’t think you’re engaged in
category learning. Indeed, the fact that participants in our
relations named, clue and categorize condition took the
longest of all our participants to reach criterion—and were
least likely to reach it—suggests that one of the worst things
you can do to a person who is attempting to learn
probabilistic relational categories is tell them that they are
attempting to learn probabilistic relational categories.
Finally, it is worth noting that our results and those of
Kittur et al. (2004, 2006) raise the question of whether
natural relational concepts and categories tend to have a
deterministic or probabilistic structure. Do ad-hoc categories,
such as “things to remove from a burning house”, “ways to
escape the mob” and “things to take on a winter camping
trip” (Barsalou, 1983) have a relational invariant that holds
true across all members of the category? Does our tendency
to assume the existence of (invariant) “essences” in
biological categories reflect a desire for invariants in
relational categories? And do schemas and theories tend to

1046

possess relational invariants? For example, is there a
relational core that all members of the category “mother”
have in common? Although at first it is tempting to say yes,
the differences between birth mothers and adoptive mothers,
and between loving mothers and abusive mothers, suggest
that the answer might be no. If the answer is no, then do
people have difficulty acquiring an all-encompassing
schema for the concept “mother”? Or do we simply have
multiple “mother” schemas?
The work of Kittur et al. (2004) suggests that schemas,
theories and ad-hoc categories must either contain relational
invariants or else be difficult to acquire. The findings
presented here suggest that they may not be so difficult to
acquire, even if they lack invariants among their first-order
relations, provided the conditions under which they are
learned promote the discovery of an invariant higher-order
relation.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by AFOSR Grant # FA955007-1-0147. We are grateful to David Landy for helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

References
Anggoro, F., Gentner, D., & Klibanoff, R. (2005). How to
go from nest to home: Children’s learning of relational
categories. Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 133-138.
Barsalou, L. W. (1993). Flexibility, structure, and
linguistic vagary in concepts: Manifestations of a
compositional system of perceptual symbols. In A.C.
Collins, S.E. Gathercole, & M.A. Conway (Eds.),
Theories of memory (pp. 29-101). London: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A. (1956). A
study of thinking. Oxford, England: John Wiley and
Sons.
Doumas. L. A. A., Hummel, J. E., & Sandhofer, C. M.
(2008). A theory of the discovery and predication of
relational concepts. Psychological Review, 115, 1 - 43.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7,
155-170.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema
induction
and
analogical
transfer.
Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Holland, J. H., Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E., &
Thagard, P. R. (1986). Induction: Processes of
Inference, Learning, and Discovery. Cambridge,
MA, US: The MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Keil, F. C. (1989), Concepts, kinds and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kittur, A., Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2004).
Featurevs.
relation-defined
categories:

Probab(alistic)ly Not the Same. Proceedings of the
Twenty Six Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 696-701.
Kittur, A., Holyoak, K. J., & Hummel, J. E. (2006).
Using ideal observers in higher-order human
category learning. Proceedings of the Twenty
Eight Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 435-440.
Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist
model
of
category
learning.
Psychological Review, 99, 22-44.
Kruschke, J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of
probabilistic
category
learning.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 25, 1083-1119.
Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context
theory of classification learning. Psychological
Review, 85, 207-238.
Medin, D. L., & Smith, E. E. (1981). Strategies and
classification learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning & Memory, 7, 241-253.
Medin, D. L., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological
essentialism. In S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony
(Eds.), Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 179195). New York: Cambridge, University Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of
theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological
Review, 92, 289-316.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1992). Exemplars, prototypes, and
similarity rules. Exemplars, prototypes, and similarity
rules. In A. F. Healy, & S. M. Kosslyn (Eds.), Essays in
honor of William K. Estes. (pp. 149-167). Hillsdale, NJ,
England: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Pirolli, P. L., & Anderson, J. R. (1985). The role of
practice in fact retrieval. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 11, 136153.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family
resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Ross, B. H., & Spalding, T. L. (1994). Concepts and
categories. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Thinking and
problem solving (pp119-148). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press, Inc.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Styvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM--retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 145-166.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D. M. (1981). Categories and
concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

1047

