UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processing Time Evidence for a Default-Interventionist Model of Probability Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6sc1970f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gillard, Ellen
Schaeken, Walter
Van Doorden, Wim
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

3URFHVVLQJ7LPH(YLGHQFHIRUD'HIDXOW,QWHUYHQWLRQLVW0RGHORI3UREDELOLW\
-XGJPHQWV

(OOHQ*LOODUG HOOHQJLOODUG#SHGNXOHXYHQEH 

Centre for Instructional Psychology and Technology, Vesaliusstraat 2
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

:LP9DQ'RRUHQ ZLPYDQGRRUHQ#SHGNXOHXYHQEH 

Centre for Instructional Psychology and Technology, Vesaliusstraat 2
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

:DOWHU6FKDHNHQ ZDOWHUVFKDHNHQ#SV\NXOHXYHQEH 
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

/LHYHQ9HUVFKDIIHO OLHYHQYHUVFKDIIHO#SHGNXOHXYHQEH 

Centre for Instructional Psychology and Technology, Vesaliusstraat 2
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
$EVWUDFW
We report an experiment examining dual-process models of
probability judgments. Participants had to judge which of two
samples provided the best chances of picking a target. Often,
participants based their judgment on a comparison of the
absolute frequencies of the targets instead of on the ratios.
The comparison of the absolute frequencies of the targets was
either congruent with the comparison of the ratios (congruent
condition), or not (incongruent condition). In this study, the
proportion of incongruent (versus congruent) trials was
manipulated. Accuracy rates and reaction times were
recorded. Accuracy rates for incongruent items decreased but
remained unchanged for congruent items when more
congruent items were presented. The most striking reaction
time result is that the RTs for correct responses to congruent
items drastically increased when fewer such items were
presented, whereas the RTs for correct and incorrect
responses to incongruent items remained unchanged. This
increase in RTs for correct responses to congruent items runs
counter to the parallel-competitive model, but can in our
opinion be reconciled with a default-interventionist model.
.H\ZRUGV dual-process models, probability judgment,
reasoning.

,QWURGXFWLRQ
In this paper we investigated probability judgments.
Participants had to judge which of two samples provided the
best chances of picking a target. Participants are known to
have the tendency to base their responses on a comparison
of the absolute frequencies of the target instead of on the
ratios (Babai, Brecher, Stavy, & Tirosh, 2006; Falk, Falk, &
Levin, 1980; Green, 1983). In other words, they neglect the
denominators in their judgment. Sometimes the judgment
based on the absolute frequencies of the targets (e.g., black
marbles in a box containing both black and white marbles)
will be FRQJUXHQW with the judgment based on the ratios
(e.g., Figure 1a), but the task can easily be modified to

create an LQFRQJUXHQW item (e.g., Figure 1b). Comparison of
the absolute frequencies of the targets then no longer results
in correct probability judgments. The basic congruency
effect (i.e., the lower accuracy for incongruent trials than for
congruent ones) has been demonstrated before, but the
extension of this experiment comparing dual-process
accounts is novel. We will first introduce the general dualprocess framework.
According to the dual-process view, people have two
systems for decision-making: one fast, automatic, and
heuristic based, and the other slower, constrained by
working memory (WM) capacity, and analytic (e.g., Evans
2008). Even though heuristic processing often leads to
correct judgments, it can also bias reasoning in some
situations (the incongruent conditions). Dual-process
researchers posit that participants have a tendency to rely on
heuristic processes instead of on analytic processes. This
way, they can account for participants’ failure to provide the
normatively correct responses on a range of reasoning tasks.
The dual-process framework is frequently used to
interpret performance when judging probabilities. That, is
the tendency to rely on a comparison of the absolute
frequencies of the targets would result from heuristic or
intuitive processes (e.g. Babai, et al., 2006; Reyna &
Brainerd, 2008; Stavy & Tirosh, 2000). A judgment based
on a comparison of the ratios on the other hand would be the
outcome of analytic processes.
Evidence for a dual-process account of performance on
this task was found in that correct judgments on congruent
items and incorrect judgments on incongruent items have
been observed to correspond with smaller latencies than
correct responses to incongruent items (Babai et al., 2006).
Also, under time pressure the congruency effect increased
(Gillard, Van Dooren, Schaeken, & Verschaffel, 2008). That
is, more errors were made on incongruent items, whereas
accuracy remained unchanged for congruent ones. In the

1792

same study, a similar response pattern for accuracy rates
was observed when participants were asked to solve the task
while simultaneously solving an attention demanding
secondary task. Therefore it was concluded that the
tendency to neglect the denominators exhibits two
quintessential features of heuristic processes: fastness and
effortlessness.
Our first goal was to investigate whether the tendency to
neglect the denominators is sensitive to a manipulation of
H[SHFWDWLRQV. We manipulated the proportion of incongruent
(versus congruent) trials: One group of participants received
a task with 80% incongruent trials whereas the other group
received a task where only 20% of the trials were
incongruent. If neglecting the denominators is sensitive to
the expectation that a comparison of the absolute
frequencies of the targets is not sufficient to yield a correct
response, we expect a KLJKHU SURSRUWLRQ RI LQFRQJUXHQW
YHUVXV FRQJUXHQW  LWHPV to result in a VPDOOHU FRQJUXHQF\
HIIHFW. That is, we expect fewer errors on incongruent items,
but we expect accuracy for congruent items to remain
unchanged.
The exact way in which heuristic and analytic processes
interact in this type of task has not yet been investigated.
Therefore the second goal was to clarify how the processes
compete to determine responding by registering the reaction
times. In the dual process literature, different models have
been proposed about this interaction. 3UHHPSWLYH PRGHOV
(e.g., Klaczynski, 2000) assume that people employ
decision strategies that decide at onset whether the heuristic
or analytic route will be followed in order to prevent
potential conflicts. 3DUDOOHOFRPSHWLWLYH PRGHOV (e.g.,
Epstein, 1994; Sloman, 1996), on the other hand, assume
that the two pathways are always (simultaneously)
activated. If both processes result in the same outcome, that
response is given. If not, the conflict must be resolved in
order to give the correct response. Another possibility is the
GHIDXOWLQWHUYHQWLRQLVW PRGHO, where it is assumed that the
heuristic response is the default, unless intervening analytic
processes override it (e.g., De Neys & Glumicic, 2008;
Evans, 2007; Kahneman & Frederick, 2005). We believe the
expectancy manipulation and the latency recordings can
help to disentangle the way in which the heuristic and the
analytic processes interact in this probability task. We will
discuss now each of the three models in more detail.
Pre-emptive models are models of FRQIOLFW DYRLGDQFH
rather than of FRQIOLFW UHVROXWLRQ (Evans, 2007). They
assume that there is some superficial feature of the problem
that cues either heuristic or analytic processes when
scrutinizing the problem. It is decided at onset, whether the
analytic or heuristic route will be followed. An example is
the selective scrutiny model (Evans, Barston, & Pollard,
1983) for syllogistic reasoning. In the case of the probability
task under investigation, a pre-emptive model seems
psychologically implausible to us because the different
items do not differ from each other in any immediately
visible way. For this reason, it seems unlikely that by

scrutinizing the problem, a decision can be made whether
heuristic or analytic processes will be applied.
A parallel-competitive account for this task has been
provided by some authors (e.g., Babai et al., 2006). They
have suggested that as the absolute frequency of the black
marbles is the salient feature, it is automatically processed
and compared. This processing would run parallel to the
comparison of the black-to-white marbles ratios. When the
processing of the absolute frequencies of the black marbles
and of the ratios result in the same conclusion (congruent
condition), this is the end of processing. If they result in two
different conclusions (incongruent condition), the conflict
has to be resolved. The analytic processes have the capacity
to inhibit the heuristic-based response. But the heuristics
can also be so pervasive that people fail to inhibit the
heuristic-based response.
Because both processes run simultaneously according to
the parallel-competitive account, even when people err on
incongruent items, this model predicts that people should be
“aware” of the conflict between the outcome of comparing
the absolute frequencies of the targets and the ratios (De
Neys & Glumicic, 2008; Evans 2007). Such conflict
awareness would obviously arise for incongruent items
only. This should lead to longer reaction times (RTs) of
incorrect responses to incongruent items than for correct
responses to congruent items. These latter items should
always be very fast because of the absence of conflict. But
the RTs for incorrect responses to incongruent items should
still be shorter than RTs for correct responses to those items,
because in the latter cases the heuristic-based response was
successfully inhibited.
The parallel-competitive processing model would predict
a smaller congruency effect in the 80%-incongruent
condition. More frequent confrontations with the conflict
between heuristic and analytic processes might facilitate the
inhibition of the heuristic-based response and hence increase
accuracy for incongruent items.
As we said before, according to the parallel-competitive
model, when no conflict between heuristic and analytic
processing occurs, no additional time is needed. For this
reason, the model would not predict a difference in RTs for
congruent items. Also for the other response types, the
model does not predict a difference in RTs between
conditions. Hence, the same RT pattern is expected within
both conditions: namely that correct responses for
incongruent items take longer than incorrect responses on
those items, and that incorrect responses for incongruent
items take longer than correct responses for congruent ones.
In a default-interventionist model, heuristic and analytic
processes are sequentially engaged. An example of a
default-interventionist model is Evans’ (2006) revised
heuristic-analytic model. In such a model, a problem is
always processed heuristically first and a default response is
provided. After that, analytic processes may or may not be
engaged. If engaged, these analytic processes evaluate the
heuristic outcome. They can refute the heuristic outcome
and alter it, but often they tend to satisfy the heuristic

1793

outcome. That is, they accept the heuristic response if it is
plausible.
In the case of the probability task we use in our
experiment, a default-interventionist model would assume
that participants start with comparing the absolute
frequencies of the targets. Their judgment will be based on
this comparison if no analytic processes are engaged or if
the analytic processes merely satisfy the heuristic outcome.
Only when the analytic processes refute the heuristic
outcome and alter it by comparing the ratios, a correct
response will be made.
A default-interventionist model would further predict that
heuristic-based responses require less time than analyticbased responses. Unlike in the parallel-competitive model,
there is no reason to assume that incorrect responses to
incongruent items should be more time-consuming than
correct responses to congruent items. A defaultinterventionist model does, however, predict that correct
responses to incongruent items should take longer than
incorrect responses to those items.
A default-interventionist model would also predict a
smaller congruency effect in the 80%-incongruent
condition. The experience that going down the analytic
route is worth the effort in most cases (because the default
response was incorrect) would motivate the participant to
engage more in analytic processes. Evans (2006) names
motivation as one of the possible factors that might
influence the engagement of analytic processes.
According
to
a
default-interventionist
model,
manipulating the proportion of incongruent (versus
congruent) items should not only affect the congruency
effect with regard to accuracy rates but also with regard to
the RTs. Since the model predicts that correct responses for
congruent items will more often result from analytic
processes when more incongruent (versus congruent) items
are present, the RTs for correctly solved congruent items
should also be longer compared to the condition where
fewer incongruent (versus congruent) items are present.

for course credit. They solved congruent and incongruent
items. The proportion of incongruent (versus congruent)
trials was manipulated. For one group (n = 44) 80% of the
trials were congruent trials (and 20% were incongruent
ones). The other group (n = 44) received 20% congruent
trials (and 80% incongruent ones).

0DWHULDOV
On each trial, participants were presented with two boxes,
both of which contained black and white marbles.
Participants were asked to decide which of both boxes had
the highest probability of picking a black marble. There
were two types of items, congruent and incongruent ones.
Figure 1 presents an example of each. For congruent items
the box with the highest frequency of black marbles also
had the highest probability of picking a black marble. For
incongruent items, the box with the highest frequency of
targets provided a lower probability of picking a black
marble. There were 120 trials. For all items, the difference
between both boxes in the true probability of picking a
black marble was always higher than 20% but lower than
30%. We also took care that the total numbers of marbles,
and the amount of white marbles was not always highest or
lowest in the box that was the correct answer.

3URFHGXUH
General task instructions were given to familiarize
participants with the task and procedure. The first 10 trials
were practice trials, thereafter 120 experimental items were
presented. For all trials (practice and experimental trials),
the proportion of incongruent trials (versus congruent trials)
was either 20 or 80%. The inter-stimulus interval was 500
ms (a fixation cross was presented). Participants pressed a
key to indicate their response, first box (alphanumeric ‘1’
key) or second box (‘2’ key). No feedback was given.
The trials were semi-randomly presented with the
restrictions that (a) the correct response could not be the
same on more than three consecutive trials; (b) the intuitive
response could not be the same on more than three
consecutive trials. After completion of the first block,
participants continued with the second block without a
pause or warning.

5HVXOWV
(a)

$FFXUDF\5DWHV

(b)

Figure 1: Example of (a) a congruent and (b) an
incongruent item.

0HWKRG
3DUWLFLSDQWVDQGGHVLJQ
The participants were 88 first-year (undergraduate) students
from the University of Leuven, who participated in return

Table 1 presents the basic findings. Participants erred
significantly more often on incongruent items. The crucial
finding is the interaction with the manipulation of
expectation: the congruency effect is larger in the condition
with fewer incongruent trials: The difference in accuracy
between congruent and incongruent items increases from
18% when 80% of the trials are incongruent to 33% when
20% of the trials are incongruent.
The repeated measurements ANOVA produced a
significant main effect of item type: )(1,86) = 40.64, S <

1794

.01, S ð = 0.32. Condition was marginally significant: )(1,
86) = 3.86, S = .05, S ð = 0.04. Also the interaction between
item type and block was marginally significant: )(1, 86) =
3.38, S = .07, S ð = 0.03.
Table 1: Accuracy results for congruent and incongruent
trials for each condition.
Condition
20% incongruent
80% incongruent

Congruency
C
I
C
I

Mean VWGHY
97,10
 
64,11
 
97,92
 
79,71
 

5HDFWLRQ7LPHV
Figure 2 presents the RTs in each condition for three types
of responses: correct responses to congruent items, incorrect
responses to incongruent items, and correct responses to
incongruent items. In the ‘20%-incongruent’ condition it is
clear that correct responses to incongruent items take
considerably longer than the other two response types. In
the ‘80%-incongruent’ condition, however, it is clear that
not only the correct responses to incongruent items but also
correct responses to congruent items take considerably
longer.
3,25

ORJ 57 PV

3,20



3,15
3,10
3,05
3,00
2,95
2,90

congruent correct
incongruent correct
incongruent intuitive

5HVSRQVHW\SH

Figure 2: RTs for three response types: correct responses to
congruent items (congruent correct), incorrect responses to
incongruent items (incongruent incorrect), and correct
responses to incongruent items (incongruent correct), for the
80%-incongruent (dotted line) and 20%-incongruent
condition (full line).
The repeated measurements ANOVA produced a significant
main effect of response type, )(2, 172) = 9.76, S < .01, S ð
= 0.10. There was no main effect of condition )(1, 86) =
1.50, S = .22, S ð= 0.02. The interaction between response
type and condition was also significant, )(2, 172) = 5.61, S
< .01, S ð = 0.06. Missing data in each condition were

replaced by the log RT mean of that response type. It should
be noted that the RTs for correct responses are based on
more trials (97% for congruent items and 79% or 64% for
incongruent items) than for incorrect trials (20% or 35% for
incongruent items).
Post-hoc comparisons (Duncan’ s MRT) revealed that the
RTs for correct responses to incongruent items in the 20%incongruent condition are significantly higher than RTs for
incorrect responses to those items, S< .01. They were also
higher than correct responses to congruent items, S < .01.
Correct responses to congruent items and incorrect
responses to incongruent items did not significantly differ in
their RTs, S = .53.
In the 80%-incongruent condition, the RTs for correct
responses to congruent items did not statistically differ from
those for correct responses to incongruent items, S = .29.
Incorrect responses to incongruent items were significantly
faster than both correct responses to those items, S = .05,
and than correct responses to congruent items, S < .01.
The significant condition × response type interaction
effect was mainly due to a significant increase in RTs of
correct responses to congruent items, S = .02. For incorrect
responses to incongruent items there was no statistically
reliable difference between both conditions, S = .33. The
same was true for correct responses to incongruent items, S
= .71.

'LVFXVVLRQ
Both the parallel-competitive model and the defaultinterventionist model predicted the increase of the
congruency effect in the presence of more congruent items.
In the parallel-competitive model, the effect can be
explained by facilitation in inhibiting the heuristic-based
response when a conflict occurs. A default-interventionist
model can explain the finding by stating that in the 20%incongruent condition, participants more often experience
that going down the analytic route yields the same response
as staying with the heuristic-based outcome. This makes the
monitoring component of the analytic system lax and cause
participants to rely more on the heuristic processes in this
condition.
The analysis of the RTs favors according to us a defaultinterventionist model over a parallel-competitive model for
two reasons. First, the finding that in the 20%-incongruent
condition, the RTs for incorrect responses to incongruent
items are similar to the RTs of correct responses to
congruent items runs counter to the prediction of the
parallel-competitive model. In that model, RTs of the first
type of response should be slower than RTs of the second
type of response (but still faster than those of correct
responses to incongruent items), because for incongruent
items, heuristic and analytic processes cue different
responses. The resulting conflict should slow down the
respondent, even when they fail to resolve the conflict in
favor of the analytic outcome. The default-interventionist
model, on the other hand, includes a straight heuristic
pathway and can therefore account for this RT finding.

1795

Second, the most striking RT result is that RTs of correct
responses to congruent items drastically increase when more
incongruent (versus congruent) items are present. Again,
this finding runs counter to a parallel-competitive model.
According to this model, there is no reason why the
processing of congruent items should take longer even when
those items are less frequent. In a parallel-competitive
model heuristic and analytic processes run simultaneously
and because for congruent items the processes do not
conflict, there would be no need for a deeper processing
under any circumstances.
A default-interventionist model on the other hand can
account for this finding by claiming that the more frequent
experience that going down the analytic route merited the
effort (because the outcome was not the same as the
heuristic-based outcome), causes participants to also follow
this analytic path when solving the less frequent congruent
items. This explanation makes sense under the assumption
that congruent and incongruent items cannot be
distinguished before having compared the ratios of the two
samples.
We now give our interpretation of the probability
judgment task under consideration according to a defaultinterventionist model. In such a model, the role of the
heuristic processes is in selecting the (seemingly) most
relevant information. In this case this would be the absolute
frequency of the targets. Many others consider the absolute
frequency the most salient property, the ‘gist’ of the
problem information (e.g., Reyna & Brainerd, 2008; Stavy
and Tirosh, 2000). The monitoring component of the
analytic system then evaluates whether the heuristic-based
outcome is reasonable, or whether it should be altered.
Often, people stop processing the problem at that point. This
means that they will go straight down the heuristic route and
base their judgment on the comparison of the absolute
frequencies of the targets (i.e., they neglect the denominator,
the total number of marbles in each box). The experience
that refuting the heuristic-based response and going down
the analytic route is not worth the effort, in the sense that
the outcome is the same (as is most frequently the case
when a majority of the items are congruent), makes people
more lax in their responding (and therefore faster but more
error-prone), according to a default-interventionist model.

&RQFOXVLRQ
The expectancy manipulation shows that despite the
tendency to base ones judgment on a comparison of the
absolute frequencies of the targets, this behavior can be
controlled to a certain extent. When the proportion of
incongruent (versus congruent) items is large, one tends to
question the judgment based on the absolute frequencies
more often, and alter the heuristic-based outcome by
comparing the ratios. That is, by taking the denominator
into account. This leads to higher accuracy scores on
incongruent items and longer RTs for congruent items. The
longer RTs for congruent items can be explained by the fact
that congruent and incongruent items cannot be

distinguished before having compared the ratios of the two
samples. Hence, the heuristic-based outcome is refuted by
the monitoring component of the analytic system for these
items as well, and the judgment is based on the comparison
of the ratios. These findings run counter to a parallelcompetitive model but can according to us be accounted for
by a default interventionist model.

$FNQRZOHGJPHQWV
This research was partially supported by Grant GOA
2006/01 “Developing adaptive expertise in mathematics
education” from the Research Fund of the K.U.Leuven,
Belgium. Wim Van Dooren is a post-doctoral researcher of the
Research Fund K.U.Leuven.

5HIHUHQFHV
Babai, R., Brecher, T., Stavy, R., & Tirosh, D., (2006).
Intuitive interference in probabilistic reasoning.
International -RXUQDO RI 6FLHQFH DQG 0DWKHPDWLFV
(GXFDWLRQ 627-639.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual-process theories of reasoning. &RJQLWLRQ 12481299.
Epstein, S. (1994). Integration of the cognitive and
psychodynamic unconscious. $PHULFDQ 3V\FKRORJLVW 
709-724.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2006). The heuristic-analytic theory of
reasoning: Extension and evaluation. 3V\FKRQRPLF
%XOOHWLQDQG5HYLHZ 378-395.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2007). On the resolution of conflict in
dual-process theories of reasoning. 7KLQNLQJ DQG
5HDVRQLQJ 321-329.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
reasoning, judgement and social cognition. $QQXDO
5HYLHZRI3V\FKRORJ\ 255-278.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Barston, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On
the conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic
reasoning. 0HPRU\ &RJQLWLRQ 295-306.
Falk, R., Falk, R., & Levin, I. (1980). A potential for
learning probability in young children. (GXFDWLRQDO
6WXGLHVLQ0DWKHPDWLFV181-204.
Gillard, E., Van Dooren, W., Schaeken, W., & Verschaffel,
L. (2008). 7KH DXWRPDWLF QDWXUH RI QHJOHFWLQJ WKH
GHQRPLQDWRULQSUREDELOLW\MXGJPHQWV7LPHSUHVVXUHDQG
'XDOWDVNFRQVLGHUDWLRQV Manuscript under preparation.
Green, D. R. (1983). A survey of probability concepts in
3000 pupils aged 11–16 years. In D. R. Grey, P. Holmes,
V. Barnett, & G. M. Constable (Eds.), 3URFHHGLQJVRIWKH
)LUVW,QWHUQDWLRQDO&RQIHUHQFHRQ7HDFKLQJ6WDWLVWLFV (pp.
766-783). Sheffield, U.K.: Teaching Statistics Trust.
Kahneman, D., & Frederick, S. (2005). A model of heuristic
judgment. In K.J. Holyoak & R.G. Morrison (Eds.), 7KH
&DPEULGJHKDQGERRNRIWKLQNLQJDQGUHDVRQLQJ(pp. 267293). New York : Cambridge University Press.
Klaczynski, P. A. (2000). Motivated scientific reasoning
biases, epistemological beliefs, and theory polarization: A

1796

two-process approach to adolescent cognition. &KLOG
'HYHORSPHQW 1347-66.
Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (2008). Numeracy, ratio
bias, and denominator neglect in judgments or risk and
probability. /HDUQLQJDQG,QGLYLGXDO'LIIHUHQFHV89107.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of
reasoning. 3V\FKRORJLFDO%XOOHWLQ3-22.
Stavy, R., & Tirosh, D. (2000). +RZ VWXGHQWV 0LV 
8QGHUVWDQG 6FLHQFH DQG 0DWKHPDWLFV ,QWXLWLYH 5XOHV
Teachers College Press.

1797

