UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Process of explanation and representation in a counterintuitive problem of probabilities

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8749t96c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Maja, Jordi

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Process of explanation and representation
in a counterintuitive problem of probabilities
Jordi Maja (jordimaja@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Balearic Islands
Ctra Valldemossa km 7,5, 07122 Palma (Spain)
Abstract
Starting with the version "Card game" (Tubau and Alonso,
2003) of the counterintuitive problem of probabilities Monty
Hall, a version of the problem was designed in which there is
a “Help-sentence” and a “Double question” that allow a
shallow increase in the proportion of correct responses. The
experiments tries to confirm to what extent the increase in the
percentage of switches in the First illusory question is due to
an associative effect. There are a small percentage of
participants who seem to take advantage of these helps and
yet keep their correct answer until the end of the
questionnaire. It is suggested that there is some sort of non
linguistic representation in such participants that could be
either more associative or more numerical in nature, and some
future research to explore this idea further is proposed.
Keywords: self-explanation, implicit knowledge, reasoning,
inference, scheme, mental representation.

Introduction
This study analyses different explanations that participants
gave to an illusory question that they answered correctly. It
argues that there is an implicit knowledge behind the
justifications that most of the participants give for their
answer to this illusory question. An example from the
reasoning field of the presence of this kind of knowledge
could be the subcomponents studied by Chi, Bassok, Lewis,
Reimann & Glaser (1989), Chi & van Lehn (1991), Renkl,
(1997). There, the example of a physics text (newtonian
mechanics) shows how many elements are actually involved
(rather than explicitly written) in our presumably good
educational texts. It would be interesting to continue in this
direction and explore the psychological representation that
relies on that.

The Monty Hall Dilemma: version “card
game”
The Monty Hall dilemma is the adaptation of an American
television gameshow from the 1960’s, which involves a
contestant guessing which of 3 doors hides a prize. The
contestant initially chooses one of 3 doors, which remains
closed, and the presenter, who knows what is behind each of
the doors, opens one of the other two remaining doors,
showing that that one doesn’t contain a prize. The question
that the contestant has to answer is whether he would rather
choose to stick with his initially chosen door, or whether he

would like to change to the other door that the presenter has
not opened yet.
Tubau and Alonso (2003) presented this dilemma in the
form of a card game (see Appendix for details of the game).
The initial probability of each card being correct is the
same, 1/3. Once the informant has showed one of his cards
(situation of elimination), we tend to make the illusory
inference that “if there are only two cards, the probability of
each of them of being the ace is the same (1/2)”, when the
probabilities are in fact the same as they were at the
beginning: for the decision-maker, p (ace) = 1/3, and for the
informant, p (ace) = 2/3.
A possible explanation for such an illusory response could
draw from a heuristic of similarity, where in situations in
which there are two alternatives, we think the probabilities
are equal.
We will see that there are several ways of arriving at the
correct response to the dilemma without resorting to the
application of the theorem of Bayes.
A simple and completely correct explanation for the
participants’ continued belief in the probabilities after the
elimination appeals to the invariability of the probabilities
of the initial sets. The elimination is not informative from
the point of view of the probabilities of the initial sets: since
the beginning we have known that at least 1 of the 2 cards
held by the informant is different from the ace; the
elimination is informative from the point of view of the
individual probabilities of the cards (since the cards of the
informant change from having equal probabilities of 1/3 to
having probabilities of 0 and 2/3), but these do not affect the
probabilities of the initial sets.

Necessary and sufficient information for the
correct resolution of the dilemma
It is important to realise that the key point in the explanation
of the dilemma is the situation of elimination. Any of the
factors that facilitate the resolution of the dilemma in fact
facilitate the comprehension of the implications of the
situation of elimination. It is at this moment that it is
necessary to bear in mind that the performance of the
informant is conditioned, and this is relevant to their
response. Girotto & Gonzalez (2005) suggests that, “the

649

crux of the problem is that these combinations appear as
irrelevant to most individuals, so that they resort to more
basic probabilities”.

immediate effect of such a “Help-sentence”. If the
presentation of possibilities is sufficient, there will be global
progress in the results.

Let us consider, furthermore, that to overcome the strong
illusory inference, it is not enough only to consider the
variety of possible cases of performance of the informant
(that is to say, to think that “if John has the ace and the 7, he
will always show the 7, whereas if he has the 7 and the 8 he
will show half of the time the 7 and half of the time the 8),
but it is necessary also to consider the globality (or generic
sum) of these and to compare the number of times in which
there is the ace and the 7 and the number of times in which
there is the 7 and the 8. For in the case where the informant
has the 7, for example, the reasoning would be as follows:

In the conditions B and C, a “Double question” was
designed in order to help participants to answer correctly the
dilemma and asking them for a justification for their
responses. If the aid of the Help-sentence and the Double
question allow the use of reasoning that becomes explicit,
then the justification will be clear and complete enough and
the results solid; if the help is basically associative (such as
Schul and Mayo’s 2003 comment: “it might not be
surprising that the experiential mode is used for processing
highly complex narratives”), then the results will be unclear
and the quality of the justifications insufficient.

“Help sentence”

If the informant
has the ace and 7,
he will always
show 7.
If he has 7 and 8,
he will show half
of the time the 7.
Therefore,

Table 1
generic case

n times

n/2 times

specifying for
a
natural
number
n=2

n/2 = 1

Every 3n/2 times
Every 3 times
that he shows 7, n that he shows 7,
will be with the ace 2 of them will
and n/2 with 8.
be with the ace
and 1 with the
8.

Therefore, if the informant shows the 7, it will be with the
ace more times than with the 8; we have explored this
reasoning in several questionnaires (see Tubau, 2008).

Experiment
A version of the problem was designed (see Appendix for
details of the game) and the experiment was separated
among 3 conditions; they were administered at different
consecutive stages.
The aim of Condition A is to see if, in order to overcome
the illusory inference, it is sufficient for the participants to
be given a “Help-sentence” that shows to them the ways in
which the informant might perform (following the line
suggested by Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto, Legrenzi, &
Caverni (1999), Girotto and González (2005)); this
condition wants to see if, having only been given part of the
necessary information, they are able to deduce the rest. With
this aim, as well as the questions that are normally
administered –Decision and Probability-, a “Previous
question” was included, with the aim of confirming the most

Method
Material. See Appendix.
In condition B, question “(a)” will always be correctly
answered if the statement was correctly comprehended.
Question “(b)”, which in fact already implies the illusory
inference, is the one that theoretically could imply serious
problems; more specifically, it could be similarly difficult to
the two questions (Decision and Probability) that finally
were considered in order to evaluate the correct resolution
of the dilemma.
In Condition C, instead of the Help sentence, the
complete explanation given for participants in condition B
was included: i.e., the correct response, followed by the
connective ‘because’ (there is plenty of literature supporting
its help and processing1), and followed by an explanation of
the different ways in which the informant could behave:
“John is more likely to be hiding the ace because if John has
the ace and the 7, he will always show the 7, if he has the
ace and the 8 he will always show the 8, and if he has the 7
and the 8 he will show half of the time the 7 and half of the
time the 8.”
Participants. 22 students of the Universitat of Barcelona
participated in exchange for course credit (one of the
participants was eliminated due to previous familiarity with
the problem); in condition B, 52 students; in condition C, 58
students of the University of Balearic Islands participated.
Procedure. The texts / questionnaires were administrated
to groups of 4 participants. The time taken to complete the
questionnaire was 15 minutes (none of the participants took
any longer). It was emphasised that they should read the
sentences with special attention.
1

In relation to the processing of causal inferences in expository
texts, see Noordman, Vonk, & Kempff (1992) and Singer,
Harkness, & Stewart (1997).

650

Looking at the differences between conditions for a same
question, significant differences in the Decision question
between condition A and condition C were also found (18%
vs. 48%; x2 (1, N=78) = 5.95, p<.01); by contrast to
condition B, almost significant differences in the Probability
question between condition A and condition C (29% vs. 9%;
x2 (1, N=78) = 3.38, p=.06) were found.

Results
Analyses of switches
80
71

70

74

64

60

Cond.
A
Cond.
B
Cond.
C

50

45

Analyses of justifications

48

40
29

30
20

18

20

9

10

Most of the participants (60% of the 53 participants)
answered, and even justified, correctly the Double question
(i.e., answered correctly both parts of the Double question).
In condition C, again most of the participants (74% of the
58 participants) answered the Double question correctly,
and justified it correctly.

0
First Illusory
Question

Decision

Probability

Figure 1: Percentage of participants who reasoned correctly
in Conditions A, B and C. The ‘First illusory question’ is, in
Condition A, the Previous question and, in Conditions B
and C, the second part of the Double question.
In the condition A, in the questions of Decision and of
Probability, participants switched their choices 18% and 9%
of the time respectively. Looking at the results obtained in
the Previous question (First illusory question), significant
differences between the Previous question and the question
of Decision (64% vs. 18%; x2 (1, N=44) = 9.40, p<.005)
were found; there was no significant difference between the
questions of Decision and Probability.
The difference between the questions of condition A and
condition B was significant in the Decision question (18%
vs. 45%; x2 (1, N=73) = 4.78, p<.05); it was significant
neither in the Probability question nor in the First illusory
question.
In the condition B, by seeing the difference between
questions, significant differences were found between the
First illusory question and the Decision question (71% vs.
45%; x2 (1, N=103) = 7.19, p<.01); significant differences
comparing the Decision question and the Probability
question were also found (45% vs. 20%; x2 (1, N=102) =
7.57, p<.01). In the condition C, looking at the differences
between questions, there were obtained 48% and 29% of
switches (correct response) in the questions of Decision and
of Probability, respectively; there were significant
differences (48% vs. 29%; x2 (1, N=112) = 4.57, p<.05); in
the First illusory question, significant differences between
this question and Decision were found (74% vs. 48%; x2 (1,
N=114) = 8.08, p<.005).

The answers that contained a verbal justification were
analysed and classified by the following criteria:
Table 2. Classification of the justifications of the
participants (conditions B and C)
Types
of
justification2
C:
Repetition of the
consideration of the
Cases of the Helpsentence
N:
Consideration
(explicit)
of
a
consecutive Number
of trials
E:
Double
sense
(Equivalency) of the
relationship between
the cards that John has
and the card that he
shows
S:
Invariability of the
probabilities of the
initial Sets
H:
John Hides the ace.

2

Examples of justifications (of
the participants)
“It’s more probable that John
shows the ace because if he has
the ace and the 7 he always shows
the 7 [and if he has the 7 and the
8 he only shows it half the time]”
“Because if they play several
times and always show the 7 it
would be that hides the ace.”

“If John shows the 7 it’s more
probable that he has the ace
because if John has the ace and
the 7 it’s more probable that
shows the 7.”
“Because the 7 and ace always
go together.”
“Because John always has 2
cards”

“The ace, because he is forced
to hide it.”
“Because he hides the 8 only
half of the time whereas he
always hides the ace.”

Considering only the correct responses (‘Inc’ expresses
‘Incorrect Responses’)

651

40 38

20

Percentage
of Justif.

27

30
19
13

10

4

Decision

10

10

4

4

8

6

8
4 44

2

Probability

4

2

0
Inc

H

C

S

E

N

Figure 2. Type of justification and correct responses (%)
in the Decision and Probability questions for Condition B

40
30

28

20
10

Percentage
of Justif.

26

24

Decision

16
55

7

10 9
75 75
7
5
3
32

Probability

0
Inc

H

C

S

E

N

Figure 3. Type of justification and correct responses (%)
in the Decision and Probability questions for Condition C
Comparing the justifications of the conditions B and C,
there was an increase in the condition C of the type of
justifications ‘H’ (not being significant). There was
difference between the type of justification and correct
responses to the ‘Decision’ and ‘Probability’ questions,
being the correctness of both the Decision and the
Probability questions more predictable from the type of
justifications “S” (perhaps more creative) and “E”.

Discussion
As was expected, in the Decision question (in which the
participant was only given the option of switching or
sticking with the initially selected card), better results than
in the Probability question (in which the exact probabilities
were also asked) were found in both the B and C conditions
(following the tendency that there is more difficulty
expressing the answers by exact numbers rather than
relative probabilities).
In the condition A, it can observed that the participants’
knowledge of the possibilities was not sufficient for the
task, despite being complete (i.e., differentiating the

possibilities as a function of the informant’s behavior);
having an understanding of the possibilities of performance
of the informant was not sufficient for the participants to
answer the questions of Decision and Probability correctly.
Nevertheless it has been seen that they do answer correctly
the Previous question.
The results show a surprisingly high percentage of
switches in the Previous question and a strong decrease in
the later questions, despite all of them inviting the same
illusory inference. In condition C, the results, as the increase
of the justifications of type “H” shows, seem to confirm the
strength of the illusion and they seem to confirm the
associative help of the Help-sentence and the Double
question.
How do the participants use the information from the
Help-sentence to answer the Previous question (condition
A) correctly? Let us note the possibility that, taking in
account the statement of the Help-sentence and the Previous
question, most of the participants had highly activated in
memory the pair “ace, 7”, in such a way that it facilitated
their answering of the Previous question. However, taking
into account the increase in percentage of switches in the
later questions in comparison to the classical versions (with
results lower than the 10% and the 5% in the questions of
Decision and Probability, respectively), it may be that there
is a more complex associative effect that could stimulate a
more completed elaboration of the Help-sentence.
In condition B and C, looking at the classification of the
justifications, it can observed that what most of the
participants do (approximately 60% -comprised of the “C”,
“H” and “E” types of justification) is literally repeat the
consideration of the cases they got from the Help-sentence.
It may be interesting to focus in on these justifications (the
repetition of the help sentence), because they were the most
common ones.
Analysing the quality of the justifications that the
participants gave for their answers to the illusory question
that they answered correctly, it can be seen that their
justifications were mostly incomplete and insufficient. This
may be for several reasons:
(1) a possible logical formalisation of the justification shows
that the implied reasoning is complex enough to need a
more elaborate explanation3;
(2) the low results obtained when the explanans, which
gives the explanation, appears alone (the description of the
possibilities; condition A);
3

One possible formalisation of what is said by the participants
could be:
Let H1 = <have ace and 7>, and H2 = <have 7 and 8> be two
exclusive events (with the probability of the intersection of both
events being zero) which are equally probable. Then, we have the
following relationship:
=>
p(H1|D) > p(H2|D).
p(D| H1) > p(D| H2)

652

(3) the inconsistency in the results (high percentage of
correct choices in the first question, then falling on the
following questions –though still implying the same illusory
inference-);
(4) one would expect that the participants considered, on a
consecutive number of trials, the sum of the cases and the
different preeminence of the ace in each of them (see Table
1).
The line of reasoning that they seem to take is: “if
whenever John has the ace and the 7, he shows the 7 (and
only half of the times when he has the 7 and the 8), this
implies that, if John shows the 7, it is more likely that he
will have the ace and the 7 (than the 7 and the 8)”. Such
reasoning is, in this case, correct (it’s true because the
previous probabilities are equal), but it is not obvious.
In what follows, from the observation of the justifications,
two possible ways will be commented in which the
participants who literally repeat the hint from the Helpsentence could be reasoning in order to correctly answer the
first illusory question and yet keep their correct answer until
the end of the questionnaire.
(1) Bias between <showing the 7> and <having the ace
and the 7>.
The double question, together with the Help-sentence, can
stimulate a bias or association between <showing the 7> and
<having the 7 and the ace>, which can be called an
associative or “matching bias” (Evans, 2003). Especially in
Experiment 2, with the Double question, the way the
questions are formulated might lead the participant to see (in
a associative form) a double sense in the relation of
probabilities appearing in the help texts, in such a way that
they don’t merely understand that (a)“ If John has the ace
and the 7 is more likely that he shows the 7” but also that
they affirm the inverse sense, (b) “if John shows the 7, it’s
more likely that he has the ace and the 7 (than the 7 and 8)”.
Another way (see Tubau, 2008 for a graphic schema) to
express the double sense would be:

(2) Consideration of the sum of the cases.
The help sentences can stimulate that, thanks to the
explanation of the different possibilities of the informant, a
generic sum of cases is presupposed in which they observe
that, most of the times, it’s shown the ace (see Table 1); see
also Gigerenzer & Hoffrage (1995) for a similar argument.
These types of reasoning may be processed by means of
numbers, but may be also processed in a more abstract or
imaginistic form (Kosslyn, 1980) using, for example,
graphic schemata.

General discussion
In future experiments these kinds of representations using
protocol analyses could be explored with a delay, in
different conditions, of a few hours and two days; a
complementary methodology of task recognition could be
used; it seems difficult to choose, however, which could be
the best item (or sentence) to present in the recognition task.
It could be interesting also to explore if some analogous
problems can be found in which there was a similar
probabilistic structure and where it could be see which are
the justifications given for the participants. Finally, the role
of WM capacity in the kind of justifications (type and
correctness) could be explored; following the suggestion of
two systems of reasoning (Evans, 2003), it could be
explored whether the WM capacity have any influence so
that participants have access to any sort of heuristic and
begin to justify incorrectly (because of its bad application)
the second part of the Double question.

Table 3
Initial sentence
“if John has ace and 7, it
is more probable that he
shows the 7 ”
“if John has 7 and 8, it is
less probable that he shows
the 7 ”

Inverse sense
“if John shows 7, it is
more probable that he has
ace and 7 ”
“if John shows 7, it is less
probable that he has 7 and
8”

653

ANNEX
Questionnaires
“Problem 3 cards”
Mary and John have 3 cards: the ace, 7 and 8 of diamonds
and they play to the following game: Mary chooses a card
and keeps it without seeing it. John keeps the other two.
Imagine that John has to show one card apart from the ace
to Mary. So, John has to inspect his cards and show one
non-ace card to Mary.
5
If John has the ace and the 7, he will always show the 7,
if he has the ace and the 8 he will always show the 8 and if
he has the 7 and the 8 he will show half of the time the 7
and half of the time the 8.
6
a. Who is more probable that hides has the ace? / Who is
more likely to hide the ace? b. Why?
7

a. When is it more likely that John shows the 7: (1)
when he has the ace and 7 or (2) when he has 7 and 8?
b. If John shows a card with the 7, which card will he
most likely be hiding? The ace or the 8?
Justify your response to the question b.
Once John has showed a card that is not the ace, Mary can
choose between sticking with her initial card (which she has
still not seen) and changing it for the one that John is still
hiding.
8

What should Mary do if she wants to draw the ace as
many times as possible? Why?
a) Switch the card b) Stick with her initial card c) Either
of the above. The probabilities are the same.
9

a) If Mary sticks with the initial card, what is the
probability of her having the ace? b) If Mary switches the
card, what is the probability of her having the ace? c) Why?

References
Chi, M., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R.
(1989). Self-explanations: How students study and use
examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 5, 145–182.
Chi, M.T.H. & VanLehn, K.A. (1991). The content of
physics self-explanations. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 1, 69-105.
Evans, J.St.BT (2003). In two minds: dual process accounts
of reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 454-459.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Girotto, V., & Gonzalez, M. (2005). Probabilistic reasoning
and combinatorial analysis. In V. Girotto, & P. N.
Johnson-Laird (Eds.) The shape of reason. New York:
Psychology Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, M.,
& Caverni, J-P. (1999). Naive probability: a mentalmodel
theory of extensional reasoning. Psychological Review,
106, 62-88.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1980). Image and mind. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A
study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 129.
Schul, Y., & Mayo, R. (2003) Searching for certainty in an
uncertain world: The difficulty of giving up the
experiential for the rational mode of thinking. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 16, p. 93-106.
Tubau, E. & Alonso, D. (2003). Overcoming illusory
inferences in a probabilistic counterintuitive problem: The
role of explicit representations. Memory and Cognition,
31 (4), 596-607.
Tubau, E. (2008). Enhancing probabilistic reasoning: The
role of causal graphs, statistical format and numerical
skills. Learning and Individual Differences, 18(2), p. 187196.

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Elisabet Tubau; I am also grateful to the
anonymous reviewers. Preparation of this manuscript was
supported by the ‘Programme for scholarship of further
study abroad “Sa Nostra”’.

5

Help-sentence: Phrase that explains the different possibilities
of the informant
6
The “Previous Question” is only presented in Condition A (it
would be the 1st Illusory Question).
7
The “Double question” is only presented in Conditions B and
C (the 1st Illusory Question would be the second part, (b), of the
Double question)
8
DECISION
9
PROBABILITY

654

