UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Producing Less Preferred Structures: More Gestures, Less Fluency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9g6353bp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cook, Susan Wagner
Jaeger, T. Florian
Tanenhaus, Michael

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Producing Less Preferred Structures: More Gestures, Less Fluency
Susan Wagner Cook (susan-cook@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA

T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Michael K. Tanenhaus (mtan@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Science, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA
Abstract

Preference and Production

Speakers often have choices about how to structure their
utterances. However, even though multiple alternatives may
be acceptable in theory, often one of them will be preferred
over the others. The question we explored here was what
happens when speakers produce less preferred alternatives.
We developed a new experimental paradigm to reliably elicit
the propositional or double object dative with varying degrees
of preference. We then used this paradigm to investigate
how, given properties of the message, an individual speaker's
preference for a particular structure affects how that utterance
is produced. Speakers gestured more and were more likely to
be disfluent when they chose less preferred structures. Thus,
having a choice per se does not guarantee more successful
production. Instead, production is facilitated when speakers
choose more preferred alternatives.

Alternative theories of language production appear to make
opposing predictions about why speakers produce less
preferred structures, leading to different predictions about
how these structures should be produced.
Availability-based accounts of production (e.g. Bock &
Warren, 1985; Ferreira & Dell, 2000) argue that speakers
produce less preferred alternatives because of the material
that was more available at the moment of choice. Although
the material consistent with the preferred choice is generally
more likely to be available at the choice point, when it is
not, speakers will instead produce the less preferred
alternative, allowing them to take advantage of the material
that is currently available. On this account, speakers should
experience no more or less difficulty when producing less
preferred or preferred structures, because these structures
are produced in precisely those environments where they are
beneficial to the speaker.
Competition-based models of production (e.g. Haskell &
MacDonald, 2003; Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004) assume
that speakers produce less preferred alternatives because this
structure is more active at the moment of choice, given
interactions among all operating constraints. However,
when the less-preferred structure is chosen, more often than
not, the preferred structure will be more active than the less
preferred structure will be when the preferred structure is
chosen. Accordingly, speakers should be more likely to run
into difficulty when producing less-preferred structures, due
to greater ongoing competition from partially active
preferred structures. Such difficulty may show in a higher
rate of disfluencies and gestures, as well as slowed speech.
These accounts offer explanations into the mechanism
underlying production difficulty during less preferred
structures. Computational level accounts, such as accounts
of rational production (in the sense of Anderson, 1990), also
make predictions about the production of less preferred
structures. Since less preferred structures have a lower
probability of occurring in the context where they are less
preferred, they necessarily encode more information.
Accordingly, under the principle of Uniform Information

Keywords: speech production; gesture; disfluencies; dative
alternation.

Introduction
Grammatical constraints restrict the structures speakers
can use to convey their message – not all structures are
grammatically acceptable. But grammar also provides
speakers with some flexibility, by offering more than one
grammatically acceptable way of encoding a proposition
linguistically. Moreover, speakers appear to benefit from
flexibility. When speakers can choose how to structure an
utterance (e.g. when choosing between a double object, DO,
or prepositional dative, PD to communicate a transitive
event), they on average produce those utterances faster and
with fewer errors in comparison with when they can not
choose (Ferreira, 1996).
However, even though multiple alternatives may be
acceptable in theory, often one of them will be preferred
over the others. For example, in Ferreira’s (1996) study, in
the conditions where choice was available, speakers
preferred (65-77%) one of the possible alternatives. The
question we explored here was what happens when speakers
choose to produce the less preferred alternative.

62

Density (Jaeger, 2006; Levy & Jaeger, 2007), we should
expect speakers to provide more signal when producing less
preferred structures. Additional signal could be provided by
speaking slower, by inserting disfluencies, and by gesturing.
Disfluencies increase the amount of time over which
information is distributed and the signal a higher probability
of a priori low-probability information (see discussion).
Gestures provide additional signal and channel over which
information is distributed.
To explore the relation between preference and
production, we designed a new experimental paradigm to
vary the degree of preference for one structure over another.
This allowed us to both evaluate the competing predictions
that availability and competition models make about
difficulty when speakers produce a less-preferred structure
and to explore whether production was consistent with the
principle of Uniform Information Density. Based on
previous work, we predicted that speakers would be less
fluent and would gesture more as both production difficulty
and information density increased.

Methods
Subjects
Sixteen college students participated in the current study;
video data from one subject was lost and not included in the
data analysis.

Stimuli
Our stimuli were computer-animated vignettes of a
human-like actor interacting with other people and objects
created using Poser software. The experimental stimuli
were designed to elicit the following six ditransitive verbs:
give, hand, offer, show, take and throw. These verbs were
chosen because they were predicted to vary in verb bias
based on previous research. The filler items were designed
to elicit the following six transitive verbs: carry, kick, lift,
push, pull, and touch.
A single animated figure (“Simon”) was the agent in all of
the vignettes. Repetition of the agent throughout the
experiment was used to increase the likelihood of this role
being the subject of the sentence, yielding more structures
of the desired type (active ditransitive structures).
Experimental items included at least one additional
animated human recipient and at least one inanimate theme.
Unlike the agent, the themes and the recipients were never
repeated across items. To manipulate argument expression
weight (Bresnan et al., 2007), experimental items differed in
whether the scene contained a contrast referent to the
recipient and/or theme or neither. Contrast referents were
always identical to the target referents involved in the main
action, except for one distinctive visual feature. There were
four stimulus conditions: No Contrast, Recipient Contrast,
Theme Contrast, and Both Contrasts (see Figure 1). A
given participant saw each item in only one of the possible
conditions.

Reliably Eliciting Preferred and Dispreferred
Ditransitive Structures
One grammatical structure that affords choice of structure
and that has been widely studied is the dative alternation.
Speakers can use either the prepositional dative (PD) or the
double object (DO) construction to convey a single
message. For example, speakers can choose between saying
“Simon gave the backpack to the man” (PD) or “Simon
gave the man the backpack” (DO). This choice depends on
a variety of factors, including the pronominality, animacy,
definiteness, givenness, and weight of the two argument
expressions (Bresnan, Cueni, Nikitina, Baayen, 2007), as
well as verb bias (Stallings, MacDonald & O’Seaghdha,
1998) and syntactic priming (Bock, 1986).
Production experiments often have high exclusion rates.
Those that succeed often use recall tasks to elicit particular
structures (Bock, 1986) or use highly unnatural tasks (e.g.
constructing sentences from words, Ferreira, 1986). Corpus
studies, in contrast, have been criticized for lack of control,
(but see Bresnan et al 2007; for discussion of corpus vs.
experiment, see Jaeger 2009). Our goal was to elicit
utterances under relatively natural conditions while
achieving a high yield of the desired verbs and structures.
We developed experimental stimuli designed to elicit
precisely the sort of linguistic variety known to predict
dative alternation in corpus studies (Bresnan et al., 2007).
We used animated videos to elicit verbs known to have
varying amount of bias, and we included contrasting
elements in some scenes to manipulate the weight of the
noun phrases necessary to describe the elements in each
scene.

Figure 1: Still image from the animation designed to elicit
contrast on both the theme and the recipient (as in “Simon
gave a backpack with stars to a man with purple pants”)

63

Procedure

As expected given previous work (Bock, 1986; Bresnan et
al., 2007; Stallings et al., 1998), participants’ choice of
syntactic structure was affected by a variety of factors. We
analyzed the data using multilevel logistic regression to
predict the log odds of producing a PD, based on the verb,
theme and recipient pronominality, theme and recipient
weight (whether the argument expression was realized with
a contrastive prepositional phrase, e.g. “backpack with
stars”), as well as the syntactic structure of the immediately
preceding experimental item. We also included random
intercepts for subject and item effects. As can be seen in
Figure 2, all factors had expected effects on speaker’s
preference for PD. Speakers were more likely to produce a
PD when the preceding utterance was a PD (syntactic
priming, β=1.74, z=4.33, p<.01), when the theme was
referred to by a pronoun (i.e. given and likely to appear
early in the utterance, β = 2.10, z=2.60, p<.0001) and when
the recipient was realized with contrastive modification
(heavier and likely to appear later in the utterance, β = 1.31,
z=4.81, p<.00001). Conversely, speakers were less likely to
produce a PD when the preceding utterance was a DO (β = .67, z=1.98, p=.048), and when the theme was realized with
contrastive modification (β =-0.72, z=2.60, p<.01).
Recipient pronoun did not reach significance.

Participants were instructed to describe “what Simon does
in each vignette” to an experimenter “as if you were
describing it naturally to someone who had never seen it
before”. An undergraduate experimenter listened attentively
and provided naturalistic feedback. The entire procedure
was videotaped for subsequent analysis.

Coding
All speech was transcribed and annotated for disfluencies.
The disfluencies annotated were pauses, filled pauses, word
repetitions, sentence restarts, fillers, and word lengthening.
We plan to extend the annotation to include speech rate
information, to assess whether speaker slow their speech
rate when producing less preferred structures (as suggested
by the corpus study presented in Tily, Gahl, Arnon, Kothari,
Snider, & Bresnan, 2009).
The presence of hand gestures during target utterances
was also coded. We excluded functional movements
(scratching, or adjusting hair) and counted all remaining
hand movements as gestures.

Results
The stimuli reliably elicited the intended verbs, contrast and
structures from speakers, even though there were only
general instructions and no pretraining on the items (77%
usable trials). Speakers also produced referring expressions
of varying weight during the target utterances (Table 1).
Moreover, speakers reliably used a small set of verbs,
providing enough data to estimate the structural bias for the
included verbs during the experiment, as can be seen in
Table 2.
Table 1: Variation in referring expressions across
conditions.

No contrast
Theme contrast
Recipient contrast
BothContrast

Theme
Heavy
.19
.41
.10
.43

Recipient
Heavy
.28
.23
.78
.74

Figure 2: Effects on log odds of producing a PD.
Thus, the stimuli reliably elicited ditransitive structures
that differed along the intended dimensions (complexity of
the argument expressions and verb bias), leading to a widely
spread distribution of PD bias across the entire experiment
(.19 to .9995). We then used the PD bias estimate from our
model to determine the preference for the actually produced
structure as the probability of producing it (i.e. when a DO
was produced, we subtracted the predicted probability of
producing a PD from one to obtain the predicted probability
of a DO). The preference for the structures that were
actually produced ranged from .007 to .995. Note that the
multilevel model accounted for random speaker differences.
Thus, we are now in a position to investigate how, given
certain properties of the message, an individual speaker's

Table 2: Verbs elicited in the study and their bias estimated
when controlling for other factors known to predict dative
alternation.
Verb
Show
Offer
Give
Hand
Toss
Throw
Take

PD bias in
our data
0.27
0.32
0.34
0.52
0.72
0.89
0.98

64

preference for a ditransitive structure affects how that
utterance is produced.

utterance was related to the probability of gesturing during
that utterance.
We again used a multilevel logistic
regression to predict the probability of producing a gesture
during the target utterance, given the preference of
producing the structure, and controlling for the number of
words in the utterance. There was a significant and negative
effect of preference on gesture. The more preferred the
structure, the less likely a speaker was to gesture during that
utterance (β = -.41, z=2.43, p=.015, See Figure 4).

Preference and Production Difficulty
We conducted two separate analyses to investigate the
relation between speakers’ preference for a structure and the
production difficulty experienced while producing it. The
first analysis investigates the distribution of disfluencies, the
second investigates the distribution of gestures.
Disfluencies can be seen as overt signs of production
difficulty. Speakers are more disfluent before words that are
unlikely (Beattie & Butterworth, 1979; Shriberg & Stolcke,
1996), and when they are planning longer and more
complex utterances (Clark & Wasow, 1998).

Gesture and Speech Production
In addition to disfluencies, hand gestures may offer a
privileged window onto speech planning because they can
occur simultaneously with speech. Indeed, gestures are
precisely timed with respect to the accompanying speech
(McNeill, 1992). Moreover, gestures have been related to
factors known to be important for speech production, and
are associated with information that is conceptually more
difficult. For example, gestures are more likely to occur
with infrequent words, and with new information. Gestures
may even function for speakers in these situations,
facilitating lexical access (Morrel-Samuels & Krauss, 1992)
and/or lightening cognitive load (Goldin-Meadow,
Nusbaum, Kelly & Wagner, 2001).
We used a multilevel logistic regression to predict the
probability of producing at least one disfluency during the
target utterance, given the preference for the structure (i.e.
the probability of the structure as estimated above), and
controlling for the number of words in the utterance. We
also included random subject and item effects. There was a
significant and negative effect of preference on disfluency
(β = -.28, z=2.61, p<.01, See Figure 3). The more less
preferred the utterance, the more fluently it was produced.

Figure 4: Effects of preference and the number of words
on log odds of producing a gesture.
Thus, our findings indicate that, across the utterance as a
whole, higher preference were associated with less difficulty
during production, and less recruitment of multiple
modalities during production. Thus, these findings are
consistent with the claim that speakers experience greater
difficulty producing less preferred structures. However,
models of language production predict difficulty or
facilitation at a particular point in a speaker’s utterance.
While competition-based models are compatible with a
longer lasting effect of choosing a dispreferred structure,
production difficulty should be highest during the noun
phrase immediately following the choice point (the verb),
because it should be relatively less active. In contrast,
availability-based models suggest that this noun phrase
should be readily produced, as it is the one being chosen
because of its availability. Accordingly, we conducted
follow-up analyses focusing only on the first noun phrase
produced by speakers after the verb.
Limiting our analysis to the portion of the utterance where
speakers commit to a particular structure did not change the
pattern of findings. Speakers were again more disfluent
during the first noun phrase when the structure was less
preferred (β = -.32, z=2.78, p<.01), and they were more
likely to initiate a gesture during this clause (β = -.69,
z=2.12, p=.03). Thus, as speakers commit to a particular
structure, production reflects the probability of that
structure.

Figure 3: Effects of preference and the number of words
on log odds of producing a disfluency.

Discussion
These findings reveal that both fluency and gesture can be
predicted from the probability of (preference for) the

As a second look at the relation between preference and
production, we explored how the preference for each

65

syntactic structure that is in the process of being produced.
When speakers produce more preferred structures, they
gesture less and are more fluent. Thus, having a choice per
se does not guarantee more successful production. Instead,
production is facilitated when speakers choose the preferred
alternative.
This result is unexpected for availability accounts (e.g.
Bock & Warren, 1985; Ferreira & Dell, 2000), but
consistent with competition accounts (e.g. Haskell &
MacDonald, 2003; Solomon & Pearlmutter, 2004) of
selection during syntactic production. The results are also
unexpected for any account that consider the very notion of
“producing a less preferred structure” to be ill-defined,
because they are based on the assumption that whatever
speakers produce in a given instance (by definition) is the
preferred structure. Our results argue against this view.
Speakers occasionally produce structures that they
themselves usually disprefer in the given context and when
they do so, they are more likely to be disfluent and to
produce gestures.
One possibility is that these tendencies may arise in
speakers’ own production system, as suggested by
competition accounts of language production. If producing
less preferred structures is more difficult, then speakers are
expected to be more disfluent. Disfluencies may also reflect
speakers’ accommodation of demands on listeners’
processing systems. In comprehension, less expected
material is processed more slowly, and speakers may use
disfluencies as a signal to dynamically adjust listeners’
expectations. Indeed, comprehenders are faster at processing
expressions that introduce new discourse referents when the
expression is preceded by a filled pause (Arnold et al.,
2004). Whether speakers intend disfluencies as a signal to
the comprehender remains an open question.
Like disfluencies, gestures may arise via demand on the
speaker’s production system, or as an overt signal to the
listener’s comprehension system. As a communicative
signal, gesture may be a useful tool for revealing the
particular alternatives that are being considered in a
particular moment, both for experimenters interested in
exploring the production process, and for listeners seeking
to understand their conversation partners. Speakers often
include information in their gesture that is not available in
their speech (gesture-speech mismatches).
Moreover,
production of these gesture-speech mismatches reflects
choice among various alternatives (Garber & GoldinMeadow, 2002). Thus, one possibility is that, like
disfluencies (Arnold et al., 2004), speakers’ gestures may
signal the presence of the less expected structure to
listeners.
Alternatively, gestures may help speakers alleviate
demands on their own production systems (GoldinMeadow, Nusbaum, Kelly & Wagner, 2001; Melinger &
Kita, 2007). Gestures have been hypothesized to facilitate
both lexical and conceptual processing during speech
production (e.g. Alibali, Kita & Young, 2000; Rauscher,
Krauss & Chen, 1996). In the study reported here,

disfluencies and gestures tended to co-occur, which is
consistent with the hypothesis that they may arise via a
common mechanism.
Additional work will be necessary to determine whether
gestures and disfluencies are functional for the speaker or
for the listener, or for both. Because some gestures are
sensitive to the visual co-presence of a listener while other
gestures are not (Alibali, Heath & Myers, 2001), further
experiments varying the visual co-presence of the listener
will allow exploration of whether speakers are designing the
gestures and the associated disfluencies explored here for
their listeners. If speakers intend disfluencies and gestures
as communicative signals, speakers should increase
production of disfluencies when gesture is unavailable to the
listener, particularly for less preferred structures.
The findings reported here are also consistent with the
hypothesis of Uniform Information Density (Jaeger, 2006;
Levy & Jaeger, 2007). Uniform Information Density
predicts that speakers prefer to distribute information
uniformly across their utterances. This can be shown to be
an optimal strategy with regard to communicative success
(Shannon, 1948; cf. Aylett & Turk, 2004; Genzel &
Charniak, 2002) and processing difficulty (Levy & Jaeger,
2007). Uniform Information Density, while compatible with
an audience design interpretation, does not assume that
speakers design their utterances so as to ease
comprehension. Uniform Information Density can be
derived to be a rational production strategy without
reference to comprehension (Levy & Jaeger, 2007; for
further discussion on the relation between Uniform
Information Density and audience design, see Jaeger, 2006,
in progress). Uniform Information Density hence provide a
computational level account of what properties the
production system should exhibit if it was structured in such
a way as to support efficient production.
Because the information content of a particular word is
inversely related to its probability, our findings reveal that
the more informative a particular argument, the more
disfluent the production and the more gestures speakers
produce along with it. Thus, speakers may use disfluencies
to distribute highly informative arguments over a greater
amount of time, decreasing the information density and
avoiding high information peaks. Indeed speakers are more
likely to produce disfluencies before less probable words
(Beattie & Butterworth, 1979; Shriberg & Stolcke, 1996)
and in low probability syntactic environments (our results;
see also Tily, Arnon, Bresnan, Kothari, & Snider, 2007).
Disfluencies (and gestures) may then be seen as increasing
the probability (and hence lowering the information content)
of a priori low-probability words following them (cf. Jaeger,
2006, and ongoing work).
Consistent with the hypothesis of Uniform Information
Density, our findings also suggest that speakers may utilize
multiple channels in order to avoid information peaks.
When speakers produce more informative arguments, they
are more likely to distribute information across auditory and
visual channels of communication via gesture. Previous

66

work exploring gesture production has similarly found that
gestures are produced with informative speech (McNeill,
1992). Future work will be necessary to explore whether
listeners use information from gestures as a visual cue to the
information content of the associated speech.

Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy
in text. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on
Association for Computational Linguistics, 199-206.
Goldin-Meadow S., Nusbaum, H. C., Kelly, S. D., &
Wagner, S. (2001) Explaining math: Gesturing lightens
the load. Psychological Science, 12, 516-522.
Haskell, T. R. & MacDonald, M. C. (2003). Conflicting
cues and competition in subject–verb agreement. Journal
of Memory and Language, 48, 760-78.
Jaeger, T. Florian. 2006. Redundancy and Syntactic
Reduction in Spontaneous Speech, Stanford University.
Levy, R., and Jaeger, T. F. 2007. Speakers optimize
information density through syntactic reduction. In B.
Schlökopf, J. Platt, and T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances in
neural information processing systems (NIPS) 19, 849856. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Melinger, A., & Kita, S. (2007). Conceptualization load
triggers gesture production. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 22, 473-500.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal
about thought. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Morrel-Samuels, P. & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Word
familiarity predicts temporal asynchrony of hand gestures
and speech. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 18, 615-622
Rauscher, F. H., Krauss, R. M. & Chen, Y. (1996). Gesture,
speech, and lexical access: The role of lexical movements
in speech production. Psychological Science, 7, 226-231.
Shannon, C. E. (1948) A mathematical theory of
communication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27,
379-423, 623-656
Shriberg, Elizabeth, and Stolcke, Andreas. 1996. Word
predictability after hesitations: A corpus-based study.
ICSLP 96.
Solomon, E.S. & Pearlmutter, N.J. (2004). Semantic
integration and syntactic planning in language production.
Cognitive Psychology, 49, 1-46.
Stallings, L.M., MacDonald, M.C. & O’Seaghdha, P.G.
(1998) Phrasal ordering constraints in sentence
production: Phrase length and verb disposition in heavyNP shift. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 392-417
Tily, H., Arnon, I., Bresnan, J., Kothari, A., & Snider, N.
(2007). What makes a construction predictable? Using
semantic and contextual cues to better model phonetic
reduction. CUNY Sentence Processing Conference.
Tily, H., Gahl, S., Arnon, I., Kothari, A., Snider, N., &
Bresnan, J. (2009). Pronunciation reflects syntactic
probabilities: Evidence from spontaneous speech.
Language and Cognition, 1, XX-XX.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grant HD-27206 to MKT.

References
Alibali, M.W., Heath, D.C., Myers, H.J. (2001). Effects of
visibility between speaker and listener on gesture
production: Some gestures are meant to be seen. Journal
of Memory and Language, 44, 169-188.
Alibali, M. W., Kita, S., & Young, A. (2000). Gesture and
the process of speech production: We think, therefore we
gesture. Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 593-613.
Anderson, J. R. (1990) The adaptive character of thought.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Arnold, J. E., Tanenhaus, M. K., Altmann, R. J., &
Fagnano, M. (2004). The old and thee, uh, new:
disfluency and reference resolution. Psychological
Science, 15, 578-82.
Aylett, M. & Turk, A. (2006). Language redundancy
predicts syllabic duration and the spectral characteristics
of vocalic syllable nuclei. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119, 3048-3058.
Beattie, G.W., & Butterworth, B.L. (1979). Contextual
Probability and Word Frequency as Determinants of
Pauses and Errors in Spontaneous Speech. Language and
Speech, 22, 201-211.
Beattie, G. & Shovelton, H. (2000). Iconic hand gestures
and the predictability of words in context in spontaneous
speech. British Journal of Psychology, 91, 473-491.
Bock, J.K. (1986) Syntactic Persistence in Language
Production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355-387.
Bock, J. K. & Warren, R. K. (1985). Conceptual
accessibility and syntactic structure in sentence
formulation. Cognition, 21, 47-67.
Bresnan, G., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T, & Baayen, R.H. (2007).
"Predicting the Dative Alternation." Cognitive
Foundations of Interpretation, ed. by G. Boume, I.
Kraemer, and J. Zwarts. Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands
Academy of Science.
Clark, H. H. & Wasow, T. (1998). Repeating words in
spontaneous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 37, 201–242.
Ferreira, V. S. (1996). Is it better to give than to donate?
Syntactic flexibility in language production. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35, 724-755.
Ferreira V. S. & Dell, G. S. (2000). Effect of ambiguity and
lexical availability on syntactic and lexical production.
Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296-340.
Garber, P. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2002). Gesture offers
insight into problem-solving in adults and children.
Cognitive Science, 26, 817-831.

67

