UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Re-Categorization: Restructuring In Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/78w8j2jr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cosejo, David
Oesterreich, Justin
Ohlsson, Stellan

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Re-Categorization: Restructuring In Categorization
David G. Cosejo (dcosej1@uic.edu)
Justin Oesterreich (joeste1@uic.edu)
Stellan Ohlsson (stellan@uic.edu)
University of Illinois at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60607 USA

contradicts those prior concepts? For brevity, we refer to
this process as restructuring.
Why is restructuring difficult? In the science education
context, one plausible hypothesis is that scientific concepts
are more complex than common sense ones. The ordinary
concept of "pulling" is simpler than the concept of "mutual
attraction" that underpins mechanics; the concept of
"mixture" is less complex than the chemical concept of
"dynamic equilibrium"; and so on. Science concepts require
attention to more aspects of a situation for correct
application. Restructuring in science learning may be
difficult because it requires the learner to move from a
simpler to a more complex conception.
In this paper, we describe an experimental paradigm
called re-categorization that allows us to bring restructuring
into the laboratory for close-up study. We use a standard
categorization paradigm, but change the target category
once the participants start responding correctly. Adaptation
to the change is stretched out over multiple categorization
trials. Also, re-categorization affords experimental control
over the relevant prior knowledge because participants learn
their ‘misconception’ in the course of the experiment.
We describe the re-categorization paradigm in more
detail, report an empirical study, highlight the salient
features of participants' behavior and discuss what cognitive
mechanism may be able to reproduce and explain those
features. Our results are consistent with a gradualist
conception of the restructuring process.

Abstract
The process of overriding prior experience and learning –
restructuring – was examined within a categorization
paradigm. Undergraduate students worked on a modified
categorization task in which they learned an initial
“misconception” category and later had to restructure their
knowledge to acquire a different target category. Participants
were able to learn both the misconception and the target
category. The data are consistent with the conclusions that
participants searched the relevant attribute space in parallel,
that negative feedback had little effect, and that the
supposedly rejected “misconception” was still affecting
behavior at the end of target category training.
Keywords: restructuring; categorization; cognitive change.

Introduction

The world we live in is constantly changing. Changes may
be dramatic and large-scale, exemplified by the way
Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans and the way
fiscal crises change the global economy. Most changes are
smaller and less destructive. We might have to adjust our
commute due to changing train schedules, or we might have
to learn to use a new computer. At both the global and the
mundane scales, our environment is changing and we must
change accordingly.
There are multiple lines of work in the cognitive sciences
that address the issue of adaptation to changing task
environments. In the area of skill acquisition, researchers
model how people learn to perform unfamiliar tasks through
practice (Ohlsson, 2008) and try to measure the mental cost
of task switching (Altmann, 2007). In studies of creativity
and insight, participants are faced with problems that require
them to override their initial task representation (Kershaw &
Ohlsson, 2004; Öllinger, Jones & Knoblich, 2006).
Educational researchers investigate how to promote
conceptual change in science learning (Ohlsson, 2009;
Sinatra & Pintrich, 2003). Social psychologists have
proposed mechanisms for attitude and belief change
(Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006; Petty et al., 2006).
The central unsolved theoretical problem is how someone
can learn something new that conflicts with what they knew
before (Ohlsson, 2009). If new information is understood
with the help of already acquired concepts, how, by what
cognitive process, can a person acquire information that

The Re-Categorization Paradigm
During a trial in the standard categorization paradigm, a
participant sees a stimulus, predicts whether it is an instance
of the category to-be-learned and receives feedback. Trials
continue until the category is learned according to some
mastery criterion (Ross et al., 2008). The re-categorization
paradigm extends this task by incorporating the key feature
of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task (WCST), a clinical
measure of perseverance: Once the category has been
acquired, the experimenter shifts the learning target to
another category without telling the participant (Stratta, et
al., 1997; Obonsawin, 1999). Responses that were correct
before the shift might now be incorrect and vice versa.
A re-categorization task thus consists of two phases: First,
there is the initial training phase in which participants
acquire the initial category ('misconception'). This phase
ends with the “behind-the-scenes” shift, and is followed by

573

a second training phase on the second, target category. The
question is how and by what processes participants “back
out” of the initial category and acquire the target category.

either a simple or a complex target category. Participants
were randomly assigned to the four conditions (labeled SS,
SC, CS, CC), shown in Table 2. The specific features that
defined the initial and target categories are displayed in
Table 3.

Study

If participants solve categorization tasks by searching
through the relevant hypothesis space, then a larger
hypothesis space should increase the difficulty of the task. If
a simple category is defined by a single value, a feature, on
one of six binary attributes, then there are 12 possible
hypotheses. But there are 132 possible complex categories,
defined by a conjunction of two features. Hence, complex
categories should be harder to learn. Also, category
complexity should interact with restructuring. A simple-tocomplex shift should be more difficult than either a simpleto-simple or a complex-to-complex shift. (It is less clear
what to predict for a complex-to-simple shift.)

Table 2: Design and number of participants in each cell.
Initial
category
Simple
Complex

Target
category
Simple
Complex
One!one
One!two
(n = 73)
(n = 64)
Two!one
Two!two
(n = 76)
(n = 65)

Procedure Participants were asked to read instructions
presented onscreen and to ask the experimenter if he or she
had any questions. Participants read that the bacteria were
discovered on Mars and that their task was to decide if they
were “oxygen resistant” or “not oxygen resistant.”
Participants saw a labeled variant (see Figure 2) and were
instructed to “memorize the names of these six features.”
Table 3: Category definitions for the four conditions.

Figure 1: An example of a Martian bacterium.

Condition
Simple-tocomplex (SC)
Simple-to-simple
(SS)
Complex-tocomplex (CC)
Complex-tosimple (CS)

Participants Participants in the present study were 278
undergraduates in an introductory psychology course who
received course credit for participating.
Materials We created a set of 64 images of fictional microorganisms ("Martian bacteria"). An example is displayed in
Figure 1. The example has a tail with cilia, a single cell
wall, a white cell body, one nucleus, ribosomes and three
head bulbs. The possible attributes and their values are
listed in Table 1. The materials also included a written
instruction and a set of rating scales for recording
participants' confidence judgments. All materials were
presented via a computer screen and all participant
responses were recorded using the E-Prime software
package (www.pstnet.com/products/E-Prime/default.htm/).

Head bulbs
Ribosomes &
single cell wall
Two nuclei & tail
cilia

Target category
Two nuclei & tail
cilia
Two nuclei
Two nuclei & tail
cilia
Head bulbs

Participants were asked to rate how important they
thought the six attributes would be for predicting oxygen
resistance. Each of the six attributes were rated on a scale
from zero to five, with zero being “not important” and five
being “very important.” Feature importance ratings were
gathered three times: before initial training, after training on
the initial category and again after training on the target
category.

Table 1: Attributes and their possible values (features).
Attributes
Tail cilia
Number of nuclei
Ribosomes
Cell wall
Head bulbs
Cytoplasm

Initial category
Head bulbs

Values (features)
Present or not present
Two or zero
Present or not present
Double or single layer
Three or zero
White or grey

Design The study was a 2 X 2 design, with either a simple
(one-feature) or a complex (two-feature) initial category and

Figure 2: Labeled stimulus from the task instruction.

574

After reading the instructions, participants began training
on the initial category. Training consisted of training blocks
of 16 trials each. In each trial, participants saw a single
image randomly selected from either the training subset or
the assessment subset, depending on which type of block
participants were in. The 64 images were split into 32
training images and 32 assessment images. Images in the
assessment blocks were never included in training blocks.
Participants then pressed either “Y” or “N” (yes or no) in
response to the question “is this bacterium oxygen
resistant?” and used the number keys to indicate their level
of confidence in their decisions. Participants then received
feedback (see below). Participants continued training until
they reached a mastery criterion of 15 out of 16 correct
responses in a training block. The maximum number of
training blocks for the initial category was 10. Participants
were then presented with an assessment block of 16 trials in
which no feedback was given and all stimuli were
previously unseen. At this point, participants were also
asked to rate the importance of the six attributes.
When training resumed, the to-be learned category had
changed. Participants were not told of this shift. The training
procedure for the target category was the same as for the
initial category. Participants were then presented with a
second assessment block. They were again asked to rate the
importance of the six attributes.
On each training trial, participants received feedback on
whether or not their response was correct. Positive feedback
following a correct response stated, “You are correct. This
bacterium was indeed oxygen resistant.” Negative feedback
following an error stated, “You are incorrect, this bacterium
was not oxygen resistant.” Similarly for “not oxygen
resistant.” During the assessment blocks, participants did
not receive feedback. At the end of the task, participants
were debriefed and thanked for their participation.

and +1 when completely consistent with the target category.
Reponses inconsistent with both categories do not affect the
ratio.

Results

Acquisition of the initial category The number of
participants who acquired the initial category
('misconception') varied greatly across conditions. Of the
137 participants who were trained on a simple, singlefeature initial category, 89 (65%) reached the mastery
criterion in less than 10 training blocks. However, of the
141 participants who were trained on a complex, twofeature initial category, only 11 (8%) learned it. Thus,
complexity mattered initially [χ2 (1, n = 100) = 60.84, p <
.001]; see Table 4. The two conditions with complex initial
categories (CS and CC) did not produce sufficient
participants who acquired the initial category for meaningful
data analysis, so the following analyses focus on the two
conditions with simple initial categories (SS and SC).
Acquisition of the target category Of the 89 participants
who learned the initial category, 74 (83%) also successfully
restructured their definition of "oxygen resistance" and
reached the mastery criterion for the target category as well
in less than the maximum of 10 training blocks; see Table 4.
Table 4: Number of participants who learned initial and
target categories by condition. Percentages refer to the
column immediately to the left.
Condition
SC
SS
CC
CS
Collapsed

Measures
For each trial we recorded whether the response given was
consistent with the initial category, whether it was
consistent with the target category, a confidence judgment,
response time and time spent looking at the subsequent
feedback screen. We recorded the number of training blocks
taken to reach criterion for the initial and target categories,
respectively. We collected attribute importance ratings
before training, after initial category training and after target
category training.
We also computed a change ratio (CR) which examined
the balance between the two types of responses. The CR is
computed as the ratio of the difference between target and
initial responses to their sum (within a block of 16 trials):

n
64
73
65
76
278

Initial
category (%)
41
(63.0)
48
(66.0)
7
(11.0)
4
(5.0)
100
(36.0)

Initial and
target (%)
39 (95.1)
35 (72.9)
6 (85.7)
2 (50.0)
82 (82.0)

Did success rate differ, depending on the complexity of
the target category? Of the 89 participants who learned the
single-feature misconception, 35 were trained on the singlefeature target category and 39 were trained on the twofeature target category. Contrary to our predictions, there
was no effect of target complexity. For the simple target, 35
of 48 (73%) acquired the target category, while for the
complex target category, 39 of 41 (95%) acquired the target,
χ2 (1, n = 74) = 0.78, ns.
How much cognitive effort did restructuring require?
Figure 3 shows the frequency distribution of the number of
blocks to successful acquisition of the target category for all
89 participants who learned the initial category. Most of the
participants had restructured by Block 3, (i.e., within 48
training trials). The modal value was Target- 2 or within 24
trials. However, the distribution is strongly skewed, with a
long tail. Notice that the frequency shown for the 10th

CR = (Target – Initial) / (Target + Initial)
The CR variable is zero when a participant's responses are
equally consistent with both categories, -1 when his or her
responses are completely consistent with the initial category

575

training block includes the participants who had not yet
learned the target category by the end of Block 10.

restructured, and some participants had only completed
restructuring by Target-9. It is plausible that SC participants
had to realize that the target category was defined by two
features, and they varied in how quickly they reached this
insight. Both conditions scored a perfect +1 in the last
training block because this analysis only includes successful
participants.

Figure 3: Frequency distribution for number of blocks to
restructure for the SC and SS conditions (n = 89).
Did the amount of cognitive effort differ as a function of
complexity? Once again, the answer is no. There is no
significant difference between the mean number of blocks to
restructure for the SC and SS conditions, t(74) = -0.36, ns.
To study the change from the initial to the target category
in more detail, we plotted the CR measure (see the Measures
section) separately for the SC and SS conditions; see
Figures 4 and 5. In Figures 4 and 5, the mean CR score for
each block after the shift is displayed. ‘Target-1’ indicates
the first target training block after restructuring and so on.
‘A2’ indicates Assessment Block 2.
On the first assessment block (A1, not shown), the mean
CR score is close to -1 because this analysis only includes
participants who successfully acquired the initial category.
Participants in both conditions are still responding below
zero (i.e., in accordance with the initial category) in Target1 after the shift in the to-be-learned category, but both are
above zero by Target-2, indicating rapid adaptation to the
change in feedback in both conditions.

Figure 5: Mean CR for the SS condition by target training
blocks (n = 35).
What did the participants learn? What was their state of
knowledge once they had learned the target category? The
obvious hypothesis is that they replaced the initial definition
of oxygen resistance with the target definition in response to
the negative feedback on erroneous postshift decisions. The
data do not support this replacement hypothesis. First,
performance on Assessment Block 2 (A2) is close to zero on
the CR score in both conditions. That is, once feedback was
removed and they were asked to categorize stimuli that were
previously unseen, their performance became partially
consistent with the initial category again (Figures 4 and 5;
see the values for A2). Recall that a CR score of zero means
that half the participant's responses were consistent with the
initial category and half with the target category.
Second, the feature importance ratings do not support the
replacement hypothesis. Figures 6 and 7 show the three sets
of importance ratings broken down by the six attributes.
Recall that ratings were collected before training, after
initial training and after target training.
The middle set for both Figures 6 and 7 confirms the
successful learning of the initial ("head bulbs") category.
Head bulbs are judged as more important than in the first set
and all other features have decreased in importance.
However, after successful learning of the one-feature target
category “two nuclei,” the head bulb feature has decreased
in importance again, but the correct feature is accorded less
importance than it was initially, and the irrelevant “shaded
cytoplasm” feature is considered almost as important
(Figure 7). Notice that no feature is rated zero. This pattern
is repeated for the two-feature target category (Figure 6).
The “head bulbs” dominate the second set of importance
ratings, but in the third set, the correct features, “two nuclei”

Figure 4: Mean CR for the SC condition by target training
blocks (n = 39).
In Figure 5, the SS condition exhibited relatively steady,
almost linear progress and all participants had restructured
by Target-8. In the SC condition, progress was nonlinear,
indicating that participants varied in how quickly they

576

and “tail cilia”, are awarded less importance than they were
initially, and the “head bulbs” feature is still considered
somewhat important. Again, no feature was rated zero.
We examined whether feature importance ratings changed
across the three occasions on which participants were asked
to give ratings. Within-subjects ANOVAs with three levels
of time revealed that in the complex condition, all six
features changed in importance over time, “nuclei,” F (2,
39) = 23.38, p < .001, “ribosomes,” F (1.72,39) = 69.46, p
< .001 with Greenhouse-Geisser correction, “cilia,” F (2,39)
= 26.31, p < .001, “head bulbs,” F (1.34,39) = 39.67, p <
.001 with Greenhouse-Geisser correction, “cell wall,” F
(2,39) = 35.18, p < .001 with Greenhouse-Geisser
correction, “shaded cytoplasm,” F (2,39) = 47.96, p < .001.
Similar analyses were conducted and similar results were
obtained for the simple condition. In short, participants’
feature importance ratings varied as a function of time as
participants first learned the initial category and then the
target category.
Furthermore, we asked whether there were differences in
importance ratings among the features within each occasion.
At each time, we treated each feature as a within-subjects
factor. For the complex condition at Time 1, importance
ratings were different from each other, F (3.81, 39) = 4.31, p
< .01 with Greenhouse-Geisser correction. Similar analyses
were conducted and similar results were obtained for Time
1, 2 and 3 for both conditions.

The data suggest two conclusions with respect to the final
knowledge state of the participants. First, their final
conception of oxygen resistance is not well described as a
conjunction of features. Instead, features appear to be
evaluated individually, with participants assuming that more
than one feature may be relevant. This is why the twofeature target category was not radically more difficult to
acquire. Participants considered all features in parallel in
both conditions. Second, the features were not evaluated on
an either-or basis for relevance, but are better described as
having a degree of importance. Third, there was no
complete rejection of any feature. Both the initial category
definition and the features that were irrelevant throughout
the task were awarded some degree of importance at the
end.
What does this characterization of the final knowledge
state imply about the mechanisms of change? What type of
learning mechanisms would have this kind of outcome? A
first-approximation explanation follows, if we assume that
the task is awarded a fixed amount of a quantity that we
may call ‘strength.’ Strength gets assigned to the different
features depending on the stimuli seen and the feedback
given. As participants go through initial training, almost all
the strength is allocated to the “head bulbs” feature. To
explain what happens next, we hypothesize that negative
feedback was ineffective. The allocation of strength across

Discussion

Figure 6: Feature importance ratings for SC condition (n = 39).

Figure 7: Feature importance ratings for SS condition (n = 35).

577

the features is only adjusted when there is positive feedback.
However, the increase of strength of one feature affects that
of other features because the total amount of strength is
fixed. Thus, as learning of the target progresses, there is a
gradual increase in the strength of the relevant features
while the other features lose some of theirs. However, to be
consistent with the pattern of importance ratings, we have to
further assume that the loss of strength is proportional to
how much strength a feature already has. Most of the loss
occurs on the “head bulbs” feature and less on the other
features. The overall effect is that the strength is spread out
across the features, instead of concentrated on the correct
definition of the target category. The target features do not
ever reach the level of the “head bulbs” feature because
there is not enough strength to go around. The result is a
final knowledge state in which all the features have some
strength and the differences between the target features and
the irrelevant features are relatively small. This explains the
inconsistent performance on the second assessment block.
An account along these lines contrasts with multiple
expectations derived from the idea that people learn
abstract, rule-like representations of the relevant categories
in this type of experiment. First, it is plausible to assume
that people treat conjunctive categories as conjunctions of
select features, while the pattern in our data is more
consistent with the idea that participants treat all the features
as relevant to varying degrees. Second, it is plausible that
people restructure in response to contradictory feedback,
while our data are consistent with the idea that only positive
feedback has an effect. Third, it is plausible that after
restructuring, the old knowledge structure has been changed
or deleted, but our data indicate that it is still active;
interestingly, researchers in other fields have reached
analogous conclusions (Ohlsson, 2009; Petty et al,. 2006).
The present study had several shortcomings and
limitations that will be addressed in future work. The
informal explanation above needs to be implemented as a
simulation model in order to investigate whether it can
reproduce the quantitative details of the data. The
counterintuitive lack of a complexity effect needs to be
replicated with other stimuli and other behavioral data such
as think-aloud protocols to see whether it is robust and
generalizable. In particular, the effect needs to be replicated
with realistic stimuli and categories. Finally, the exact
implications for areas like insight, conceptual change and
belief revision remain to be worked out.

References

Altmann, E. M. (2008). Comparing switch costs:
Alternating runs and explicit cueing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 33, 475-483.
Gawronski, B., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2006). Associative
and propositional processes in evaluation: An integrative
review of implicit and explicit attitude change.
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 692-731.
Kershaw, T. C. & Ohlsson, S. (2004). Multiple causes of
difficulty in insight: The case of the nine-dot problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 30(1)¸ 3-13.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., Haider, H., & Rhenius, D.
(1999). Constraint relaxation and chunk decomposition in
insight problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(6),
1534-1555.
Obonsawin, M. C., Crawford, J. R., Page, J., Chalmers, P.,
Low, G., & Marsh, P. (1999). Performance on the
Modified Card Sorting Test by normal, healthy
individuals: Relationship to general intellectual ability
and demographic variables. British Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 38(1)¸ 27-41.
Ohlsson, S. (2008). Computational models of skill
acquisition. In R. Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of
computational psychology (pp. 359-395). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ohlsson, S. (2009). Re-subsumption: A possible mechanism
for conceptual change and belief revision. Educational
Psychologist, 44, 20-40.
Petty, R., Tormala, Z., Brinol, P., & Jarvis, W. (2006).
Implicit ambivalence from attitude change: An
exploration of the PAST model. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 90, 21-31
Ross, B., Taylor, E., Middleton, E., & Nokes, T. (2008).
Concept and category learning in humans. In H. L.
Roediger, III (Ed.), Cognitive psychology of memory.
Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Sinatra, G. M. & Pintrich, P. R. (2003). Intentional
Conceptual Change. Philadelphia: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stratta, P., Daneluzzo, E., Prosperini, P., Bustini, M.,
Mattei, P., & Rossi, A. (1997). Is Wisconsin Card Sorting
Test performance related to working memory capacity?
Schizophrenia Research, 27(1), 11-19.
Öllinger, M., Jones, G., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Heuristics
and representational change in two-move matchstick
arithmetic tasks. Advances in Cognitive Psychology, 2,
239-253.

Acknowledgments

Preparation of this paper was supported by Award
N000140910125 from the Office of Naval Research. We
thank Cyndie Penrose, Tim Sparer, Amana Mohammad, and
Noah Cepela for assistance with data collection and
analysis. Further thanks go to Bettina Chow for helping
pioneer the recategorization paradigm.

578

