UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Realism in Dynamic, Static-Sequential, and Static-Simultaneous Visualizations during
Knowledge Acquisition on Locomotion Patterns

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6cx287p0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Gerjets, Peter
Imhof, Birgit
Scheiter, Katharina

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Realism in Dynamic, Static-Sequential, and Static-Simultaneous Visualizations
during Knowledge Acquisition on Locomotion Patterns
Birgit Imhof (b.imhof@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
In the current study the level of realism in visualizations and
the role of diverse presentation formats of dynamic and
different static visualizations in a complex, dynamic domain
(locomotion pattern classification) were investigated. In a
two-by-three design with the two independent factors realism
(realistic, schematic) and presentation format (dynamic,
static-sequential, static-simultaneous) one hundred-andtwenty university students were randomly assigned to six
conditions. Learners had to learn how to classify fish
according to their locomotion pattern. Learning outcomes
were measured by two pictorial tests, assessing recognition
and transfer performance. Data analyses showed an advantage
of the dynamic conditions over the sequential conditions in
both recognition and transfer performance. Simultaneous
visualizations did not lead to different learning outcomes than
either dynamic or sequential visualizations. Moreover, there
was no main effect for realism or an interaction of realism
with presentation format. Implications for the design of
instructional materials are discussed.
Keywords: Animation; static pictures; realism; visualization.

Amount of realistic detail
In general, visualizations have the potential to support
learners’ understanding in complex and dynamic domains.
However, visualizations are a broad field with various
formats and functions (cf. Scheiter, Wiebe, & Holsanova,
2008). An important question is under what conditions the
specific benefits of different visualization formats occur
(e.g., Tversky, Bauer-Morrison, & Bétrancourt, 2002).
As identified by Höffler and Leutner (2007) in their metaanalysis, an important dimension of visualization design
concerns the amount of realistic details depicted. According
to Rieber (1994) “realism is somehow measured against the
likeness of the object the picture is supposed to represent”
(p. 148). This similarity is achieved by copying the realworld referent with respect to shape, details, texture, or
color. The few empirical comparisons of realistic and
schematic visualizations have yielded inconsistent results so
far (cf. an overview Scheiter et al., in press).
Due to their high resemblance with depicted real objects
realistic visualizations may facilitate their recognition (e.g.,
Goldstone & Son, 2005; Höffler & Leutner, 2007).
However, they also entail more irrelevant details and
therefore might direct learners’ attention away from the

important aspects (Dwyer, 1976). By schematizing
visualizations, relevant aspects, which might be difficult to
detect in reality, can be presented in an easier-to-perceive
way. On the other hand, learners studying schematic
visualizations might have difficulties when being confronted
with real-world phenomena. Dwyer (e.g., 1976) did a lot of
research on the question what amount of realistic detail
depicted is useful in static visualizations. It could be shown
that the relative efficiency of realistic and schematic
visualizations depends on several factors. First of all, the
learning goal has an influence, because what has to be
learned may lead to different needs for information
regarding details or more schematized aspects. Another
important aspect is the presentation method, that is, the
interactivity in the form of self-controlled versus systempaced learning environments.
Our assumption is that in a learning task about movement
pattern classification only details necessary for movement
recognition should play an important role. Additionally, the
presentation format of the visualizations also might have an
influence. In line with the latter assumption, the metaanalysis of Höffler and Leutner (2007) found dynamic
visualizations particularly effective when they are realistic.

Presentation formats of visualizations
A second and probably the most common differentiation of
visualizations is the one between dynamic and static ones.
There are several meta-analyses concerning comparisons
between animated and static displays, which led to
equivocal results so far. Park and Hopkins (1993) found that
dynamic visualizations were better than static ones in 15 out
of 27 comparisons, whereas there were no differences
between dynamic and static visualizations in the remaining
12 comparisons. Interestingly, in none of the studies static
visualizations were superior to dynamic ones.
In the meta-analysis of Höffler and Leutner (2007) an
overall advantage of instructional animations (i.e., dynamic
visualizations) over static visualizations could be found.
Tversky and colleagues (2002) questioned in their review
the findings that dynamic visualizations are in general
superior to static ones and identified two aspects, which
may explain the advantages of dynamic visualizations. First,
in a couple of studies (see Tversky et al., 2002, for an

2962

overview) the dynamic visualizations entailed more
information than the static ones. This additional information
may have caused the better learning outcomes of dynamic
conditions. Second, many of the dynamic visualizations are
interactive. Following Mayer and Chandler (2001) a
minimal amount of interactivity already leads to better
learning outcomes. Hence, if the dynamic visualization is
interactive and the static one is not, the interactivity and not
the dynamic aspects may be the reason for better learning
outcomes in the dynamic conditions.
The inconclusive result pattern indicates that there may be
moderators that will have an impact on whether dynamic
visualizations are superior to static ones or not (Tversky et
al., 2002). Accordingly, in the last few years more and more
studies have aimed at identifying crucial aspects – that may
act as moderators – concerning the effectiveness of dynamic
visualizations. Some beneficial conditions under which the
potential of dynamic visualizations could be tapped have
already been identified. For example, Tversky and
colleagues (2002) postulate the congruence principle,
whereby animations are effective in the case that the
learning content can be directly depicted in the dynamic
materials because it is dynamic itself. Thus, dynamic
visualizations should be especially suited to convey
knowledge about dynamic domains. Furthermore, the metaanalysis of Höffler and Leutner (2007) found dynamic
visualizations superior to static ones especially when the
dynamic
visualizations
involved
procedural-motor
knowledge. Additional supporting evidence for the
superiority of dynamic visualizations has been found with
hand manipulative tasks (i.e., human motor skills; Ayres et
al., 2009; Wong et al., 2009). Although the superiority of
dynamic visualizations regarding movement has been found
exclusively for human movements so far, it can be argued
that human motor skills are an example of what is called
biological motion (Johansson, 1973). Hence, the latter
findings may suggest that dynamic visualizations are better
suited to convey biological motion in general.
Moreover, how effective a dynamic visualization is, also
depends on the fact to what the dynamic visualization is
compared with. There are several different presentation
formats of static visualizations which may all serve as
objects of comparison for dynamic visualizations.
The presentation of static pictures can vary with respect to
different aspects. For example, the number and the size of
pictures shown may be different; the duration of the
presentation of single pictures may vary with the content;
and of course the presentation format of static visualizations
regarding their sequentiality can be different. Multiple static
pictures may be presented either sequentially, that is, one
after another at the same position on the screen so that
earlier pictures are replaced by later ones, or
simultaneously, that is, all together on one page.
The two presentation formats, namely sequential and
simultaneous presentation of multiple static pictures, can be
characterized by different benefits and drawbacks for
learning. On the one hand, the temporal alignment of visual

elements is easier in a sequential presentation due to almost
identical spatial positions. However, a sequential
presentation of multiple static visualizations is more similar
to a dynamic presentation, because it is still transient
(Hegarty, 2004, Lowe, 1999). On the other hand, in a
simultaneous presentation the depicted information remains
visible on the screen and therefore comparisons among
discrete steps are enabled. Additionally, learners can
regulate the pacing of the cognitive processing.
The question of how to present static pictures has not
been considered in the aforementioned meta-analyses and
reviews. Static visualizations have often been lumped
together into a single category, whose effects were then
compared to dynamic visualizations. Up to now, there are
barely any studies concerning the sequentiality of static
visualizations (sequential versus simultaneous) and the
possible benefits these options offer. One exception is a
study by Boucheix and Schneider (2009), who showed that
in a mechanical domain, simultaneous static pictures
improved performance compared to sequential ones and
were as good for learning as dynamic visualizations. The
results of this study are a first indication that sequential
static visualizations are worse than simultaneous ones.

Research Questions
In the current study we first tested whether dynamic
visualizations are superior over both (sequential and
simultaneous) static formats and whether simultaneous
representations show benefits over sequential ones in
complex, dynamic domains. Second, we were interested in
whether realistic or schematic visualizations are superior in
complex dynamic domains concerning locomotion patterns
classification and whether realism in visualizations
moderates the effectiveness of different presentation formats
(i.e., dynamic, sequential-static, and simultaneous-static).

Experiment
Method
Participants. One hundred-and-twenty university students
(average age: 24.23 years, SD = 3.90; 91 female and 29
male) were randomly assigned to one of six conditions
resulting from varying the two factors realism and
presentation format (dynamic-realistic, dynamic-schematic,
static-sequential-realistic, static-sequential-schematic, staticsimultaneous-realistic, and static-simultaneous-schematic).
Learning domain and materials. Students were asked to
learn how to classify fish according to their locomotion
patterns. Biodiversity is a central concept in biology
education. There are more than 20,000 species of fish
known in the world today. Among these not only a rich
variety of forms and colors, but also a rich variety of
adaptations related to swimming behavior can be observed
(Videler, 1993). For biologists it is necessary to acquire
knowledge about fish locomotion, because of at least two
reasons: First, knowledge about different fish locomotion

2963

forms is helpful to classify diverse fish families or species.
Second, the various movement patterns are related to several
important principles in biology (e.g., evolutionary
adaptation) and principles in other sciences (e.g., physics).
The materials were designed to illustrate four different
types of movement patterns (subcarangiform, balistiform,
tetraodontiform, and labriform) deployed by different types
of fish. As a first independent factor we manipulated the
realism of the visualizations to investigate under which
conditions certain visualization formats support the
understanding of fish locomotion. We compared
experimental
conditions
that
contained
realistic
representations of movement patterns (real digital videos or
sequences of stills, see Figure 1 left) to conditions that
contained schematic representations (animations or
sequences of frames, see Figure 1 right). The dynamicrealistic visualizations were real underwater videos of actual
fish, where the movement pattern could be observed very
well (e.g., relevant fins were visible, few occlusions etc.).
The animations consisted in black-and-white line drawings
of the fish moving, where irrelevant details were left out
(e.g., texture, surroundings, variations in shape etc.). The
animations were constructed based on the real videos to
make them as comparable as possible regarding other
aspects (e.g., perspective, size of the depicted fish).

Figure 1: Example of realistic (left) and schematic (right)
static visualizations of the labriform locomotion pattern
To investigate whether dynamic representations are more
suitable than static sequential and static simultaneous
representations to support students’ understanding of fish
locomotion classification and whether static simultaneous
representations show also advantages over sequential ones
in complex dynamic domains, we varied presentation
format as a second independent factor. We compared
experimental conditions that contained non-interactive
dynamic representations of movement patterns to conditions
that merely contained a series of static representations of
one movement cycle of these movement patterns. As
dynamic visualizations we used videos and animations. As
static visualizations we used multiple stills and frames
extracted from the dynamic visualizations. Nine static
visualizations were extracted from the videos and from the
animations for each locomotion pattern, thereby achieving
the same quality of the pictures. The static visualizations
were chosen by an expert and represented key states in the
complete movement cycle for the respective locomotion
pattern. Because fish movement cycles are very fast, almost

every still and frame of the dynamic visualizations was used
in the static versions. There were two different static
conditions. The static visualizations were presented either
sequentially one after another or simultaneously all together
on one page.
The dynamic visualizations (approx. 4-10 s; 25 fps) were
presented in loops for 72 seconds. The static sequential
visualizations were presented successively twice for four
seconds each in the same size as the dynamic visualizations
(480 x 360 px). For the simultaneous static visualizations
the same pictures were used as in the sequential conditions
and were presented for 72 seconds all together on one
screen. The pictures’ size was half (240 x 180 px) of the size
of the dynamic and the sequential static visualizations.
Therefore, there was no need for the subject to scroll,
because all nine pictures fitted to the screen at once.
In the learning phase the participants saw visualizations
for each of the four to-be-learned locomotion patterns in a
predefined order according to the classification scheme of
Lindsey (1978). The presentation was system-controlled and
accompanied by auditory text. The text explained the
depicted locomotion pattern in terms of typical fish using
this locomotion pattern, body parts or fins involved, kind of
movements executed (undulation versus oscillation),
parameters of the movements (e.g., visible wavelength on
the moving parts, amplitude), and the maximum velocity.
The important features of the locomotion patterns were
depicted additionally in a table located above the
visualizations during the learning phase in each condition.
In a former study, we tested the same materials with
pictorial tests and also with a text-based factual knowledge
questionnaire assessing declarative knowledge. In line with
Bétrancourt and Tversky (2000) dynamic visualizations
were superior only in the pictorial tests assessing more
procedural-based knowledge concerned with the ability to
identify the locomotion patterns of different fish. These tests
are most suited to address the key learning objective in this
domain and were hence used again in the current study.
First, there was a movement pattern recognition test
consisting of 24 pictorial multiple choice items.
Visualizations from all six conditions were used in this test
as stimuli that had to be recognized. Learners had to choose
for each pictorial item the kind of locomotion pattern that
was depicted. Possible answers were the four locomotion
patterns and the additional answer “I don’t know”. Figure 2
shows a static recognition task for the balistiform
locomotion pattern.
Second, a multiple choice transfer test consisting of 12
items that depicted “new” fish that had not been presented
in the learning phase was administered. As for the
recognition task, for these pictorial items of novel fish the
subjects had to choose the depicted locomotion pattern (cf.
Figure 2). The movement patterns were clearly identifiable
in the transfer test videos, but the fish had different forms,
shapes, and colors than those used in the learning phase.
The transfer test was used to assess how good learners could
transform their acquired knowledge on new fish performing

2964

familiar locomotion patterns. Because typical scenarios for
this task are realistic ones with real fish (e.g., aquaria,
snorkeling or diving trips), all 12 transfer items were tested
in realistic format, four of them in static-sequential format,
four in static-simultaneous format and four in dynamic
format.

Table 1: Means (and standard deviations) in percent correct
as a function of realism and presentation format.

dynamic-realistic
dynamic-schematic
static-sequential-realistic
static-sequential-schematic
static-simultaneous-realistic
static-simultaneous-schematic

Figure 2: Screenshot of a realistic static-sequential
recognition task of the balistiform locomotion pattern
Procedure. Participants were tested individually. They first
got a short overview on the study in which they were
informed about the procedure. Subsequently, they had to
complete a personal questionnaire assessing demographic
data. Then, they had to read a paper-pencil-based
introduction (four pages). Thereafter, they started with the
computer-based learning phase (approx. 10 min). Finally,
learners worked immediately after the learning phase on the
different tests (approx. 15 min). In total, an experimental
session lasted approximately 55 minutes.

Results
We conducted two-way independent analyses of variance
(realism x presentation format) for recognition and transfer
performance (results are shown in Table 1). Because of
space limitations, statistical values are only reported for
significant results.
Analyzing the effects of realism on learning outcomes
revealed no differences between the realistic and schematic
conditions for both, recognition and transfer performance.
With regard to presentation format, the analysis revealed
overall main effects for both, recognition, F(2, 114) = 6.84,
MSE = 491.18, p = .002, η2p = .11 and transfer performance,
F(2, 114) = 7.27, MSE = 657.99, p = .001, η2p = .11.
Bonferroni-adjusted pairwise comparisons revealed that
dynamic visualizations led to significantly better recognition
(M = 85.10 %, SD = 19.10) and transfer performance (M =
77.08 %, SD = 23.85) than sequential visualizations
(recognition: M = 66.77 %, SD = 23.37; transfer: M = 55.21
%, SD = 25.65; all ps ≤ .001). The simultaneous conditions
(recognition: M = 75.83 %, SD = 23.08; transfer: M = 65.83
%, SD = 26.74) did not differ in their performance from
either the dynamic or the sequential conditions.

Recognition
86.88
(17.69)
83.33
(20.72)
65.42
(27.01)
68.13
(19.70)
77.50
(22.35)
74.17
(24.24)

Transfer
77.50
(24.35)
76.67
(23.97)
54.58
(28.67)
55.83
(22.96)
61.67
(28.66)
70.00
(24.69)

There were no interactions between the two independent
variables realism and presentation format for the two
dependent variables recognition and transfer.

Discussion
The objective of this study was to test the relative
effectiveness of different visualization formats to foster
knowledge acquisition in the complex dynamic domain of
classifying biological locomotion patterns.
The results are in line with the hypothesis that dynamic
visualizations are beneficial for conveying knowledge about
dynamic movements. Furthermore, the results indicate that
the sequentiality of the static presentation format has an
influence on learning outcomes. The sequential presentation
of static visualizations was worse in comparison to the
dynamic presentation format. In contrast, the simultaneous
presentation of static visualization did not differ from the
dynamic presentation in a biological domain, thereby
replicating the findings of Boucheix and Schneider (2009).
This was the case although in the current study dynamic
visualizations were compared to either sequentially
presented or simultaneously presented visualizations in a
completely different domain than the one used by Boucheix
and Schneider (2009; mechanics) containing mainly
procedural aspects. These findings lead to the question
whether in former studies and meta-analyses information
about the presentation format of the static conditions may
have shed light on the inconsistent results concerning the
superiority of dynamic visualizations. In future research and
following meta-analyses the factor sequentiality of the static
presentation of visualizations should be considered.
Additionally, there is the need to further address questions
concerning the effectiveness of different static presentation
formats that include more aspects than only sequentiality,
but also the number and the size of the pictures shown or the
duration of the presentation of single pictures to mention
only a few.
A sequential presentation of static visualizations is the
presentation format that is most comparable with dynamic
visualizations. Like in dynamic visualizations there are only

2965

few visual search and comparison processes possible. The
comparison of various aspects and objects at different points
in time is not possible. Hence, this presentation format is
almost as transient as dynamic visualizations (Hegarty,
2004). The results show that this visualization format in
comparison to dynamic visualizations has no benefit for the
transmission of knowledge in complex dynamic domains.
Simultaneous static visualizations, on the other hand, allow
learners to compare important states of the objects. In our
study we could show that simultaneously presented static
visualizations are as good for learning as dynamic
visualizations. This result suggests the possibility that
learning about locomotion pattern classification depends not
only on the continuity of the movements, but also on
comparisons among different states of objects. Therefore, an
open question is whether there are simultaneous
presentation formats, which may even outperform dynamic
presentations, because they facilitate comparisons among
the important states of the objects in an even better way. In
the present study the simultaneous static visualizations were
depicted in a row, where comparisons mostly had to be
made from left to right or vice versa. Another possible
solution would be to depict the simultaneous static
visualizations in columns, where comparisons have to be
made from upper to lower positioned pictures or vice versa.
Having in mind that the movement patterns of fish are all
cyclic (i.e., reiterating), a beneficial solution would also be
to present the simultaneous visualizations in a cycle, what
avoids skipping back to the beginning of the row or column.
These possible simultaneous presentation formats of
visualizations are investigated in a follow-up study
(currently being under experimentation) that investigates
how different presentation formats affect learners’
knowledge acquisition.
There were no overall differences in learning outcomes
between realistic and schematic visualizations. Proponents
of realistic visualizations have suggested that a visualization
rich in detail should improve recognition because more cues
are available that allow retrieving the resulting mental
representation from memory (cf. Dwyer, 1976). These
suggestions could not be confirmed in the present study.
Interestingly, even for the transfer test that consisted of only
realistic items there was no advantage of realistic
visualizations in the learning phase in terms of a congruency
effect. In other words, schematic visualizations were as
good for transforming knowledge to new realistic
visualizations as realistic ones.
If both realistic and schematic visualizations had specific
advantages and drawbacks for learning, further research
should focus on how to combine the advantages of both
formats, while reducing their relative drawbacks. One
possible solution is to present both, realistic and schematic
visualizations, to learners. This approach can be best
addressed against the background of research on learning
with multiple representations, which allow providing
instructional materials that are suited to accommodate
learning in a variety of situations and for different learners

(Ainsworth, 1999). Showing both realistic and schematic
visualizations to learners may improve learning for a wider
range of tasks compared to studying only one visualization
format. However, for this approach to be effective, it needs
to be guaranteed that both formats have individual strengths
for accomplishing different tasks and that the learners will
invest sufficient effort in processing both formats and in
relating them to each other (Scheiter et al., in press).
Another possible solution is to combine different amounts
of realism in a single visualization to support understanding
in this domain. Realistic visualizations facilitate an
assessment of the movement as a whole, which suffices for
recognizing the global pattern. Therefore, it is possible that
only the realistic details on the moving object (in our case)
and not the realistic details of the background are helpful.
The benefits of realistic objects might be cancelled out in
the present study by the irrelevant details conveyed by the
realistic backgrounds (e.g., coral reefs etc.). Maybe learning
outcomes could be improved by showing the realistic details
on the moving object only, in our case the fish, and reducing
learners’ cognitive load by fading out irrelevant details of
the background. With the present materials consisting of
real videos and simple black-and-white line drawing
animations this aspect could not be addressed, although it
should be controlled and investigated in further research.
Distinguishing between realistic details of the relevant
objects and the background would be possible with highly
realistic animated models of the objects moving in front of a
highly realistic background. When there is the possibility to
fade out the realistic details separately either from the
objects or from the background, the benefits and drawbacks
could be systematically addressed. Such a design would not
only enable us to implement a medium amount of realistic
details depicted; rather, it would combine the two extreme
points by mixing them in a single visualization by having a
realistic fish on a schematized background and vice versa.
This design is planned for a follow-up study investigating
differential effects of realistic details referring to either
relevant or irrelevant aspects of the stimulus.
Creating highly realistic animations of the to-be-learned
contents rather than using digital real underwater videos as
in the current study has another important advantage.
Additional realistic details can be presented in a
systematically controlled way. That means important
aspects, such as the perspective and the duration of the
presentation can be controlled. Especially the perspective
from which position the learner looks at the objects, in our
case fish, is important. For different locomotion patterns
different perspectives would be useful. Wavelike
movements are easier to perceive from above, whereas for
paddlelike movements a perspective from the side or behind
the fish (depending on which fins are used for propulsion)
would be more preferable.
Additionally, the learning material could be interactive by
letting the learners choose the perspective or other aspects
of the learning materials, such as the presentation speed or
duration. Future studies need to address whether learning

2966

with dynamic and static visualizations can be further
enhanced by making them interactive (Bétrancourt, 2005).
In the current experiment, no interactivity was included;
thus, the dynamic visualizations could not be adapted by a
learner to his/her processing speed. Nevertheless, dynamic
visualizations proved to be superior to static visualizations.
Moreover, in future research the validity of the learning
materials should be addressed outside of the laboratory.
Therefore, field experiments with knowledge tests on actual
fish during aquaria visits or snorkelling excursions should
be investigated (cf. Pfeiffer et al., 2008; Pfeiffer et al., in
press).
The results of the current study reflect what some
researchers (e.g., Hegarty, 2004; Tversky et al., 2002)
already supposed. It should not be asked which kind of
visualization format is the most suitable, but when, under
what conditions, and for whom the specific advantages of
various visualization formats occur. This also implies to
make more use of pictorial test stimuli in future research as
these stimuli seem to provide a more detailed account
concerning the relative effectiveness of different
visualization formats (cf. Bétrancourt & Tversky, 2000).

Acknowledgments
The current study is part of a larger research project on the
“resource-adaptive design of visualizations for supporting
the comprehension of complex dynamics in the Natural
Sciences” funded by the Leibniz-Gemeinschaft (funding
period: 2007-2009).

References
Ainsworth, S. E., (1999). A functional taxonomy of multiple
representations. Computers and Education, 33, 131-152.
Ayres, P., Marcus, N., Chan, C., & Qian, N. (2009).
Learning hand manipulative tasks: When instructional
animations
are superior to equivalent
static
representations. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 348353.
Bétrancourt, M. (2005). The animation and interactivity
principles. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), Handbook of Multimedia
(pp. 287-296). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bétrancourt, M., & Tversky, B. (2000). Effect of computer
animation on users' performance: A review. Le Travail
Humain, 63, 311-329.
Boucheix, J.-M., & Schneider, E. (2009). Static and
animated presentations in learning dynamic mechanical
systems. Learning and Instruction, 19, 112-127.
Dwyer, F. M. (1976). Adapting media attributes for
effective learning. Educational Technology, 16, 7-13.
Goldstone, R. L., & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14,
69-110.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning as mental
simulation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 280-285.

Höffler, T. N., & Leutner, D. (2007). Instructional
animation versus static pictures: A meta-analysis.
Learning and Instruction, 17, 722-738.
Johansson, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological
motion and a model for its analysis. Perception and
Psychophysics, 14, 201-211.
Lindsey, C. C. (1978). Form, function, and locomotory
habits in fish. In W. S. Hoar, & D. J. Randall (Eds.), Fish
physiology (Vol. 2, pp. 1-100). New York: Academic
Press.
Lowe, R. K. (1999). Extracting information from an
animation during complex visual learning. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 225-244.
Mayer, R. E., & Chandler, P. (2001). When learning is just a
click away: Does simple user interaction foster deeper
understanding of multimedia messages? Journal of
Educational Psychology, 93, 390-397.
Park, O.-C., & Hopkins, R. (1993). Instructional conditions
for using dynamic visual displays: a review. Instructional
Science, 21, 427-449.
Pfeiffer, V.D.I., Gemballa, S., Bizer, B., Jarodzka, H.,
Imhof, B., Scheiter, K., & Gerjets, P. (2008). Enhancing
students’ knowledge of biodiversity in a situated mobile
learning scenario: Using static and dynamic visualizations
in field trips. In P. A. Kirschner, F. Prins, V. Jonker, & G.
Kanselaar (Eds.), International Perspectives in the
Learning Sciences: Cre8ing a learning world.
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference for
the Learning Sciences – ICLS 2008 (Vol. 2, pp. 204-212).
Utrecht: The Netherlands: International Society of the
Learning Sciences, Inc. (ISLS).
Pfeiffer, V.D.I., Gemballa, S., Jarodzka, H., Scheiter, K., &
Gerjets, P. (in press). Situated learning in the mobile age:
Mobile devices on a field trip to the sea. Association for
Learning Technologies Journal.
Rieber, L. P. (1994). Computers, graphics, and learning.
Madison, WI: Brown & Benchmark.
Scheiter, K., Gerjets, P., Huk, T., Imhof, B., & Kammerer,
Y. (in press). The effects of realism in learning with
dynamic visualizations. Learning and Instruction.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2008.08.001.
Scheiter, K., Wiebe, E., & Holsanova, J. (2008). Theoretical
and instructional aspects of learning with visualizations.
In R. Zheng (Ed.), Cognitive effects of multimedia
learning (pp. 67-88). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Tversky, B., Bauer-Morrison, J., & Bétrancourt, M. (2002).
Animation: Can it facilitate? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 57, 247-262.
Videler, J. J. (1993). Fish Swimming. London, UK:
Chapman & Hall.
Wong, A., Marcus, N., Smith, L., Cooper, G. A., Ayres, P.,
Paas, F., & Sweller, J. (2009). Instructional animations
can be superior to statics when learning human motor
skills. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 339-347.

2967

