UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Recognition Memory Deficits in Alzheimer's Disease: Modeling Clinical Groups and Individual
Patients

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/046528mh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Lee, Michael
Pooley, James
Shankle, William

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Recognition Memory Deficits in Alzheimer’s Disease:
Modeling Clinical Groups and Individual Patients
James P. Pooley (jpooley@uci.edu)
Michael D. Lee (mdlee@uci.edu)
Department of Cognitive Sciences, 3151 Social Sciences Plaza A
University of California, Irvine, CA, 92697-5100

William R. Shankle (rshankle@mccare.com)
Medical Care Corporation, 19782 MacArthur Boulevard
Irvine, CA 92612
Abstract
Recognition memory tests are useful for understanding
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In the clinical context, it is
important to model performance at both the group level
(e.g., for the characterization of clinical subpopulations)
and individual level (e.g., for the diagnosis of a patient).
Using a clinical data set from AD patients, we show how
a signal detection theory model that assumes hierarchical
individual differences in discriminability and response
bias adequately describes these data at both the group
and individual levels, and also present preliminary descriptive and predictive analyses of the data at both levels.
Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease; Hierarchical Bayesian
modeling; Cognitive psychometrics; Signal detection
theory; Recognition memory.

Introduction
Severe degradation of episodic memory is the hallmark
behavioral symptom of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Differences in the severity of this mnemonic degradation
best distinguish adults who are aging normally from
those affected with AD on the basis of behavior alone
(Locascio, Growdon, & Corkin, 1995). Given this diagnostic power, it is not surprising that most neuropsychological testing for AD has tended to focus on episodic
memory. Episodic memory may be measured using a
variety of experimental paradigms, but the simplest approach is to use a yes/no recognition memory test.
In a yes/no recognition memory test, individuals are
shown a study list of items to memorize and are then
tested on their ability to discriminate these studied target items from unstudied distractor items on subsequent
test lists. On each trial of the experiment, an individual is shown an item and simply indicates whether or not
the item was on the study list. These responses fall into
four classes: hits, misses, false alarms, and correct rejections. Based on counts of these responses, performance
on yes/no recognition memory tests is often measured
using signal detection theory (SDT) models.
SDT (Macmillan & Creelman, 2005) provides a general framework for understanding how the variability in
the memory representations of target and distractor items
interacts with a cognitive decision process to affect performance on recognition memory tests. Use of SDT
models to characterize the results of recognition memory
experiments is common in cognitive psychology, where

the goal is often to model the group performance of cognitively normal individuals. In contrast, SDT models are
used less often in AD research, where it is important to
model performance at both the group level (e.g., for the
characterization of clinical subpopulations) and the individual level (e.g., for the diagnosis of a patient).
The goal of this paper is to use SDT to model recognition memory performance of AD patients at both the
group and individual levels. In the next section, we describe the SDT model in more detail. We then describe
new clinical data, and evaluate three SDT approaches to
modeling the individual patients and clinical groups in
these data. These models make different assumptions
about individual differences, and we show that only a
hierarchical model is satisfactory. Finally, we use this
hierarchical model to present some first analyses of the
clinical data in terms of both the memory characteristics
of groups of patients with different levels of cognitive
impairment, and in a predictive test of individual patient
diagnosis.

Signal Detection Theory
SDT models are often used in cognitive psychology as
simple models of how individuals make decisions. Under this view, the parameters of the SDT model have psychological interpretations that give insight into the underlying memory and decision processes involved in a
recognition task.
The basic SDT model shown in Figure 1 assumes
that, on each trial, the presented item evokes some latent memory strength. The memory strengths of both
target and distractor items are assumed to have Gaussian
distributions, with the mean of the distractor distribution
separated from the mean of the target distribution by a
distance d 0 . In this way, d 0 measures the discriminability
of the target and distractor items, and so represents the
acuity of memory for the items.
Due to the assumed overlap of the target and distractor
distributions, an individual needs a decision strategy for
relating memory strength to responses in the recognition
test. SDT models assume this is done using a criterion
level of memory strength k below which the individual
will respond ‘new’ and above which the individual will
respond ‘old’. The area h under the target distribution
above the criterion corresponds to the hit rate, and the

2849

target

Probability Density

distractor

in stage 5, and 22 in stage 6.1 In this data set, variability
on at least two qualitatively distinct levels is expected.
At an individual level, each patient is expected to differ in their mnemonic ability; at a group level, patients
with a given FAST stage are expected, on average, to
differ in mnemonic ability from patients with a different
FAST stage. The first row of Figure 3 summarizes patient performance , with the panels corresponding to the
six stages. Each point corresponds to a patient, showing
their combination of hits and false-alarms in the task. It
can be seen that, generally, performance worsens (i.e.,
there are fewer hits and/or more false-alarms) with increasing stage, but also that there remains considerable
variability across patients within the same stage. This
means any attempt to model these data should account
for this systematic variation both between groups (i.e.,
how the funtional stages differ in terms of memory and
decision strategy) and within groups (i.e., how individual
patients differ in their memory and decision strategy).

h

f

c
0

k

d0

Memory Strength

Figure 1: The unequal variance signal detection theory
model and parameters.

area f under the distractor distribution above the criterion corresponds to the false alarm rate.
The distance c between this criterion and unbiased responding is commonly used as a measure of response
bias due to its independece of d 0 (Snodgrass & Corwin,
1988). The response bias measures the tendency of an
individual to give one response rather than another.
Most SDT models in psychology assume that the standard deviations of the target and distractor distributions
are equal. Results of recognition memory experiments
(e.g., Mickes, Wixted, & Wais, 2007), however, support a version of SDT in which the standard deviation
of the target distribution is 25% larger than the standard deviation of the distractor distribution, so that τ =
σdistractor /σtarget = 0.8.

Clinical Data Set
Our data come from a neurology clinic where 533 patients completed a yes/no recognition memory test consisting of 10 target and 10 distractor words selected from
the CERAD word list (e.g., Shankle et al., 2005). The
majority of these patients had AD, vascular dementia,
lewy body disease, or a mixture of these diagnoses.
Independent of patient performance on the recognition
memory test, a trained neurologist used the functional
assessment staging test (FAST) to classify each patient.
The FAST (Reisberg, 1988) is a well-validated diagnostic tool used by clinicians to classify patients into one
of seven stages, each of which corresponds to a level
of functional impairment. Specifically, progessing from
stage 1 to stage 7 corresponds to ‘normal aging’, ‘possible mild cognitive impairment’, ‘mild cognitive impairment’, ‘mild dementia’, ‘moderate dementia’, ‘moderately severe dementia’ and ‘severe dementia’.
Of the 533 patients, 145 were judged to be in FAST
stage 1, 93 in stage 2, 96 in stage 3, 131 in stage 4, 46

Three SDT Models
In this section, we evaluate the ability of three SDT models to account for our clinical data. Although the three
models share the basic SDT assumptions, each makes
different assumptions regarding individual differences in
discriminability and response bias.
In order to perform Bayesian inference, we implemented the SDT models as probabilistic graphical models in WinBUGS (Lunn, Thomas, Best, & Spiegelhalter, 2000), software that uses a variety of Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms (Gilks, Richardson,
& Spiegelhalter, 1996) to obtain samples from the joint
posterior distributions of these parameters. Probabilistic
graphical models are widely used for Bayesian inference
within statistics (e.g., Jordan, 2004) and more recently
in cognitive science (Lee, 2008; Shiffrin, Lee, Kim, &
Wagenmakers, 2008), including in the current context of
recognition memory and SDT (Dennis, Lee, & Kinnell,
2008). All of our analyses used 2000 posterior samples
collected following a burn-in (i.e., a set of samples discarded to ensure that the recorded samples are representative of the posterior distribution) of 1000 samples.

No Individual Differences
Our first attempt to account for the clinical data uses
an SDT model in which all patients with a given FAST
stage have the same discriminability and response bias.
This approach is seen in the cognitive modeling literature
when SDT is fit to averaged or aggregated data, estimating one set of parameters to describe all the individuals
in a group.
Graphical Model The graphical model is shown in
the left panel of Figure 2. Consistent with the assumption that all patients with a given FAST stage have the
1 Since patients with a diagnosis of FAST stage 7 can, at
best, speak approximately 5 or 6 words per day and, at worst,
cannot lift their head, no data from patients with this diagnosis
were included in our data set.

2850

i stages
λd,i

µd,i

µc,i

dj

cj

hj

fj

Hj

Fj

λc,i

i stages
j patients
ci

zj

di

hj

fj

Hj

Fj

τ

cj

dj

hj

fj

Hj

Fj

τ

zj

j patients

T

D

τ

j patients

T

D

T

D

Figure 2: Graphical models for the SDT models that assume no (left), full (middle), and hierarchical (right) individual
differences in discriminability and response bias.

same discriminability and response bias, the plate with
i = 1, . . ., 6 corresponds to the six FAST stages. Within
this plate, the di and ci nodes correspond to the discriminability and response bias, respectively, for the ith
FAST stage. The plate with j = 1, . . ., 533 corresponds
to the 533 patients. Within this plate, the z j node indicates the FAST stage of the jth patient, which via
SDT determines the hit and false alarm rates h j and
f j for that patient. Formally, h j = Φ(dz j /2 − cz j ) and
f j = Φ(−(dz j /2 + cz j )/τ), where τ was set to the empirical value of 0.8. Based on the hit and false alarm
rates and the T = 10 target and D = 10 distractor words
presented to all patients during the recognition tests,
the jth patient produces H j ∼ Binomial(h j , T) hits and
Fj ∼ Binomial( f j , D) observed false alarms during the
test. We used the standard non-informative priors d j ∼
Gaussian(0, 2) and c j ∼ Gaussian(0, 1/2).
Results We use posterior predictive distributions as a
standard Bayesian assessment the fit of models to data
(e.g., Gelman, Carlin, Stern, & Rubin, 2004). These distributions for hits and false alarm counts are shown in
the second row of Figures 3 and 4, at the group and individual level respectively. In each panel, the box sizes
are proportional to the mass of the posterior predictive
distribution. The second row of Figure 3 shows that the
group level model only adequately accounts for the variability of FAST stage 1, perhaps stage 2, but no other
stages. The second row of Figure 4 shows the posterior
predictive distribution for a randomly selected individual patient from each FAST stage. In all but one case,
the mass of the posterior predictive distributions does not
contact the patient’s data, represented by the cross. From

this, we conclude that the SDT model with no individual
differences does not adequately describe the data.

Full Individual Differences
Our second attempt to account for the clinical data uses
an SDT model in which each patient is assumed to have
a different level of mnemonic ability. This approach is
seen in the cognitive modeling literature when SDT is
fit to individual participant data, and parameters are estimated for each separately.
Graphical Model The graphical model is shown in the
middle panel of Figure 2. Since each patient is assumed
to have a unique discriminability and response bias (and
consequently hit and false alarm rates), the plate corresponding to the patients now extends over the corresponding d j , c j , h j , and f j nodes. These variables have
the same definitions and priors as before, but now applied
at the level of individuals rather than stages.
Results Posterior predictive distributions for the group
analysis of the SDT model with full individual differences are shown in the third row of Figure 3. Each of
these distributions puts roughly equal mass on each possible pair of hit and false alarm counts, which does not
match the observed data. The basic problem is that, by
fitting at an individual level, the model cannot make inferences about groups of participants. Where the model
does fare well is at the individual level, shown in the third
row of Figure 4. Here, the posterior predictive fits to the
selected patients are excellent, as they should be. Nevertheless, the inability of the SDT model with full individual differences to describe the FAST groups means that
it does not satisfy the dual goals we set at the outset.

2851

Stage 1

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4

Stage 5

Stage 6

Data

None

Full

10

Hierarchical

Hits
0
0
10
False Alarms

Figure 3: The first row shows the hit and false-alarm counts for each patient, according to their FAST stage. The
second, third, and fourth rows show the posterior predictive distributions for hit and false alarm counts for the no
difference, full difference, and hierarchical difference models. In the posterior predictive panels, the box sizes are
proportional to the mass of the posterior predictive distribution for that combination of hits and false-alarms.

Hierarchical Individual Differences
Our third approach uses an SDT model in which each
patient is assumed to have different discriminability and
response bias, depending on their FAST stage. We do
this by assuming a structure to the individual differences,
using a hierarchical model.
Graphical Model The graphical model is shown in
the right panel of Figure 2. Since each patient has a
unique discriminability and response bias, the plate
corresponding to the patients still extends over the
corresponding d j and c j nodes. However, we now
assume that these values are drawn from Gaussian
distributions, where the discriminability and response
bias distributions for the ith FAST stage have means
µd,i and µc,i and precisions λd,i and λc,i. Formally, for
example, d j ∼ Gaussian(µd,z j , λd,z j ).
Results Posterior predictive distributions for the group
analysis for the SDT model with hierarchical individual differences are shown in the fourth row of Figure 3.
In contrast to those produced by the two previous SDT
models, these distributions provide a good description of
the data. Similarly, the fourth row of Figure 4 shows that
the posterior predictive distribution for the randomly selected patients are as good as those obtained using the
SDT model with full individual differences. From this,
we conclude that the SDT model with hierarchical individual differences does adequately describe the data at

both the group and individual level.
This descriptive adequacy makes it sensible to examine the parameter inferences made by the model. We
present two analyses of this type, one at the group and
one at the individual level, to demonstrate what sort of
analyses are possible. At the group level, Figure 5 shows
scatterplots of 50 randomly sampled pairs of mean discriminability µd and mean response bias µc values from
the joint posterior distribution over these parameters for
each FAST stage. The FAST stage groups are separated
with respect to mean discriminability, with progressive
stages having lower values. In contrast, the FAST stage
groups have roughly equal levels of response bias with
only a slight decease evident as the stages progress.
At the individual level, we evaluated the adequacy of
the hierarchical model to predict the FAST stage of patients based on their test performance. To accomplish
this, we used data from 483 of the 533 patients to obtain a posterior distribution over the discriminability and
response bias parameters.2 We then found the posterior
distribution for the FAST stage variables z j of those patients whose true FAST stage was withheld, and made
the predicted staging corresponding to the mode of that
distribution (i.e., the standard MAP estimate).
2 Many of the 533 patients participated in the same recognition memory test multiple times. Only data from their first visit
was used for the posterior predictive analyses. For the prediction analysis, however, data from subsequent visits on which a
patient did not change FAST stage were combined.

2852

Stage 1

Stage 2

Stage 3

Stage 4

Stage 5

Stage 6

Data

None

Full

10

Hierarchical

Hits
0
0
10
False Alarms

Figure 4: Posterior predictive distributions for hit and false alarm counts for one randomly selected patient from each
of the first six FAST stages.

Figure 6 presents the results of this analysis, showing
how the model predictions relate to the true diagnoses.
Each box corresponds to a (truth,prediction) pair, and
the box size is proportional to the frequency of that pairing. Black boxes on the diagonal are correct classifications. The gray outline regions in Figure 6 correspond
to the broader classsification dividing FAST stages 1 and
2, which essentially represent normal cognitive functioning, from stages 3–6, which represent cognitive impairment with or without dementia. It can be seen that the
predictions of the model are generally good, especially
at the broader level, but are certainly not perfect. Our
main point is that it is straightforward to make predictions for individuals by assuming hierarchal individual
differences, and that these predictions are informed by
the different group characteristics observed in Figure 5.

Discussion
We think the hierarchical approach to modeling groups
and individuals is an important and useful one. The no
individual differences model failed to account for data at
both the the group and individual levels, because it failed
to provide a mechanism to deal with the variability that
existed within a given FAST stage. The full individual
differences model failed to account for data at the group
level, because it had no representation of this group level.
In contrast,the hierarchical individual differences model
was able to account for data at both levels successfully.
While it may not be surprising that this model was able
to account for data at the group level better than the other
two models, its ability to account for the data at the indi-

vidual level as well as the SDT model with full individual
differences may strike some as a surprising.
Previous work using SDT to model data from patients
with dementia (Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). In this
work, a basic SDT model (assuming equal variances)
was used to model recognition memory data from dementia patients (diagnosed with either AD or Parkinson’s
disease). One of the main results of this study was that
patients with dementia have abnormally liberal response
biases (as measured by c). While Figure 5 appears to
show a decreasing trend, there is no evidence of the liberal criterion values found in the previous work.
In our hierarchical SDT model, we assumed differences between individuals. One potential limitation is
that we did not attempt to account for differences between items. Some authors (e.g., Rouder & Lu, 2005)
have noted that SDT parameters are systematically underestimated when item variability is not accounted for.
Adding such an assumption to the hierarchical model
produced here is straightforward, and worth pursuing.
A final issue concerns the performance of the hierarchical SDT model on the prediction task. While the
model’s performance was imperfect, its predictions (both
correct and incorrect) seem sensible. As the first row of
Figures 3 and 4 show, a large number of patients with
FAST stages 4 (and even some with stages 5 and 6) still
perform perfectly on the test. This may tell us more about
the utility of recognition memory tests as diagnostic tools
for AD, rather than about any fundamental deficits in
the hierarchical SDT model. Given these results, modeling data from another recognition or recall paradigm

2853

1
0.75

6

5
Predicted Stage

Mean Bias

0.5
0.25
0
−0.25
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 5
Stage 6

−0.5
−0.75
−1
−1

0

1

2

3

4

4

3

2

1
5

1

Mean Discriminability

Figure 5: Joint posterior for the means of the discriminability and response bias parameters of the SDT model
that assumes hierarchical individual differences.

2

3
4
True Stage

5

6

Figure 6: FAST stage prediction performance.

could prove useful in clinical settings (cf. Locascio et
al., 1995).
In conclusion, we have demonstrated, using a large
clinical data set, how an SDT model with hierarchical
individual differences in discriminability and response
bias is able to solve a problem that appears in clinical research: modeling patient performance at both the group
and individual levels. Considerable work needs to be
done to extend the approach to offer insights into the
nature of episodic memory deficits in AD, but we feel
that the general approach of applying memory models
from cognitive psychology to gain insights into AD holds
great promise.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by award NIRG-08-90460
from the Alzheimer’s Association.

References
Dennis, S. J., Lee, M. D., & Kinnell, A. (2008). Bayesian
analysis of recognition memory: The case of the
list-length effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 361–376.
Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., & Rubin, D. B.
(2004). Bayesian data analysis. Boca Raton, FL:
Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Gilks, W. R., Richardson, S., & Spiegelhalter, D. J. E.
(1996). Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice.
Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Jordan, M. I. (2004). Graphical models. Statistical Science, 19, 140–155.
Lee, M. D. (2008). Three case studies in the Bayesian
analysis of cognitive models. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 1–15.

Locascio, J. J., Growdon, J. H., & Corkin, S. (1995).
Cognitive test performance in detecting, staging,
and tracking Alzheimer’s disease. Archives of
Neurology, 52, 1087–1099.
Lunn, D. J., Thomas, A., Best, N., & Spiegelhalter,
D. (2000). WinBUGS - A Bayesian modeling
framework: Concepts, structure, and extensibility.
Statistics and Computing , 10, 325–337.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection
theory: A user’s guide (Second ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mickes, L., Wixted, J. T., & Wais, P. E. (2007). A direct test of the unequal-variance signal-detection
model of recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 858–865.
Reisberg, B. (1988). Functional assessment staging
(FAST). Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 24, 653–
659.
Rouder, J. N., & Lu, J. (2005). An introduction to
Bayesian hierarchical models with an application
in the theory of signal detection. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 12, 573–604.
Shankle, W. R., Romney, A. K., Hara, J., Fortier, D.,
Dick, M. B., Chen, J. M., et al. (2005). Methods to improve the detection of mild cognitive impairment. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 102(13), 4919–4924.
Shiffrin, R. M., Lee, M. D., Kim, W., & Wagenmakers,
E.-J. (2008). A survey of model evaluation approaches with a tutorial on hierarchical Bayesian
methods. Cognitive Science, 32, 1248–1284.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to
dementia and amnesia. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 117, 34–50.

2854

