UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reconsidering human cross-situational learning capacities: a revision to Yu &amp; Smith's
(2007) experimental paradigm

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/91w0n66j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Blythe, Richard A.
Smith, Andrew D.M.
Smith, Kenny

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reconsidering human cross-situational learning capacities: a revision to Yu &
Smith’s (2007) experimental paradigm
Kenny Smith (kenny.smith@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre, Division of Psychology, Northumbria University,
Northumberland Building, Northumberland Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

Andrew D. M. Smith (andrew@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit, PPLS, University of Edinburgh,
Dugald Stewart Building, 3 Charles Street, Edinburgh, EH8 9AD, UK

Richard A. Blythe (R.A.Blythe@ed.ac.uk)
SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh,
James Clerk Maxwell Building, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3JZ, UK
Abstract

Yu, 2008; Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, in press) have argued that words can still be learned despite this sort of uncertainty, by combining information across exposures via crosssituational learning. While a number of flavours of crosssituational learning exist (see e.g. Siskind, 1996; Frank et
al., in press), the basic premise is as follows. Each situation
in which a word is used provides a number of candidates for
that word’s meaning. Multiple uses therefore produce multiple sets of candidate meanings, and the learner can make use
of this cross-situational information, for example by assuming that the true meaning of the word lies at the intersection
of these sets of candidate meanings.

Cross-situational learning allows word learning despite
exposure-by-exposure uncertainty about a word’s meaning, by
combining information across exposures to a word. A number of experimental studies demonstrate that humans are capable of cross-situational learning. The strongest claims here
are made by Yu and Smith (2007), who provide experimental
data suggesting that adult humans are capable of using crosssituational learning to rapidly learn the meanings of multiple
words simultaneously and despite considerable uncertainty at
each exposure. We identify a flaw in their testing regime which
throws their conclusions into doubt, and conduct a new experiment which remedies this methodological flaw. Our data supports a more limited view of the ability of adults to rapidly and
simultaneously apply cross-situational learning in conditions
of (relatively) high referential uncertainty.
Keywords: word learning; cross-situational learning

Introduction
Learning the meaning of a new word is a challenge: as famously noted by Quine (1960), there are in principle infinitely many meanings which could be consistent with a single utterance of an unfamiliar word, or any sequence of such
utterances. However, despite this theoretical difficulty, humans manifestly do learn the meanings of new words, and
rapidly too (Bloom, 2000).
A productive area of investigation has been to explore how
children eliminate some of the theoretically-possible but in
practice spurious candidate meanings for a new word, in order to make a better guess as to the word’s true meaning.
A number of such heuristics have been identified, including
(to name but two examples) the mutual exclusivity heuristic (each object should have only one name, and therefore
already-labelled objects can be excluded as candidate referents for new words: Markman & Wachtel, 1988) and the
shape bias (words generalise by shape, so a new word probably refers to a category-typical shape rather than colour, texture, etc: Landau, Smith, & Jones, 1988).
However, heuristics of this sort are unlikely to uniquely
identify the true meaning of a word on every word learning
encounter: some residue of uncertainty will remain. Various
authors (e.g. Pinker, 1989; Siskind, 1996; Gillette, Gleitman,
Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999; Yu & Smith, 2007; L. B. Smith &

Several experimental studies have shown that adults and
children are capable of cross-situational learning, both from
naturalistic stimuli (e.g. Gillette et al., 1999; Piccin & Waxman, 2007) and more stylised materials (Yu & Smith, 2007;
L. B. Smith & Yu, 2008). Perhaps the most striking demonstration of human cross-situational learning prowess is provided by Yu and Smith (2007), henceforth YS, who show that
adult learners are able to learn multiple words simultaneously
despite a small number of exposures to each word and referential uncertainty at each exposure. We show here that a flaw
in YS’s testing regime means that they risk substantially overestimating human cross-situational learning proficiency.
In the next section we provide an analysis of their testing regime and demonstrate that their human participants are
in fact outperformed by a simple non-cross-situational learning procedure. This severely undermines the conclusion that
their experimental results indicate powerful cross-situational
learning abilities. We then describe a replication and extension of YS’s results using a more appropriate testing regime.
Our results provide only partial support for YS’s original conclusions. At intermediate levels of referential uncertainty, human participants can indeed use cross-situational learning to
rapidly learn multiple words in parallel. However, our results
also show that at the highest level of referential uncertainty
tested, this ability breaks down — human cross-situational
learning abilities may be somewhat weaker than suggested by
YS. Furthermore, our results suggest problems at lower levels

2711

(a)

of referential uncertainty, possibly arising from the difficulty
of integrating information across widely separated exposures.

"clow" "goom" "quidector"

(b)
"quidector" "thant" "dwilt"

Analysing Yu & Smith (2007)
In order to demonstrate conclusively that a group of word
learners are capable of cross-situational word learning, the
following three steps are necessary: (1) Present those learners
with a sequence of training exposures to a target word or target words; (2) Test those learners on their ability to correctly
identify the meaning of each target word; (3) Demonstrate
that the resulting performance is significantly better than that
which could be obtained by any learner using a single one of
those training exposures (i.e. the learning performance truly
indicates cross-situational, rather than one-shot, learning).
YS present a series of word-learning studies which they argue meet these three criteria. We believe a deficiency in their
testing regime (item 2 above) means that they are not in fact
able to satisfy the third requirement: a learner capable of only
remembering a single training exposure for each word outperforms their human participants under their testing regime.
YS use the following experimental set-up (their Experiment 1) to demonstrate cross-situational learning. Adult participants are presented with a series of exposures to words
(aurally presented) paired with referent objects (presented visually). Example exposures (using our materials, not those
used by YS) are illustrated in Figure 1. At each exposure
2, 3 or 4 words are presented simultaneously, depending on
condition (these are referred to as the 2x2, 3x3 and 4x4 conditions respectively), with all participants experiencing all conditions. Participants are trained on 18 words in each condition, with the training set being constructed such that each
word is paired with its referent object six times.
During testing, participants are presented with each word
in turn, and asked to pick out the correct referent object for
that word from an array consisting of the correct object plus
three foils, which are themselves referents of other words and
will therefore have been encountered six times during training (see Figure 1d). YS show that human participants perform significantly better than a memoryless baseline strategy
which selects randomly among the four test objects, which
would get 25% of test items correct on average: human learners score on average between 53% and 88%, depending on
condition, with greater levels of referential uncertainty (i.e.
the 4x4 condition) leading to reduced performance.
The baseline performance that YS evaluate their participants against is that which would be achieved by a learner
with no memory of any of the training exposures they received. Humans perform better than this. However, there
are other learners who might perform better than this memoryless learner without making use of cross-situational information. In order to demonstrate that humans are performing
cross-situational learning, it must also be demonstrated that
they are outperforming these non-cross-situational learners.
Consider the following learner, who we will term the oneexposure learner. The one-exposure learner remembers the

(c)

"dwilt" "quidector" "ipe"

(d)
"quidector"

Figure 1: Training (a–c) and test (d) exposures in the YS 3x3
condition.

details of only one of each of the six exposures they receive
for each word — e.g. the first exposure, or the last. On testing on a particular target word, this learner selects at random from all the test objects which it saw paired with the
target word on the single exposure it remembers. For example, looking at the training and testing episodes depicted in
Figure 1, if the one-exposure learner remembers the exposure
depicted in Figure 1(a), upon testing on the array shown in
Figure 1(d) the one-exposure learner would guess at random
among three possible referent objects (those objects present
in the single remembered exposure). Alternatively, if the
learner only remembered the exposure depicted in Fig. 1(b)
or (c), the learner would guess at random among two possibilities in the test array (if it remembered exposure b) or correctly identify the target referent as it is the only object from
the single remembered exposure present in the test array (if
c was the sole remembered exposure). This learner is clearly
not integrating information across exposures, since it only remembers a single training exposure for each word. Nor is it
learning from the test exposure — given a different test array,
this one-exposure learner might perform differently.1
How well would the one-exposure learner perform on YS’s
test regime? We have previously provided a mathematical
formalism which can be straightforwardly adopted to calcu1 Given that the test array constrains which referent objects can
be selected, the one-exposure learner could be said to be exploiting
cross-situational information between the single remembered exposure and the test array. While this is a potentially interesting interpretation, we believe it is desirable to separate this weak form
of cross-situational learning (which essentially exploits the reduction in uncertainty afforded by the test regime) with cross-situational
learning across multiple exposures (which is more relevant to crosssituational word learning in the real world). As we will argue in the
rest of the paper, the YS testing regime obscures the extent of this
more interesting form of cross-situational learning by using a test
which rewards one-exposure learning.

2712

  
  −1
T
M−T
M
Q(O|T,C, M) =
·
·
.
O
C−O
C

(1)

The first term is the number of ways of correctly selecting
T
overlapping items: there are O
ways in which the desired
number of overlapping foils (O) can be chosen from the test
foils T . The second term is likewise the number of ways of
correctly selecting non-overlapping items: M − T gives the
number of referents which are not test foils, and we must select C − O training foils from this set. The number of valid
combinations of training foils and test foils which satisfy the
desired condition is the product of these two expressions, and
the probability of obtaining O objects which were present in
both the test and training foil sets is obtained by multiplying
this quantity by the probability of a given set of training foils.
Once we have calculated this quantity it is relatively easy
to calculate the probability of a one-exposure learner guessing
the target meaning correctly on test. This is:
O=T

Pone (T,C, M) =

∑

O=0

1
· Q (O|T,C, M)
O+1

(2)

1.0
0.8
0.6

Proportion correct, P one

0

5

10

15

Number of test foils, T

Figure 2: Probability of correctly guessing the target for a
one-exposure learner, for various numbers of test foils (T ).
Mean
√ and 95% confidence interval for the mean (1.96 ×
SD/ N) of YS’s human learners are given as solid points
plus error bars, with shapes coded according to C, offset as
necessary to avoid obscuring other points. Horizontal dotted
line gives performance of the YS memoryless learner.

expression has the comparatively convenient closed form
"

  −1 #
M+1
M−T
M
1
−
·
.
Pone (T,C, M) =
T +1 C+1
C+1
C
(3)
Figure 2 shows, for M = 17 and C = 1, 2 or 3 (the parameters used by YS in their Experiment 1) the probability of this
one-exposure learner correctly identifying the target referent
under various testing regimes, including T = 3 (the number
of test foils used by YS) and T = M, the hardest possible test
where the learner is confronted with all possible word referents at every test. We also plot the human performance from
Yu and Smith (2007), Experiment 1.
There are several things to note. Firstly, the one-exposure
learner outperforms YS’s 25% baseline in all cases where
T = 3, and in nearly all other test regimes. Secondly, and
most importantly, under the C = 1 condition human performance is not significantly different from that of the oneexposure learner (t(37) = 1.27, p = 0.21)2, whereas under
the C = 2 and C = 3 conditions humans perform significantly
worse than the one-exposure learner(C = 2: t(37) = 2.22,
p = 0.03; C = 3: t(37) = 8.83, p < 0.001).3 Finally, the
one-exposure learner performs worst on the test when T = M,
at which point it will achieve a proportion 1/C + 1 correct
(guessing among the target and the C training foils on the sin2 All

p values reported in this paper are for two-tailed tests.
report a second set of experimental results (their Experiment 2), which involves comparing a replication of the 4x4 condition of Experiment 1 with two conditions where participants learn
smaller lexicons (9 words) in the 4x4 conditions, with more repetition of each word. Performance in the 9-word lexicon conditions is
indistinguishable from one-exposure learner performance: greatest
t(27) = 1.57, p = 0.128.
3 YS

where the sum is over the possible sizes of overlapping sets,
and the fraction gives the probability of correctly selecting
the target meaning by chance from the union of the overlapping set and the target meaning. It can be shown that this

C=1
C=2
C=3

0.4

late this (equation 1 in K. Smith, Smith, Blythe, & Vogt,
2006). We will repeat the relevant expression here, modified
to the question at hand for ease of exposition.
YS’s experimental deign can be expressed as follows. A
learner attempts to learn W words, each paired uniquely with
one of W associated referent objects. At each exposure to a
particular target word, a learner sees the target word (and a
number of other words) paired with the target referent plus C
non-target referent objects (the training foils: C = 1 in YS’s
2x2 condition, C = 2 in the 3x3 condition, C = 3 in the 4x4
condition). Those training foils are drawn from a set of M =
W − 1 objects. During testing, the learner is presented with
the target word and asked to identify the target referent from
a set consisting of the target referent plus T (= 3 in YS’s
paradigm) non-target referents (test foils) drawn from the set
of M = W − 1 non-target referents.
For a one-exposure learner, the relevant question is: for a
given word, how many of the T test foils were also present
in the set of C training foils during the single remembered
exposure to the target word? If there is no overlap between
training and test foils the one-exposure learner will correctly
identify the target referent as the only object it remembers
co-present with the target word. If there is some overlap between these sets of foils, the one-exposure learner will guess
at random between the target object and the members of this
overlapping set.
The probability of O items being present in the overlap between T test foils and C training foils is given by

2713

gle remembered training exposure). If we wish to eliminate a
non-cross-situational learning strategy like the one-exposure
learner as a candidate explanation for human behaviour, the
best approach is therefore to test on the full array of referent
objects, rather than a subset.
The fact that the one-exposure learner performs better
than humans is slightly puzzling — can we reject non-crosssituational learning on the basis that human performance is
inconsistent with this learning behaviour? Unfortunately not.
One straightforward way to account for this mismatch is to
introduce the notion of a forgetful one-exposure learner. As
before, this learner only remembers a single exposure to each
target word, but within that exposure forgets each referent object (including the target) with probability f . We can provide
the following expression for the probability that a forgetful
one-exposure learner will guess correctly on a particular target word:
 C+1
1
Pf ( f , T,C, M)
+
h =′ T +1 f
i
(4)
C =C
′
(1 − f ) ∑C′ =0 P(C |C, f ) · Pone (T,C′ , M)
where P(C′ |C, f ) gives the probability of remembering C′ of
the C training foils, given by the expression
 
C
′
′
′
P(C |C, f ) =
· (1 − f )C · f C−C .
(5)
′
C

The second term in the expression for Pf gives the probability of correctly identifying the target during testing, weighted
by the probability of remembering the target (1 − f ) and between 0 and C of the training foils. The first term covers the
case where all details of the training exposure are forgotten,
including the target, in which case the forgetful one-exposure
learner picks at random among the T + 1 possibilities. The
other possibilities (forgetting the target and remembering one
or more of the training foils) will lead to incorrect guesses
and can therefore be omitted.
Close matches between the forgetful one-exposure learner
and the mean performance of YS’s human participants can be
achieved by assuming that f increases with C. For example,
human behaviour is not significantly different from that of the
one-exposure learner if we assume the following f values:
C = 1, f = 0; C = 2, f = 0.1; C = 3, f = 0.4; t(37) ≤ 0.37.
Based on these results, we therefore cannot reject the
null hypothesis that humans are incapable of cross-situational
learning and are achieving the observed levels of performance
by simply (partially) remembering a single exposure from the
sequence of exposures. It is important to emphasise that we
know that humans are capable of cross-situational learning
— as discussed above there are a number of other empirical
demonstrations of cross-situational learning (e.g. Gillette et
al., 1999; Piccin & Waxman, 2007). However, YS’s study
makes the strongest claims about human cross-situational
learning (both in terms of its rapidity and simultaneity), and a
replication of the YS experimental paradigm with a more demanding test regime (such that participants must identify the

target referent from an array of all possible referent objects)
is required to support this conclusion — at present, we cannot
rule out non-cross-situational learning as a potential explanation for the observed behaviour, or at least as a confounding
factor masking the true learning abilities of their participants.

An Experimental Test
We therefore ran an experimental study to remedy the flaw in
the Yu and Smith (2007) method. As described below, we ran
two groups of participants: a Control group, who underwent
a direct replication of YS’s Experiment 1, and an Experimental group, where we replaced the flawed YS test with a more
robust test of cross-situational learning ability (each test comprises the target plus all 17 possible test foils).

Method
Participants 48 undergraduate psychology students at
Northumbria University participated in the study as part of
a participation co-op scheme.
Materials Participants were asked to learn pairings of a referent object and a spoken (nonsense) word form. 54 novel
referent objects were created by cutting and pasting together
components parts of pictures of technological artifacts to produce novel objects — see Figure 1 for examples. We created
54 nonsense words (using the English Lexicon Project Website: Balota et al., 2007) which followed English phonotactics
and were stratified according to number of syllables (1–3),
stress (first or second syllable) and initial sound (vowel, single consonant, consonant cluster). These words were grouped
into three sets, such that each set had a similar sample of
the various word types and the subjectively more confusable
words were in different sets. Spoken forms of these words
were produced using the Victoria voice on the Apple Mac OS
X built-in speech synthesiser.
Design and Procedure Following YS, participants were
explicitly briefed on the task: they would have to work out
which object went with which word, multiple objects would
appear on the screen and their associated words would be spoken, there was no relationship between where the object appeared on the screen and the order in which the words were
spoken, and their task was therefore to work out across trials
which word went with which object. Participants were tested
in groups of between 1 and 5, seated at a PC in a room with
the PCs distributed around the periphery facing the walls.
Participants observed objects being displayed on the monitor
and listened to words being presented over headphones.
As in the YS study, participants were tested on three sets of
18 word-object pairings. Each set of 18 word-object pairings
was created by pairing each word from one of the word sets
with a referent object selected randomly without replacement
from the set of 54 referent objects. The degree of referential
uncertainty varied between word sets, with either two, three
or four words and their referents being presented at each exposure trial (the 2x2, 3x3 and 4x4 conditions, corresponding
to C of 1, 2 or 3). All participants experienced all three con-

2714

18

ditions. Following YS, exposure times were designed so that
total training time was the same in each condition (see Table
1). Given that the training sequence is independent of the test
regime, we designed the training sequences such that participants were paired across the Control and Experimental group
— for every member of the Control group, there was a participant in the Experimental group who received an identical
series of training exposures but underwent a more rigorous
test. Order of presentation of the three conditions and three
sets of word forms was counterbalanced across participants.

3

6

9

12

15

Yu & Smith
Control
Experimental

Condition
2x2
3x3
4x4

# trials
54
36
27

Time per trial (secs)
6
9
12

0

Table 1: The training regimes

2x2

Total time
324
324
324

After training on a word set was completed, participants
were tested: each word from the current word set was presented aurally and the participants were instructed to select
the associated object from the test array by clicking on it using the mouse. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
two groups. The Control group were tested using the YS test
regime — on each test trial, they were required to identify the
target referent from an array of four objects, the actual target
object and three foils selected at random from the set of 18
referent objects in use for this word set. Replicating the YS
regime allows us to check for any differences with their basic result arising from differences in participants or materials.
The Experimental group were tested using what we identify
above as the correct test regime — on each test trial, they
were required to identify the target referent from an array of
all 18 referent objects associated with this word set.

Results
Figure 3 shows the results from our two groups, alongside the
results from YS’s Experiment 1. Levels of performance in the
Control condition correspond fairly well with those of YS,
the greatest difference being slightly lower performance of
our participants in the 3x3 condition (YS: M = 13.69 words
learned; Control: M = 12.92), but this difference is not significant (t(60) = 0.83, p = 0.412). This gives us some confidence that our materials and participant pool are roughly
comparable to those of YS.
Focusing on the contrast between the Control and Experimental groups: as suggested by Figure 3, an ANOVA with
referential uncertainty as a within-subjects factor and three
between-subjects factors (test regime, order of presentation
of the three levels of referential uncertainty, order of presentation of the three sets of word forms) reveals a main effect
of referential uncertainty during training (F(2, 72) = 99.84,
p < 0.001) and of test configuration (F(1, 36) = 20.62, p <
0.001). There is also a significant interaction between referential uncertainty and order of presentation of the three levels

3x3

4x4

Figure 3: Mean performance (out of 18 words) of YS’s participants and our participants, organised by condition. Error bars
give the 95% confidence interval of the mean. Dashed horizontal lines give one-exposure performance — note that oneexposure performance for YS and Control groups is sometimes far greater than human performance, as discussed with
reference to Figure 2.

of referential uncertainty (F(10, 72) = 3.97, p < 0.001), indicative of a practice effect: participants perform relatively
poorly on their first word set (averaging across test regimes
and levels of referential uncertainty, M = 9.54 words correct) relative to their second and third sets (M = 11.42 and
M = 11.69 words correct respectively). Counterbalancing of
presentation orders means this practice effect does not alter
the overall pattern of results we report in the remainder of the
paper. All other main effects and interactions are n. s.
Looking at the performance of matched pairs of participants across the two testing conditions, participants in the
Experimental group perform worse across the board: smallest t(23) = 3.253, p = 0.004, occurring in the 2x2 condition. Post-hoc tests on both the Control and Experimental
groups show that performance differed significantly between
each level of referential uncertainty (all Bonferroni-corrected
p values < 0.01).
We can also ask whether performance in the Experimental group gives a clear signal that our participants are doing cross-situational learning: are they significantly better
than the best non-cross-situational performance level, afforded by one-exposure learning? One-sample tests show
that participants in the Experimental group perform above
the one-exposure chance levels in the 2x2 condition (mean
one-exposure learner performance of 9 words, W = 204,
p = 0.012)4 and in the 3x3 conditions (mean one-exposure
learner performance of 6 words, t(23) = 3.77, p = 0.001), but
not in the 4x4 condition (mean one-exposure performance of
4.5 words, t(23) = 1.26, p = 0.219).
4 The non-normal nature of the distribution of scores on the 2x2
condition (A2 = 0.782, p = 0.032) necessitates use of a one-sample
Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test rather than a one-sample t-test.

2715

Discussion
The finding that, in the Experimental 4x4 condition, our participants do not perform significantly above the one-exposure
level of performance is a major departure from the conclusions reached by YS, and suggests that, given a more careful
construction of the testing regime, our participants may not be
capable of doing cross-situational learning in the 4x4 condition, contrary to the conclusions drawn by YS. In other words,
due to a flawed testing regime, YS may have overestimated
the human capacity for rapid, simultaneous cross-situational
learning under higher levels of referential uncertainty.
We had anticipated the strongest signal of cross-situational
learning in the 2x2 condition. In fact, the signal of crosssituational learning here (relative to the one-exposure baseline) is equivalent or slightly weaker to that in the 3x3 condition (mean difference from the one-exposure level = 3.17
words in the 2x2 condition, 3.42 in the 3x3 condition). While
this might merely reflect the high level of the one-exposure
baseline in the 2x2 condition, another interpretation is possible and perhaps worthy of exploration. In the 2x2 condition
participants receive 54 randomly-ordered exposures, as opposed to 36 in the 3x3 condition and 27 in the 4x4 condition.
Consequently, consecutive exposures to a given word in the
2x2 condition are disproportionately likely to be broken up
by intervening exposures to other words. All other things being equal, information across trials is therefore more likely to
be forgotten in the 2x2 condition than in the other conditions.
This might explain why performance in this condition is not
even better differentiated from one-exposure performance —
it may be that the relatively fragmented nature of the training
stimuli in the 2x2 condition fosters a behaviour more in line
with the one-exposure baseline. Note that the test configuration used by YS would not reveal this problem, given the
high baseline level of one-exposure performance in their 2x2
condition: essentially, it doesn’t matter if you can’t remember
more than one exposure, since you’ll probably guess right on
test anyway.
Under this interpretation, learners are therefore faced with
two difficulties in applying cross-situational learning in this
experiment: (1) degree of referential uncertainty, the 4x4 condition being the most challenging; (2) forgetting between exposures, with the 2x2 condition being hardest. Performance
is greatest (relative to the one-exposure baseline) when both
these pressures are minimised — in the 2x2 condition, it may
be that forgetting effects drag performance back towards the
baseline despite low referential uncertainty. We are currently
running a series of follow-up experiments to explore the impact of the interleaving of exposures on performance (point 2
above), as well as exploring whether cross-situational learning is possible under higher levels of referential uncertainty
(e.g. 4x4) for smaller (< 18 word) lexicons.

Conclusions
Our analysis of the flaw in the testing regime used by Yu
and Smith (2007) shows that their results do not support the

conclusion that adult humans are capable of rapidly learning
multiple words in the face of relatively high referential uncertainty. Our replication and extension of their work shows that
more limited conclusions are justified: while our participants
were clearly doing cross-situational learning under the low
(2x2) and intermediate levels (3x3) of referential uncertainty,
there was no clear signal of cross-situational learning under
the highest level of referential uncertainty tested (4x4). These
results suggest that human capacities for rapid and simultaneous cross-situational may be more limited than suggested by
Yu and Smith (2007).

Acknowledgements
A. D. M. S. is supported by ESRC grant RES-062-23-1537.
R. A. B. is an RCUK Academic Fellow. Thanks to Ronan
O’Ceallaigh for helpful early discussions.

References
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., et al. (2007). The English Lexicon
Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445–459.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of words.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. (in press).
Using speakers’ referential intentions to model early crosssituational word learning. Psychological Science.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A. (1999).
Human simulations of vocabulary learning. Cognition, 73,
135–176.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The importance of shape in early lexical learning. Cognitive Development, 3, 299–321.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s use
of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meaning of words.
Cognitive Psychology, 20, 121–157.
Piccin, T. B., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Why nouns trump
verbs in word learning: new evidence from children and
adults in the human simulation paradigm. Language Learning and Development, 3, 295–323.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Siskind, J. M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning mappings. Cognition, 61, 1–38.
Smith, K., Smith, A. D. M., Blythe, R. A., & Vogt, P. (2006).
Cross-situational learning: a mathematical approach. In
P. Vogt, Y. Sugita, E. Tuci, & C. Nehaniv (Eds.), Symbol
grounding and beyond (pp. 31–44). Berlin: Springer.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics. Cognition, 106, 1558–1568.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414–420.

2716

