UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relational Language Helps Children Reason Analogically

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2553h9gw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Flusberg, Stephen
Gentner, Dedre
Simms, Nina

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relational Language Helps Children Reason Analogically
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Nina Simms (ninasimms@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Stephen Flusberg (sflus@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
This paper explores the role of relational language in the
development of children’s analogical reasoning ability. In two
experiments, children were asked to make a relational
mapping between two pictures while ignoring a competing
object match. Three-and-a-half-year-olds, 5½-year-olds, and
7-year-olds were all more successful at this task when they
heard relational language. Experiment 2 further demonstrated
that children were as good at finding the relational match with
an object match present if they heard relational language as
they were when there was no compelling object match present
at all. These results suggest that relational language may be
important in instilling the ability to reason analogically.
Keywords: Analogy; analogical development; relational
language; language and thought

Introduction
Humans are prolific learners, in part because of our ability
to learn through analogy. Analogy involves aligning the
shared relational structure between a base and target
representation (Gentner, 1983). From this mapping,
reasoners can draw inferences about a target that are
suggested by the base. Analogies also promote the
abstraction of relational schemas that can then be applied to
new situations or domains (Gick & Holyoak, 1983), and
making an analogy often leads to re-representation of either
or both aligned structures (Gentner & Colhoun, in press;
Gentner & Rattermann, 1991; Loewenstein, Thompson, &
Gentner, 1999).
Given analogy’s potential to facilitate learning,
investigation into children’s analogical abilities is crucial to
understanding cognitive development. Analogical ability
appears to be present even in very young children. For
example, Gentner (1977) showed that preschoolers could
carry out spatial analogies from the human body to a
mountain or a tree, even when the matches were made
difficult with surface distractors. Chen & Daehler (1989)
found that 6-year-olds were able to transfer relational
structure from a story to a real-world situation. Prior to
completing a problem-solving task, children heard two
stories. Some children heard neutral stories, and others

heard stories illustrating abstract schemas for solving the
task. Children who heard the abstract schemas were more
likely to solve the task using the problem-solving technique
from the stories than children who heard neutral stories.
Although young children are able to make and use
analogies, their abilities do not match those of adults. One
of the most striking differences between adults’ and
children’s performance on analogical tasks is children’s
focus on objects and object properties over relations (Blades
& Cooke, 1994; Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991). The transition from reliance on objects
to relations has been termed the relational shift (Gentner,
1988). Although this shift is well-documented, researchers
disagree on what drives the change. The various
explanations are closely tied to general theories of
analogical development, specifically domain knowledge
accounts and maturational constraints accounts.
Domain knowledge theories of analogical development
suggest that children’s ability to reason analogically
increases as they accrue knowledge about a particular
domain and its relations (Gentner, 1988; Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991; Goswami & Brown, 1989; Rattermann &
Gentner, 1998; Vosniadou, 1989). Thus, children may
successfully reason analogically in a familiar domain (e.g.,
family relationships), but fail in an unfamiliar domain (e.g.,
scientific concepts). With limited knowledge of the
relations, children depend instead on the information they
do have about the objects and their properties. In contrast,
maturational constraints theories view analogical
development as driven primarily by increases in children’s
basic cognitive capacity, like working memory (Halford,
1993) and inhibitory control (Richland, Morrison, &
Holyoak, 2006). In these accounts, children are unable to
represent complex relations due to working memory
limitations, and they lack the inhibitory control to carry out
relational matches when compelling object matches are
present.
Of course, it may be the case that maturational gains and
knowledge gains interact in the development of analogical
reasoning, but it is important to determine the relative
contribution of each. Using a paradigm adapted from

1054

Markman and Gentner’s (1993) “one-shot mapping task”,
Richland, Morrison, and Holyoak (2006) investigated the
roles of working memory and inhibitory control when
knowledge of the relations was held constant. They showed
children pairs of pictures depicting familiar relations (e.g.,
chasing) and asked children to find a corresponding object
in the second picture that went with an object in the first
picture. If children are reasoning analogically, they should
select the second object based on its role in the relational
structure. Richland et al. varied the complexity of the
relations and the presence of a distracting object match1 and
found that 3- to 4-year-olds and 6- to 7-year-olds had
difficulty with the task both when the relational structure
was more complex and when a distracting object match was
present. For the 3- to 4-year-olds, the effect of the
distracting object match was such that performance was
extremely poor with an object match present, regardless of
the complexity of the relation. Richland et al. (2006) argued
from these results that knowledge accretion alone is not
enough to account for the development of analogical ability.
Rather, they suggest that children must also have sufficient
inhibitory control to successfully reason analogically.
In this paper, we focus on an additional factor that may be
important in children’s ability to reason about relations:
relational language. In fact, we suggest that relational
language can help children overcome the challenge of
competing object matches to succeed on analogical tasks.
Relational language is a representational tool that can help
children focus on common relations and align two structures
(Gentner, 2003; Gentner & Rattermann, 1991). Loewenstein
and Gentner (2005) found, for example, that aligning two
three-tiered boxes in order to find a hidden object was
difficult for young children. The task was even more
challenging when distinct objects were placed at each
location in the two boxes in such a way that corresponding
objects were not in corresponding locations (the objects
were cross-mapped). However, when the locations of the
boxes were described with spatial language (e.g., on, in,
under or top, middle, bottom), children were able to
successfully align the two boxes and find the hidden toy.
As in Markman and Gentner’s and Richland et al.’s
studies, the present studies asked children to view pairs of
scenes with familiar relations and to select an object from a
target picture that corresponded with a particular object
from the base picture. However, in our task the key variable
was whether children heard relational language to describe
the pictures. Given previous research suggesting that
relational language enhances children’s analogical abilities,
we expected that children who heard relational language
would outperform children who heard neutral language.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Seventy 5½- and 7-year-olds participated in
this experiment. Six children were excluded, due to parental
interference (N = 1) and answering incorrectly on at least
one filler trial (N = 5), leaving 32 5½-year-olds (ages 61-71
months, M = 65.4 months old) and 32 7-year-olds (ages 7889 months, M = 83.3 months) in the final analyses. Half of
the children in each age group participated in the Relational
language condition, and half in the Neutral Language
condition. All participants were native English speakers.
Materials and design Children viewed pairs of scenes
depicting familiar relations (e.g., chasing) and were asked to
select an object from the target picture that corresponded
with the actor (the “doer” of the action) in the base picture.
Importantly, on experimental trials, the picture pairs were
cross-mapped (Gentner & Toupin, 1986): that is, the actor
in the base picture also appeared in the target picture but
played a different role in the relation (see Figure 1). Thus,
children could select an object in the target picture by
matching objects (e.g., cat) or by matching relational roles
(e.g., chaser).
Children saw a total of 15 pairs (3 practice, 10
experimental, and 2 fillers). The practice pairs served to
introduce children to the task. They were literally similar:
that is, the relations, the objects and the object roles were
highly similar (e.g., a giraffe eating from a tree and a
slightly taller giraffe eating from a different tree). We used
literally similar practice pairs in order to avoid biasing
children towards either relational or object matches.

1

In Richland et al.’s studies, the distracting object was present
in the second picture but was not part of the main relational
structure. In contrast, Markman and Gentner (and Gentner and
Toupin) used cross-mapped examples, in which the object
participated in the matching relation but in a different role. The
impact of different types of object distractors on children’s
analogical performance was examined directly in Experiment 2.

1055

Figure 1: Sample stimuli pictures from Experiment 1.

Two literally similar filler pairs were also interspersed
among the ten experimental trials and to check whether
children remained engaged throughout the testing session.
Children who failed to answer both filler trials correctly
were excluded from further analyses.
Children in each age group were assigned to either the
Relational Language condition or the Neutral Language
condition, resulting in a 2 x 2 between-subjects design.
Procedure On all trials, the experimenter began by placing
a pair of pictures in front of the child, with the base picture
above the target picture. Then, the experimenter pointed to
the base picture and asked the child, “What’s in this
picture?” Regardless of the child’s answer, the experimenter
agreed and described the picture, mentioning both the
relation and the objects (e.g., “That’s right, the cat is
chasing the mouse.”). Following the description, the
experimenter pointed to an object in the base and asked the
child to find the one that “went with” that object in the
target. On experimental trials, children in the Relational
Language condition heard, “Do you see this one that’s
chasing? What does this one go with in this [pointing to
target] picture?” Children in the Neutral Language condition
heard, “Do you see this one? What does this one go with in
this [pointing to target] picture?” In both conditions,
children heard neutral phrasing for all practice and filler
trials.
If children had trouble during the practice trials, the
experimenter showed them the correct answer and
explained. Once the child understood the format of the task
after the three practice trials and was able to respond
correctly on his or her own on the last two practice trials, the
experimenter moved on to the experimental trials.2 No
feedback was given on the experimental and filler trials.

Results
Each child’s proportion of relational responses was entered
into a 2(Age) x 2(Language Type) univariate ANOVA
(Figure 2). Seven-year-olds made more relational choices
than 5½-year-olds, although this effect was only marginally
significant, F(1,60) = 3.12, p = .08. However, a main effect
of Language Type was significant, F(1,60) = 6.52, p < .05.
Children who heard relational language chose the relational
match more often than children who heard neutral language.
Although the Age x Language interaction was not
significant, when the two age groups were analyzed
separately, the relational language advantage was found
only for the 7-year-olds, F(1,60) = 7.33, p < .01.

to object matches, this improvement is noteworthy. The
degree of improvement is also striking; the 7-year-olds
increased relational responding by 40% when they heard
relational language.
However, compared to the performance of the 7-year-olds
in Richland et al.’s (2006) studies (Richland et al. did not
test 5½-year-olds), the performance of the 7-year-olds who
heard neutral language in this experiment was fairly low
(32% relational responses versus 64% in Richland et al.).
This difference may be due to the training procedures used
in the two studies. In Experiment 1, children were
intentionally given ambiguous training examples that
supported either an object or relational matching strategy;
children received no feedback about which strategy was the
“correct” one. In contrast, Richland et al. used fuller
instructions and gave analogical practice pairs with
feedback supporting the relational match. To provide
children with the best possible chance at selecting the
relational match in Experiment 2, we used instructions and
practice procedures like those used by Richland et al. In
anticipation of improved performance, we replaced the 7year-old group with a younger group of 3½-year-olds.
One final difference between Experiment 1 and Richland et
al. (2006) was the nature of the object distractors. Like
Markman and Gentner (1993), Experiment 1 used object
distractors that were participants in the target relation but
cross-mapped so they filled another role. For instance, if in
the base picture a cat was chasing a mouse, in the target
picture, the cat was being chased by a dog. In contrast,
Richland et al.’s distractors were extraneous to the main
relation. That is, if a cat was chasing a mouse in the base
picture, the target picture might show a boy chasing a girl,
with the cat in the background (i.e., not chasing or being
chased). Therefore, in Experiment 2, we also added a
within-subjects factor of Pair Type to investigate any
differences that may exist between external and crossmapped distractors, as well as no distractor.

Discussion
As predicted, hearing relational language helped children
make an appropriate relational match, despite a compelling
object match. Given how strongly young children are drawn
2

These practice procedures differ from those used by Richland
et al.’s (2006), which more closely resemble those used in
Experiment 2.

1056

Figure 2: Mean proportion of relational choices in
Experiment 1.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants Twenty-four 3½-year-olds (ages 40-47, M =
43.89 months) and 21 5½-year-olds (ages 62-66, M = 64.18)
participated in this study. Two additional 3½-year-olds
refused to participate. All but four children participated in
the lab at Northwestern University. The other four children
(all 5½-year-olds) were tested individually at a preschool.
Materials and Design Like Experiment 1, Experiment 2
employed Age and Language Type as between-subjects
factors. Additionally, a within-subjects factor of Pair Type
was added to the design, resulting in a 2 x 2 x 3 mixed
design. In Experiment 1, the pairs were designed so that the
object match, or distractor, was always cross-mapped from
the base to the target picture. Experiment 2 also used crossmapped pairs, in addition to pairs in which the object match
was external to the relation and pairs in which there was no
distractor (Figure 3). On cross-mapped trials, the object
distractor participated in the same relation in the target
picture as in the base picture (e.g., towing), but in a different
role (e.g., towee versus tower) (Figure 3c). On external
distractor trials, the distractor did not participate in the
target relation, but was present in the target picture (Figure
3b). On no-distractor trials, no object distractor was present
in the target picture (Figure 3a). The direction of the relation
(e.g., towing from right to left) was varied within pairs so
that spatial location could not be used as a proxy for a
relational match.
Children saw a total of nine experimental picture pairs
(three of each type), each exemplifying a different relation
(e.g., towing). The type of pair seen for each relation was
counterbalanced across participants. In addition to the nine
experimental trials, children also saw three practice trials,
one of each pair type, for a total of twelve picture pairs. No
fillers were used in Experiment 2.
Procedure The general format of Experiment 2 roughly
follows that of Experiment 1, but the wording of the
instructions and questions were modified to resemble those
used by Richland et al. (2006). Specifically, children were
instructed that the pictures had a common “pattern” and that
they should use this pattern to match the pictures. The
experimenter began by laying down the first pair of practice
pictures, with the base above the target, and saying:
“There is a certain pattern in the top picture, and the same
pattern happens in the bottom picture, but it looks different.
Let me show you what I mean. See, in the top picture, there is
a boy holding a dog. Now in the bottom picture, there is an
elephant holding a cat. See, the same pattern happens in both,
but it looks different. Now, in this game, first you have to
figure out what the pattern is that happens in both pictures.
Then I am going to point to one thing in the top picture, and
your job is to tell me what is in the same part of the pattern in
the bottom picture. So, on these pictures, if we have a boy
holding a dog, if I point to the boy, which one is like this one

Figure 3: Sample stimuli pictures from Experiment 2.

1057

in the bottom picture? Which one is in the same part of the
pattern in the bottom picture?”

On practice trials, children were given feedback about the
correct (i.e., relational) answer, and incorrect practice trials
were repeated. All children first saw the no distractor
practice trial, followed by the external distractor practice
trial, followed by the cross-mapped distractor practice trial.
Practice trials were followed by the nine experimental
trials. On experimental trials, the experimenter did not ask
for or give descriptions of the base and target pictures
(unlike Experiment 1). Rather, the experimenter only asked
what was “like this one” in the target picture. Children in
the Relational Language condition heard a relational
description of the actor in the base (e.g., “Do you see this
one that’s towing? What is like this one in the bottom
picture?”). Children in the Neutral Language condition
heard a neutral description of the actor (e.g., “Do you see
this one? What is like this one in the bottom picture?”).
Children were given no feedback on experimental trials.

Results
As predicted, children who heard relational language chose
the relational match more often than those who did not. This
was confirmed by a 2(Age) x 2(Language Type) x 3(Pair
Type) mixed measures ANOVA over children’s relational
responses, where Age and Language Type were betweensubjects factors (Figure 4). Main effects of Age, F(1,43) =
11.79, p < .01, and Language Type, F(1,43) = 13.06, p <
.01, were significant. The 5½-year-olds chose the relational
match significantly more often than the 3½-year-olds, and
children who heard relational language chose the relational
match significantly more often than those who did not. A
main effect of Pair Type was also significant, F(2,86) =
3.92, p < .05. As in prior research, children chose the
relational match significantly more often when there was no
distracting object match present.
The main effects of Pair Type and Language Type are
best understood in light of their interaction, F(2,86) = 5.22,
p < .01. Children who heard relational language chose the
relational match as frequently on trials with a distractor
(external or cross-mapped) as on those with no distractor. In
contrast, children who heard neutral language chose the
relational match significantly more frequently when there
was no distractor than with either external or cross-mapped
distractors (both Bonferronis, p < .01). Performance on the
external and cross-mapped trials did not differ significantly.
The three-way interaction with Age was not significant,
suggesting that a similar pattern was found at both ages.

matches rather than on the competing object matches. Given
how tempting young children find object matches, the fact
that hearing relational language boosted their performance
to a level equal to the no-competition level is quite
remarkable.
It is also interesting that external distractors and crossmapped distractors were equally disruptive to children’s
performance in the neutral language condition. The fact that
children showed similar performance whether or not the
object match participated in the relevant relation suggests
that children may not be attending to the relation at all when
an object match is present.

General Discussion
Together, these studies suggest that relational language is a
fundamental aspect of children’s analogical development.
Across two studies, when children were provided with
relational descriptions, they were able to overcome their
focus on objects to make a correct relational match. The
improvements from relational language were large, found
across three distinct age groups, and were present despite
changes in methodology and stimuli.

Discussion
In Experiment 2, as predicted, relational language helped
children to select the appropriate relational match and
ignore tempting object matches. In fact, children were just
as accurate on trials with distractors as on no-distractor trials
when they heard relational language, suggesting that
relational language helped children focus on the relational

1058

Figure 4: Mean proportion of relational choices in
Experiment 2.

Although the results of the two experiments are generally
consistent, there are some notable differences. First,
performance in Experiment 2 was much better than in
Experiment 1. We attribute this improvement to more
explicit instruction and feedback in the second experiment.
Secondly, 5½-year-olds in Experiment 2 showed significant
improvement when they heard relational language compared
to neutral language, but this pattern was not significant in
Experiment 1. This may be due to the fact that pictures in
Experiment 1 were described by the experimenter before
asking the child to make a selection (e.g., “In this picture,
the cat is chasing the mouse, and in this picture the dog is
chasing the cat.”), whereas in Experiment 2 they were not.
For 5½-year-olds in Experiment 1, the additional relational
role descriptor (e.g., chaser) may not have added anything
beyond what was already provided by the verb.
In sum, these findings add to evidence that relational
language helps children reason analogically (Gentner, 2003;
Gentner & Christie, 2008), but more work is needed to
determine precisely how language is helping. Relational
language could aid the mapping process by selecting among
several possible conceptualizations, or by highlighting
common relations, so that the child can focus on the
common structure (Gentner, 2003; Gentner & Clement,
1988). For example, hearing the relational label chaser may
invite focusing on the chasing relation and on the role of the
cat within that structure, rather than on the cat as an entity.
Language might also support executive processes, helping
children inhibit attention to objects. Finally, Jacques and
Zelazo (2005) suggest that language can increase children’s
cognitive flexibility.
We suggest that relational language is a powerful tool that
helps children represent and map relational structure. The
data presented here add to the evidence that symbolic
learning is important in human analogical development.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF Grant REC-0337360
and ONR Grant N00014-08-0040 to the first author. We
thank the children and families who participated and the
members of the Project on Children’s Thinking and the
Cognition and Language Lab.

References
Blades, M. & Cooke, Z. (1994). Young children’s ability to
understand a model as a spatial representation. Journal of
Genetic Psychology, 155, 201-218.
Chen, Z. & Daehler, M. W. (1989). Positive and negative
transfer in analogical problem solving by 6-year-old
children. Cognitive Development, 4, 327-344.
Gentner, D. (1977). Children's performance on a spatial
analogies task. Child Development, 48, 1034-1039.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.

Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and cognition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Clement, C. A. (1988). Evidence for
relational selectivity in interpreting analogy and
metaphor. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation. New York: Academic Press.
Gentner, D. & Colhoun, J. (in press). Analogical processes
in human thinking and learning. In A. von Müller & E.
Pöppel (Series Eds.) & B. Glatzeder, V. Goel, & A. von
Müller (Vol. Eds.), On Thinking: Vol. 2. Towards a
Theory of Thinking. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D. & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277-300.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goswami, U. & Brown, A. L. (1989). Melting chocolate and
melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal
relations. Cognition, 35, 69-95.
Halford, G. S. (1993). Children’s Understanding: The
Development of Mental Models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Jacques, S., & Zelazo, P. D. (2005). On the possible roots of
cognitive flexibility. In B. Homer & C. Tamis-Lamonda
(Eds.), The Development of Social Understanding and
Communication. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Loewenstein, J. & Gentner, D. (2005). Relational language
and the development of relational mapping. Cognitive
Psychology, 50, 315-353.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., and Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 6, S86597.
Markman, A. B. & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). More evidence for
a relational shift in the development of analogy:
Children's performance on a causal-mapping task.
Cognitive Development, 13, 453-478.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249-273.
Vosniadou, S. (1989). Analogical reasoning as a mechanism
in knowledge acquisition: A developmental perspective.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

1059

