UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Relational and Role-Governed Categories: Views from Psychology, Computational Modeling,
and Linguistics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tx997c5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Goldwater, Micah
Goodman, Noah
Murphy, Gregory
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Relational and Role-Governed Categories:
Views from Psychology, Computational Modeling, and Linguistics
Micah B. Goldwater (micahbg@mail.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station A8000 Austin, TX 78712 USA

Noah D. Goodman (ndg@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Stephen Wechsler (wechsler@mail.utexas.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station B5100 Austin, TX 78712 USA

Gregory L. Murphy (gregory.murphy@nyu.edu)
Department of Psychology, New York University
6 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003 USA
Keywords: categories; concepts; representation; relations;
lexical semantics; Bayesian modeling.

Introduction
Concepts are central to human cognition, structuring our
thoughts and allowing us to generalize our experiences,
predict the future, and control our surroundings. The study
of concepts in cognitive psychology has largely focused on
categorization of individual objects based on descriptive
features, e.g., a bird is an animal with wings and a beak
(Rosch, 1973). In this respect it has diverged from other
fields of cognitive science, such as linguistics, which
focuses on argument structure and composition, Yet a
significant new thread of research has emerged in the
psychology of categorization, re-examining the role of
relational structures in concept representation (Markman, &
Stilwell, 2001; Gentner & Kurtz, 2005). This emerging field
studies stable representation of relations (“relational
categories”), e.g. X is visiting Y, and natural categories
defined by the role objects play in events, e.g., a guest is a
person who is visiting somebody else, or a catalyst is an
entity that precipitates a change of state. This perspective
unifies research on categorization with other areas in
cognitive science in which relational representations have
long been central: analogical and causal reasoning (Gentner,
Holyoak & Kokinov, 2001), scripts and schemas (Shank,
1982), and lexical semantics (Dowty, 1979), amongst
others.
While theories of relational and role-governed categories
show promise for advancing the psychology of concepts,
research in this direction is just beginning. What’s more,
researchers are spread across departments and often
unaware of each other’s work. The goal of this symposium
is to bring together scientists from different disciplines to
discuss their work, and to be a forum to discuss important
next directions.

Symposium Structure
This symposium will include a series of four talks on
relational and role-governed categories from varied research
methods and perspectives. The first talk will present
psychological experiments investigating how people form
and use these categories. The second presents computational
models of relational theory and role-governed category
learning. The third will discuss research on lexical
semantics, contrasting the roles relational nouns and nonrelational nouns play in semantic composition. The fourth
will tie the others together, and discuss the place this
research has in the study of categorization more broadly.
We now discuss each of the participants and their
presentations in turn.
Micah B. Goldwater is a PhD candidate in the Cognition
graduate program in the department of Psychology at the
University of Texas at Austin. He works under the
advisement of Arthur Markman and Catharine Echols
investigating
conceptual
representation,
analogical
reasoning and language processing in infants, children and
adults. This research makes novel connections across these
fields by focusing on how experimental findings relate to
real world behavior. Throughout graduate school, he has
been an active member of the Cognitive Science Society,
having presented and published his research in a variety of
venues.
Goldwater’s presentation will describe experiments using
both behavioral and neurological measures investigating the
nature of relational and role-governed categories, and how
they contrast with feature-based categories.
These
experiments examine the connection between relational
structures and role-governed categories by showing that
instantiating a novel relational representation licenses novel
role-governed categories. He will also discuss the conditions

2083

under which objects will be categorized based on their
common relational role, as opposed to shared features or
thematic association, revealing mechanisms of rolegoverned category formation. Finally, he will discuss how
role-governed and feature-based categories are differentially
used “in the wild” to label (or “tag”) images on the worldwide-web.
Noah D. Goodman is a research scientist in the Department
of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at MIT, and a member of
the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory. He studies the computational basis of human
thought, merging behavioral experiments with formal
methods from statistics and logic. Goodman has developed
structured-Bayesian approaches to concept representation
and applied these ideas both within traditional conceptlearning and in a broad array of related areas including
causal reasoning, and social cognition. Goodman has
published widely in psychology, cognitive science, and
artificial intelligence, including several papers that have
received computational modeling prizes from the Cognitive
Science Society.
Goodman's presentation will consider computational
formalisms for capturing the representation and learning of
relational and role-governed concepts. He will describe a
modeling approach that combines logical representations
with Bayesian techniques for describing inference under
uncertainty. This formalism captures a range of standard
effects for feature-based concepts while extending naturally
to role-governed concepts. Goodman will discuss how
computational formalisms help to situate role-governed
concepts within the landscape of concepts studied by
cognitive scientists and tie them to conceptual change in
childhood, and compositionality ideas of formal semantics.
Stephen Wechsler is an Associate Professor of Linguistics
at the University of Texas at Austin. He holds a PhD in
Linguistics from Stanford University. A specialist in
syntactic theory, his two main research areas are the syntaxlexical semantics interface and morphosyntax. His first
book (Wechsler, 1995) addresses the first area; his second
book addresses the second area; and his third book (Oxford
UP, in progress) will return to the first area.
Wechsler’s presentation will focus on insights that have
been gleaned from recent work on the semantic composition
of nouns, both relational and non-relational, with their
surrounding syntactic contexts. When in construction with
a relational noun, verbs of possession and genitive
possessors express an argument of the noun (John has a
sister; John’s sister), while non-relational nouns in the same
constructions give rise to interpretations involving
possession (John has a car; John’s car) and certain other
semantic or discourse relations. This deep connection
between possession and predication can be seen in patterns
of sublexical scope, systematic polysemy and idiom
formation. Wechsler will explore a middle ground between
lexical decomposition and constructional approaches.

Gregory L. Murphy is Professor of Psychology at New
York University. He received a PhD in Psychology from
Stanford University and has previously held professorships
at Brown University, and University of Illinois UrbanaChampaign. He has been a leader in the field of categories
and concepts for more than 25 years, as he has literarily
written the book on the topic (Murphy, 2002) and published
one of the field’s most cited papers (Murphy & Medin,
1985) that continues to challenge all models of
categorization more than 20 years later. His research has
focused on category learning, induction, and the
representation of word meaning
Murphy will serve as the symposium’s discussant. His
presentation will discuss the conflict between "normal"
taxonomic categories, like dogs, cars, and parties, and a
number of different category types that have received less
attention in the literature. These include script categories,
thematic categories, role-based categories, and goal-derived
categories. There is some controversy over whether such
categories are "real," in the sense that they are
spontaneously used and represented in memory. The talk
will address both the evidence of such "reality" and the
more theoretical question of whether such things should be
called categories at all--and whether that makes a difference.
Using this perspective he will tie together the previous three
talks and present this area’s next set of challenges.

References
Dowty, D. R. (1979). Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publications.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J., & Kokinov, B. (Eds.). (2001).
The Analogical Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B.
Markman & P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside
and outside the lab. Washington, DC: APA, p. 151-175.
Markman, A. B. & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Artificial Intelligence, 13, 329 – 358
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92,
289-316.
Rosch, E.H. (1973) Natural categories. Cognitive
Psychology 4, 328-50.
Schank, R. C., 1982, Dynamic Memory. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wechsler, S. (1995) The Semantic Basis of Argument
Structure. Stanford University: CSLI Publications.

2084

