UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Scaling Laws in Cognitive Science

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7kp1v8j4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Brown, Gordon
Cancho, Ramon Ferreri
Holden, John
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Scaling Laws in Cognitive Science
Christopher T. Kello (Moderator), Cognitive Science Program, University of California, Merced, CA
Gordon D. A. Brown, Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry, England
Ramon Ferrer i Cancho, Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informatics,
Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
John G. Holden, Department of Psychology, California State University, Northridge, CA
Klaus Linkenkaer-Hansen, Department of Integrative Neurophysiology,
VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Theo Rhodes, Cognitive Science Program, University of California, Merced, CA
Guy C. Van Orden (Moderator), Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, OH
Keywords: Scale invariance, power law distributions, longrange correlations, 1/f noise, scale-free networks, neural
avalanches, Lévy foraging

A scaling law (a.k.a. power law) occurs in nature when one
observed variable x is a function of another, raised to some
power α: f(x) = axα. A well-known example from biology is
the allometric scaling law relating metabolic rate and body
mass across species (Brown & West, 2000). Scaling
relations are scale invariant, which means that multiplying x
by a constant factor c causes only a proportionate scaling of
the function itself: f(cx) = a(cx)α. This results in a property
of self-similarity across scale, e.g., a plot of metabolic rate
against body mass has the same shape whether the range of
species is restricted to small mammals, or covers the entire
animal kingdom.
Scaling laws are ubiquitous in physical, chemical,
biological, geological, social, and economic systems.
However their ubiquity does not mean that scaling laws are
trivially mundane, nor does it necessarily mean that all
scaling laws emerge from a single, universal principle. A
scaling law suggests that some principle or process applies
across many orders of magnitude. The particular principle or
process may be different from one scaling law to the next.
That said, the recurrence of scaling laws across so many
different systems has led some researchers to search for
unifying principles (e.g. Bak, 1996; West, Brown, &
Enquist, 1999); otherwise, one is left wondering why
scaling laws are so ubiquitous.
In cognitive science, some of the better-known scaling
laws are Weber’s law, Steven’s law, and power law learning
and forgetting curves (Chater & Brown, 2008). The first two
laws have played important roles in theories of sensation
and perception, the latter two in learning and memory.
These laws have been investigated mostly within their
respective domains, rather than in the context of other
scaling laws in nature (for a notable exception, see Shepard,
2002).
More recently, a number of additional scaling laws have
been discovered in studies of language, memory, cognition,
and their neural correlates. Evidence is mounting that
scaling laws are ubiquitous in cognitive science as in other
sciences, which raises the question of why. Are there
common principles that apply across different scaling laws,
and if so, how do they inform theories of mind and brain?

This symposium brings together seven researchers from a
diverse range of disciplines (cognitive science, psychology,
computer science, neuroscience) and locations (US,
England, Spain, Netherlands) to discuss a range of scaling
laws (scaling relations, scale-free networks, power law
distributions, long-range correlations a.k.a. 1/f noise, Lévy
flights) from a number of empirical sources (episodic recall,
language corpora, word naming, electroencephalogram i.e.
EEG recordings, category member generation). Accounts of
each particular scaling law will be discussed and compared.
The overarching aims are to raise awareness of scaling laws
in cognitive science, and to discuss their meaning for theories
of memory, language, and cognition.
Chris Kello (Moderator) and colleagues have investigated
two kinds of scaling laws. One is found in trial-to-trial
fluctuations in measurements of repeated behaviors, such as
acoustic measures of spoken word repetitions (Kello,
Anderson, Holden, & Van Orden, 2008). Measurements are
auto-correlated over dozens and even hundreds of trials, and
it is now established that their fluctuations follow a pervasive
1/f scaling relation. Separately, Kello and Beltz (in press)
analyzed the lexicons of various languages as networks of
word nodes whose links are determined by phonemic or
orthographic relations. These networks were found to be
scale-free, in that the number of nodes with N links was a
function of N raised to a power. Both findings are interpreted
in terms of criticality in cognitive and linguistic systems.
Gordon Brown and colleagues have found scale similarity
over a wide range of time scales for retrospective and
prospective memory recall (Maylor, Chater, & Brown, 2001).
Participants recalled events from the past day, week, or year,
and cumulative response probabilities were indistinguishable
across time scales. Brown, Neath, and Chater (2007)
explained these and other results with a temporal ratio model
of memory. Unlike various models of short-term and longterm memory that assume mechanisms with characteristic
time scales, the temporal ratio model holds that a common set
of principles governs forgetting and retrieval over the time
scales of seconds, minutes, days, and even years.
Ramon Ferrer i Cancho and colleagues have investigated
the possibility that Zipfian scaling laws in language corpora
result from phase transitions between alternate
communication modes (the traditional default hypothesis is
that Zipfian laws are inevitable and therefore trivial properties

2085

of symbol strings; Miller & Chomsky, 1963). Zipf’s original
law relates the frequency F of a word to its frequency rank R
in a given corpus. Ferrer i Cancho and Solé (2003) derived
Zipf’s law from an information theoretic model that balanced
memory needs (speaker’s effort) versus disambiguation needs
(listener’s effort). Zipf's power law distribution was obtained
at a critical point in a phase transition. Ferrer i Cancho, Solé,
& Köhler (2004) have also applied similar analyses and
principles to discover and explain scale-free structure in
global syntactic dependency networks induced from corpora.
Jay Holden and colleagues have found that distributions of
speeded naming latencies to printed words have power law
tails (Holden, Van Orden, & Turvey, in press), and the
authors propose that such reaction time distributions can be
generally modeled as mixtures of lognormal and power law
distributions. Their results are interpreted as evidence for a
general principle of interaction-dominant dynamics.
Cognitive system components must interact to implement
cognitive functions. Lognormal-power law mixtures indicate
that such interactions are predominantly multiplicative, as
opposed to additive. The same indication is made by evidence
that fluctuations in series of reaction times tend to follow a 1/f
scaling relation (Van Orden, Holden, & Turvey, 2003).
Klaus Linkenkaer-Hansen and colleagues have found
evidence of long-range correlations in EEG fluctuations
that take the form of a 1/f scaling relation. In an earlier
study (Linkenkaer-Hansen et al., 2001), intrinsic neural
activity was measured while participants remained still but
wakeful, and long-range correlations were found in alphaband (i.e. around 10 Hz) power fluctuations. Such
conditions of intrinsic activity are analogous to the
repetitive, minimally perturbed conditions used by Kello,
Holden, Van Orden and colleagues to elicit 1/f fluctuations
in behavioral activity. More recently, Linkenkaer-Hansen
and colleagues have shown deviations from scaling relations
in EEG fluctuations as well as burst distributions (i.e.,
neural avalanches) measured from Alzheimer’s patients
(Montez et al., 2009; for analogous behavioral results in
attention-deficit disorders, see Gilden & Hancock, 2007).
These results indicate that scaling laws are associated with
neural and cognitive health.
Theo Rhodes and colleagues have found that generating
members of a category (e.g. name all the animals you can
think of in twenty minutes) is similar to animal foraging in
the wild, in that both activities produce Lévy distributions
(Rhodes & Turvey, 2007). With respect to animal foraging,
distance intervals from one foraging event to the next have
been found to be power law distributed. Such Lévy flights or
walks (i.e. a random walk with values sampled from a
power law distribution instead of Gaussian distribution)
have been shown to be optimal search strategies under
sparse resource conditions (Viswanathan et al., 1999). With
respect to “memory foraging”, Rhodes and Turvey found
that time intervals from one recall event to the next are also
power law distributed, suggesting that the ecology of animal
foraging shares properties with the ecology of human
memory.

References
Bak, P. (1996). How Nature Works. New York: SpringerVerlag.
Brown, G. D. A., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal
ratio model of memory. Psychological Review, 113, 539576.
Brown, J. H. & West, G. B. (Eds.) (2000). Scaling in
Biology. Cambridge: Oxford University Press.
Chater, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2008). From universal laws
of cognition to specific cognitive models. Cognitive
Science, 32, 36-67.
Ferrer i Cancho, R., & Solé, R.V. (2003). Least effort and
the origins of scaling in human language. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 100, 788-791.
Ferrer i Cancho, R., Solé, R. V., & Köhler, R. (2004).
Patterns in syntactic dependency networks. Physical
Review E, 69, 051915.
Gilden, D. L. & Hancock, H. (2007). Response variability in
attention-deficit disorders. Psychological Science, 18, 796
-802.
Holden, J. G., Van Orden, G. C., & Turvey, M. T. (in press).
Dispersion of response times reveals cognitive dynamics.
To appear in Psychological Review.
Kello, C. T., Anderson, G. G., Holden, J. G., & Van Orden,
G. C. (2008). The pervasiveness of 1/f scaling in speech
reflects the metastability of cognition. Cognitive Science,
32, 741-754.
Kello, C. T. & Beltz, B. C. (in press). Scale-free networks in
phonological and orthographic wordform lexicons. To
appear in I. Chitoran, C. Coupé, E. Marsico, & F.
Pellegrino (Eds.), Approaches to Phonological
Complexity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., et al. (2001). Long-range temporal
correlations and scaling behavior in human brain
oscillations. Journal of Neuroscience, 21, 1370-1377.
Maylor, E. A., Chater, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2001). Scale
invariance in the retrieval of retrospective and prospective
memories. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 162-167.
Miller, G. A. & Chomsky, N. (1963). Finitary models of
language users. In R. D. Luce, R. Bush, & E. Galanter
(Eds), Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. 2.
New York: Wiley.
Montez, T., et al. (2009). Altered temporal correlations in
parietal alpha and prefrontal theta oscillations in earlystage Alzheimer disease. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, early edition on-line.
Rhodes, T. & Turvey, M. T. (2007). Human memory
retrieval as Lévy foraging. Physica A, 385, 255-260.
Shepard, R. N. (2002). Perceptual-cognitive universals as
reflections of the world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 581-601.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331-350.
Viswanathan, G. M., Buldyrev, S. V., Havlin, S., da Luz, M.
G. E., Raposo, E. P., & Stanley, H. E. (1999). Optimizing
the success of random searches. Nature, 401, 911-914.

2086

