UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shared Temporal Accuracy of Action Execution and Sensory Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7qv142jm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Herai, Tomomitsu
Mogi, Ken

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shared Temporal Accuracy of Action Execution and Sensory Perception
Tomomitsu Herai (herai@brn.dis.titech.ac.jp)
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku,
Yokohama, 226-8502, Japan

Ken Mogi (kenmogi@csl.sony.co.jp)
Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Takanawa Muse Bldg., 3-14-13, Higashigotanda,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, 141-0022, Japan

Abstract
Integration of an action and its sensory feedback is important
in interacting with an uncertain environment and construct a
consistent model of the world. In this process, multisensory
data need to be processed, in which audition and vision play
important roles. Subjective simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli
is affected by various factors. To investigate the relation
between our subjective simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli
and our action, we conducted an experiment in which
subjects’ action affected the temporal patterns of resulting
stimuli. The modes of contingency between action and stimuli
were made variable. We found significant correlations
between the accuracies of actions and the "window" of
subjective simultaneity among subjects, although their task
performances were widely varied. In addition, the correlation
patterns were found to depend on the contingency between
the key pressing and stimuli. These results suggest that the
subjective simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli correlates with
the accuracy of execution of action, indicating a common
mechanism engaging the perception of subjective
simultaneity in sensorimotor integration and action execution.
Keywords:
sensorimotor
contingency;
integration; subjective simultaneity; timing

audiovisual

Introduction
We interact with our environments through voluntary
movements and its sensory feedback. We recognize
ourselves and the external world through sensorimotor
interactions. However, it is rarely the case that we have a
complete knowledge about the sensorimotor contingency in
a given context. Understanding the mechanism of
integrating motor and sensory information in the presence of
uncertainty provides us with important information as to
how we construct a consistent model of the world.
The sensorimotor contingency affects both our
perception and action. Recent studies have shown that if
sensory stimuli are the results of our own action (i.e.
pressing a key which generates beep), our perceived timing
of those sensory feedback are closer to the timing of action
than actually (Haggard, Clark & Kalogeras, 2002; Tsakiris
& Haggard, 2003). In addition, this temporal shift was
affected by the event probability of sensory stimuli (Engbert
& Wohlschläger, 2007; Moore & Haggard, 2008). A higher
event probability has been found to lead to a larger temporal
shift. Furthermore, the adaptation of this temporal shift
recalibrates the perceived timing of the action and the visual

stimulus, leading to a illusionary temporal reversal in which
the subject perceive the flash before the action (Stetson et al.,
2006). These studies suggest that our cognitive processes
related to agency and expectation affect the perceived
timing of sensory events.
Temporal shifts in perception are ubiquitous in our daily
life. We have to always treat multisensory information,
where the knowledge about the external world is mainly
from vision and audition. Since the light travels much faster
than the sound, the delay of the timings at which each
sensory organ receives its appropriate stimuli becomes
progressively larger depending on the distance from the
event. Despite this temporal disturbance, we tend to
perceive the light and sound signals from a single source
simultaneously (Kopinska & Harris, 2004; Stone et al.,
2001; Sugita & Suzuki, 2003). The temporal window of
subjective simultaneity has shown to be affected by various
factors. Studies have shown that adjacent adaptation
affected the width of simultaneous temporal window and
subjective simultaneity (Fujisaki et al., 2004; Navarra et al.,
2005; Vroomen et al., 2004). Spatial position (Zampini,
Shore & Spence, 2003; Zampini et al., 2005) and attention
changed the subjective simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli
(Zampini, Shore & Spence, 2005). The subjects in these
studies were typically presented with the stimuli passively.
The relation between our action and the audiovisual
integration remain still unclear.
As noted above, intentional action changes the perceived
timing of its sensory feedback. Based on this point, we
hypothesized that the subjective judgment of the
simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli would be affected by the
processes of sensorimotor integration. To examine this
hypothesis, we conducted an experiment using two keys
which generated either a beep sound or flash. The timings of
key pressings by the subjects were reflected in the following
generations of flash and beep. In general, variances exist in
the accuracy of motor performance and the sensitivity of
perception. We were interested if there was a common
mechanism involving action execution and simultaneity
perception as reflected in the performances of subjects.

1948

Experiment
Methods
Subjects Eight healthy subjects participated in this study (4
females and 4 males, 24 to 45 years old, with a mean of 29
and s.d. of 6.5. The subjects were all right-handed). All had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and audition and
motor ability to perform the tasks. Written informed
consents were obtained from all subjects. They were naïve
about the purpose of the present study.
Stimuli and Apparatus The visual and auditory stimuli
were produced by a PC (Panasonic CF-W4). The programs
were created with DirectX. The visual stimulus (flash) was a
white circle (2.8°) and was presented for the duration of one
frame at the center of a black background (17.6°×23.0°) on
the monitor with a refresh rate of 60Hz. The auditory
stimulus was a beep (1,800Hz, 10ms) sound which was
presented to both ears though a headphone (Sony MDRXD100). The manipulations in the experiment were
conducted by the keys on the keyboard of the PC. The two
stimuli were released by pressing the 'D' and ';' (semicolon)
keys. The correspondence between the keys and the stimuli
are explained in the next section. Subjects responded to the
presentation of stimuli by pressing one of the arrow keys
(“<-” (simultaneous) or “->” (not simultaneous) located at
the lower right corner on the keyboard with the index finger
of their right hand. Participants were seated at a distance of
60cm from the monitor and put their index fingers of both
hands with a gap of 12 cm from each other on the keyboard
(where there were “D” and “;” keys) (Figure 1).
The experiments were conducted in a dimly lit and sound
attenuated room.
Experimental Design There were two prominent conditions
("coupled delay" condition and "random delay" condition).
100 trials were conducted for each condition.
In the "coupled delay" condition, the delays between the
first and second stimuli (flash to beep or beep to flash) were
given as a function of the interval of key presses by the
subject (Figure 2). Subjects were instructed to press two
keys simultaneously in the experiment, resulting in varied
intervals between the two key pressings in physical time,
although the subjects might deem them as simultaneous.
The actual intervals between the key pressings were
reflected in the delays between the flash and beep by
twentyfold. Thus, the subject's action was coupled with the
resulting sensory feedback in a magnified manner.

Figure 2: The relation between the key pressing intervals
and the stimuli delays.
This experimental condition had three situations
categorized by key-stimuli relationships (table 1). In
condition 1, pressing the left and the right keys generated
the flash and beep, respectively. In condition 2, the keystimuli relationship was a reversal of that in condition 1. In
condition 3, the relation between the keys and stimuli were
randomized. The total trial number of the two assignments
(left key-flash/right key-beep) and (left key-beep/right keyflash) situations were the same (50 times each) in condition
3. 100 ms after the second key was pressed, either the flash
or beep was presented as specified by the conditions 1, 2
and 3. After the designated delay set to be 20 times of the
key press interval, the other stimulus (flash or beep) was
presented. The subjects judged whether they perceived flash
and beep simultaneously or not in a two alternative forcedchoice.
Table 1: Relationship between the keys and the stimuli

Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3

Left key
Right key
flash
beep
beep
flash
Key-Stimulus relationship is random.

As a control experiment, the subjects conducted the
random delay condition, in which the delays between the
beep and flash were randomly distributed between -270 ms
(beep first) to + 270ms (flash first). Delay values of -270ms,
-240ms, -210ms, ...., 0ms, …., +210ms, +240ms, +270ms,
(separated by 30ms step), were given. Each value was used
5 times each, except for 0ms which was used 10 times.
No feedback was provided for the accuracy of key
pressing and the simultaneity judgment. Subjects conducted
the control condition first and then conducted the coupled
delay conditions. The orders of experimental conditions
were counterbalanced among the subjects.
Procedures Before the experiment, to become familiar with
the experimental tasks, the subjects practiced twenty trials in
the same situation as the control condition except that the
delays between the flash and beep were set to be different.
They were instructed to press the two keys as
simultaneously as possible
In the experiment, before starting the each condition, the
subjects were instructed of the relationship between the keys
and the stimuli by the experimenter. After the experimenter

1949

confirmed that the subject understood this relationship, the
experiment started.
Figure 3 shows the procedure for one trial in the
experiment. The fixation point was presented for 1.5s at the
beginning of the trial. After the fixation disappeared, the
subject pressed the two keys simultaneously on their own
timings. 100ms after the both keys were pressed the flash
and beep were presented depending on the key-stimuli
relationship. The subjects judged whether they perceived the
flash and beep simultaneously or not by pressing the
judging keys with their index finger of the right hand
accurately and fast as possible as they could. The inter
stimulus interval was set to be 2.5s

p=.025). The SDs of the delays of all stimuli were not
different significantly (F(2,14)=1.44, p=.27). This result
indicates that the nature of the subjects’ perception changed
whereas the action remained constant among the conditions.

Figure 4: Plot of the standard deviation (SD) of the delays
of all stimuli versus the delays judged simultaneous in each
condition and each subject. Each point represents a subject.

Figure 3: A procedure of one trial.

Results
Since the delays between the beep and flash depended on
the subjects’ action, the standard deviations (SDs) of the
delays of all stimuli reflected an accuracy of their
simultaneous key pressings. On the other hand, the SDs of
the delays judged simultaneous by the subject reflected the
thresholds of subjective simultaneity. The distributions of
the delays between flash and beep were different among the
subjects and the conditions except for the control condition
(where the interval was given randomly independent of the
subject's key pressing). The analysis was done for all stimuli
and the subset of stimuli judged as simultaneous by the
subject.
Figure 4 shows that the SDs for all stimuli and for the
stimuli judged as simultaneous have large positive
correlations for conditions 1, 2, and 3, where the correlation
of cond.3 was significant [cond.1, r=.67 (t6=2.19, p=.072);
cond.2, r=.68 (t6=2.24, p=.066); cond.3, r=.88 (t6=4.46,
p=.0035)]. One-way within-participants ANOVA showed
that the SDs of the delays judged as simultaneous were
significantly different among the conditions (F(2,14)=4.85,

For a further analysis, we calculated the regression lines
for each condition. We analyzed the homogeneity of
regression slopes statistically and found that they were
significantly different among the conditions (F(2,18)=5.93,
p=.01). We also analyzed the homogeneity of regression
slopes in each pair with the Bonferroni method. It was
revealed that the regression slopes of cond. 2 and cond. 3
were
significantly
different
(F(1,12)=13.91,
p=.0029<.05/3=.017).
Figure 5 shows the mean reaction times in the four (1, 2, 3,
and control) conditions. One-way within-participants
ANOVA showed that the reaction times were significantly
different among the conditions (F(3,21)=5.45, p=.0063). A
post-hoc multiple comparison analysis (Ryan’s method)
revealed that the reaction times between the control
condition and condition 3 were significantly different
(t28=2.86, p=.0078).

1950

**

p< .01

Figure 5: Mean reaction times in each condition.

Discussion
The present study investigated 1) how the subjective
simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli was affected when the
delays between beep and flash depended on the subjects’
action and 2) how the sensorimotor contingency was
engaged in the integration of the action and its sensory
feedback.
The standard deviations of the delays of all stimuli and
that of the delays judged simultaneous represented the
accuracy of simultaneous key pressing and the threshold of
subjective simultaneity, respectively.
There are large
individual differences in subjective simultaneity in
audiovisual stimuli (Stone et al., 2001). The values of both
axes in Figure 4 depend on each subjects’ performances of
key pressings and simultaneity judgments, reflecting the
individual characteristics. Nevertheless, the values were
significantly correlated among the subjects in the condition
3. The correlations in conditions 1 and 2 are also noticeable.
These positive correlations are not trivial. The subject's
accuracy of key pressing and the accuracy of simultaneity
judgment can be in principle independent. Our result
suggests the existence of a shared temporal accuracy
between action execution (key pressing) and sensory
perception (simultaneity judgment). Thus, we suggest that
the threshold or accuracy of motor output is associated with
the threshold or criterion of the simultaneity judgments of
beep and flash. In addition, we suggest that the threshold of
subjective simultaneity might depend on the accuracy of
simultaneous movement of two hands. There might be a
shared threshold of simultaneity within the brain mechanism,
which is embodied both in our action and perception.
The standard deviations of the delays judged
simultaneous were significantly different among the
conditions while that of the delays of all stimuli were not.
The results indicated that subjects’ threshold of subjective
simultaneity in cond.1 and 2 became severer than that in
cond.3. This change cannot be explained by adaptation
(Fujisaki et al., 2004; Navarra et al., 2005) and spatial factor
(Zampini et al., 2003; Zampini et al., 2005). We thought
that subjects’ knowledge about the contingency of the key
and the stimuli induced perceptual and behavioral changes
in the present study. Subjects might attend more their key
pressing in cond.1 and 2 than in cond.3 because their actions
were linked to the stimuli more directly in these conditions.
Since a temporal resolution of tactile is higher than
audiovisual, they tended to notice an asynchronous of their
key pressing and it led severe judgments.
Since the variables of both axes in Figure 4 depended on
the subject’s action and perception, the regression lines
indicate the nature of sensorimotor integration in the each
condition. The relation between each subjects’ action and
perception would affect the slopes of regression lines
significantly. The cognitive mechanism engaging this
change might be common among the subjects as there were
large positive correlations in each condition. These large
correlations and the change of regression slope indicated
that the sensorimotor contingency affected not only the

perceived timing of sensory stimulus (Haggard et al., 2002;
Moore & Haggard, 2008) but also the subjective
simultaneity of audiovisual stimuli.
The significant effect on the reaction times might reflect
an interaction of the sensorimotor contingency and subjects’
knowledge of it. Since the delay between beep and flash
were linked to the subject’s key pressing in conditions 1, 2,
and 3, the subjects were in principle able to use the
information related to their key pressing in judging the
simultaneity of the beep and flash, starting the process of
preparation to make judgments just after they have pressed
the two keys. They would only confirm their insight of their
own action by referring to the stimuli that follow. On the
other hand, in the control condition, the subjects had to wait
for the occurrence of the beep and flash, basing their
responses solely on the actual properties of the flash and
beep stimuli. Therefore, the timing of preparation for the
simultaneity judgment in the control condition would be
later than that in the conditions 1, 2, and 3, leading to larger
values of reaction time.
However, the above assumption cannot explain why the
reaction time in the condition1 and 2 were not significantly
different from that in the control condition.
Since the subjects knew the relations between the key
pressings and the stimuli and attended to their key pressing
in the conditions 1 and 2, they might come to care for the
order of key pressing in judging the simultaneity of stimuli.
In contrast, in condition 3, they would come to ignore the
orders and attended to the simultaneity of action and the
stimuli only. These factors would mean that the subjects
would take more time to judge in condition1 and 2 than in
condition 3. If the subjects were asked about the temporal
order of beep and flash instead of simultaneity, their
reaction time would be possibly faster in conditions 1 and 2
than in condition 3.
In conclusion, our results suggest a shared temporal
accuracy between the action execution and sensory
simultaneity judgment, when the action and sensory
feedback are coupled. The subjective simultaneity of visual
and auditory stimuli is affected not only by adaptation
(Fujisaki et al., 2004; Navarra et al., 2005), spatial factor
(Zampini et al., 2003; Zampini et al., 2005) and attention
(Zampini, Shore & Spence, 2005) but also by the accuracy
of the key pressing that induce the stimuli, possibly affected
by the contingency between action and its sensory feedback.
When the subjects were able to access to the information as
to the relation between the key pressing and the stimuli,
their simultaneous judgments became severer. These results
indicate that there is a close correlation between action and
perception affected by the sensori-motor contingency.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Fumihiko Taya, Qi Zhang, Toru
Yanagawa, Kei Omata, Takayasu Sekine, Ayako Onzo,
Tamami Sudo, Fumiko Tanabe, Eiichi Hoshino, Shinichi

1951

Nozawa, Tetsuo Ishikawa, Mayumi Toshima, Haruna
Takagawa and Miki Kato for their useful comments.

References
Engbert, K., & Wohlschläger, A. (2007). Intentions and
expectations in temporal binding. Conscious Cogn, 16(2),
255-264.
Fujisaki, W., Shimojo, S., Kashino, M., & Nishida, S.
(2004). Recalibration of audiovisual simultaneity. Nat
Neurosci, 7(7), 773-778.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nat Neurosci, 5(4), 382385.
Kopinska, A., & Harris, L. (2004). Simultaneity constancy.
Perception, 33(9), 1049-1060.
Moore, J., & Haggard, P. (2008). Awareness of action:
Inference and prediction. Conscious Cogn, 17(1), 136-144
Navarra, J., Vatakis, A., Zampini, M., Soto-Faraco, S.,
Humphreys, W., & Spence, C. (2005). Exposure to
asynchronous audiovisual speech extends the temporal
window for audiovisual integration. Brain Res Cogn
Brain Res, 25(2), 499-507.
Stetson, C., Cui, X., Montague, P., & Eagleman, D. (2006).
Motor-sensory recalibration leads to an illusory reversal
of action and sensation. Neuron, 51(5), 651-659.
Stone, J., Hunkin, N., Porrill, J., Wood, R., Keeler, V.,
Beanland, M., et al. (2001). When is now? Perception of
simultaneity. Proc Biol Sci, 268(1462), 31-38.
Sugita, Y., & Suzuki, Y. (2003). Audiovisual perception:
Implicit estimation of sound-arrival time. Nature,
421(6926), 911.
Tsakiris, M., & Haggard, P. (2003). Awareness of somatic
events associated with a voluntary action. Exp Brain Res,
149(4), 439-446.
Vroomen, J., Keetels, M., de Gelder, B., & Bertelson, P.
(2004). Recalibration of temporal order perception by
exposure to audio-visual asynchrony. Brain Res Cogn
Brain Res, 22(1), 32-35.
Zampini, M., Guest, S., Shore, D., & Spence, C. (2005).
Audio-visual
simultaneity
judgments.
Percept
Psychophys, 67(3), 531-544.
Zampini, M., Shore, D., & Spence, C. (2003). Audiovisual
temporal order judgments. Exp Brain Res, 152(2), 198210.
Zampini, M., Shore, D., & Spence, C. (2005). Audiovisual
prior entry. Neurosci Lett, 381(3), 217-222.

1952

