UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Similarity and Structural Priming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8765f5d6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
Snider, Neal

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Similarity and Structural Priming
Neal Snider (nsnider@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Meliora Hall, Box 270268
Rochester, NY 14627-0268 USA
Abstract

production. Priming is a phenomenon where the processing
of a stimulus (the ‘target’) is facilitated if a similar stimulus
(the ‘prime’) has been processed previously. This facilitation
is greater the more similar the prime and the target, and in
fact priming only occurs if they are similar along some cognitive dimension. This is why priming can illuminate the mental representation of knowledge, because if people’s behavior
is sensitive to this similarity, then that similarity must arise
from the two structures having the same cognitive representation of that dimension. Thus, by experimentally finding the
dimensions of similarity between stimuli that cause priming,
one can determine the nature of the mental representations of
those stimuli. One of the most basic findings in lexical priming is that the magnitude of priming is affected by semantic or
associative relatedness. People have less latency in producing
a target word following a prime word that is closely related to
it (Ratcliff & McKoon, 1981).
This paper presents a pair of corpus studies to investigate
whether structural priming of the ditransitive alternation is
also sensitive to similarity. The ditransitive alternation involves the choice between the Double Object (DO, 1a) construction, where the recipient argument Noun Phrase (NP) appears before the theme NP, and the Prepositional Object (PO,
1b) construction, where the theme appears before the recipient:

The increasing evidence that language processing is sensitive
to lexical and structural co-occurrences at different levels of
granularity and abstraction (Jurafsky, Bell, Gregory, & Raymond, 2001; Bybee, 2006) has led to the hypothesis that lexical
and structural processing may be unified (MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Jurafsky, 1996). This paper examines the specific hypothesis that structural priming and lexical priming may be due to the same underlying mechanism.
Lexical priming is known to exhibit sensitivity to the similarity
between the prime and the target: the more similar the prime
and target words, the greater the magnitude of the priming effect (Ratcliff & McKoon, 1981). Two corpus studies show evidence of an effect of similarity on structural priming. Structural and semantic similarity of the prime and target structures
are modeled using a database of ditransitives extracted from
the Switchboard corpus and a nearest-neighbor similarity metric. More similar prime and target structures are found to be
more likely to occur in the same construction. This effect is in
addition to the known similarity effect of verb identity (Pickering & Branigan, 1998), which is controlled through simultaneous multiple regression and model comparison. This suggests
that lexical and structural priming could be the same process.
Implications for models of representation and processing are
discussed.
Keywords: priming; corpus; mixed models; similarity; lexicon; syntax

Introduction
There is increasing evidence that language processing is sensitive to lexical and structural co-occurrences at different levels of granularity and abstraction, and that syntactic knowledge consists of chunks of idiosyncratic linguistic experience
that are larger than the word level (Bybee, 2006; Goldberg,
2006; Tomasello, 2003). This is opposed to the traditional
“words and rules” view summarized in Pinker (1999), where
generalizations about word order and argument structure are
stored in a set of rules, and all idiosyncratic information is
stored in a lexicon of words. Contrary to the predictions of
this view, a series of empirical studies going back over the
last couple of decades have shown that people’s behavior is
sensitive to the frequency of occurrence of rather large groupings of words, and also that behavior is sensitive to very finegrained distinctions between stimuli (Jurafsky et al., 2001).
These results are also interesting because they indicate that
lexical and syntactic processing may be unified in the same
model of representation and processing (MacDonald et al.,
1994; Jurafsky, 1996).
The purpose of the present study is to investigate the possibility that lexical and syntactic priming are sensitive to the
same factors and thus may be the same process operating on
the same representational base. The methodology is structural priming. Priming is a particularly useful method for
studying the representations involved in lexical and structural

(1)a. we ... give [a country]recipient [money]theme 1 (DO)
b. we give [money]theme [to a country]recipient 2 (PO)
Priming in the ditransitive was demonstrated in the very earliest studies of structural priming (Bock, 1986; Bock & Loebell, 1990) and has been extensively studied in the intervening years (Pickering & Branigan, 1998, etc.). Priming for
the ditransitive alternation in conversational speech has also
been demonstrated (Gries, 2005; Bresnan, Cueni, Nikitina, &
Baayen, 2007).
Like lexical priming, at the structural level, there is some
evidence that more similar prime and target structures are
more likely to appear in the same construction. Pickering and
Branigan (1998) presented a series of production priming experiments using sentence completion. They tested whether
various types of structural overlap between prime and target
would increase priming. They found that when the same verb
is used in both the prime and target, priming is much more
likely. They did not find that priming was more likely in their
materials when the prime and target verbs shared the same
tense, aspect, or agreement. They argued based one these re1 Example

from the Switchboard corpus
alternant of (1a)

2 Hypothetical

815

sults that lexical heads have privileged status in the representation and processing of constructions: construction choice is
mediated by choice of the head verb and its argument structure. Another interpretation is that the verb identity boost in
priming is due to a more general similarity effect in structural priming, just like that found in lexical priming. The verbal head of a construction is certainly an important part of its
representation, especially when it comes to choosing between
constructions, because it is a strong cue (Garnsey, Pearlmutter, Myers, & Lotocky, 1997; Bresnan et al., 2007). However,
there are other features of each token of a construction that
are important for determining construction choice, and these
may also affect priming. Other experiments have shown that
sharing other features besides the lexical head can increase
priming. Cleland and Pickering (2003) showed that in priming adjective-noun ordering in English (the green square vs.
the square that’s green), priming is increased when the prime
and target share the same head noun, as well as adjective. Further, priming these constructions is increased when the head
nouns are semantically similar (in the same semantic class),
although not when they are phonologically similar. Also Griffin and Weinstein-Tull (2003) showed that Verb Phrase complement constructions are more likely to be repeated when
they are similar with respect to having the same number of
semantic arguments. All these results are consistent with the
hypothesis that structural priming is sensitive to a general
similarity between constructions. The purpose of the current
paper is to test whether similarity in structural priming can
be measured using a continuous metric of general similarity
between prime and target structures, just like lexical priming.
The Data section below describes the data used for the
priming studies: a database of ditransitives drawn from a corpus of naturalistic dialogue. Study 1 replicates in a corpus
study the Pickering and Branigan (1998) experimental finding that priming is boosted when the verb is repeated. Study
2 presents a metric for measuring structural-semantic similarity between prime and target structures, and tests whether
this affects priming beyond the similarity due to verb repetition. Finally, the paper concludes with a discussion of the
implications for models of representation and processing.

gument ordering, for example the semantic class of the verb
and the givenness and animacy of the recipient and theme.
They used a logistic regression analysis to determine which
of these factors were significant predictors of the ditransitive
alternation. Bresnan et al. found that nonpronominal, inanimate, nongiven, and indefinite recipients are more likely to be
in the PO construction. On the other hand, nongiven and indefinite themes are more likely to be in the DO construction.
Also, if the theme was longer than the recipient, a DO is more
likely. Finally, a previous use of PO in the dialogue made PO
more likely, so priming is evident by this measure. This same
database from Bresnan et al. (2007) was used for the current
study of the factors that affect of priming in the ditransitive,
and the factors mentioned above were used as controls. The
probability that the verb occurs in the PO (verb bias) was also
added because Bresnan et al. (2007) found that some verbs
are biased towards one alternant. These controls are very important when studying structural priming in dialogue, because
there are many other reasons that constructions might be repeated (Szmrecsányi, 2005), such as stylistic choice, where
two tokens are in the same construction because they are in
similar information-structural environments. In an attempt to
isolate the persistence effects that are due to priming, the factors from the Bresnan et al. (2007) will be controlled when
the effects of interest are reported.
The first step in this study of priming in the ditransitive
is to add a factor that indicates whether the previous prime
construction was PO or DO (as opposed to the more general
parallelism factor in Bresnan et al. (2007), which only indicated if a DO had occurred previously in the dialogue). In
this study and those that follow, only priming-related factors
are of interest, so the subset of the data will be used where a
prime construction is measurable (the first token in a dialogue
will have no prime). This yields a database of 1002 tokens,
of which 215 are PO (the whole Bresnan et al. database has
2349 tokens, of which 499 are PO).

Study 1: Verb repetition and structural priming
If structural priming behaves like lexical priming, then one
would predict that structural priming is sensitive to similarity
between the prime and target, just as in lexical priming. The
results of the experiments by Pickering and Branigan (1998)
indicate that prime constructions are more likely to be repeated when the prime and target share the same verb. In
order to test the prediction that this result is due to a broader
similarity effect on structural priming using the ditransitive
database, it must first be demonstrated that priming in such
natural dialogue is more likely when the prime and target tokens have the same verb.

Data
The data that will be used to examine similarity effects in
structural priming comes from a corpus study of the ditransitive alternation. Bresnan et al. (2007) presented an extensive
study of the ditransitive alternation and the factors that influence the choice of PO or DO construction. They extracted
all the alternating verbs in the Treebank Switchboard (Marcus, Santorini, & Marcinkiewicz, 1994) that occurred in either the DO or PO construction. They then searched through
the the entire Switchboard corpus, not just the part parsed
in the Penn Treebank project, and extracted the alternating
verbs that they had identified as ditransitive in the Treebank.
They also annotated their database with many features of the
construction that they hypothesized might affect choice of ar-

Methods
The head verb of the prime construction was extracted for
each token in the database, and a factor was added that indicated whether the prime and target tokens had the same
verb. To determine whether the interaction between prime

816

construction and prime-target verb identity is statistically significant, a logistic regression model similar to that in Bresnan
et al. (2007) was used, with likelihood of PO being the positive response. Specifically, a mixed logit model3 was used in
both studies in order to control for a random effect of speaker
(in other words, each speaker is allowed to have a different rate of ditransitive choice). Mixed logit models can be
thought of as an extension of logistic regression that includes
modeling of random effects. Inclusion of random effects is
necessary to generalize beyond the speakers in the data sample. In this study, the random effect accounts for the fact that
speakers may have different rates of ditransitive use. Here and
in all following studies, the coefficient β for each independent
variable and its levels of significance will be reported. Coefficients in logistic regression models are given in log-odds (the
space in which logistic models are fitted to the data). The
dependent variable was structure choice, DO or PO.
Statistical tests on the model are also reported. The Wald’s
Z tests whether the log-odds coefficient of the factor is significantly different from zero, and therefore tests the directionality of the coefficient, whether it is positive, and biases towards
the PO, or negative, and biases towards the DO. In order to
determine whether the factor is significantly predictive in the
model (regardless of direction), a likelihood ratio test (∆x (Λ))
is performed. To perform this test, a model is run with all the
factors included in order to determine the log-likelihood of
the data according to the full model. Then, to test for the significance of a factor x, that factor is removed and it is noted
how much the data log-likelihood changed according to the
model. The ∆x (Λ) test is also more robust against collinearity in the model , so even though the factors are highly correlated (like the main effect of priming and its interaction with
the factor of interest in this study, verb identity), one can determine which is actually driving the effects on ditransitive
choice.

Figure 1: Spine plot illustrating the the effect of prime-target
verb identity on ditransitive choice.

Discussion
The results of this study replicate the experimental findings
of Pickering and Branigan (1998): priming is increased when
the prime and target share the same verb. Pickering and
Branigan interpreted this result as evidence for the privileged
status of lexical heads in the representation and processing of
constructions: construction choice is mediated by choice of
the head verb and its argument structure. Another interpretation is that the verb identity boost in priming is due to a more
general similarity effect in structural priming, just like that
found in lexical priming. The verbal head of a construction
is certainly an important part of its representation, especially
when it comes to choosing between constructions, because it
is a strong cue (Garnsey et al., 1997; Bresnan et al., 2007).
However, there are other features that are important for determining construction choice, and these may also affect similarity and priming. The next study investigates this possibility.

Results
Figure 1 illustrates graphically the number of persistent constructions with respect to verb repetition. The height of the
boxes on the y-axis indicates the proportion of prime target
pairs for which the same construction was used in each condition, and the width of the boxes on the x-axis indicates the
proportion of the data that occurred in each condition. The
table shows that a greater proportion of prime construction
repetitions occurs when the verb is the same between prime
and target, as opposed to when the verbs are different.
The interaction between priming and verb identity was
added to the model (which includes all the factors from Bresnan et al. (2007) as controls), and was found to significantly
increase priming (β = 1.1489, odds = 3.15, SE = 0.6494 ,
Z = 1.769, pZ < .08, χ2 = 3.2, pχ ¡ .08)4 . A PO prime is 3.15
times more likely to be repeated if the prime and target share
the same verb.
3 the

Study 2: Structural priming and similarity
If lexical and structural processing are similar because they
draw on similar representations, then one would expect to
find that the processing mechanisms involved in structural
priming will be affected by the same factors as lexical priming, like structural and semantic similarity. This study tests
the hypothesis that structural priming is increased when the
prime and target are more similar, that is, when they share
more features than just their head verb.

Methods
The main methodological issue then for this study is how
to measure the similarity between prime and target tokens.
Nearest Neighbor (NN) exemplar models (Daelemans, Zavrel, Sloot, & Bosch, 2001) provide just such a similarity

lme4 library in the R statistical package

4 This result also appeared as a control factor in Jaeger and Snider

(2008)

817

measure. NN models classify cases by comparing the current case with all other observed exemplars (usually a data
set derived from a corpus), and picking the best classification based on past experience. An essential part of this model
is the distance metric used to determine how similar exemplars are to one another. The algorithm uses this to weight
highly the exemplars that are closest to the case to be classified. However, such a distance metric could also be extremely
useful in determining how similar one structure is to another
for other purposes, such as predicting their priming behavior.
Exemplars in NN models are defined as sets of features.
The distance between exemplar X and exemplar Y , ∆(X,Y ),
is the weighted sum of the difference between the two exemplars along each of the dimensions defined by the features:
∆(X,Y ) = ∑ wi δ(xi , yi )

to teach them something and target I don’t pay much attention
to it have a larger distance of 1.2, which reflects the fact that
they only share a pronominal recipient, but differ on all other
dimensions (different verbs, the prime theme is pronominal
while the target theme is abstract and non-pronominal, etc.).

Results
To demonstrate graphically the trends in the data with respect to prime-target similarity, Figure 2 shows how the NNdistance relates to proportions of POs produced when the
prime construction is PO (note this graph only reflects trends
in data, and does not reflect the effect of this factor while controlling for other possibly confounding factors). The height of

(1)

i

where wi is the weight associated with feature i, and δ(xi , yi )
is defined as:
 |x −y |
i
i

 maxi −mini if numeric, otherwise
δ(xi , yi ) = 0
if xi = yi


1
if xi 6= yi
If the feature is categorical, the the difference between the two
exemplars is 0 if they have the same value for the feature, and
1 if they have different values for the feature. If the feature
is continuous, then the difference between the two exemplars
is just the difference in the values of feature i for the two
exemplars, divided by the maximum range of that feature (so
that features won’t be weighted too highly just because they
involve larger numbers).
Applying such a model to priming, the hypothesis for this
study is that two exemplars that are more similar in the sense
that they share more features and have a lower NN-distance
between them, are more likely to prime. The similarity hypothesis predicts that the interaction between the prime construction and the NN-distance will be negative: the less distance between the prime and target structures, the more likely
the target will be in the same construction as the prime. To
test the hypothesis, the NN-distance according to equation
(1) was calculated between every prime-target pair in the ditransitive database. The features used to calculate the NNdistance are all the features that were included in the Bresnan et al. (2007) study, that is, all the non-priming-related
factors in Table 1, plus features representing the head verb,
the head of the recipient NP, and the head of the theme NP.
The feature weights were absolute values of the coefficients
in a control model that was run which did not include priming factors. These coefficients/weights did not differ significantly from the values in the second column of Table 1. As
an example, two tokens that have a small exemplar distance
(0.66) are the prime He hasn’t given it to someone else and
target I’ll take it to him, which, although they have different
verbs, both have inanimate, pronominal themes and animate,
pronominal recipients. On the other hand, the prime I’m there

Figure 2: Spine plot illustrating the the effect of prime-target
similarity on ditransitive choice.
the boxes on the y-axis show the proportion of PO and DO targets for each similarity bin when the prime construction was
PO. The width of the bins on the x-axis shows how much of
the data falls in each bin of the similarity factor. The graph arguably shows a negative trend: more POs are produced when
the construction is PO and the k-NN distance between prime
and target is low than when the prime-target distance is high.
To determine whether the trend in figure Figure 2 is statistically sigificant, a factor was added to the model representing the interaction between the Prime construction and
NN-distance. Also, the factor from Study 1 was added to
control for the the boost of priming when the prime and target verb are the same (Pickering & Branigan, 1998). Thus
the model will test whether the similarity metric based on all
features of the prime and target structures is a better predictor of priming than a predictor based on verb identity alone.
This tests the prediction of the similarity hypothesis that more
similar primes and targets should prime more, and the similarity is not merely head-driven: similarity is a continuous effect based on the associative strength between two structures.
Thus, the crucial test for the similarity effect on priming is

818

Table 1: Summary of statistical analysis of the effect of prime-target similarity on ditransitive choice
Predictor
Parameter estimates
Wald’s test
∆x (Λ)-test
(independent variable)
Log-odds S.E. Odds
Z P
χ2 P
Nonpronominal recipient
0.34 0.46
1.8
1.3  0.001
1.7 < 0.2
3.57 0.51
36
6.9 < 0.2
48  0.001
Inanimate recipient
Nongiven recipient
2.32 0.50
10
4.7  0.001
22  0.001
0.78 0.51
2.1
1.5 < 0.2
2.2 < 0.15
Indefinite recipient
Plural theme
0.93 0.36
2.9
3.0 < 0.005
8.7 < 0.005
Nongiven theme
-1.25 0.43
0.28 -3.0 < 0.005
8.9 < 0.005
-1.37 0.24
0.24 -6.0  0.001
35  0.001
log(length difference)
Indefinite theme
-2.26 0.41
0.09 -6.0  0.001
35  0.001
-1.6 0.42
0.18 -4.0  0.001
16  0.001
Nonpronominal theme
Semantic class
-2.8 0.50
0.07 -5.4  0.001
29  0.001
0.53 0.10
1.7
5.1  0.001
26  0.001
Verb bias
Prime constr = PO
0.65 0.32
1.9
2.1 < 0.05
4.3 < 0.05
Prime constr x Identity
-0.024 0.82
0.97 -0.1 < 1
0.03 < 1
Prime constr x NN-dist
-2.36 0.87
0.05 -2.7 < 0.01
10.8 < 0.005

that, while prime and target exemplars that share a verb are
certainly more similar, having identical verbs does not drive
the whole effect. The model comparisons (∆x (Λ)) will test
whether the effect of similarity still influences priming even
when prime-target verb identity is controlled.
The results of the statistical analysis are presented in Table
1. The coefficients in log-odds and standard errors associated with the control factors are given in the second and third
column. The corresponding odds coefficients are given the
fourth column. The fifth and sixth columns summarize the
Wald’s Z statistic, which tests whether the coefficients are significantly different from zero. Finally, the last two columns
give the χ2 over the change in data likelihood (∆x (Λ)) associated with the removal of the predictor (x) from the final model. There is a clearly significant interaction between
prime construction and the NN-distance between the prime
and target exemplars such that the less distance between the
prime and target, the more likely they are to both be in the
same construction. When the prime construction is PO, the
PO construction is 10.6 times more likely in the target for every one-unit decrease in the distance between the prime and
target in feature space. This effect is in addition to the known
verb repetition boost in structural priming because the NNdistance explains all the variation when both it and the verb
identity factor are in the model. However, verb identity is
still a strong factor in determining similarity because both
verb identity (p < .005) and NN-distance (p < .05) interact
with priming when the verb identity feature is excluded from
the NN-distance metric.5

peat the prime construction. Further, this effect is not merely
driven by the head of the construction (the verb), although
this is certainly a strong contributor to similarity.
These results indicate that structural priming is affected by
a general notion of structural-semantic similarity, like lexical
priming. Thus, lexical and structural production are affected
by priming in the same way with respect to similarity, which
is consistent with a model of representation and production
in which there is no explicit distinction between lexical and
structural storage.

Conclusion
These studies present evidence from modeling ditransitive
choice in natural language corpora that structural priming is
more likely the more features the prime and target structures
share. This has a clear implication for the study of structural
priming, that the verb repetition boost in structural priming
found by Pickering and Branigan (1998) is a specific case
of a more general similarity effect in priming. This similarity hypothesis also makes the further prediction that overlap
of other words and features should boost priming in singlefactor priming experiments like the Pickering and Branigan
and Cleland and Branigan studies. Experimentally testing
this hypothesis would also strengthen the causal link between
similarity and priming, to establish that it is indeed similarity
that causes persistence and not choice of the same structure
that causes similar words to be chosen.
More generally, these studies provide further evidence that
lexical and syntactic priming are affected by similar factors.
They complement results presented by Jaeger and Snider
(2008), who presented evidence that structural priming is affected by the predictability of the prime such that the prime
construction is more likely to be repeated the less predictable
it is given the verb. A similar “inverse predictability effect”
was found in lexical priming in that people require less time

Discussion
This study provides evidence that prime-target similarity significantly strengthens structural priming: target tokens that
share more features with the prime are more likely to re5 More

details about this study may be found in Snider (2008)

819

to react to target words (producing them and deciding if they
are words) if the target was preceded by a low frequency
prime than if it was preceded by a high frequency prime
(Scarborough, Cortese, & Scarborough, 1977; Perea & Rosa,
2000).
One implication of these results is that models of processing, particularly production, may need to explain why lexical
and structural production mechanisms are affected by similar factors. Production models usually have separate storage
mechanisms for lexical information and structural information (Bock, 1999), but these models could incorporate the
representations from Usage-based grammars (Bybee, 2006;
Goldberg, 2006; Tomasello, 2003), which make available linguistic representations with different degrees of abstraction
and granularity, and do not have an explicit representational
distinction between word and structure. An example of a
representational model that uses such structures, which have
the abstraction necessary for the priming results presented
here, but still have fine lexical detail necessary to capture the
similarity effects is the Data-Oriented Parsing model of Bod
(1992). This model uses all possible substructures of a corpus
to parse new strings, so it implicitly discovers constructions
of various grain sizes, including single words. A production
model that uses such representations would have no explicit
distinction between words and structures, and could capture
these results.

bility to the comprehension of temporarily ambiguous sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 58–93.
Goldberg, A. (2006). Constructions at Work: The Nature of
Generalization in Language. Oxford University Press.
Gries, S. (2005). Syntactic Priming: A Corpus-based Approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 34(4), 365–
399.
Griffin, Z., & Weinstein-Tull, J. (2003). Conceptual structure
modulates structural priming in the production of complex
sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(4), 537–
555.
Jaeger, T. F., & Snider, N. (2008). Implicit learning and syntactic persistence: Surprisal and cumulativity. In Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of the cognitive science
society.
Jurafsky, D. (1996). A probabilistic model of lexical and
syntactic access and disambiguation. Cognitive Science,
20, 137–194.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. D.
(2001). Probabilistic relations between words: Evidence
from reduction in lexical production. In J. L. Bybee & P. J.
Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic
structure (pp. 229–254). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
MacDonald, M. C., Pearlmutter, N., & Seidenberg, M. S.
(1994). The lexical nature of syntactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological Review, 101, 676–703.
Marcus, M. P., Santorini, B., & Marcinkiewicz, M. A. (1994).
Building a large annotated corpus of English: The Penn
Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 313–330.
Perea, M., & Rosa, E. (2000). Repetition and form priming
interact with neighborhood density at a brief stimulus onset
asynchrony. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 7(4), 668–
77.
Pickering, M., & Branigan, H. (1998). The Representation
of Verbs: Evidence from Syntactic Priming in Language
Production. Journal of Memory and Language, 39(4), 633651.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language. Basic Books.
Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1981). Does activation really
spread. Psychological Review, 88(5), 454–462.
Scarborough, D., Cortese, C., & Scarborough, H. S. (1977).
Frequency and repetition effects in lexical memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 3, 1–17.
Snider, N. (2008). An exemplar model of syntactic priming. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
Szmrecsányi, B. M. (2005). Language users as creatures
of habit: a corpus-based analysis of persistence in spoken
English. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory, 1, 113–
149.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language: A UsageBased Theory of Language Acquisition. Harvard University
Press.

References
Bock, J. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language production. Cognitive Psychology, 18(3), 355-387.
Bock, J. (1999). Language production. In R. Wilson & F. Keil
(Eds.), Mit encyclopedia of the cognitive sciences (pp. 453–
456). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bock, J., & Loebell, H. (1990). Framing sentences. Cognition, 35(1), 1–39.
Bod, R. (1992). Data Oriented Parsing (DOP). Proceedings
COLING’92.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T., & Baayen, H. (2007).
Predicting the dative alternation. Proceedings of the Royal
Netherlands Academy of Science Workshop on Foundations
of Interpretation. Amsterdam.
Bybee, J. (2006). From usage to grammar: The minds response to repetition. Language, 82(4), 711–733.
Cleland, A. A., & Pickering, M. J. (2003). The use of lexical and syntactic information in language production: Evidence from the priming of noun-phrase structure. Journal
of Memory and Language, 49, 214–230.
Daelemans, W., Zavrel, J., Sloot, K. van der, & Bosch, A.
van den. (2001). TiMBL: Tilburg memory based learner,
version 4.0, reference guide (Tech. Rep.). ILK Technical
Report 01-04, Tilburg University. available from http://ilk.
kub. nl.
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E., & Lotocky,
M. A. (1997). The contributions of verb bias and plausi-

820

