UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Situated Communicative Acts: A Deontic Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x9985f6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Carassa, Antonella
Colombetti, Marco

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Situated Communicative Acts: A Deontic Approach
Antonella Carassa (antonella.carassa@lu.unisi.ch)
Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Lugano, Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
6900 Lugano, Switzerland

Marco Colombetti (marco.colombetti@lu.unisi.ch)
Faculty of Communication Sciences, University of Lugano, Via Giuseppe Buffi 13
6900 Lugano, Switzerland
Department of Electronics and Information, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32
20133 Milano, Italy

Abstract
We delineate a theory of communicative acts as situated actions, through which agents co-construct a viable situation by
creating or otherwise manipulating deontic affordances. We
rely on Gilbert’s theory of plural subjects to introduce the
concept of joint meaning as a type of joint commitment. We
then show that our approach allows for an innovative treatment of indirect speech.
Keywords: Situated communicative act; joint commitment;
joint meaning; deontic affordance; indirect speech.

Introduction
Language is an indispensable tool for human interaction. If
we are interested in the relationship between what is said,
the mental representations of the interacting agents, and the
situation in which the interaction takes place, a fundamental
contribution has been given by Speech Act Theory. After
entering the Cognitive Science world in the late 1960s (Cohen & Perrault, 1979), models based on Speech Act Theory
have been worked out to deal with language understanding
(Allen, 1983), language generation (Appelt, 1985), dialogical exchanges (Airenti et al., 1993), and so forth.
Already in the early 1980s, however, Stephen Levinson
(1981) argued that Speech Act Theory is inherently inadequate to account for real communicative interactions; more
recently, Herbert Clark (1996) criticized Speech Act Theory
for neglecting the intrinsic participatory nature of communication; and Jacob Mey (2001), to make another example,
insists on the need to replace the concept of a speech act
with the concept of a pragmatic act, because in general the
communicative contribution of an utterance cannot be reduced to a well-identified illocutionary act, not even if the
notion of an indirect speech act is brought into play.
Scholars who express discontent with Speech Act Theory
often defend a situated approach to linguistic communication (Mey, 2001). The idea is that the communicative contribution of an utterance can be understood only if the overall situation in which the interaction takes place is taken into
account. However, this type of claims are more of a research
program than a fully-fledged theory: in our opinion, no satisfactory treatment of what it means for a communicative
interaction to be situated has been developed yet.
In this paper we submit what we take to be a step to a
theory of situated communicative interactions. In our view,

the situations in which interactions take place are partly
given and partly collectively constructed by the agents
themselves during the interaction. A crucial aspect of a situation, from the point of view of communication, is its deontic component, which can be treated in terms of joint commitments (Gilbert, 1996, 2000, 2006). We suggest that an
agent’s communicative acts may be regarded as actions that
enrich the current situation with new deontic affordances,
which can be accepted, rejected of further negotiated by the
other agents. According to this view, a substantial component of the force of a communicative act lies in its power to
enrich or modify the network of commitments that bind the
interacting agents. While we are not the first to deal with the
deontic dimension of communication (see for example
Traum & Allen, 1994; Walton & Krabbe, 1995; Clark,
2006; Searle, 2007), our treatment of meaning in terms of
joint commitments appears to be novel.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we
defend a situated and deontic approach to communicative
acts; in particular we introduce Gilbert’s concept of a joint
commitment and analyze its relationship with communication. Then we show how our approach can be applied to
deal with an important aspect of communication, namely
indirect speech. Finally we draw some conclusions and delineate possible directions for further research.

Situated Communicative Acts
If communication is to be understood within a situation,
what is a situation? Obviously the physical setting is important; moreover the context in which an interaction is carried
out is crucial to set the values of indexicals like now, here, I,
and so on. But this is going to play a marginal role, if any,
in determining the communicative force of an utterance.
It is widely accepted that situations are best regarded as
sources of affordances (Gibson, 1979; Norman, 1988; Carassa et al., 2005), that is, of action possibilities that are perceived by the agents. Such affordances may exist in a situation before the agents start to carry out an interaction. More
interestingly, agents often produce new affordances that
enrich the current situation. Consider for example Ann and
Bob walking in a wood in search of mushrooms; suddenly
Ann, who at the moment is somewhat far from Bob, shouts,
(1) “Hey, there are some gorgeous ones here!”

1382

This utterance may be interpreted as a “pushmi-pullyu”
communicative act (Millikan, 1996), to wit, as a communicative act that is at the same time an instance of informing
(an assertive) and one of inviting (a directive). But this
would leave out an important part of the story. After producing Utterance 1, it would be inappropriate for Ann to
walk away, without waiting for Bob to reach her; if she did
so, Bob would be entitled to complain and to ask for an explanation (“Why didn’t you wait for me?”). To explain this
fact we may assume that Utterance 1 also has a commissive
force: if Ann invites Bob to join her at place X, she has to
stay at X until Bob either reaches her at X or rejects her invitation. Finally, it is easy to imagine Ann producing Utterance 1 in a jubilant tone, thus expressing a feeling of joy.
According to this analysis, Utterance 1 appears to be significantly overloaded, realizing at the same time an assertive, a directive, a commissive, and an expressive act. Rather than being an exception, however, a case like this
seems to be the rule. Indeed, every directive act involves a
commissive component; for example, if Bob asks Ann to
bring him a cup of coffee, he thereby commits to wait for
the cup of coffee to be brought by Ann, to accept it, and (at
least in normal conditions) to drink it: any deviation from
this pattern of behavior would have to be justified. Symmetrically, commissive acts typically include a directive component; for example, if Ann says to her father
(2) “I’ll come visit next Sunday,”
then she not only makes a promise, but also implicitly asks
her father to stay at home next Sunday to welcome her.
A first consequence of these considerations is that it may
be sensible to abandon the idea that a communicative act be
classified as an assertive, or a directive, and so on. A better
choice may be to assume that, in general, communicative
acts serve several functions at the same time: an assertive
function, a directive function, a commissive function, and
an expressive function. But why is it the case that a single
communicative act tends to serve different functions? The
answer, we believe, is to be found in the way communicative acts combine with the overall situation in which human
interactions are carried out.
In a forthcoming paper (Carassa & Colombetti, 2009) we
argue that communicative acts should be regarded as actions
that produce deontic affordances, to wit, the opportunity for
the hearer(s) to enter a deontic relationship with the speaker.
More precisely, communicative acts typically produce precommitments, which can then be turned into joint commitments by suitable reactions. The concept of a joint commitment, that we consider as fundamental for a situated approach to communication, has been introduced and extensively analyzed by Margaret Gilbert. Here we can only
sketch the crucial features of this concept; for an extensive
treatment we refer the interested reader to Gilbert’s works
(1996, 2000, 2006).

Gilbert’s concept of a joint commitment
According to Gilbert all genuinely collective phenomena
(like joint activities, collective beliefs, group feelings, social

conventions, and so on) involve a special kind of commitment, that she calls a joint commitment. A subject may be
personally committed to do X, for example as a result of an
individual decision: such a decision may be rescinded, but
until this does not happen the subject is committed to do X.
Being committed to do X is a desire-independent reason or
the subject to do X; however, in the case of a personal commitment the subject is the only ‘owner’ of the commitment,
and can rescind it as he or she pleases. Contrary to personal
commitments, a joint commitment is a commitment of two
or more subjects, called the parties of the joint commitment,
to engage in a common project ‘as a single body.’ Therefore
joint commitments are not separately owned by their parties,
but are, so to speak, collectively owned by all parties.
In view of the purpose of this article, the main features of
joint commitments are that: (i) they are desire-independent
reasons for action that are intentionally created by agents in
interaction; and (ii), they consist of deontic relationships
between the parties, more specifically of directed obligations with their correlative rights and entitlements. If a
group is jointly committed to do something, then every party is obligated to all other parties to do his or her part of the
joint activity, and has the right that all other parties do their
parts. It is characteristic of joint commitments that all such
obligations are created simultaneously, and are interdependent in the sense that each party is bound by the joint commitment only as long as the other parties are so bound. If
and when all its obligations are fulfilled, a joint commitment
is itself fulfilled; on the contrary, if one of its obligations is
violated, the joint commitment is violated (which, in many
cases, implies that the joint commitment ceases to exist).
The content of a joint commitment need not be a collective action: a group of subjects may commit to holding a
certain type of attitude, like a belief, a desire, a disposition,
a feeling, and so on. As we shall see, joint commitments to
beliefs (also called group beliefs by Gilbert) are particularly
interesting for our current goal. A few observations are important here. First, all joint commitments, inclusive of
commitments to beliefs, are desire-independent reasons for
action. To give an example, suppose that Ann and Bob
jointly commit to believing that drinking coffee is bad for
one’s health; later on, they will have to behave in certain
ways, or else their commitment will be violated. Second,
joint commitment to a belief should not be confused with
what is usually called common belief or mutual belief in the
Cognitive Science literature: in particular it is possible for a
group of agents to be jointly committed to believing that p,
while it is common belief of the same group that not-p. The
reason is again that joint commitments are reasons for action: being jointly committed to believing that p just means
that the parties are committed to behaving in ways that are
compatible with such a belief; what the parties actually believe is a logically independent issue.
It follows from these considerations that fulfilling or violating a joint commitment is logically independent of sincerity. If one acts coherently with a commitment, then the
commitment is fulfilled even if the subject was insincere

1383

about his or her beliefs, desires, and so on; and if a subject
does not act coherently with a commitment, then the commitment is violated even if the subject was sincere. Of
course there are often moral reasons for being sincere, but
this has nothing to do with the obligations of joint commitment.

Joint commitment and communication
Joint commitments have a puzzling feature: while they
come into force at a specific moment (at which they create
simultaneous and interdependent directed obligations of all
the parties), they are the cumulative result of an incremental
process of collective construction. A joint commitment cannot be created by a single member of a group: what is
needed is an overt ‘offer’ of every agent to participate in
creating the joint commitment.
In our view, situations of interaction are related to joint
commitments in two distinct ways. First, at any moment the
current situation may afford an agent the possibility to offer
to another agent the opportunity of building a new joint
commitment. Second, such an offer is itself a new affordance, more precisely a deontic affordance, which is created
by an agent to be exploited by the others. Thus by performing a communicative act, an agent both exploits the current
situation and enriches it with new deontic affordances.
Let us go back to the mushroom gathering example. Before Ann produces Utterance 1, the situation is already
shaped by deontic relationships binding Ann and Bob: for
instance, Ann and Bob have agreed to go for mushrooms
together, and are therefore bound by a joint commitment to
this effect. This type of activity, when performed collectively, normally includes certain practices, like helping each
other to gather mushrooms from the same patch, when the
agents are lucky enough to find a rich one. Ann’s uttering
“Hey, there are some gorgeous ones here!” can be seen to
disclose a deontic affordance for Bob, which is now in a
position to accept (or refuse, or further negotiate) Ann’s
offer. In a sense, Ann’s communicative act produces ‘a half’
of a joint commitment (which, more technically, we call a
precommitment): Bob is thereby called to produce the other
half, of to reject the offer (with some motivation).
In view of this analysis, we think that classifying Ann’s
communicative act as an assertion that indirectly realizes an
invitation would miss the point. What Ann really does is to
introduce a new element in the current situation; such an
element is a deontic affordance, namely the possibility for
Bob to create a new joint commitment with Ann.

the perlocutionary level, the speaker creates a deontic affordance for engaging in a joint project (Clark, 1996).
It has often been observed that the meaning of a communicative act appears to be at least partially undetermined
until the hearer takes it up. Consider the following conversation, occurring at a dinner party:
(3) Ann: “I feel sleepy.”
(4) Bob: “I’ll get you another cup of coffee.”
(5) Ann: “Thank you, Bob.”
Now suppose that Ann’s original statement was intended as
an indirect invitation to leave the party; Bob’s reply redefines it as an indirect request to receive help in dealing with
the fact of feeling asleep; finally Ann accepts Bob’s redefinition. We may wonder whether Bob correctly understood
Ann’s original invitation (and decided to ignore it), or was
really mistaken in his interpretation. In a concrete situation
it may be impossible for Ann to establish what went on in
Bob’s mind. But in any case after the exchange Ann and
Bob have reached an agreement on the meaning of Utterance 3: independently of Ann’s original communicative
intention, the utterance has been accepted as an indirect request to receive some support. In our view, Ann and Bob
have now achieved joint meaning of such an utterance.
Joint meaning is a special case of a joint commitment to a
belief: more precisely, it is the joint commitment (of the
speaker and the hearer) to the belief that the speaker performed a communicative act of a certain type. All communicative acts produce a first-level, illocutionary deontic affordance, namely the opportunity for the hearer to form a
joint meaning with the speaker. But communicative acts
typically produce also a second-level, perlocutionary deontic affordance, namely the opportunity for the hearer to engage in a joint project with the speaker. In our example, by
Utterance 4 Bob not only proposes to understand Utterance
3 as a request for support, but also accepts such a request.
Finally, by Utterance 5 Ann accepts Bob’s understanding.
After the exchange Ann and Bob are jointly committed to
carrying out a specific joint project, in which Bob brings a
cup of coffee to Ann and Ann drinks it.
The deontic dimension of communication is, we believe,
essential to understand the actual force of communicative
acts. We do not propose to drop the more traditional explanations based on epistemic and volitional mental states, like
beliefs and intentions; rather, we suggest that also the deontic dimension should be taken into account. In the next section we show that doing so allows one to explain some
problematic aspects of indirect speech.

Joint meaning and joint projects
Communicative acts generate two levels of deontic affordances, corresponding to the illocutionary and perlocutionary levels of analysis of Speech Act Theory. At the illocutionary level, the speaker creates a deontic affordance for
creating joint meaning (Carassa & Colombetti, 2009 1 ); at
1

The Deontic Structure of Indirect Speech
Any attempt to use Speech Act Theory to model a real conversation immediately faces a problem: most often, the literal illocutionary act performed through the production of an
utterance does not account for its full communicative force.

In the referenced paper we further justify our definition of joint
meaning as a joint commitment by relating the creation of a

1384

commitment to the view that communicative intentions are reflexive, in the sense clarified, among others, by Bach & Harnish
(1979).

The standard approach to solve this difficulty relies on the
concept of an indirect illocutionary act (Searle, 1975). The
idea is that an utterance, besides realizing a literal illocutionary act, may realize a further indirect illocutionary act. The
paradigmatic example is the by now famous “Can you reach
the salt?”, whose standard interpretation is that a request of
passing the salt (e.g., during a social dinner) is realized indirectly, for politeness’ sake, through a question concerning a
preparatory condition of the request.
Searle’s view of indirect speech acts is that they retain
their literal illocutionary force, but add a further illocutionary force, which can be reconstructed inferentially by reasoning under assumptions of conversational cooperation.
This approach to indirect speech, however, runs into several
difficulties. First (as already remarked by Levinson, 1981),
an indirect speech act does not always retain its literal force.
Second, many (if not most) utterances in real conversations
appear to realize a complex set of different indirect speech
acts, which are not always related to the literal illocutionary
act in a simple way (e.g., through a constitutive condition of
the indirect illocutionary act, like in the salt passing example). Third, it is unclear why indirect speech should be so
pervasive, given that politeness cannot always be invoked as
an explanation.
Basically, we are left with the problem of explaining why
indirect speech appears to be a standard way for people to
communicate. In a recent paper, Pinker and colleagues analyze some cases of indirect speech, most of which go
beyond issues of politeness; as the authors put it (Pinker et
al., 2008:833), “People often ... veil their intentions in innuendo, euphemism, or doublespeak. Here are some familiar examples:
– Would you like to come up and see my etchings? [a sexual come-on]
– If you could pass the guacamole, that would be awesome. [a polite request]
– Nice store you got there. Would be a real shame if something happened to it. [a threat]
– We’re counting on you to show leadership in our Campaign for the Future. [a solicitation for a donation]
– Gee, officer, is there some way we could take care of the
ticket here? [a bribe]”
The authors propose an explanation of indirect speech based
on three points: plausible deniability, relationship negotiation, and language as a digital medium. We shall now analyze the two following examples in the light of our approach
based on the concept of deontic affordance:
(6) “Gee, officer, is there some way we could take care of
the ticket here?”
(7) “Nice store you got there. Would be a real shame if
something happened to it.”

The collective construction of viable situations
In many situations, an offer to engage in an illegal transaction has to be disguised, so that plausible deniability is assured. Let us consider a direct alternative to Utterance 6,
like for example (Pinker et al., 2008:834):

(8) “If you let me go without a ticket, I’ll pay you $50.”
Utterance 8 creates a deontic affordance for the policeman,
who can now accept or refuse a bribe. Unfortunately, if the
policeman refuses to take up the deontic affordance, he may
arrest the driver on the charge of attempting to bribe him.
The speaker is thus in a difficult situation: if her proposal is
accepted, everything will go fine; but if the proposal is rejected, she may get into troubles. According to Pinker and
colleagues the indirect proposal, while being sufficiently
clear to be understood by the officer, is still enough ambiguous to prevent a prosecutor from proving beyond reasonable doubt that the driver offered a bribe; this fact protects
the driver from unpleasant consequences if the officer
proves unwilling to be corrupted.
There is, however, another important aspect that the explanation proposed by Pinker and colleagues does not highlight: even if the driver’s indirect offer is accepted, the interaction will not be construed as a case of bribe, but rather as
a favor that the generous officer is willing to do to help the
driver. As we said in the previous section, we suggest that:
at the illocutionary level, the speaker creates a deontic affordance for the hearer to participate in the production of
joint meaning; at the perlocutionary level, the speaker
creates a deontic affordance for the hearer to engage in a
joint project with the speaker. With Utterance 8, a bribing
project is overtly proposed by the driver, and the policeman
may just accept or reject it (with possible troubles for the
speaker, in the latter case). With Utterance 6, on the contrary, the driver proposes a different type of joint project, in
which the officer does a favor to the driver, who in turn will
show her gratitude in a tangible form.
Now the policeman has several choices. First, he may accept both the joint meaning and the joint project without
losing face. Second, he may accept the joint meaning and
refuse the joint project without further consequences, for
example by saying, “Sorry, Madam, there’s really nothing I
can do for you.” Third, he may want to unveil the driver’s
game and bring the underlying bribing project to the light.
In such a case the officer may still want to accept or refuse
the project. In the latter case, plausible deniability will protect the driver from unpleasant consequences.
It is important to stress that if the generous-officer project
is taken up as a matter of joint meaning (be it accepted or
refused), it can still be common knowledge of the driver and
the officer that what is actually at stake is a case of bribery.
This entails no logical contradiction because a group may be
jointly committed to believing that p even if not-p is common belief of the same group: the joint commitment, if successfully created, will be a desire-independent reason for the
members of the group to act coherently with the belief that
p, even if all members actually believe that not-p and this is
common belief. We think that this is the key to understanding many forms of indirect speech.
The difference between common belief and joint meaning
is also a key to understanding Utterance 7. This utterance
evokes a situation in which the speaker, as a member of
some criminal organization, threatens a shopkeeper of burn-

1385

ing her shop to ashes if she refuses to pay protection money.
The difference with the previous example is that, although
the threat is indirect, the speaker does not intend to leave it
open for the hearer to refuse the proposed project. Why is
the speaker using indirect speech, then?
The explanation offered by Pinker and colleagues relies
on the fact that “language is tacitly perceived to be a digital
medium” (2008:836). As a consequence, “overt propositions
are perceived as certain and act as focal points, whereas
implicatures from indirect speech are perceived as being
some measure short of certainty” (2008:837). A corollary is
that “indirect speech merely provides shared individual
knowledge, whereas direct speech provides common knowledge, and relationships are maintained or nullified by
common knowledge of the relationship type” 2 (2008:837).
Pinker and colleagues insist that indirect speech can only
provide shared individual knowledge because their theory is
unable to justify the use of indirect speech if the threat expressed by Utterance 7 is assumed to be common knowledge of the speaker and the hearer. However, it seems to us
that in a suitable cultural context the fact that the utterance
conveys a threat will inevitably be common knowledge of
the gangster and the shopkeeper. This is not a problem for
our approach because, as we have already clarified, joint
meaning, being a joint commitment, may conflict with what
is common belief of the speaker and the hearer. We view
Utterance 7 as resulting into the following state of affairs:
(i), it is common belief of the speaker and the hearer that the
utterance conveys a threat; (ii), the speaker proposes as joint
meaning that he is offering a useful service in exchange of a
fair payment.
Of course, neither the speaker nor the hearer really believe that a fair transaction is being proposed. But this is
exactly what is being suggested as a matter of joint meaning. To clarify this point, consider four possible answers by
the shopkeeper:
(9) “True, safety is important. Could you take care of
that?”
(10) “Kind of you to care, but this is a very safe area.”
(11) “You can just drop your mask. How much am I supposed to give?”
(12) “You don’t scare me, get off my store right away or
I’ll call the police.”
With Utterance 9, the shopkeeper accepts both the joint
meaning and the joint project proposed by the speaker. With
Utterance 10, the joint meaning is accepted, but the joint
project is refused. With utterance 11, the joint meaning is
refused, and the underlying project is unveiled and accepted.
Finally, with Utterance 12 the joint meaning is refused, and
the underlying project is unveiled and refused.
Utterances 6 and 7 have an important feature in common:
in both cases the speaker invites the hearer to co-construct
2

A group of subjects have shared individual knowledge of p if
every member of the group privately knows that p. Shared individual knowledge is entailed by common knowledge, but does
not entail it.

what we call a “viable situation.” In the first case, the bribing project is disguised as an act of kindness that the policeman may be willing to do to the car driver; in the second
case, the request for money is disguised as a fair compensation due for a valuable service. In both cases, the speaker
invites the hearer to jointly commit to a representation of the
current situation that is different from what the same situation is understood to be as a matter of common belief.
Between Utterance 6 and 7 there is also a difference, in
that plausible deniability is more crucial to the former than
to the latter. This difference is justified by the asymmetric
allocation of power between the speaker and the hearer in
the pre-existing situations. In the bribing example the policeman has the (actual) power to withdraw the ticket and
the (legal) power to charge the driver of attempting to bribe
him. Therefore, it is essential for the driver that the underlying bribing project can be denied if it is refused; in such a
case the driver will probably pull out and pay the ticket. In
the protection money example the situation is different: if
the underlying threat is unveiled and the project is refused,
the gangster is unlikely to withdraw. He may persist in his
attempt to construe the project with the shopkeeper as one
of fair trade, but he may also accept to bring the threat out in
the open, remind the shopkeeper the he is the one who holds
the knife, and insist that the protection money be paid.
Our concept of collective construction of a viable situation also applies to those instances of indirect speech that
are viewed as cases of relationship negotiation by Pinker
and colleagues. These authors rely on a taxonomy proposed
by Alan Fiske (1992), who classifies human relationships in
four categories (i.e., dominance, communality, reciprocity,
and market pricing), which represent different resource distribution patterns. Many cases of indirect speech, like in
particular those motivated by politeness, can be explained as
efforts to deprive a communicative act of certain presumptions that are incompatible with the relationship holding
between the speaker and the hearer. For example, the indirect request
(13) “Can you reach the salt?”
is explained as the speaker’s attempt to avoid conveying the
presumption of dominance over the hearer that would normally accompany a direct imperative.
Fiske’s scheme may be too basic to explain the complexity of human relationships, but even if one accepts it, taking
the deontic dimension into account is still necessary: to be
constitutive of a stable interpersonal relationship, a pattern
of resource distribution must be accepted by the relevant
agents. But acceptance is a form of joint commitment, and
as such generates rights, obligations and entitlements. Interpersonal relationships can thus be viewed as situation components that are intrinsically deontic and actively coconstructed by the interacting agents (typically over a series
of previous interactions).
We can now apply this view to explain the use of Utterance 13 to make a request. In a situation involving reciprocity, like for example a social dinner, an agent has the
right to receive certain forms of support from another agent,

1386

provided that this has a reasonable cost. In a situation of
dominance, on the contrary, services can be claimed irrespective of their costs (at least within certain limits). Inquiring about the hearer’s ability to reach the salt without having to leave his place at the table allows the speaker to signal that she would like the hearer to pass the salt as part of
an interaction carried out within a relationship of reciprocity, rather than within one of dominance.

Conclusions
We have proposed to regard communicative acts as actions
by which deontic affordances are created or otherwise manipulated in concrete situations. Communicative acts produce deontic affordances at two different levels: at the illocutionary level, what is offered to the hearer is to participate
in the creation of joint meaning; at the perlocutionary level,
what is offered is to engage in a joint project with the
speaker. Joint meaning is regarded as a special case of joint
commitment, to wit, the joint commitment to believe that a
certain type of communicative act has been performed. A
joint commitment to a belief (i.e., a group belief) has an
important property: it operates as a desire-independent reason for action even if conflicting individual or common beliefs are entertained by the parties of the joint commitment.
In our view, this property is the key to understanding the
logic of indirect speech.
In this paper we have only scratched the surface of a huge
problem, and much further research is needed before we can
propose a satisfactory theory of situated communication
based on the deontic notion of joint commitment. In particular, we believe that it will be important to understand what
elements of mental architecture underlie the human ability
to form joint commitments, and more generally desireindependent reasons for action, which appear to go beyond
the epistemic and volitional components of cognition that
have been studied so far in Cognitive Science (see Carassa
et al., 2008, for a first step in this direction).

References
Airenti, G., Bara, B. G., & Colombetti, M. (1993).
Conversation and behavior games in the pragmatics of
dialogue. Cognitive Science, 17, 197-256.
Allen, J. F. (1983). Recognizing intentions from natural
language utterances. In M. Brady & R. C. Berwick (Eds.),
Computational models of discourse. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Appelt, D. (1985). Planning English sentences. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bach, K., & Harnish, R. M. (1979). Linguistic
communication and speech acts. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Carassa, A., & Colombetti, M. (2009). Joint meaning.
Journal of Pragmatics, in press, doi:10.1016/
j.pragma.2009.03.005.
Carassa, A., Colombetti, M., & Morganti, F. (2008). The
role of joint commitments in intersubjectivity. In F.
Morganti, A. Carassa & G. Riva (Eds.), Enacting

intersubjectivity: Cognitive and social perspectives to the
study of interactions. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Carassa, A., Morganti, F., & Tirassa, M. (2005). A situated
cognition perspective on presence. Proc. 37th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 510516). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. (2006). Social actions, social commitments. In:
N. J., Enfield & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Roots of Human
Sociality. Oxford and New York: Berg.
Cohen, P. R., & Perrault, C. R. (1979). Elements of a planbased theory of speech acts. Cognitive Science, 3, 177212.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Gilbert, M. (1996). Living together: Rationality, sociality,
and obligation. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gilbert, M. (2000). Sociality and responsibility: New essays
in plural subjet theory. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Gilbert, M. (2006). A theory of political obligation. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality:
Framework for a unified theory of social relations.
Psychological Review, 99, 689-723.
Levinson, S. C. (1981). The essential inadequacies of
speech act models of dialogue. In H. Perret, M. Sbisà & J.
Verschueren (Eds.), Possibilities and limitations of
pragmatics. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Mey, J. L. (2001). Pragmatics: An introduction (2nd
edition). Oxford: Blackwell.
Millikan, R. G. (1996). Pushmi-pullyu representations. In J.
Tomberlin (Ed.), AI, connectionism, and philosophical
psychology. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview. Reprinted in
Millikan, R. G. (2005), Language: A biological model,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things.
Basic Books, New York.
Pinker, S., Nowak, M. A., & Lee, J. J. (2008). The logic of
indirect speech. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Science, 105, 833-838.
Searle, J. R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In P. Cole & J. L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3): Speech
acts. New York: Academic Press. Reprinted in Searle, J.
R. (1979), Expression and meaning: Studies in the theory
of speech acts, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, J. R. (2007). What is language: Some preliminary
remarks. In S. L. Tsohatzidis (Ed.), John Searle’s
philosophy of language: Force, meaning, and mind.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Traum, D. R., & Allen, J. F. (1994). Discourse obligations
in dialogue processing. Proc. 32nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (pp. 1-8).
Walton, D. N., & Krabbe, E. C. W. (1995). Commitment in
dialogue: Basic concepts of interpersonal reasoning.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

1387

