UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial terms reflect near-optimal spatial categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/41n1k53g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Khetarpal, Naveen
Majid, Asifa
Regier, Terry

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial terms reflect near-optimal spatial categories
Naveen Khetarpal (khetarpal@uchicago.edu)*
Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)†
Terry Regier (regier@uchicago.edu)*
*

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Max-Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 6500 AH Nijmegen, The Netherlands

†

Abstract

The analogy with color

Spatial terms in the world’s languages appear to reflect both
universal conceptual tendencies and linguistic convention. A
similarly mixed picture in the case of color naming has been
accounted for in terms of near-optimal partitions of color
space. Here, we demonstrate that this account generalizes to
spatial terms. We show that the spatial terms of 9 diverse
languages near-optimally partition a similarity space of spatial
meanings, just as color terms near-optimally partition color
space. This account accommodates both universal tendencies
and cross-language differences in spatial category extension,
and identifies general structuring principles that appear to
operate across different semantic domains.

As Levinson et al. (2003) noted, a similar situation obtains
with respect to color naming across languages: there are
both universal tendencies and cross-language differences.
The upper panel of Figure 2 shows a grid of color stimuli
often used in color naming research, while the lower panel
shows the color naming system of a particular language,
Wobé, mapped against that grid: each colored region is the
extension of a color term. There is evidence consistent with
the universalist view that color categories across languages
are organized around a set of universal focal colors (Berlin
& Kay, 1969; Regier et al., 2005). Yet there is also
evidence consistent with the opposing relativist view that
category extension is determined by language, not just by
these focal colors (Roberson et al., 2005).

Keywords: Spatial terms; semantic universals; linguistic
relativity; language and thought; cognitive modeling.

Spatial terms across languages
The categories picked out by spatial terms differ across
languages, but also reveal universal tendencies (Bowerman
& Pederson, 1992; Bowerman, 1996; Talmy, 2000;
Bowerman & Choi, 2001). Melissa Bowerman designed a
set of 71 spatial scenes (see a sample of 10 in Figure 1),
which have been used to elicit spatial terms in a variety of
languages. Levinson et al. (2003) analyzed the spatial terms
applied to these scenes by speakers of 9 unrelated
languages. This study and others confirm the general
picture of universal tendencies co-existing with languagespecific categorization patterns.

Figure 1: 10 spatial scenes, as categorized in 2 languages:
Tiriyó and Yélî-Dnye. Source: Levinson et al. (2003).

Figure 2: Color naming grid (upper panel), and the color
naming system of Wobé, spoken in Ivory Coast, mapped
against that grid (lower panel).
A proposal that may resolve this tension was advanced by
Jameson and D’Andrade (1997). They pointed out that
perceptual color space is irregularly shaped. In the grid of
Figure 2, hue appears to vary evenly along the horizontal
axis, and lightness evenly along the vertical axis, but this
obscures the third dimension of color: saturation. In this
grid, each color is shown at the maximum possible
saturation for that hue/lightness pair – and that maximum
possible saturation varies unevenly across the grid, meaning
that the ―outer skin‖ of color space is unevenly shaped.
Jameson and D’Andrade suggested that color names across
languages partition this uneven space such that names are
maximally informative about color. Regier et al. (2007)
formalized this proposal and tested it against data from the
World Color Survey (WCS), a color naming database drawn
from 110 languages of non-industrialized societies
worldwide. They defined the well-formedness of a given

2396

categorical partition of color space to be the extent to which
such a partition maximizes similarity within categories, and
minimizes it across categories (Garner, 1974). Concretely,
they took the similarity between two colors i and j, sim(i,j),
to be a Gaussian function of the distance between colors i
and j in a standard 3-dimensional perceptual color space,
CIELAB. Given this, they defined:

Sw

averaged across all 110 languages of the WCS. It can be
seen that there is a clear tendency across languages for the
attested, unrotated system to ―fit the shape‖ of color space:
to be more well-formed than unattested variants of
comparable complexity, derived by rotation in hue.1

sim (i, j )
( i , j ):
cat ( i ) cat ( j )

Da

(1 sim (i, j ))
( i , j ):
cat ( i ) cat ( j )

W

Sw

Da

Here Sw is an overall measure of within-category similarity,
obtained over all unique pairs of colors i,j that fall in the
same category; Da is an overall measure of across-category
dissimilarity, over all unique pairs that fall in different
categories; and W is well-formedness. Regier et al. used
steepest ascent in well-formedness to create theoretically
optimal color naming systems with n=3,4,5,6 categories,
and found that these theoretical optima were similar to
actual color naming systems found in some languages.
They also found that most color naming systems in the
WCS were near-optimal, in the sense that they were more
well-formed than a natural comparison class of unattested
systems of comparable complexity. The top panel of Figure
3 shows the color naming system of Berinmo (Roberson et
al., 2000), while the middle and bottom panels show
hypothetical systems obtained by rotating the Berinmo
system by different amounts in the hue dimension. If color
naming in Berinmo is near-optimal, we would expect the
attested system to show higher well-formedness than any
hypothetical system derived from it by rotation to any
position along the hue dimension. This prediction was
confirmed.

Figure 3: The Berinmo color naming system unrotated (top),
and rotated four (middle) and eight (bottom) hue columns.
Adapted from Regier et al. (2007).

Figure 4: Well-formedness averaged across all 110 WCS
languages, as a function of rotation. Adapted from Regier et
al. (2007).
In this sense, color naming across languages tends to be
near-optimal, a finding that accounts for universal
tendencies in color naming. However the same account also
suggests how language may play a role in determining
category boundaries. There are often many highly wellformed systems, sometimes varying subtly from one
another, and linguistic convention may select from among
this set of high-ranked candidate systems. This would
account for the mixed picture of universal tendencies and
some language-specificity in the demarcation of boundaries.
In this manner, the well-formedness account suggests a
specific middle ground between nature and nurture in color
naming.

Are named spatial categories near-optimal?
Can these ideas also account for spatial language, in which
we see a similarly mixed pattern of universals and crosslanguage variation? The present study tests this question.
In place of the color naming grid and the naming data of
the World Color Survey relative to that grid, we used the 71
line-drawn spatial scenes of the TOPOLOGICAL RELATIONS
PICTURE SERIES designed by Melissa Bowerman (see e.g.
Bowerman & Pederson, 1992) and illustrated in part in
Figure 1, as named by speakers of 9 unrelated languages:
Basque, Dutch, Ewe, Lao, Lavukaleve, Tiriyó, Trumai,
Yélî-Dnye, and Yukatek (Levinson et al., 2003). In place of
similarities based on the CIELAB color space, we obtained
pairwise similarities among these spatial scenes based on
pile-sorting of these scenes by speakers of English and
Dutch.2 Finally, in place of rotation in the hue dimension,
we used rotation in a similarity space derived from the pile1

The same rotation analysis was applied to each of the 110
languages of the WCS. Figure 4 shows well-formedness
(linearly transformed to the range 0-1) as a function of the
number of columns of rotation in the hue dimension,

For 82 of the 110 languages of the WCS, the attested system
yielded higher well-formedness than any rotation of that system.
2
These two languages were chosen for convenience only.
Future research can usefully explore the sensitivity of our results to
the native language of pile-sorters.

2397

sorting. We wished to determine whether the spatial
naming systems of these 9 languages are near-optimal in a
manner analogous to that demonstrated for color naming
systems.

Participants were not restricted in the amount of time
they had to complete the task. They were also told that they
were free to make as many piles as they needed, and that
there was no restriction on the number of items allowed in a
single pile.

Methods
We describe here the methods undertaken to perform this
test: the treatment of the naming data, the measurement of
similarities, the well-formedness function, and the rotation
method.

Naming data
The naming data had been collected previously (see
Levinson et al., 2003). For each of the 9 languages, we
recorded, for each of the 71 spatial scenes, the modal spatial
adposition for that scene — i.e. the spatial term that was
used by the largest number of speakers of the language to
name that scene. Ties were broken by random choice. The
resulting array of names was taken to be that language’s
spatial naming system for those scenes.

Analysis. The similarity between each pair of spatial scenes
was determined by the proportion of all participants who
placed those two cards in the same pile. For example, if all
46 participants placed card i and card j in the same pile, then
the similarity between i and j would be sim(i,j) = 46 ÷ 46 =
1; if 23 of the participants placed these two cards in the
same pile, then the similarity between i and j would be
sim(i,j) = 23 ÷ 46 = 0.5, and so on.

Well-formedness
The well-formedness function W was the same as that of
Regier et al. (2007), as described above, with the adjustment
that the function sim(i,j) for any pair of spatial scenes i and j
was determined by pile-sorting as just described.

Similarity judgments

Rotation

It would have been prohibitively time-consuming to collect
pairwise similarity judgments for all possible pairs of the 71
scenes. Therefore we instead asked participants to sort the
scenes into piles (cf. Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, & Wang,
1999; Rosenberg & Kim, 1975). The pile-sorting data were
then used to derive a measure of similarity between each
pair of spatial relations.

We wished to determine whether the linguistic spatial
systems represented by our naming data were near-optimal
in the same sense as color naming systems – that is, whether
these attested systems were more well-formed than a natural
comparison class of unattested systems of comparable
complexity, derived by rotation. Rotation is an appropriate
means of generating hypothetical systems comparable to the
original, since the number of categories, the number of
stimuli per category, and (to the extent allowed by the
irregularity of the space) the location of the categories
relative to each other are all maintained. Performing
rotation-based comparisons requires a similarity space
within which rotation can occur. Therefore, we (1) created
a similarity space from the pile-sort similarity data, (2)
rotated the naming systems in that space, and (3) compared
well-formedness of attested and rotated systems. We
describe these steps in turn.

Participants. 24 native speakers of Dutch and 22 native
speakers of English participated in the sorting task, at the
MPI in Nijmegen and the University of Chicago,
respectively.
Materials. The 71 line drawings were printed individually
onto 6.5 × 6.5 cm cards. The FIGURE objects were drawn in
orange and the GROUND objects were drawn in black. (The
FIGURE is the object which is to be thought of as located
relative to the GROUND object.) The tabletop on which
participants sorted the cards into piles was 115(W) × 60(D)
cm.
Procedure. Participants were verbally instructed to ―group
the cards into piles so that in each pile, the spatial relation of
the orange object to the background black object is similar.‖
The directionality of this relation was emphasized and
reiterated. To help ensure that they would judge similarity
with respect to spatial arrangement and not with respect to
the identity of the objects involved, participants were further
told that they ―may see the same objects on multiple cards‖
and instructed to ―not put cards together just because they
contain an image of the same object or objects.‖
Participants were instructed in their native language; the
English instructions from which these excerpts come were
translated to Dutch, and back-translated to English in an
effort to minimize possible differences in meaning.

Creating a similarity space. The pairwise similarities
obtained by pile-sorting were provided as input to a
multidimensional scaling algorithm, ALSCAL, which
produced a similarity space from them (3-dimensions, stress
= 0.180; only minimal further reduction in stress was
obtained with more dimensions). Each of the 71 spatial
scenes is represented as a point in this space, and the
distances between points approximate the dissimilarity
between the corresponding spatial scenes. Figure 5 shows
the 71 points plotted in 2 dimensions of the resulting 3dimensional space. The points are irregularly positioned in
this space, by rough analogy with the irregularity of color
space that appears to drive patterns of color naming across
languages (Jameson & D’Andrade, 1997; Regier et al.,
2007).

2398

Figure 5: The 71 spatial scenes plotted as points in 2
dimensions of a 3-dimensional similarity space.
Rotating in similarity space. In the color domain, rotating
was an apparently simple matter of shifting a color naming
system ―rightward‖ or ―leftward‖ in the color naming grid,
along the hue dimension. In the spatial domain, rotating
naming systems is less straightforward, since there exists no
explicit grid – and when the points are plotted in the MDSproduced similarity space, as in Figure 5, the points are not
arranged in an implicit grid either. Moreover, in the
similarity space there are 3 dimensions around which one
could rotate.
Therefore, we rotated a given spatial naming system in
this similarity space as follows. We first selected one of the
3 dimensions of the space as the axis around which we
would rotate, and then rotated all points in the 3-D space
around that axis by the same amount. Specifically, call the
set of all 71 points P. We rotated the set of points P around
the selected axis by some angle α, resulting in a new set of
points P'. In general, these points P' did not coincide with
the original points P – it is in this sense that there is no
implicit grid. Nonetheless we wished to relabel the original
points P, which represent the spatial scenes in our stimulus
set, according to the labels on nearby rotated points in P'.
We therefore identified a bijection (one-to-one
correspondence) between points in P and P' that nearminimized the total distance between corresponding points
in the two sets3, and assigned to each point in P the label of
the corresponding point in P'. We took the resulting new
labeling of the points P to be the rotated labeling at angle α,
around the selected dimension. We rotated each spatial
naming system by increments of 15˚ all the way around the

circle (i.e. 0˚, 15˚, 30˚, 45˚, up through 345˚), and did so
separately around each of the three dimensions of the
similarity space.
This procedure yields, for each dimension of the
similarity space, 23 hypothetical naming systems that are
comparable to the original naming system in that they have
the same number of categories, the same number of stimuli
per category, and roughly the same arrangement of the
categories relative to each other, as in the original. Some
distortion of the shape of the categories is introduced by the
rotation process, because of the necessity of coercing points
in P' to nearby points in P – but note that something similar
happens in the case of color rotation as well: when a color
naming system is shifted ―rightwards‖ or ―leftwards‖ in the
grid, the labels are shifted to other colors that differ not only
in hue, but also in saturation because of the irregular shape
of the space, resulting in some distortion of overall category
shape. Critically, in both color and space, if there were no
such distortion of the categories under rotation, wellformedness would not differ under rotation – thus, these
distortions are what allow us to determine how well a given
labeling system ―fits‖ a given similarity space.
Comparing well-formedness. For each of the 9 languages
in our sample, we rotated that language’s spatial naming
system around each of the 3 dimensions of the similarity
space, as described above. We then determined the wellformedness of the original system and of each rotated
variant.

Results
Figure 6 displays the well-formedness of the Lao spatial
naming system, and of hypothetical variants derived from it
by rotation around each of the 3 dimensions (arbitrarily
labeled x, y, and z) of the similarity space. The attested
system is shown at 0˚ rotation. The attested system exhibits
higher well-formedness than any rotation around the x and z
axes, and higher well-formedness than any rotation around
the y axis with one exception, which is immediately
adjacent to the attested system.

3

Specifically, we considered the points P in random order, and
assigned each point p P to the nearest as-yet-unassigned point
p' P'. We repeated this process 106 times with different random
orderings of P, and chose the mapping that yielded the minimum
overall distance between corresponding points in P and P'. We
also explored a variant of this procedure in which we instead chose
the mapping that maximized well-formedness. The overall results
were qualitatively the same.

2399

Figure 6: Well-formedness of Lao when rotated about each
of the 3 axes.

These results are qualitatively similar to those obtained by
Regier et al. (2007) for color naming, and they suggest that
in Lao at least, spatial terms are near-optimal in the sense
that the categorical partition of similarity space that they
define is more well-formed than is (nearly) any member of a
natural comparison class of hypothetical partitions of
comparable complexity. Thus, the Lao spatial naming
system appears to ―fit‖ the shape of the similarity space,
much as color naming systems appear to fit the shape of
color space.

Figure 7 shows that this pattern holds for all 9 languages in
our dataset: the top, middle, and bottom panels in the figure
show the well-formedness of each of the 9 languages when
rotated about the x, y, and z axes, respectively. The attested
systems have higher well-formedness than almost all
hypothetical variants of them that were considered,4 and are
in this sense near-optimal – which helps to explain universal
tendencies in spatial naming. At the same time, these
results suggest a possible role for local linguistic convention
in determining spatial categories. The fact that the spatial
systems of these languages are quite different, yet are all
near-optimal, suggests that there may be many highly wellformed partitions of the similarity space, and that linguistic
convention may select from among these highly-ranked
systems.

Conclusions
There are universal tendencies in the categories picked
out by spatial terms across languages, and there is also
substantial cross-language variation.
The universal
tendencies suggest that spatial terms reflect universal
cognitive structure of some sort, while the cross-language
variation suggests support for the opposing relativist view
that linguistic convention plays a central role in determining
the extension of the categories found in any given language.
In this language-and-thought debate, as in many others, the
evidence offers partial support for both positions, and full
support for neither.
We have argued that this empirically complex picture can
be accounted for in a theoretically straightforward way.
Levinson et al. (2003) suggested an analogy between spatial
terms and color terms, and we have pursued this idea here.
Specifically, we have shown that just as color terms nearoptimally partition color space (Regier et al., 2007), so
spatial terms near-optimally partition an underlying
similarity space. On this view, the universal tendencies in
spatial naming result from irregularities in the similarity
space, and the cross-language variation reflects the fact that
there are often several nearly equally good ways to carve up
this space.
There is a potential criticism of this argument that we
anticipate. It might be claimed that the analogy with color
is flawed, since the irregularity in color space reflects
something fundamental, whereas the irregularity in the
spatial similarity space may not. Specifically, in color, the
irregularity of the space reflects the fact that the maximum
obtainable saturation varies unevenly across hue/lightness
combinations.
In contrast, it may be claimed, the
irregularity of our spatial similarity space may primarily
reflect the particular sampling of the space of all possible
spatial relations that the 71 scenes happen to represent. The
grid in the case of color ensures that the sample of colors
4

Figure 7: Well-formedness of all 9 languages when rotated
about the x (top panel), y (middle panel), and z (bottom
panel) axes.

Two of the nine languages – Dutch and Yélî-Dnye – have
peaks at exactly 0˚ rotation around all 3 axes; results for other
languages are comparable to those for Lao. Further research is
needed to determine whether the Dutch results are unusually clean
because the pile-sorting was performed in part by Dutch-speakers.

2400

considered is a systematic one; we have no such assurance
in the case of the spatial stimuli we have used here.
It is true that the sample of stimuli we have relied on here
appears to be less systematically arrayed than in the case of
color – this may be unavoidable in a semantic domain as
complex as topological spatial relations, which can capture
not just the actual location of an object, but also its method
of attachment to another object, whether it is a piece of
clothing, etc. And it is likely that some of the irregularity in
our similarity space indeed reflects the manner in which the
full space of spatial relations was sampled rather than any
sort of universal constraint on spatial cognition. Another
obvious limitation is that our similarity space is based on
responses from speakers of only two closely related
languages, English and Dutch. However, despite this, we
suspect that some of the structure of the resulting space does
indeed reflect universal constraints on the way humans think
about space. Tellingly, the spatial systems of 9 diverse
languages (one was Dutch, but the rest were unrelated to
either English or Dutch) appear near-optimal when assessed
in this space. It is clear why we would obtain these results
if the structure of the space reflects at least in part universal
aspects of human spatial cognition – and it is not clear why
we would obtain them otherwise.
Many questions are left open by the results we have
reported here. How important is it to have a systematic
sample of spatial stimuli? Would we obtain different results
if we tested for near-optimality using a method other than
rotation? Just how universal is the similarity space: are there
detectable differences in the pile-sorting of English and
Dutch speakers that are traceable to their respective systems
of spatial terms? Why do languages have different numbers
of spatial terms, partitioning semantic space more or less
finely? Perhaps most interestingly, when we see that there
are hypothetical systems that are slightly more well-formed
than the attested system from which they were derived, are
there actual spatial naming systems that look like those
high-ranked hypothetical systems? One might expect this
on the account we have presented here. Some of these
questions can be answered through further analysis of
existing data, while others will require more data. Yet
whatever the eventual answers to these questions, we hope
the results we have presented help to clarify the interplay of
universal and language-specific forces in the naming of
spatial relations across languages.

Peterson, M. Garrett, & L. Nadel (Eds.) Language and
space (pp. 385–436). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bowerman, M. & Choi, S. (2001). Shaping meanings for
language: Universal and language-specific in the
acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In M.
Bowerman and S. Levinson (Eds.) Language acquisition
and conceptual development (pp. 475–511). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bowerman, M. & Pederson, E. (1992). Cross-linguistic
studies of spatial semantic organization. In Annual Report
of the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 1992
(pp. 53-56).
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Potomac, MD: L. Erlbaum Associates
Jameson, K. & D’Andrade, R. (1997). It’s not really red,
green, yellow, blue: An inquiry into cognitive color space.
In C. L. Hardin & L. Maffi (Eds.), Color categories in
thought and language (pp. 295–319). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. C. & Meira, S. (2003). Natural concepts in the
spatial topological domain—adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typology. Language, 79, 485-516.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Cook, R.S. (2005). Focal colors are
universal after all. PNAS, 102, 8386-8391.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. PNAS, 104,
1436-1441.
Roberson, D., Davies I. & Davidoff, J. (2000). Color
categories are not universal: Replications and new
evidence from a stone-age culture. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 369-398.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I.R.L., & Shapiro, L.R.
(2005). Color categories: Evidence for the cultural
relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 378-411.
Rosenberg, S. & Kim, M. P. (1975). The method of sorting
as a data-gathering procedure in multivariate research.
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 10, 489-502.
Talmy, L. (2000). How language structures space. In L.
Talmy (Ed.) Toward a cognitive semantics, Volume 1 (pp.
177-254). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF under grant SBE0541957, the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center
(SILC).

References
Berlin, B. & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their
universality and evolution. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space for
language: A cross-linguistic perspective. In P. Bloom, M.

2401

