UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial components in the mental representations of numeric and symbolic magnitudes:
Extending the SNARC effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/019912j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Leth-Steensen, Craig
Petrusic, William
Shaki, Samuel

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Components in the Mental Representations of Numeric and Symbolic
Magnitudes: Extending the SNARC Effect
William M. Petrusic (bill_petrusic@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University,
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada

Samuel Shaki (Samuel_Shaki@hotmail.com)
Department of Behavioral Sciences, Ariel University Center of Samaria,
Ariel, 44837, Israel

Craig Leth-Steensen (clethste@connect.carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University,
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada

effect the Spatial Numerical Association of Response
Codes (SNARC), capturing the association of the spatial
component of the mental representation of numbers and
the hand of the response.

Abstract
With English-language readers as participants, in an
experiment requiring pair-wise comparative judgments of
numerical magnitude, typical SNARC effects were
obtained. With comparisons of the remembered size of
animals, SNARC depended on the direction of the
instruction. In both cases the continua are organized from
left to right corresponding to the direction of reading. On
the other hand, with Hebrew- and Arabic-language readers,
exactly the same configuration of findings was obtained
except that the spatial direction in each domain was
reversed; the mental continua are organized from right to
left corresponding again to the direction of reading.

The Present Experiments: Overview
In one set of experiments, we employ English-language
readers (i.e., people who read from left to right). In the
next, we employ Israeli and Palestinian participants who
read from right to left, with a view toward determining if
the form of SNARC effect is language - direction of
reading - dependent. In each case, in one set of
conditions, we require comparisons of numerical
magnitude, and in another, we require comparisons of the
remembered sizes of animals, with a view toward
determining whether SNARC effects also occur with
symbolic, non-numerical continua.

Keywords: mental number line; SNARC effect; spatial
representation; direction of reading; symbolic comparisons;
number processing.

Introduction

Experiment 1: Robust SNARC Effects in
Numerical Comparisons – English Readers

There is substantial evidence in support of the claim that
psychologically, numbers are represented on a mental
number line, with both spatial and extensive components.
The most striking, indeed landmark, demonstration of a
spatial component in the mental representation of the
number line was obtained by Dehaene, Bossini, and
Giraux (1993) in the context of a parity judgment task.
They found that responses with the left hand were faster
than those with the right hand when the numbers were
relatively small (e.g., 1 and 2). On the other hand, when
the numbers were relatively large (e.g., 8 and 9),
responses were faster with the right hand than with the
left hand. The authors argued than small numbers are
represented on the left end of the number line and become
positively associated with the leftward responses.
Similarly, because relatively large numbers are located on
the right of the number line they tend to preferentially
elicit rightward responses. Dehaene et al. labeled their

A further purpose of this experiment was to determine
how the instructions are presented might influence the
SNARC effect. In particular, using a within-participants
design, in one condition the instructions randomly varied
from trial to trial (randomized) and in the other condition
they remained constant over a block of trials (blocked).
As well, an additional purpose was to determine if the
SNARC effect in any way depended on the direction of
the comparison. For comparisons involving pairs of
positive and negative numbers, Shaki and Petrusic (2005)
had previously found approximately comparable SNARC
effects with the two possible forms of the instructions.

1547

Method

mean of the standardized regression coefficients were
significantly less than zero affirming the clear and robust
occurrence of SNARC effects.

Twelve Carleton university students participated in a
single 45-min. session for course credit. They indicated
which was either the larger or the smaller of three
relatively small digit pairs (0-1, 1-2, 2-3) and three
relatively large digit pairs (6-7, 7-8, 8-9). Each pair in the
design was presented in each of the two possible left-right
position orders, resulting in 12 digit pairs. The two forms
of the comparative instructions occurred equally often and
were constant over a block in one condition (blocked) and
inter-mixed, occurring equally often and in random order
in a second condition (randomized). This factorial
combination of the 12 stimulus pairs by two instructions
by two conditions was replicated ten times.

Experiment 2: Symbolic Comparisons –
English Readers
SNARC effects have been obtained with continua other
than numbers. Indeed, recently SNARC effects have also
been obtained with well-defined, highly over-learned
linear orderings. Most notably, Gevers, Reynvoet, and
Fias (2003) have shown that when participants are
required to categorize a month of the year as coming
before or after July, RTs are faster with the leftward than
rightward responses with the earlier months in the year
and conversely for the months later in the year. Similar
effects were obtained in categorical judgements of
whether a letter of the alphabet came before or after the
letter “M”. Each of these experiments nicely shows that
mental representations with spatial components are not
unique to numbers. However, it remains to be determined
if stimuli varying on other varieties of continua might also
have spatial components in their mental representations.
Accordingly we seek to determine if SNARC effects,
paralleling those with well-defined, highly over-learned,
linear orderings might be obtained with comparisons of
the remembered size of animals (i.e., symbolic
comparisons).

Results

RT(RIGHT) - RT(LEFT) (Ms)

As the plots in Figure 1 show, RTs are faster with left
hand responses than with right hand responses for the
small number pairs and faster with the right hand than
with the left hand for the relatively large number pairs.
The interaction involving stimulus pair and hand, which
defines the SNARC effect with these paired comparisons
is statistically reliable (F(5, 55) = 7.69). Importantly, as is
also evident in the plots in Figure 1, the obtained SNARC
effects did not depend on the direction of the instruction
nor whether the instructions were blocked or randomized.
80.0

Method

SMALLER: y=44.7 - 8.5x, r2=.753

BLOCKED: y=47.19 - 11.2x, r2=.945
RANDOMIZED: y=32.9 - 6.5x, r2=.902

60.0

LARGER: y=38.8 - 9.3x, r2=.567

Twenty-four Carleton University students participated for
course credit in a single 45-min. session. On each trial
they determined which was the larger of three pairs of
relatively small animals (ant-bee, bee-mouse, mouse-rat)
and three pairs of relatively large animals (dog-pig, pigcow, cow-elephant) on half of the trials and which was
the smaller on the other half. Each pair in the design was
presented in each of the two possible left-right position
orders, resulting in 12 animal names pairs. The two forms
of the comparative instructions (“Smaller” “Larger”)
occurred equally often and were randomly changed from
trial to trial. This factorial combination (the 12 stimulus
pairs by two instructions) was replicated six times,
preceded by a single replication of practice trials.

40.0
20.0
0.0
-20.0
-40.0
-60.0

(A)

-80.0
1

2

(B)
3

4

5

6

MAX(X, Y)

7

8

9

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

MAX(X, Y)

Figure 1. Mean RTs with the left hand subtracted from
mean RTs with right hand (SNARC index) as a function
of stimulus pair for the blocked and randomized
conditions in Panel A and for each instruction in Panel B
as a function of stimulus pair in Experiment 1.

Results

Repeated measures regression analyses, as outlined in
Lorch and Myers (1990), were conducted separately with
each instruction and with each condition (blocked vs.
randomized). In each case, standardized beta regression
coefficients were obtained for each participant with the
SNARC index (RT(Right)-RT(Left)) as the dependent
variable and pair magnitude as the predictor. The
hypothesis (two-tailed) that the mean of these weights
differed from zero was then tested using the t-distribution.
With both instructions and each instruction condition, the

In contrast to SNARC effects with number comparisons,
the interaction between stimulus pair and hand of
response was not statistically reliable (F(5, 115) = 2.31).
Rather, the three-way interaction, involving stimulus pair,
hand of response, and instruction was reliable (F(5, 115)
= 4.11). Indeed, as is evident in the plots in Figure 2,
SNARC-like effects, paralleling those evident with

1548

familiar with only right-to-left reading, showed a highly
attenuated SNARC effect (which became less attenuated
with the more time spent in France).

RT(RIGHT)-RT(LEFT) (Ms)

200
150

SMALLER:
y=92.56-23.38x, r2=.616

Method

100

Seven Israelis and 5 Palestinians (19- to 26-years old)
participated in two 30-min. sessions. All participants read
Hebrew or/and Arabic only, and reported minimal
exposure to any left-to-right language. The same digit
pairs as in Experiment 1 (0-1, 1-2, 2-3, 6-7, 7-8, 8-9) and
the same animal pairs (ant-bee, bee-mouse, mouse-rat,
dog-pig, pig-cow, cow-elephant) as in Experiment 2 were
used. The two forms of the comparative instructions
occurred equally often and were presented randomly from
trial to trial. This factorial combination (the 12 stimulus
pairs by two instructions by two conditions) was
replicated six times, preceded by a single replication of
practice trials. The order of the two numbers- and
animals-sessions was counterbalanced.

50
0
-50
-100
-150
-200

LARGER:
y=-102.14+21.06x, r2=.451
SMALL

LARGE

STIMULUS PAIR (ORDINAL SPACING)

Figure 2. Mean RTs with the left hand subtracted from
mean RTs with right hand (SNARC index) as a function
of stimulus pair with each instruction for the animal-size
symbolic comparisons for the English-language (left-toright) readers in Experiment 2.

Results
For the numerical comparisons, an ANOVA with stimulus
pair, instruction, and hand as within-participant factors
revealed a significant linear-by-linear component of the
Hand by Pair interaction (F(1, 11) = 10.27), affirming a
reliable SNARC effect. As is evident from the plots in
Figure 3, rightward responses were faster than leftward
responses with relatively small numbers and conversely
with relatively large numbers. Thus, the mental number
line extends leftward for these Israeli/Arab participants,
with small numbers at the right (i.e., a reverse SNARC
effect). Moreover, this number line, as with Englishlanguage readers, is not dependent on instructions. As
well, the mean of the standardized regression coefficients
is positive and significantly different from zero with both
instructions, confirming reliable reverse SNARC effects
for these right-to-left readers.
For the symbolic comparisons, an ANOVA with the
same within-participant factors as the numerical
comparisons revealed a significant linear-by-linear-bylinear component of the Pair by Hand by Instruction
three-way interaction (F(1, 11) = 13.19). As is clear from
the plots in Figure 4, the animal mental size line is also
instruction dependent for these Israeli/Arab participants.
Moreover, the direction of the animal mental size line is
the opposite of that obtained with English-language
participants. The mean standardized regression coefficient
for the instruction “Smaller” is 0.254 which is
significantly different from zero and for the instruction
“Larger” the mean coefficient is -0.300 which also
significantly differs from zero. Thus, these regression
analyses converge perfectly with the outcomes of the
corresponding ANOVA, confirming an instructiondependent SNARC effect that is the opposite of that
obtained with our Canadian participants.

numbers, are obtained with the instruction “Smaller”.
However, reverse SNARC-like effects occur with the
instruction “Larger”. With the instruction “Smaller”, the
small animals are represented on the left of the continuum
and the large animals on the right. On the other hand, with
the instruction “Larger”, the large animals are represented
on the left and animal size decreases rightward on the
dimension. In other words, the instruction serves as a
leftward reference point. This instruction-dependent
ordering is left to right corresponding to the direction of
reading.
The mean of the standardized regression coefficients
(M = -0.47, SD = 0.39) differed reliably from zero (t(23)
= -5.85, p < 0.0001), thereby establishing a spatial
component with the mental representation of the
remembered size of animals with the instruction
“Smaller”. Indeed, for 21 of the 24 participants, the slope
of the regression line was negative. On the other hand,
with the instruction “Larger”, the slope was positive for
15 of the 24 participants, and the mean of the
standardized regression coefficients (M = 0,14, SD =
0.38) was marginally significantly different from zero
(t(23) = 1.75, p > 0.093, two-tailed).

Language-Dependent SNARC Effects:
Dehaene et al. (Experiment 7) tried to establish that the
direction of the mental number line depends on the
direction of reading by obtaining SNARC effects with
Iranians who had lived in France as immigrants for
varying amounts of time. They showed that Iranians who
had only recently arrived in France, and thus were

1549

2

400

SMALLER: Y=-119.52 + 21.41X, r =0.778
2
LARGER: Y=-102.21 + 15.96X, r =0.479

RT(RIGHT) - RT(LEFT) (Ms)

RT(RIGHT) - RT(LEFT) (Ms)

150
100
50
0
-50
-100
-150
-200
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

SMALLER: Y=-211.17 + 39.87X, r2=0.468
2
LARGER: Y=261.86 - 40.49X, r =0.765

300
200
100
0
-100
-200
-300
-400

9

SMALL

MAX(x, y)

LARGE

STIMULUS PAIR (Ordinal Spacing)

Figure 3. Mean RTs with the left hand subtracted from
mean RTs with right hand (SNARC index) as a function
of stimulus pair with each instruction for the numerical
magnitude comparisons of Experiment 3.

Figure 4. Mean RTs with the left hand subtracted from
mean RTs with right hand (SNARC index) as a function
of stimulus pair with each instruction for the animal size,
symbolic comparisons for the Hebrew- and Arabiclanguage (right-to-left) readers of Experiment 3.

Summary and Conclusions
SNARC effects in number comparisons for both Englishlanguage and Hebrew-/Arabic-language readers are not
dependent on the direction of the comparison in contrast
to SNARC effects arising from symbolic comparisons of
remembered animal size. SNARC effects for both number
and symbolic comparisons are language dependent. The
mental line for both numbers and for remembered size
extends rightward from the reference point activated by
the required instruction for English-language participants
and leftward for Hebrew-/Arabic-language participants.
Our current work is directed at determining how we might
make SNARC effects with symbolic comparisons
instruction independent (i.e., more like numbers).

References
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (193). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.
Gevers, W., Reynvoet, B., & Fias, W. (2003). The mental
representation of ordinal sequences is spatially
organized. Cognition, 87, B87-B95.
Lorch, R. F., & Myers, J. L. (1990). Regression analyses
of repeated measures data in cognitive research.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 16, 149-157

Acknowledgements

Shaki, S., & Petrusic, W. M. (2005). On the mental
representation of negative numbers: Context dependent
SNARC effects with comparative judgments.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 931-937.

This work was supported by Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Individual
Discovery Grants awarded to both W. M. Petrusic and C.
Leth-Steensen.

1550

