UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Support Structures for Linguistic Creativity: A Computational Analysis of Creative Irony in
Similes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01h265tg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Hao, Yanfen
Veale, Tony

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Support Structures for Linguistic Creativity:
A Computational Analysis of Creative Irony in Similes
Tony Veale (TONY.VEALE@UCD.IE)
School of Computer Science and Informatics
University College Dublin

Yanfen Hao (YANFEN.HAO@UCD.IE)
School of Computer Science and Informatics
University College Dublin
Abstract
Language provides a wealth of stock images and formulaic
expressions to speakers who wish to describe a topic in figurative terms. Speakers can also craft their own similes and
metaphors, and frequently do, but their most creative efforts
run the risk of being misunderstood. Ironic comparisons, in
particular, can mistakenly impart the very opposite of what a
speaker intends, by virtue of superficially saying the opposite
of what is actually meant. Creative similes are often accompanied by explanations that explicitly draw out their meaning, but such explanations run counter to the playful nature of
irony and humour. We hypothesize that speakers employ more
subtle support structures when minting humorous (and risky)
comparisons on the fly, and empirically explore the role of the
marker “about” as a channel for telegraphing humorous and
creative intent. Our analysis is founded on two large corpora
of similes that are harvested from the web, and reveals that the
presence of “about” is a very reliable predictor of a simile’s
true affective meaning.

Introduction
There is something appealingly democratic and unpretentious
about similes. Not only are they pervasive in language, they
are at home in any register of speech and any genre of text,
from scientific texts to romantic poetry (Fishlov, 1992). Conveniently, most languages provide a wealth of pre-fabricated
similes that are as well-known to native speakers as the adjectival features they serve to exemplify (e.g., “as strong as
an ox”, “as sober as a judge”, etc.; see Taylor, 1954; Norrick, 1986; Moon, 2008). Such formulaic similes allow us to
quickly identify the key stereotypes of a language and culture,
and to recognize those which are shared by different language
cultures, such as English and Chinese (Veale et. al, 2008).
But just as importantly, languages like English make it easy
for speakers to mint their own similes on the fly, by imposing
low barriers to creation.
In contrast to metaphors, similes are always marked, allowing their audience to immediately and unambiguously construe them as comparisons (Taylor, 1954; Hanks, 2004). The
syntactic form of explicit as-similes – “A Topic is as Ground
as a Vehicle” – provides a ready-made infrastructure that authors can populate with their own bespoke vehicles (Fishlov,
1992; Moon, 2008), while the ability to explicitly state the
grounds of a comparison allows an author to use vehicles that
are neither obvious or entirely to the point. Unlike metaphors,
which often employ coherent systems of mappings to support
the pretence that the topic really is a member of the vehicle category (see Glucksberg, 2001), similes can be as wildly

colorful and incongruous as an author wants, as long as the
ground is effectively communicated. Hanks (2004) thus argues that similes provide a freer and more creative means of
expression than metaphor, since similes can serve as dynamic
“triggers for the imagination” without having to appeal either
to underlying schemata or to experiential gestalts (Lakoff and
Johnson, 1980). Creative similes are often used as glosses
to illustrate or tie together elements of an argument, much as
canned jokes are often invoked in conversation to illustrate
a key point (Oring, 2003). As such, creative similes do not
have to be as rigorously constructed as metaphors, and Roncero et al. (2006) have shown that similes found on the web
are much more likely to be accompanied by explanations than
comparable metaphors that convey the same message.
Consider this example from Jerry Seinfeld, in his New
York Times remembrance of the late comic George Carlin:
“[George] was like a train hobo with a chicken bone. When
he was done there was nothing left for anybody.” (Seinfeld,
2008).
The image of a “train hobo with a chicken bone” is visually
striking, but needs an explicit explanation to help draw out its
meaning potential. Note that this additional explanation only
conveys a small part of the simile’s meaning. The image itself is rich in descriptive resonance, and one sees Carlin as
just as leery, disheveled, acid-tongued and mocking of social
conventions as the hobo on the train. But without the support structure of the adjunct “nothing left for anybody”, we
would fail to see the relevance of the chicken-bone: Carlin’s
comedy is driven by a visceral hunger that leads him to thoroughly exhaust the humor potential of his targets. In other
words, the range of possible similarities is just too large, so
the simile needs a support structure to direct us toward the
desired meaning.
Because the explanation provides just a small part of the
overall meaning, the potency of Seinfeld’s simile does not
seem diminished by its addition. This suggests that the explanations observed by Roncero et al. (2006) are used as a form
of support structure, or scaffolding (see Veale and Keane,
1992), for creative similes, allowing speakers to choose comparisons primarily on their basis of their visual and affective
resonance without fear of miscommunication. Nonetheless,
explanations can greatly diminish the potency of jokes (Oring, 2003), so when a simile is humorously used as a joke, we

1376

hypothesize that support structures, if any, will be far more
subtle. Ironic comparisons, for instance, would be utterly undermined if accompanied by an explicit explanation, since
as Grice (1978) notes, “to announce [irony] as a pretence
would be to spoil the effect” (p. 125). Nonetheless, irony
always runs a risk of being misdiagnosed (Sperber and Wilson, 1992), and so requires that great care is exercised in its
construction. Grice (1978) further notes that when “speaking
ironically ... a tone suitable to such a feeling or attitude seems
to be mandatory” (p. 125). So when ironic comparisons are
creatively minted on the fly, in conversationally-styled texts,
we hypothesize that some form of lexicalized support structure will often be used in place of an ironical tone, to subtly
direct the audience toward the desired meaning. For instance,
the indeed-construction “a [characterization], indeed!” commonly acts as a scaffolding for ironic observations about situations or events that fail to behave as advertised, such as
the remark “an officer and a gentleman, indeed” discussed
in Sperber and Wilson (1992). Likewise, the construction
“a fine [X]!” is commonly used to express a negative evaluation whether X has a positive or negative sentiment, as in
“a fine romance!”, “a fine holiday!” and even “a fine mess”.
These examples can also be followed by a use of the “indeed”
marker, or “I must say”, to compound the effect.
Speakers rarely have as much time as writers to rework
and polish their outputs, so it is intuitive to believe that they
often use some kind of support structure to ensure that their
most creative (and risky) efforts achieve successful communication. Moon (2008) has noted that the marker “about” has a
special role in signaling irony, and goes as far as to argue that
the about-form of similes, “about as ADJ as NOUN”, always
conveys an ironic meaning. But Moon’s analysis is based on
relatively formulaic similes, of the kind one expects to find
in common usage, and so this claim is based on a very small
sample set. If one looks at the much larger space of creative
similes that speakers mint on the fly, as we do in this current
work, then it becomes clear that “about” does not always signal irony, but more generally signals an attempt by a speaker
to be imprecise, humorous and creative. By signaling creative
intent, speakers ask for – and generally receive – additional
support for their desired interpretations. In this current work
we seek robust empirical support for this claim, and support
more generally for our intuition that structures like the “about
as” form act as scaffolding or support structures for creative
utterances that are at risk of being misunderstood.
To this end, we collect two very large corpora of similes:
in section 2, we describe how simple similes with one-word
vehicles, such as “as cunning as a fox”, are harvested from
the internet, while in section 3 we explicitly seek out more
complex similes prefixed with the putative support marker,
“about”. In section 4 we present a statistical analysis of these
corpora, to tease apart their similarities and differences and
thus reveal the extent to which creative comparisons exploit
the stock imagery of more formulaic similes. In section 5 we
turn to a consideration of irony and the affective signature of

similes marked by “about”. Finally, we conclude in section 6
with a discussion of our results.

Corpus I: Simple Comparisons
To compile a collection of conventional similes, one can look
to authoritative sources such as printed dictionaries, or exploit the syntactic frame of the as-simile to identify matching
instances in large text corpora. Norrick (1986), for instance,
uses the former approach, and bases his analysis on 366 similes listed in the 1970 edition of The Oxford Dictionary of
Proverbs. Moon (2008) uses a hybrid approach, and compiles a collection of 377 similes from multiple sources, one
of which is the Bank of English corpus. But the pervasiveness and ease of creation of similes means that one is likely
to find a much wider range of different similes in the collected
texts of the world-wide-web (Roncero et al., 2006). The syntactic marking of similes means that most of these similes can
be harvested automatically, using a simple process of patternmatching. Thus, when we pose the query “as * as *” to the
Google search-engine, the wildcard elements are bound by
Google to the corresponding elements of a comparison.
Google returns a large number of snippets from online documents that contain matching phrases, such as “as hot as an
oven” or “as strong as an ox”. In these snippets, we are likely
to see the same combination of ground and vehicle recur in
many different contexts. This combination of ground and vehicle is the semantic core of a simile, the part that transcends
context to be reused in the description of many different topics. The relationship of this core combination to the topic,
will in many cases, be entirely contingent and subjective;
most similes are used, after all, to communicate information
about a topic that is not fully understood or appreciated by
an audience, and so for purposes of corpus construction, the
topic has very little bearing on the semantics of the simile.
For instance, the simile “my boss is as cunning as a fox” tells
us nothing at all about bosses per se, but does tell us that
foxes are either stereotypically cunning (if the simile is nonironically straight) or stereotypically naı̈ve (if the simile is
ironic). We are primarily interested therefore in the collection of simile types – the context-transcending reusable combination of a specific ground with a specific vehicle – rather
than of simile instances – the contextually-tied application of
a ground and vehicle to a specific topic.
To ensure that we acquire the widest range of simile types
with the widest range of adjectival grounds, we need to seed
our queries with specific adjectives. For example, to ensure
that we find similes for strength, we need to use the queries
“as strong as *” and ”as weak as *”. To automate the harvesting process, we use the lexical resource WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) as a source of adjectives for these queries. In particular, we use WordNet as an inventory of antonymous adjective
pairs, such as “strong” and “weak”, since these often define
the gradable properties for which similes are used to indicate
extreme values. In all, we generate over 2000 queries of the
“as * as *” form, in which the ground position (the first wild-

1377

card *) is successively bound to a different adjective. For
tractability, we cannot consider every document returned by
Google for these queries. Rather, we consider just the first
200 snippets returned for each, allowing us to harvest a corpus of simile types by taking a wide-ranging series of different core-samples from across the full breadth of the web.
While the core-sample for each adjective is just 200 snippets
deep, this is sufficient for a frequency analysis to reveal the
most culturally entrenched English similes. For instance, in
the query “as strong as *”, the * matches “horse” 27 times,
“bull” 19 times, “gorilla” 12 times, and “Viking” just once.

Annotating the Data
When we consider only those simile instances with a singleterm vehicle, as listed in a conventional lexical resource like
WordNet, the above processes harvest 74,704 instances of
the “as * as *” pattern, 42,618 of which are unique. In
all, these instances relate 3769 different adjectival grounds
to 9286 different noun vehicles. However, while each of
these instances is a legitimate instance of a comparison, not
all qualify as similes. As defined by Ortony (1979), the difference between comparisons and similes is best characterized in terms of salience: a simile uses a vehicle for which
a given ground property is especially salient to highlight this
property in a topic. Simple comparisons, on the other hand,
merely point out correlations and commonalities between two
things, regardless of whether those commonalities are particularly salient in the vehicle. If a doctor states that a tumour
is “as big as a tennis-ball”, this is certainly cause for alarm,
but it is not a simile, since bigness is not a salient property of
tennis-balls.
Since there is no automatic way of separating similes from
simple comparisons, human judges are used to annotate all
those instances where the ground is obviously a salient property of the vehicle (the bona-fide or straight cases) or where a
property that is diametrically opposed to the ground is salient
of the vehicle (the ironic cases). The extensive grey area between these positions – where the ground is neither strongly
associated with, nor strongly opposed to, the vehicle – is not
always clear cut, and instances like “as cuddly as a bear”
might fall into either category in one context or another. The
human judges thus perform a conservative separation, discarding those instances that might lean both ways. Those that
are not discarded are annotated as either straight or ironic.
In all, 30,991 instances are identified as straight (non-ironic)
similes; of these instances, 12,259 are unique simile types,
that is, unique pairings of a ground property to a vehicle. A
smaller body of 4685 instances are annotated as ironic similes, such as “as hairy as a bowling-ball”, and of these, 2798
form unique types.

Simple Elaborations
Taylor (1954) notes that speakers sometimes elaborate existing similes to create new and more emphatic variations. For
instance, the conventional simile “as cunning as a fox” is
sometimes elaborated into “as cunning as an educated fox”

or “as cunning as an old fox”. In effect, the existing simile acts as a recognizable support structure that a speaker can
exploit to achieve minor-level creativity. To quantify the extent to which this happens, and thereby determine the relative
productivity of a simile-elaboration strategy, we generate a
query of the form “as <GROUND> as a * <VEHICLE>”
for every simple simile type in the corpus of 12,259 straight
types harvested above. This finds over 5,700 elaborations of
conventional similes on the web that mostly add perceptual
information to aid visualization; thus, we find “as white as
a frightened ghost”; “as dangerous as a ravening wolf ”; “as
green as a pickled toad” or “an Irish meadow”; and “as dry
as a stale biscuit” or “a stiff martini”. However, not all the
basic simile types yield attested elaborations, and these 5,700
extended types derive from just 700 adjectival grounds, that
is, just one in every four of the adjectival grounds in our corpus of simple straight similes. Elaboration is a productive
strategy, but clearly not an widely used one.

Subversive Elaborations
While these elaborated forms add just a single word to an
existing simile, this additional word can sometimes alter its
meaning in quite a dramatic fashion. We find that 2% of these
elaborations (or 109 simile types) subvert an original simile
to achieve an ironic effect, as in ”as dangerous as a toothless
wolf ”, ”as accurate as a blind archer” and ”as lethal as a toy
gun”. The majority of subversions – 93% – undermine a simile with a positive evaluation to produce a newer variant with
a distinctly negative attitude. To communicate this critical
viewpoint, subversions ask us to imagine broken, dysfunctional or pathetic instances of concepts whose stereotypical
guise is far more impressive. But as these figures suggest,
subversion of existing similes is a little used strategy for generating an ironic effect. Fortunately, since the ”about” form
of similes appears quite commonly on the web, this promises
to yield a much richer vein of creative comparisons.

Corpus II: Complex Comparisons
Unlike metaphors, similes are hedged assertions, since a topic
is merely stated to be approximately similar to, and not absolutely identical to, a given vehicle. Indeed, some similes
are doubly-hedged, as if to indicate to their audience that
the similarity on display is even more approximate. We see
double-hedging in the following simile from Raymond Chandler, who uses the marker “about” to emphasize the wildly approximate nature of his comparison: “[Moose Molloy] looked
about as inconspicuous as a tarantula on a slice of angel
food”. The “about” marker seems to telegraph an author’s intention to use an inventive vehicle which exhibits an inexact
ballpark similarity to the topic. Because the most culturallyentrenched similes are the most frequently reused, the simple
query pattern “as * as *” is implicitly biased toward the retrieval of these most common types. This bias is reinforced by
our efficiency-driven cut-off of 200 snippets per query, since
many one-off originals are likely to fall outside this threshold. However, we now rerun our two-phase harvesting pro-

1378

cess with the doubly-hedged query “about as * as *”, so we
are more likely to retrieve one-off similes of the kind that exhibit creativity.
Fishlov (1992) argues that excessive vehicle length is an
attention-grabbing characteristic of creative similes, so we
now extract all syntactically well-formed vehicles, whether
they comprise one word or many, from the returned snippets.
The extracted instances thus run the gamut from the short and
punchy to the long and overwrought; “about as pervasive as
air” is typical of the short variety, while “about as difficult as
finding work as a school teacher after a child-abuse conviction” typifies the longer variety. In all, this second sweep of
the harvester yields 45,021 instances of the “about” construction. Most of these instances occur just once overall, and this
second harvesting sweep yields almost as many unique types
(38,294) as instances, suggesting that 85% of these instances
are bespoke one-offs. When hand-annotated for the salience
profile that we expect from similes, we find that 20,299 of
these types (53%) are more than mere comparisons, and use
vehicles for which the stated ground is either very salient or
ironically opposed.
Interestingly, just 14% of these 20,299 simile types involve a vehicle with just one content-word, and a mere 3%
of “about” simile types (676 types) are found in the original harvesting process of simple similes. In other words, the
overlap in simile types found using both harvesting processes
– single-hedged (“as * as *”) and double-hedged (“about as
* as *”) – is negligible, on the order of 3 to 4%. Clearly, the
addition of an “about” marker causes the second web sweep
to harvest an almost completely different set of similes. We
thus see a clear quantitative and qualitative separation between similes that are marked with “about” from more conventional similes. The “about” similes are typically longer,
with a mean size of three words per vehicle, excluding initial
determiners. They are also more heavily inclined toward the
ironic. Hand-annotating for straight or ironic descriptions, we
find that only 4797 unique simile-types (or just 24%) employ
a vehicle for which the ground is both salient and apt, while
15,502 simile-types (76%) are ironic, as in “about as modern
as a top-hatted chimneysweep”.
The “about” form thus seems to be syntactic scaffolding
that allows an author to telegraph an attempt to coin an unconventional, creative and potentially “spurious” (in the sense
of Oring, 2003) simile. We can only speculate why the word
“about” is semantically suitable to this role. Perhaps the nonspatial meanings of “about” – approximate and not quite –
impart a diluted sense of negation that alerts an audience to
the possibility that all is not as it should be within the apparent logic of the simile.

Comparing Corpora
While most simple similes are formulaic evergreens, we find
that 12% of “about” similes are topical and largely perishable,
making use of well known names from the current cultural
climate, such as “Karl Rove” and “Paris Hilton”. Though

there is just a 3% overlap between the longer “about” similes and the shorter, more conventional figures of speech,
this number significantly underestimates the role of conventional imagery in the construction of creative similes. On
closer analysis, we find that 62% of the “about” similes use at
least one stock image (such as library) drawn from the inventory of conventional vehicles. The longer similes do not use
these stereotypes in isolation, or even to exemplify the same
grounds, but combine them in novel ways to create memorable images, such as “as lost as Paris Hilton in a library”.
For instance, our first corpus of simple similes contains both
“as quiet as a cat” and “as noisy as a blender”, while our second corpus of “about” similes contains a simile that combines
both of these to achieve an emergent, ironic effect: “about as
soothing as a cat in a blender”.
As in this example, a substantial number of “about” similes – 30% – use a vehicle that is a composite structure of
two or more concepts linked by a preposition. The combination above employs two stock images with contrary properties – the stealthy cat and the loud blender – to evoke a
visceral feeling of unease and disgust that stands in ironic opposition to the stereotype of calm relaxation that the simile
initially promises. Notice how the simile cleverly plays each
stock image against type: the cat, which might be considered
soothing in normal circumstances, is placed in a cruel situation that prompts us to feel its suffering; and the blender,
which is stereotypically loud and jarring, is ironically put forward as an exemplar of the very opposite. So while the longer
“about” similes achieve more imaginative and creative effects
than their conventionalized brethren, they are not completely
distinct. They frequently draw upon the same conventional
imagery, but in combinations that are designed to subvert
stereotypical properties and create a heightened sense of perception and affect.

Empirical Analysis: Irony and Affect
A critical attitude is typical of irony, and creative “about” similes should be no different in this respect than simple similes
with short, single-word vehicles. However, while some adjectives are uniformly critical in any context, such as “dull”,
“unattractive” and “stupid”, most adjectives (such as “fragile”, “tough” and “controversial”) occupy a usage-sensitive
middle ground between clearly-positive and clearly-negative.
Lacking specific knowledge of a speaker’s views on a topic,
or indeed of the topic itself, the quantification of a simile’s
positive or negative affect is too subjective to be meaningfully performed by a small group of human annotators. To
achieve as much consistency as possible in the rating of attitudes, we turn to Whissel’s (1989) dictionary of affect, an inventory of over 8000 English words with pleasantness scores
that are statistically derived from human ratings. These scores
range from 1.0 (most unpleasant) to 3.0 (most pleasant), with
a mean score of 1.84 and a standard deviation of 0.44. For our
purposes, we assume that the ground of a simile is negative if
it possesses a pleasantness score less than one standard devi-

1379

ation below the mean (≤ 1.36), and positive if it possesses a
pleasantness score greater than one standard deviation above
the mean (≥ 2.28).
Using these numeric criteria, we can quantify the balance
– or imbalance – of attitudes in different kinds of simile. In
the most conventional straight similes, we see that a positive
attitude is conveyed twice as often as a negative attitude (67%
versus 33%). In contrast, simple ironic similes convey a negative attitude six times more often than a positive attitude (86%
versus 14%). Turning to the more creative “about” similes,
we see that straight “about” similes communicate a negative
attitude a little more often than a positive attitude (56% versus
44%), but that ironic “about” similes carry a negative affect
in almost 9 out of 10 cases (89% versus 11%). Simple similes are thus more likely to impart a positive view of a topic,
while longer “about” similes are more likely overall (whether
straight or ironic) to impart a negative view of a topic.
This difference is exacerbated by the strong preference for
irony with the “about” form. Recall from section 4 that 76%
of “about” simile types are ironic, while just 18% of the
shorter, more conventional similes are ironic. Overall then,
83% of “about” similes impart a negative view of a topic,
since 12% of “about” similes are non-ironic with a negative
ground, and 71% ironically use a positive ground to impart
a negative property. Tables 1 and 2 give an overview of the
breakdown between irony and affect in each case.

also attributes “dirty” to warthogs). When a stereotype-based
vehicle is used to attribute just a single property to a topic,
these other resonant properties will also be primed. The description “as ugly as a warthog” is thus a compact way of implying “as ugly and dirty as a warthog”. There is a sardonic
humour then in negative descriptions that are communicated
via simile, but the precise degree of humour, and its effect,
will depend both on the ingenuity of the simile and on the
quality of the delivery.
As shown in Table 2, we can see that 83% of “about” similes have this potential for sardonic humour, either by directly
describing a topic in negative terms (12%) or by indirectly
implying a critical perspective via irony (71%). In contrast,
Table 1 shows that simple similes can be used for sardonic
purposes in just 42% of cases (16% are ironically positive and
26% are non-ironically negative). These numbers suggest not
just that irony is widely used in simile, but they also begin to
explain why it is used. Table 1 shows that negativity is underrepresented in simple similes, and that straight conventional
similes communicate a positive description more than twice
as often as a negative description (55% versus 26%). Irony
provides a necessary corrective to this imbalance, allowing
negative descriptions to be crafted from positive grounds. In
simple similes, the balance is almost restored, with positive
outweighing negative by 58% to 42%. Table 2 shows that
“about” similes more than correct the remaining imbalance
by choosing to employ their increased length and ingenuity
in the service of negativity and ridicule.

Table 1: Total breakdown of similes with one word vehicles.
All cells sum to 100%.
Positive Ground
Negative Ground

Straight
55%
26%

Discussion and Conclusions

Ironic
16%
3%

Table 2: Total breakdown of similes with “about” marker. All
cells sum to 100%.
Positive Ground
Negative Ground

Straight
9%
12%

Ironic
71%
8%

The reliance of similes on familiar and evocative stereotypes in which particular properties are not just salient, but
highly concentrated, means that similes have an exaggerated
effect when attributing those properties to a topic. A positive
description via simile is thus more likely to be seen as flattering than a non-figurative attribution of the same grounds,
and a negative description is likely to be seen as more cutting. For example, it is less wounding to be described as
“very ugly” than “as ugly as a warthog”. This is in part because stereotypes represent extreme points of reference, and
partly because stereotypes often have other unstated but resonant properties that are implicitly evoked (e.g., our corpus

Since over 20% of “about” similes are non-ironic, it is incorrect to assume that “about” always signals the presence of
irony. Our corpus analysis, the largest of its kind for similes,
shows that the “about” form is more nuanced than a simple
marker, but that it acts as a scaffolding structure for creative
similes, priming an audience to view comparisons with positive grounds as ironically critical and comparisons with negative grounds as plainly critical. We employ the term scaffolding in the sense of Veale and Keane (1992), to mean a
structure that allows immediate but superficial interpretation
of a figurative utterance, and on which a deeper and more insightful interpretation can gradually be elaborated. In other
words, the “about” form allows an audience to quickly construct a basic and mostly accurate interpretation of a speaker’s
intent without having to fully understand the meaning of the
vehicle. All that is required is that the audience can determine
the intended evaluative affect – positive or negative – of the
simile’s ground: if correctly ascertained as positive, then the
simile has close to a 90% chance of being ironic and critical;
if ascertained as negative, the simile has just a 40% of being
ironic and is 60% likely to mean what it overtly says.
In a very real sense then, the “about” form appears to be
a support structure for humorous linguistic creativity. Consider that creative similes of an obviously poetic bent (e.g.,
the kind analyzed by Fishlov, 1992) are typically crafted off-

1380

line, where they can be reworked and polished until they fully
cohere with their narrative surroundings. They frequently
give rise to complex mappings and associations, which encourage close-reading and deep analysis from their audience.
In contrast, similes of a humorous bent are often generated
spontaneously in fast-moving interactive situations, and genres of text that are rich in humorous comparisons (such as
dialogue-heavy novels, comic narratives, and the online texts
from which we harvest our corpora of similes in section 4)
are typically designed to mimic the free, fast-paced flow of
everyday conversation. In such time-constrained conditions,
it is useful to be able to be to telegraph the basic meaning of
a comparison, to minimize both the risk of information loss
(if the comic conceit fails, or falls flat) and the risk of complete misinterpretation (if ironic intent is not recognized, or
wrongly assumed where it is not intended). Roncero et al.
(2006) note that similes found on the internet are far more
likely than the equivalent metaphors to be accompanied by
an explicit explanation, suggesting that simile authors feel a
need to cue readers as to the proper interpretation of their creative efforts. Explanations robs jokes of their potency, so we
can expect humorous similes to eschew explicit explanations.
The “about” marker is a more subtle cue than an explanation, but it is a cue nonetheless, one that signals a playfulness
on the part of the author and one that licenses the audience
to seek out a playful, and perhaps even ironic, interpretation
when one is available.
We conclude by noting that the presence of “about” does
not make a simile humorous, nor does its absence undo any
potential a simile may have for humour. Though we can identify structural and semantic features of similes that contribute
to their humorousness, but we cannot identify structural or semantic features that are sufficient to make a simile humorous.
Ultimately, humour is not semantically or structurally determined, but arises from the pragmatic effects of an utterance’s
use in a given context. Nonetheless, structural properties –
like the presence of “about” – can encourage an audience to
collude with the author in constructing a humorous interpretation. The “about” form is unlikely to be the only construction that supports and primes a humorous interpretation in this
way, though it does seem to be one of the simplest and most
direct, at least for similes. Further investigation is needed to
see whether other linguistic markers of equal utility can be
identified, both for predicting creative intent and for automatically harvesting potentially creative texts from the web.

Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Vol. 9. Pragmatics.
New York: Academic.
Hanks, P. 2004. The syntagmatics of metaphor. Int. Journal
of Lexicography, 17(3).
Lakoff, G. and M. Johnson. 1980. Metaphors We Live By.
Univ. of Chicago Press.
Moon, R. 2008. Conventionalized as-similes in English: A
problem case. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics
13(1), 3–37.
Norrick, N. 1986. Stock Similes. Journal of Literary Semantics XV(1), 39–52.
Oring, E. 2003. Engaging Humor. University of Illinois
Press.
Ortony, A. 1979. The role of similarity in similes and
metaphors, in Metaphor and Thought, edited by A. Ortony.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Roncero, C., Kennedy, J. M., and Smyth, R. 2006. Similes on
the internet have explanations. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 13(1), 74–77.
Seinfeld, J. 2008. Dying is Hard. Comedy is Harder. New
York Times Op-Ed, June 24.
Sperber, D. and Wilson, D. 1992. On verbal irony. Lingua
87, pp 53–76.
Taylor, A. 1954. Proverbial Comparisons and Similes from
California. Folklore Studies 3. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Veale, T. and Keane, M. T. 1992. Conceptual Scaffolding:
A spatially founded meaning representation for metaphor.
Computational Intelligence 8(3), pp 494–519.
Veale, T., Hao, Y. and Li, G. 2008. Multilingual Harvesting of Cross-Cultural Stereotypes. In proc. of the 46th Ann.
Meeting of the Assoc. of Computational Linguistics.
Whissell, C. 1989. The dictionary of affect in language. In
R. Plutchnik & H. Kellerman (Eds.) Emotion: Theory and
research. New York: Harcourt Brace, 113–131.

References
Fellbaum, C. (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database. MIT Press.
Fishlov, D. 1992. Poetic and Non-Poetic Simile: Structure,
Semantics, Rhetoric. Poetics Today, 14(1), 1–23.
Glucksberg, S. 2001. Understanding figurative language:
From metaphors to idioms. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Grice, H. P. 1978. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. L.

1381

