UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Symmetry in the Semantic Representation of Integers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4t61h88t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Schwartz, Daniel L.
Tsang, Jessica M.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Symmetry in the Semantic Representation of Integers
Jessica M. Tsang (jmtsang@stanford.edu)
Stanford University School of Education, 485 Lasuen Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Daniel L. Schwartz (danls@stanford.edu)
Stanford University School of Education, 485 Lasuen Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
One possibility is that the new structure is carried
symbolically by a set of manipulation rules and categories
(e.g., if two digits are the same absolute amount and one has
a negative sign, then they are symmetric). A recent study by
Varma and Schwartz (2009) suggests that this is not the case
for adults. The authors compared seventh graders to adults
on a number comparison task. Seventh graders showed no
symbolic distance effect when comparing a positive and
negative number. The absence of this robust marker of
analog representation suggests the children used a rule like
“a positive is larger than a negative” to compare the
numbers. On the other hand, adults showed an „inverse‟
distance effect on these problems – they answered far
comparisons slower than near comparisons – indicating that
they had developed a semantic representation of integers.
Given that adults use a semantic representation to operate

Abstract
The integers include more structure than the natural numbers;
for example, they exhibit symmetry about zero. Do adult
mental representations directly encode this increased
structure? In two studies, adults completed a numerical bisection task in which they were presented with two symbolic
integers and were asked to report the digit at the midpoint of
the interval. The reaction times demonstrated a “tuning
curve” such that people were faster when the midpoint or end
point of an interval was close to zero. The results suggest that
the mental representation of negative numbers and zero has
incorporated analog properties to represent the increased
structure of the integers.
Keywords: analog representation; mathematics; bisection;
symmetry; integers

Introduction
The positive integers, or natural numbers, have ready
perceptual referents; for example, six divided by three can
be materialized in the world as six cookies shared between
three people. The structural properties of natural numbers
(e.g., ordinality, cardinality, magnitude) can be gleaned
from applying numbers to physical situations (Griffin, Case,
& Siegler, 1994). This may help explain why people have
an analog representation of natural numbers, as indicated by
the symbolic distance effect (Moyer & Landauer, 1967) and
more recent brain evidence (Piazza, Izard, Pinel, Le Bihan,
& Dehaene, 2004).
In contrast, negative integers are abstract entities that do
not map readily to tangible things; negative three cookies
are hard to imagine, and a negative times a negative is
typically handled symbolically in school curricula.
Historically, negative numbers were considered fictitious
even when effectively used in calculations (Schwarz, Kohn,
& Resnick, 1993/1994). Schwarz, et al. (1993/1994) say,
“It was only in the 19th century that negative numbers
emerged as directed magnitudes (e.g., in the domain of
electricity) and that the set of integers was axiomatically
defined in such a way as to give negatives a symmetric
status to that of positives.”
The full set of integers includes greater quantitative
structure than the natural numbers; for example, it includes
zero as an identity; and it is possible for quantities to exhibit
symmetry. How do people represent the increased structure
of integers?

Figure 1: Protocol for bisection task. A) Study 1. B) Study 2.

323

with integers, it is possible that this representation directly
encodes the increased structure of the integer system; for
example, people may have developed an analog
representation that encodes symmetry level as well as
magnitude. This would be an interesting finding because
people do not directly experience negative objects.
To examine this possibility, we focused on the two
inherent structures of negative integers: (a) symmetry about
zero and (b) identity for addition/subtraction, which also
involves zero. Subjects completed two number bisection
tasks (Figure 1). They saw two symbolic digits on a
computer screen, and orally reported the midpoint (Study 1)
or verified a third digit as the midpoint (Study 2). For
example, given -4 and 2, they might report -1. If people
solve these problems by applying a set of rules, then we
would expect them to take about the same amount of time
regardless of the proximity of the values to symmetry or
identity. For example, -8 and 2 should take the same time
as -4 and 6. Alternatively, if people have and use symmetry
built into their representations of the integers, then we
would expect them to solve problems closer to symmetric (4 and 6) more quickly, because they can leverage relative
symmetry about zero to find the midpoint. The same
predictions apply for identity. By a rule-based account, -11
and 1 should require the same amount of time as -9 and 3.
By a semantic account, -11 and 1 should be solved faster,
because the 1 is closer to the identity of zero.
Both accounts can predict extremely fast reaction times
for perfectly symmetric problems (-6 and 6) and perfect
identity problems (0 and 12) (see Figure 2, top and bottom
sections). The differential predictions involve how response
times vary when the problem diverges from perfect

symmetry and identity. The semantic account predicts a
reaction time “tuning curve,” indicative of analog processes.
The symbolic account does not. By the semantic account,
as intervals diverge from symmetry about zero people
should slow down (e.g. -3 and 9 is slower than -5 and 4). As
the interval moves toward the identity people should speed
up again (e.g. -1 and 11 is faster than -3 and 9). Moreover,
people should only exhibit symmetry effects for mixed
pairs, in other words intervals bounded by a positive and
negative integer.
Figure 2, top and middle, shows the Symmetry-toAnchored Scale (STAS), which quantifies the degree to
which a problem pair diverges from symmetry and identity.
Identity pairs are termed “anchored” in the scale, because
the 0 presumably anchors the problem solving.
Symmetric pairs (6 and -6) receive the value of -1, while
anchored pairs (0 and 12) receive the value 1. STAS values
for non-symmetric and non-anchored pairs were computed
as follows:

Where:
I = size of the interval bounded by the stimulus pair
M = midpoint of the stimulus pair
For mixed pairs, STAS scores are based on the
proportion of the interval‟s size represented by double the
magnitude of the interval‟s midpoint. These proportions are
shifted by a constant of -1 and stretched by a factor of 2 so
that they span from -1 to 1. Since STAS scores are based on
proportion of interval size rather than absolute numerical
distance, the STAS allows intervals of
different sizes to be collapsed onto the
same -1 to 1 metric.
For non-mixed interval pairs (i.e.
bounded by two positive or two
negative
integers),
rather
than
quantifying
the
distance
from
symmetric and anchored, the STAS
defines an interval‟s distance from
anchored and “skip-counted” (e.g. the
pair 5 and 15).

Study 1: Oral Response

Figure 2: Symmetric-to-Anchored Scale (STAS) values and RT predictions for
intervals of size 12 (those that span zero only). Top: The interval pairs.
Symmetric pairs have midpoint 0. Anchored pairs have endpoint of 0. Middle:
Corresponding STAS values. Zero denotes intervals maximally far from either
symmetric or anchored. Bottom: Response time predictions according to the
semantic and symbolic accounts of integer processing.

324

In study 1, subjects completed an oralresponse
interval-bisection
task
including purely positive, purely
negative, and mixed problems, as well
as problems that involve zero as an
interval endpoint (“anchored”) or
midpoint (“symmetric”).

Figure 3: Study 1 response times by STAS value and problem type. Fitted lines come from multiple regressions on the
group means at each response point. Lines were estimated for each problem type separately, and are curvilinear if the squared
regressor in the model was significant at p<0.15. Error bars represent 1 s.e. between-subjects.
„unbold‟ for 2s as feedback that a response was recorded.
During these two seconds, the experimenter entered the
subject‟s response on a keyboard. A blank screen appeared
for 500ms between items.
Subjects completed 8 blocks of 22 items balanced to each
contain 6 positive, 6 negative, 7 mixed, 2 anchored, and 1
symmetric pair. Presentation order was randomized
individually for each subject within each block.
Prior to the recorded trials, subjects completed 20 practice
problems and any confusion was clarified.

Methods
Participants Sixteen adults from a private university
participated (8 female, mean age=30.1 years, SD=8.4).
Stimuli There were 88 unique pairs of integers. The integers
ranged from -15 to 15. Each integer appeared between 8 and
16 times, with the numbers closer to 0 repeated more often
than those farther from 0. Each pair defined an interval and
there were four intervals sizes: 50 pairs of interval size 6; 46
pairs of size 8; 42 pairs of size 10; and, 38 pairs of size 12.
Pairs were classified into five types: 48 pure positive (e.g. 2,
10), 48 pure negative (e.g. -2, -10), 56 mixed (e.g. 2, -10),
16 anchored (e.g. 10, 0), and 8 symmetric (e.g. -3, 3). Each
pair was presented twice, flipping the order of the digits, for
a total of 176 pairs.

Results
Figure 3 shows that perfectly anchored and symmetric trials
were solved extremely fast, affirming the privileged status
of zero in people‟s representation of the integers. Of greater
interest, mixed trials varied systematically according to their
position on the STAS such that problems furthest from
symmetry and anchored were solved the slowest. Pure
positive and negative problems did not show strong
evidence of a tuning curve.

Procedures Subjects completed the task individually. Digits
were presented on a computer display in 18 pt Arial bold on
a white background. Subjects sat approximately 24 inches
away from the screen and held a small microphone.
Subjects were told, “You will see two numbers pop up
consecutively. Your task is to figure out the number halfway
between them, and say the answer into the microphone.
Answer as fast as you can.” Additionally, before each
block, subjects were instructed, “Please give an approximate
answer. Do not calculate.”
Figure 1a shows the sequence for each problem. The first
number appeared in the middle of the screen for 1s, and then
the second number appeared for up to 7s. As soon as the
subject spoke, the second number changed font style to

Data Preparation Items tainted by microphone malfunction
or premature subject response (e.g. “umm”) were trimmed,
as were outlier response times (> 3SD off the subject‟s
mean) and inaccurate responses (farther than 1/4 th the total
interval size from the correct answer). This removed 17% of
the trials (range of 9% to 27%).
Anchored and Symmetric A MANOVA on the five levels
of problem type revealed a significant effect; F(2,14) =
29.70, p<.01. Two planned comparisons showed that

325

anchored and symmetric items were faster than other
problem types; F(1,15) = 55.98, p<.01. Anchored and
symmetric types were not significantly different.

representation. This was provided by the promissory
evidence that the ease of problems was determined by
proximity to the symmetric and anchored pairs, even when
zero was not a midpoint or endpoint. Finally, the pure
positive and negative pairs did not exhibit strong evidence
of a tuning curve. This shows that the tuning curve
disappears when zero is not a possible symmetry point.
At the same time, the data are muddy. One problem in the
method was the oral response. For example, subjects may
have started to say “negative” as a way to buy time while
finding the mid-point. This would distort the true estimate
of processing time. A second problem was that some
subjects may have calculated rather than approximated the
mid-point, despite instructions to the contrary. If so,
calculating might contaminate results, as it is theorized to be
a verbally mediated process reliant on memorized facts
rather than a representation of quantity (Dehaene, Spelke,
Pinel, & Stanescu., 1999). Finally, some of the intervals
were too small to find evidence of a response curve. Study 2
addresses these concerns.

STAS Position To demonstrate the tuning curve for the
mixed items statistically, perfectly anchored and symmetric
pairs were removed, and the mixed items were grouped into
three bins according to their position on the STAS. The first
bin had almost symmetric (aSymm) items (STAS of -.99
through -.33). The second bin (Far) contained items far from
symmetry and anchoring (STAS of -.33 to .33). The third
bin held almost anchored (aAnch) items (STAS of .33 to
.99). A MANOVA crossed three within-subjects factors:
STAS Position (3 bins), interval Size (sizes 8, 10, 12 – size
six was removed because it did not have three STAS bins),
and Bias (positive versus negative midpoint, shown as leftright of 0 respectively in Figure 3).
There were no significant effects at the p<0.05 level.
Using a more lenient threshold of p<0.10, the analysis
showed a main effect of STAS Position; F(2,7) = 3.35. Posthoc contrasts showed that the Far Position was slower than
other two; F(1,8) = 6.22, p<.05, indicating that people had
more difficulty as problems were moved away from
anchored and symmetric. Interval Size also exerted an effect
on reaction time; F(2,7) = 4.31, p<.10, such that size 8 was
faster than size 12; p<.05, Bonferroni corrected. There was
an interaction between Size and Position; F(4,5) = 4.40,
p<.10, such that for sizes 10 and 12, the Far was slower than
aSymm and aAnch, but for size 8, the aSymm position was
slower than Far; F(1,8) = 17.81, p<.01. There was no effect
of Bias.

Study 2: Button-Press Response
In study 2, subjects responded via button press rather than
vocalization (Fig. 1b). Also, subjects were randomly
assigned to either an approximate or calculate condition.

Methods
Participants Forty right-handed, private university
students participated (20 female, mean age = 22.11 years,
SD = 5.65).
Stimuli The stimulus set consisted of 75 unique pairs,
presented twice for a total of 150 pairs. Within-pair interval
sizes were 10 (42 items), 12 (50 items), and 14 (58 items).
Numbers ranged from -21 to 21. Across the entire stimulus
set, each integer appeared between 2 and 12 times, with
integers at the middle of the range appearing more often
than those at the ends. There were 36 positive and 36
negative pairs, 60 mixed pairs, 6 symmetric pairs, and 12
anchored pairs. For each trial, there was also a target integer
that subjects had to judge as close to the midpoint of the
stimulus pair or not. Target numbers were either: the
midpoint (correct), or the midpoint plus/minus ~1/4 the
interval size (to be rejected as implausible).

Pure v. Mixed If the tuning curve involves symmetry about
zero, the pure positive and pure negative bisections should
not exhibit a tuning curve. A 3 x 2 x 3 MANOVA of STAS
Position, Purity (mixed versus positive/negative, or “pure”,
items), and interval Size showed a main effect of Purity;
F(1,15) = 5.18, p<.05, such that pure items were faster than
mixed. There was also a main effect of Size; F(2,14) = 7.94,
p<.01, such that size 8 was faster than size 12; p<.01,
Bonferroni corrected. The Position factor did not show a
significant main effect, but did interact marginally with
Purity; F(2,14) = 2.87, p<.10 -- for mixed trials, response
times were relatively slower for Far than aAnch, while for
pure trials, Far was no different from aAnch; F(1,15) = 6.10,
p<.05.

Procedures There were two conditions. In the Calculate
condition, subjects received the following instructions on
the screen and verbally: “Two numbers will appear. As fast
as you can, calculate the number halfway between them. A
formula you can use is (a+b)/2.” In the Approximate
condition, the instructions were: “Two numbers will appear.
As fast as you can, think of a number approximately
halfway between them. Do this without calculating.”

Discussion
The results align with the hypothesis that adults have
developed a mental representation that semantically encodes
the symmetry and identity structures available in the
integers. People were faster to respond to anchored and
symmetric problems than all other types, showing the
privileged status of zero in simple computation. This,
however, does not demonstrate a semantic or analog

326

Figure 4: Study 2 response times by STAS value and problem type. X markers and solid fitted lines represent data from the
Approximate condition. Diamond markers and broken fitted lines represent data from the Calculate condition. Fitted lines
come from multiple regressions on the group means at each response point. Lines were estimated for each group and problem
type separately, and are curvilinear if the squared regressor in the model was significant at p<0.15. Error bars represent 1 s.e.
between-subjects.
The experiment consisted of six blocks of 25 items, with
item type balanced between blocks. Subjects sat ~24” from
the screen of a Lenovo T400 laptop with 18 pt bold white
Arial font on black background.
Subjects controlled the pace of the experiment. For each
item (Figure 1b), a fixation cross appeared for 1s, followed
by a 400ms blank. Then a stimulus pair appeared and
subjects had up to 5s to press the spacebar indicating they
had a midpoint in mind. The target appeared immediately
after the spacebar depression and subjects had up to 1,250
ms to press Y or N as to whether they thought the target was
the actual midpoint. Subjects responded with their right
hand only. Y and N buttons were denoted with sticky note
labels on the „l‟ or „‟‟ (apostrophe) keys on the keyboard.
Before the experiment the subjects completed two
practice runs of 12 trials. The experimenter asked the
subjects their strategy periodically during the practice runs
to ensure they followed the task instructions.

Calculate) as a between-subjects factor and Problem Type
as a within-subjects factor showed a significant main effect
of Problem Type; F(2,37) = 53.99, p<.01, so that anchored
and symmetric problems were significantly faster from the
others; F(1,38) = 93.55, p<.01. Symmetric problems were
marginally faster than anchored problems in this study;
F(1,38) = 4.00, p<.10. There was also an interaction by
condition such that the Approximate group was slower on
the problems that did not involve zero than the Calculate
group; F(2,37) = 3.56, p<.05. Evidently, symmetric and
anchored answers were retrieved before the approximation
process is completed.
STAS Position A MANOVA used the within-subjects
factors of STAS Position (aSymm, Far, aAnch), interval
Size (10, 12, 14), and Bias (positive, negative), with Group
as a between-subjects factor. There was a main effect of
STAS Position; F(2,26) = 12.55, p<.01, such that the Far
position was slower than aSymm or aAnch F(1,27) = 25.25,
p<.01. Thus, the top of each “arch” in the data was
significantly higher than the bottoms.
There was also a main effect of Bias; F(1,27) = 28.96,
p<.01, such that negative bias problems were slower than
the positive bias problems. The Group and Size main effects
were not statistically significant.
Importantly, there was a significant interaction between
Group and Position; F(2,26) = 3.39, p<.05. Planned

Results and Discussion
Figure 4 shows strong evidence of a tuning curve for mixed
trials. In contrast, pure trials show little evidence of the telltale arches.
Anchored and Symmetric Outliers were removed as
before, with an average of 18% trimmed trials (range 3% to
59%). A 2 x 5 MANOVA with Group (Approximate,

327

comparisons showed that the difference between the Far and
aSymm/aAnch items was greater for the Approximate group
than for the Calculate group; F(1,27) = 4.24, p<.05. In other
words, the response time “arch” pattern was flatter for the
Calculate group. The interaction between Group and
Position indicates that subjects in the Calculate and
Approximate groups were using different mental processes
to complete the problems; thus, we successfully controlled
the participants‟ strategies through task instructions. It also
shows that when people are encouraged to calculate the
answer symbolically, the tuning curve mitigates, as would
be anticipated if people were not relying as much on a
semantic representation.

that one of the digits was 0, so they simply retrieved the
well-learned “half-of” facts. In both cases, the structure of
the symbol system privileges zero in finding symmetry or
half-way points. Over time, it is possible that these symbolic
affordances recruit perceptual processes associated with
symmetry. For instance, the symbolic structure makes zero a
special point, and people may rely on this point when
working with number lines or other extended external
representations. Given zero, people can then apply
perceptual process associated with finding midpoints, and
with practice, these processes may be encoded directly into
the internal representation of integers.
In conclusion, we found support for the assertion that the
adult representation of integers relies on zero as a structural
pillar that aids operations with the set of integers. This may
not be a special feature of the quantity zero per se, but rather
it may be that zero is an indicator of symmetry in the integer
system. Further understanding of how people recruit new
computational structures for handling integers will benefit
from investigations into the neural underpinnings of the
presently observed effect and behavioral investigations of
other features of the representation.

Pure v. Mixed A 2 x 3 x 2 MANOVA crossed Purity,
STAS Position, and Group. Of particular relevance, there
was a significant interaction between Purity and Position;
F(2,37) = 15.13, p<.01. For pure positive and pure negative
problems in both groups, response times increased with the
absolute magnitude of the problem rather than showing the
arching pattern of the mixed problems. This suggests that
there is something particular about zero that privileges it in
the integer representation.

Acknowledgments
General Discussion

We thank Vinod Menon and Sashank Varma. Funded by
NSF 0814768 and a Stanford Interdisciplinary Graduate
Fellowship to J.T. The conclusions are ours and do not
necessarily reflect those of the granting agencies.

In an integer bisection task, subjects were very fast to
respond to intervals bounded or bisected by zero.
Furthermore, response times varied systematically as a
function of proximity to these fast zero problems.
The results indicate that zero is a salient feature in the
adult mental representation of integers. The behavioral
patterns fit an interpretation of zero as a cognitive reference
point (Rosch, 1975) that subjects use as a jumping-off
station for interpreting or manipulating surrounding
integers. The fact that the reference point also facilitates
symmetry judgment is not entailed by Rosch‟s theory. We
propose that adults have developed a semantic, analog
representation of integers that directly codes symmetry.
An alternative explanation might be that the results are
due to differential experience with the problems presented.
However, it is hard to make the case that people are faster to
bisect -7 and 5 than -8 and 4 because of more experience
with -7 and 5. Moreover, if over-learning were the source of
the effect, then easy skip-counting problems like 5 and 15
should have also exhibited exceptionally fast responses,
which they did not.
Our leading hypothesis is that these adults developed an
analog representation of the integers that incorporated
important structures of the integer system. It is interesting to
consider how this representation of abstract quantities
develops. The extremely fast responses for the anchored and
symmetric problems may provide one clue. For the
symmetric problems, people probably capitalized on a
feature of the integer symbol system. They noted that the
two digits were identical except for the difference of the
negative sign, and they quickly retrieved that the answer has
to be 0. Similarly for the anchored problems, people saw

References
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E. S., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R., &
Tsivkin, S. (1999). Sources of mathematical thinking:
Behavioral and brain-imaging evidence. Science,
284(5416), 970-974.
Griffin, S. A., Case, R., & Siegler, R. S. (1994). Rightstart:
Providing the central conceptual prerequisites for first
formal learning of arithmetic to students at risk for school
failure. In K. McGilly (Ed.), Classroom lessons:
Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp.
25–49). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Moyer, R. S., & Landauer, T. K. (1967). Time required for
judgements of numerical inequality. Nature, 215(5109),
1519.
Piazza, M., Izard, V., Pinel, P., Le Bihan, D., & Dehaene, S.
(2004). Tuning curves for approximate numerosity in the
human intraparietal sulcus. Neuron, 44(3), 547-555.
Rosch, E. (1975). Cognitive reference points. Cognitive
Psychology, 7(4), 532-547.
Schwarz, B. B., Kohn, A. S., & Resnick, L. B. (1994).
Positives about negatives: A case study of an intermediate
model for signed numbers. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 3(1), 37-92.
Varma, S., & Schwartz, D. L. (2009). The Mental
Representation of Integers: A Symbolic to PerceptualMagnitude Shift. Under revision, Stanford University.

328

