UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Synthetic Brain Imaging of English Past Tense Inflection

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5d13r54m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Ruh, Nicolas
Westermann, Gert

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Synthetic Brain Imaging of English Past Tense Inflection
Gert Westermann (gwestermann@brookes.ac.uk)
Nicolas Ruh (nruh@brookes.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Oxford Brookes University
Oxford OX3 0BP, UK

Abstract
Brain imaging studies of English past tense inflection have
found dissociations between regular and irregular verbs, but
no coherent picture has emerged to explain how these
dissociations arise. Here we use synthetic brain imaging on a
neural network model to provide a mechanistic account of
how regional dissociations between regular and irregular
processing in adults can emerge in a single mechanism
system with experience-dependent structural development.
We show that these dissociations arise from a combination of
different statistical properties of verbs relating to frequency,
relationships to other verbs, and phonological complexity.
The model generates predictions about the patterning of
active brain regions for different verbs that can be tested in
future brain imaging studies.
Keywords: English past tense; verb inflection; connectionist
modeling, synthetic brain imaging, neuroconstructivism

Introduction
The question of how verb inflections, particularly the
English past tense, are represented and processed in the
brain has been the subject of intense debate over the past 20
years. This is because the past tense contains regular forms
(e.g., look-looked) that seem to obey a linguistic mental rule,
and irregular forms (e.g., see-saw) that show properties of
associative storage. One view, the Dual-Mechanism or
Words-and-Rules Theory (e.g., Pinker, 1999; Pinker &
Ullman, 2002) holds that the apparent processing
differences between regular and irregular forms are indeed
caused by qualitatively different underlying mechanisms: a
rule for regulars, and associative storage for irregulars.
Another view, closely linked to connectionist approaches to
cognitive processing, argues that all forms are processed in
a single associative system and that apparent dissociations
between regulars and irregulars emerge on the basis of
different statistical properties of verbs that affect their ease
of processing (e.g., frequency, phonological complexity,
number of similar verbs with a similar past tense (friends,
e.g., sing and ring), number of similar verbs with a different
past tense (enemies, e.g., sing and bring)) or on the basis of
different reliance on semantic vs. phonological factors
(Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1999; McClelland & Patterson,
2002; Seidenberg & Arnoldussen, 2003; Westermann,
1998). A large amount of empirical and computational work
has aimed to provide evidence for either view. One
methodology that has been used in several studies is brain
imaging with positron emission topography (PET),

functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging
(fMRI),
magnetoencephalography (MEG) and evoked response
potentials (ERP). These studies have found differences in
brain activation patterns when participants inflect regular
and irregular verbs, respectively, leading some researchers
to claim that these data provide support for a dual
mechanism system, with the rule component and the
associative mental lexicon located in different brain regions
(Dhond et al., 2003; Jaeger et al., 1996; Lavric et al., 2001).
For example, in a seminal study by Jaeger et al. (1996)
using PET, participants were asked to generate past tense
forms of visually presented monosyllabic verb stems.
Results showed that although many brain regions were
activated by all verbs, production of regulars selectively
activated left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and left anterior
cingulate cortex. Irregulars led to higher overall activation
and involved occipital visual processing areas. These
systematic differences between both verb types were
interpreted by the authors as strong evidence for the dualmechanism account of inflection.
In another study, Dhond et al. (2003) asked participants to
covertly generate past tense forms of visually presented verb
stems while imaging their brains using MEG. Dhond et al.
also found that generation of regulars and irregulars
activated many areas in common, but that processing of
regulars led to greater activation in left inferior prefrontal
areas (Broca’s area), and processing of irregulars
preferentially activated left occipitotemporal cortex as well
as right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. These results were
interpreted as indicating that regulars activated rule-based
grammar regions and irregulars activated areas involved in
associative retrieval of forms, corresponding directly to the
dual-mechanism theory.
However, the results of these and other studies have been
controversial. One problem is that specific methodological
choices can strongly affect results. For example, because of
the low temporal resolution of PET, Jaeger et al. (1996)
used a block design in which all regular verbs and all
irregular verbs were presented together. However, this
design introduces the confound that participants could
develop strategies for regular but not for irregular verbs,
suggesting that differences between both verb types should
be found independently of the nature of the underlying
processing mechanisms (Seidenberg & Hoeffner, 1998).
Several more recent imaging studies have investigated the
possibility that observed activation differences between
regular and irregular verbs are due to statistical factors of

1364

verbs and not to separate underlying mechanisms. These
studies have attempted to carefully control a number of
statistical factors within their experimental stimuli. In an
fMRI study of past tense production in which verbs were
matched for past tense log frequency, friend-enemy ratio,
stem letter-length, and stem and past tense syllable-length,
Desai et al. (2006) found widespread overlapping activation
for all verbs. Greater activation for irregulars compared to
regulars was found in several regions in inferior frontal,
precentral and parietal cortex bilaterally. Greater activation
for regulars was found in the left dorsal superior temporal
gyrus, involving the primary auditory areas and the planum
temporale. For a subset of these verbs that were matched for
phonological complexity of the past tense form no regions
were activated more for regulars than for irregulars. Desai et
al. explained the widespread activation of brain regions for
irregular verbs with higher demands on attention, working
memory and response selection for generating the past tense
forms of these verbs. The fact that both regular and irregular
production activated Broca’s area was seen as contradicting
the dual-mechanism account which assumes that regular,
but nor irregular forms are generated through a mental
grammar instantiated in Broca’s area (Ullman et al., 1997).
Greater activation in auditory areas for regulars was
explained with regular forms being phonologically more
complex than irregular forms. Therefore, despite double
dissociations between regular and irregular verbs these
results were interpreted as evidence for a single-mechanism
view of inflection processing.
In a similar study Joanisse & Seidenberg (2005) presented
fMRI data from covert past tense production experiments.
Like all previous studies they found that production of
regulars and irregulars activated common areas in both
hemispheres. Regulars, as well as irregulars that are
phonologically similar to regulars (e.g., burnt, slept),
additionally activated the inferior frontal gyrus bilaterally.
Overall, irregulars did not activate any area more than
regulars. These results were also interpreted as conforming
to a single-mechanism view of inflection processing.
In summary, previous imaging studies, despite each
reporting dissociations between regular and irregular verbs,
have yielded inconclusive results. Not only differed the
activated regions for specific verb types greatly between
studies, but one study (Joanisse & Seidenberg, 2005)
reported activation of distinct brain regions for regulars but
not irregulars, another (Desai et al., 2006) reported the
opposite result with distinct regions active for irregulars but
not for regulars when verbs were matched phonologically,
and two other studies (Dhond et al., 2003; Jaeger et al.,
1996) reported a double dissociation with some regions
more active for regulars and others more active for
irregulars. One possible explanation for this inconsistency
of results is that indeed statistical factors and not
grammatical class determine how a verb is processed, and
that these factors differed between the specific verbs used in
the described studies. In each study regular and irregular
verbs were matched on certain factors, but the choice of

factors had little theoretical foundation and differed greatly
between studies. Jaeger et al. (1996) matched stem and past
tense frequencies (albeit based on a word list that did not
distinguish between nouns and verbs and therefore
overestimated regular stem frequencies), Lavric et al. (2001)
and Dhond et al. (2003) matched for word frequency and
letter-length, and Joanisse & Seidenberg (2005) matched for
log past tense frequency, imageability, and concreteness.
The most careful matching was done in Desai et al.’s (2006)
study where past tense log frequency, friend-enemy ratio,
stem letter-length, and stem and past tense syllable-length
were taken into account, and a sub-group was further
matched on the number of phonemes and past tense syllable
structure. However, which of these factors affect processing
in which way remains an open question. It is therefore also
unclear how a processing system that is sensitive to the
statistical properties of verbs can give rise to the observed
dissociations in the localization of active brain regions.
One approach to answering these questions is to consider
how the adult language processing system is shaped through
development. Adult psycholinguistics traditionally pays
little heed to the mechanisms of language development
although a better understanding of developmental
trajectories could inform the nature of the adult processing
system. In this paper we use computational modeling to ask
how the adult inflection processing system emerges through
interactions
between
experience-dependent
brain
development and experience with verbs that have specific
statistical properties. We then use synthetic brain imaging to
show that such a system displays visible processing
differences between regular and irregular verbs without
relying on built-in dissociable processing modules. Finally,
we investigate which statistical properties account for the
observed dissociations, generating predictions for
behavioral and imaging studies.
The computational model described here is based on the
idea of neuroconstructivist development. The theory of
neuroconstructivism (Mareschal et al., 2007; Westermann et
al., 2007) sees cognitive development as a trajectory shaped
by intrinsic (genes, mechanism of experience-dependent
brain development, principles of neural processing) and
extrinsic (structured environment, social interactions)
constraints. The adult state is a point (or more precisely, a
region) on this trajectory. Based on this view, in principle a
single processing theory should account for development
and adult processing. This implies that in order to
understand the adult system it is important to understand the
developmental process that has given rise to this system.
The model described here follows the neuroconstructivist
approach and integrates structural changes that mimic, on an
abstract level, the experience-dependent structural
development of cortical regions, allowing for the adaptation
of neural circuits to a specific learning task. This model
aims to provide a mechanistic account of how a singlemechanism processing system that is sensitive to statistical
properties of learned verbs gives rise to dissociations

1365

between regular and irregular verbs
neuroconstructivist developmental process.

through

a

Synthetic Brain Imaging
Synthetic brain imaging (SBI, Arbib et al., 2000) applies the
idea of brain imaging – to compare brain region activation
profiles between different conditions to gain insights into
underlying processing mechanisms – to artificial neural
networks. In a structured neural network different stimuli
will generate activation patterns in different network
components and, like in brain imaging, these patterns can be
compared between conditions. Although SBI is still in
initial stages of exploration, several results have been
reported. Previous applications of this method have shown
differential activation for nouns and verbs in evolved agentbased networks (Cangelosi & Parisi, 2004). In a model of
sentence comprehension (Just, Carpenter, & Varma, 1999)
SBI accounted for fMRI data on brain regions involved in
processing sentences of different complexities.
While in most cases the structure of an artificial neural
network cannot be mapped onto brain structure without
unrealistic assumptions about the match between
connectionist models and brain development and
processing, using structured neural networks to generate
synthetic brain imaging nevertheless can be highly useful
for theory building and generating predictions for real brain
imaging. First, in neural networks, the experimenter has full
control over the studied process. The large number of brain
areas activated in inflection production tasks suggests that,
even when inflecting a stem is contrasted directly with
reading the stem, it is difficult to find a baseline condition
that differs from the experimental condition only in the
inflection process. In a model of verb inflection that takes a
verb stem as input and produces its past tense as output,
there is nothing but this process. Second, a model allows for
the precise analysis of what factors affect differential
activation of network components in a much larger set of
verbs than those typically used in experiments. Third, the
language experience that has shaped a model to reach its
final structure is precisely known. This allows for a more
precise measurement of the statistical factors that affect
processing.

The Model
A prototype of the model described here has previously
been used to model acquisition and adult processing of the
English past tense (Westermann, 1998, 2000) and the
German participle (Ruh & Westermann, 2008) where it
displayed a realistic acquisition profile as well as a pattern
of non-word generalization that was comparable to adults.
The model incorporates the idea that a theoretical account of
past tense processing should encompass both acquisition
and adult performance. The model is based on the idea of
experience-dependent brain development, incorporating
constructive and regressive structural changes in the
learning process. The model starts out with a minimal
architecture (Fig. 1) with predominantly direct connections

between input and output. Hidden layer units have a
Gaussian rather than the more common sigmoidal activation
function, thus forming a receptive field (rf) for a region of
the input space. All input vectors are positioned in this space
according to their phonetic feature values (see below) and a
hidden unit will become maximally activated if its position
(i.e., the center of its rf) coincides closely with that of the
current input. For each input pattern, only the most active
hidden unit contributes to the model’s output.
meant (‘mEnt)
Output Layer
(phonological
template)

Hidden-Output
Connections

Input-Output
Connections

Hidden Layer with
Gaussian Units
(receptive fields)

Input Layer
(phonological
template)

mean (‘min)
Figure 1: The past tense model
The task of the model was to generate the past tense form
of a verb on the basis of its stem. The model learned
through weight adaptation after each presented pattern
(sweep). The direct connections from the input to the output
layer and the connections from the developing hidden layer
to the output layer were adapted with the perceptron
learning rule (learning rates 0.005 and 0.05, respectively).
The positions of the hidden layer receptive fields were
adjusted so that the receptive field of a unit moved a
fraction towards the position of the current input (learning
rate 0.001). The size of the most active hidden unit receptive
field was also adjusted depending on the distance between
its center and the current input, leading to an increase in size
when the receptive field was activated by inputs that fell
outside its center. Each hidden unit kept a running counter
of its contribution to the out output error.
Structural change in the model occurred when the current
structure no longer allowed for improvement in
performance. When the averaged network error over 10,000
sweeps was no lower than for the average 30,000 sweeps
previously, three new hidden unit receptive fields were
inserted at random positions around the existing hidden unit
with the highest contribution to output error, and their
weights to the output layer were initialized randomly. In this
process, a hidden unit whose activation leads to a high
output error will become the preferred location for the
insertion of new units. Because a high local error is usually
caused by one hidden unit being responsible for too many
input patterns with conflicting input-output transformations,
the insertion of additional resources led to a more finegrained covering of the input space in those areas where
similar sounding verbs have different past tense forms.
Regressive events in the model were implemented by

1366

pruning hidden units that were not activated for 30,000
sweeps.
This experience-dependent structural development led to
a final network structure that was adapted to the specific
task of processing past tense inflections of a set of verbs
with the given statistical distribution of properties
experienced during learning. The assumption here is that the
brain likewise adapts to process the past tense on the basis
of the specific experiences with verbs.

pathway was computed as the absolute activation reaching
the output units through the hidden-output connections.

Corpus
For the training corpus, all mono- and bisyllabic verbs with
an unambiguous past tense inflection and a past tense
frequency of at least 1 per million entries were extracted
from the English part of the CELEX database (Baayen,
Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993). The resulting set had 1,271
verb types out of which 111 (8.73% types, 46.00% tokens)
were irregular. During training, for every sweep a new verb
was drawn from this corpus on the basis of past tense
frequencies.
Verbs were represented in the following way: each
syllable was fitted into a slotted xCCCVCC template with
consonants aligned to the outer boundaries of the syllable to
generate a maximum overlap for the initial and final
consonants. A single slot (x) was used to indicate the
presence or absence of stress on this syllable. Individual
phonemes were encoded by phonetic feature vectors,
following the binary version of the PatPho coding scheme
(Li & MacWhinney, 2002) which requires 6 features per
vowel and 7 features per consonant. The presence or
absence of a feature was encoded by a value of 1 or -1,
respectively, and all features for an empty phoneme slot
were set to 0. The stem of a verb was encoded by 84 bits.
The past tense form had an additional VC suffix (13 bits).

Performance
Ten different networks were trained for 2m sweeps each.
All models reached 100% correct performance, on average
after 1,247,800 sweeps (s.d.=272). The average final
number of hidden units was 424.2 (s.d.=19.0), and receptive
field sizes ranged from 4.0 to 13.4 (mean=5.68, s.d=2.2).

Synthetic Brain Imaging
Synthetic brain imaging in the models was performed by
measuring for each verb the activation flowing through the
direct input-output and the hidden-output pathways. It was
assumed that the corresponding pathways in the brain would
be spatially separated so that in brain imaging, activation
differences between them could be observed. Activation in
the direct input-output pathway was computed as the
summed absolute activation reaching the output units
through these direct connections (i.e.,   woi ai where o
o
i
are output units, i input units, woi the weight of the
connection between input unit i and output unit o, and ai the
activation of input unit i). Likewise, activation in the hidden

Figure 2: Development of the activation profiles of both
network pathways by regular and irregular verbs. All results
are averaged over 10 networks.
Figure 2 shows the developmental profile for the
activation of each network pathway by regular and irregular
verbs. In relation to irregular verbs regulars activated the
direct pathway more, and irregulars showed more activation
than regulars in the indirect pathway. This double
dissociation between regular and irregular verbs was
apparent early in development but became stronger as the
model reached its adult state with a fully developed hidden
layer and tuned connection patterns. The fact that a double
dissociation in regional activation between regular and
irregular verbs emerges in the model on the basis of a single
associative mechanism undermines the argument put
forward in defense of the dual-mechanism view that
differential activation of brain regions for both verb types
indicates an underlying qualitative processing difference
(e.g., Jaeger et al., 1996). This result further provides
evidence for the view that the source of dissociations
between verbs lies in the ease of processing of past tense
forms. In the model the developing hidden layer allocates
processing resources for verbs that are harder to process,
and the fact that this pathway is preferentially activated by
irregular verbs indicates that on average, irregular forms are
harder to process than regulars. The argument that
dissociations between verbs reflect ease of processing has
been made previously with respect to imaging studies
(Seidenberg & Arnoldussen, 2003), but the present model
provides a mechanistic account of how these dissociations
can arise on the basis of a neuroconstructivist
developmental process. Previous approaches have also
based explanations for dissociations on a differential
involvement of semantics in the generation of regular and
irregular forms (e.g., Joanisse & Seidenberg, 1999;
Patterson et al., 2001). Without precluding the possibility
that semantic and irregular processing might be linked and
correlated, the present model shows that it is, however, not
necessary to postulate semantic involvement in the
mechanism of irregular verb inflection to explain observed
processing dissociations.

1367

The model also helps to explain why different imaging
studies have found very different areas being activated for
regular and irregular verbs. The ‘easiness’ view of
processing indicates that different statistical characteristics
of verbs affect ease of processing independent of whether
they are regular or irregular. Synthetic brain imaging offers
the possibility to investigate in detail which factors affect
ease of processing because the model is tested on a large set
of verbs in which factors vary considerably. In order to
investigate which factors affect ease we characterized each
verb along a range of factors that were accessible to the
model and therefore could affect learning: log past
frequency, number of phonological friends, enemies, and
friend/enemy ratio (types and tokens), presence of a stem
final alveolar consonant, and phonological complexity
(defined as number of phonemes per syllable). Two further
factors that were not directly accessible to the network and
whose effects therefore would arise from a combination of
other factors were age of acquisition (AoA) and verb
regularity.
Table 1: Correlations between statistical properties of verbs
and their activation of each network pathway. Age of
acquisition and regularity were not encoded in the training
data. (** indicates p<.01).
Factors
Friends (types)
Friends (tokens)
Enemies (types)
Enemies (tokens)
Friend/enemy ratio (types)
Friend/enemy ratio (tokens)
Past tense frequency
Stem final alveolar
Phonol. Complexity
Age of acquisition
Regularity

Direct path
0.032
-0.024
-0.25**
-0.24**
0.11**
0.14**
-0.17**
-0.3**
0.15**
0.45**
0.21**

Indirect path
-0.095**
-0.025
0.57**
0.41**
-0.46**
-0.37**
0.67**
-0.16**
0.1**
-0.43**
-0.7**

Table 1 shows that most of the considered statistical
factors correlate significantly with activation strengths in
both pathways. The results indicate that low frequency
verbs with an advantageous neighborhood (many friends,
few enemies, more friends than enemies) tend to
differentially activate the direct pathway, while the indirect
pathway gets activated most for frequent verbs with
unfavorable neighborhood. Phonological complexity is
correlated positively with activation in both pathways,
indicating that phonologically complex verbs led to overall
greater activation in the model. Conversely, presence of a
stem-final alveolar is correlated with lower activity across
the network.
Those factors that were accessible to the network during
training (all but AoA and regularity) were entered into a
step-wise regression model to establish their contribution to
the ratio of direct/indirect path activation (see Table 2).

Table 2: Reliable predictors of the relative activation ratio
in a step-wise regression analysis.
Factors
Past tense frequency
Enemies (types)
Friend/enemy ratio (types)
Friend/enemy ratio (tokens)
Phonol. complexity
r2 of regression model

coefficient
-0.2307
-0.1448
0.0732
-0.0636
-0.0209
0.64

p-value
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.05
< 0.001

These results suggest a picture that is slightly more
complex than directly linking activation of the hidden
pathway with low ease of processing: frequent forms as well
have a higher chance of using the indirect pathway because
even small errors accumulated through frequent exposure
will lead to allocation of hidden units. The results also show
that the effect of verb regularity that is taken as evidence for
separate underlying processing mechanisms in the dual
mechanism theory arises from a combination of other
factors. Most regular verbs show a high ratio of
direct/indirect pathway activation. The ten most typical
monosyllabic regular verbs according to this measure are
tax, glaze, wax, bless, wail, draft, flinch, flare, tune, and
wire. The ten least typical monosyllabic regulars, that is,
those regulars with the lowest direct/indirect activation
ratio, are look, need, live, seem, like, try, add, start, pick,
and want. Interestingly, these are verbs that would normally
be regarded as prototypically regular because of their high
frequencies. The synthetic imaging results presented here,
however, suggest that in brain imaging studies these verbs
might actually activate similar regions to irregulars.
The ten irregular verbs with the most typical irregular
activation pattern, that is, a low direct/indirect pathway
activation ratio, are go, say, do, know, think, teach, see,
take, seek, and make. The ten least typical irregulars
according to this measure are thrust, creep, stride, freeze,
stink, lend, shrink, strive, bet, and swear.

Discussion
The model described in this paper, which has previously
been used to account for developmental and adult
behavioral data in past tense inflection, was here extended
to model brain imaging data. The model shows how, based
on a learning process in which experience-dependent brain
development interacts with a structured environment, an
adult processing system emerges that displays dissociations
between regular and irregular verbs on the basis of a single,
associative mechanism. Investigating the underlying causes
for the emergence of these dissociations we have identified
a number of statistical factors that affect in which region of
the network a verb is preferentially processed.
Together these results raise a number of important
points. First, the synthetic brain imaging results presented
here – double dissociations between regulars and irregulars
in regional activation patterns – have in previous brain
imaging studies been taken as prime evidence for a dual-

1368

mechanism view of processing with a grammatical mental
rule for regulars and associative storage for irregulars. The
fact that in the model the same dissociations emerge on the
basis of a single processing mechanism presents strong
evidence against this account and in favor of single
mechanism views of inflection processing. Second, the
brain regions activated in producing the past tenses for
specific verbs are likely to be a complex function of
interacting statistical verb properties, with frequency of the
past tense form, number of different phonological enemies,
friend/enemy ratio and phonological complexity making
significant contributions. Third, these results indicate that
one should not expect typical regulars and typical irregulars
to activate different brain regions. Instead, because both
regular and irregular verbs that are regarded as typical have
a high frequency, they might in fact utilize the same brain
regions. With frequency in the model being one of the main
factors that determine which processing resources are used,
one would expect all frequent verbs to activate overlapping
brain regions, and less frequent verbs showing different
brain activation patterns according to their other statistical
properties. It is therefore not advisable to match a small set
of regular and irregular verbs on frequency and expect
dissociations between them to become visible in imaging
studies. Fourth, these results indicate that verbs might
dissociate differently depending on experimental paradigm.
Added processing resources are allocated both for frequent
verbs and for verbs that are hard to process. Therefore, in
imaging studies, frequent and hard verbs might activate the
same brain regions. In contrast, in behavioral paradigms
such as lexical decision tasks frequent and hard verbs might
dissociate because interactions between processing regions
can differ with specific task demands even when the same
regions are involved in processing both. Computational
modeling can be used to investigate these questions further.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ESRC grant RES-061-23-0129
to Gert Westermann.

References
Arbib, MA, Billard, A, M., I, & E., O (2000). Synthetic brain
imaging: grasping, mirror neurons and imitation. Neural
Networks, 13, 975-997.
Baayen, H, Piepenbrock, R, & van Rijn, H. (1993). The CELEX
Lexical Database.
Cangelosi, A, & Parisi, D (2004). The processing of verbs and
nouns in neural networks: Insights from synthetic brain imaging.
Brain and Language, 89, 401-408.
Desai, R, Conant, LL, Waldron, E, & Binder, JR (2006). FMRI of
past tense processing: The effects of phonological complexity
and task difficulty. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 278297.
Dhond, RP, Marinkovic, K, Dale, AM, Witzel, T, & Halgren, E
(2003). Spatiotemporal maps of past-tense verb inflection.
Neuroimage, 19, 91-100.
Jaeger, JJ, Lockwood, AH, Kemmerer, DL, VanValin, RD,
Murphy, BW, & Khalak, HG (1996). Positron Emission

Tomographic Study of Regular and Irregular Verb Morphology
in English. Language, 72, 451-497.
Joanisse, MF, & Seidenberg, MS (1999). Impairments in verb
morphology after brain injury: A connectionist model.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 96, 7592-7597.
Joanisse, MF, & Seidenberg, MS (2005). Imaging the past: Neural
activation in frontal and temporal regions during regular and
irregular past-tense processing. Cognitive Affective &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 282-296.
Just, MA, Carpenter, PA, & Varma, S (1999). Computational
modeling of high-level cognition and brain function. Human
Brain Mapping, 8, 128-136.
Lavric, A, Pizzagalli, D, Forstmeier, S, & Rippon, G (2001). A
double-dissociation of English past-tense production revealed by
event-related potentials and low-resolution electromagnetic
tomography (LORETA). Clinical Neurophysiology, 112, 18331849.
Li, P, & MacWhinney, B (2002). PatPho: A phonological pattern
generator for neural networks. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 34, 408-415.
Mareschal, D, Johnson, MH, Sirois, S, Spratling, MW, Thomas,
M, & Westermann, G (2007). Neuroconstructivism: How the
Brain Constructs Cognition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
McClelland, JL, & Patterson, K (2002). Rules or connections in
past-tense inflections: what does the evidence rule out? Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 465-472.
Patterson, K, Lambon Ralph, MA, Hodges, JR, & McClelland, JL
(2001). Deficits in irregular past-tense verb morphology
associated
with
degraded
semantic
knowledge.
Neuropsychologia, 39, 709-724.
Pinker, S (1999). Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language.
New York: Basic Books.
Pinker, S, & Ullman, MT (2002). The past and future of the past
tense. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 456-463.
Ruh, N, & Westermann, G (2008). A single-mechanism dual-route
model of German verb inflection. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society.
Seidenberg, MS, & Arnoldussen, A (2003). The brain makes a
distinction between hard and easy stimuli: Comments on Beretta
et al. Brain and Language, 85, 527-530.
Seidenberg, MS, & Hoeffner, JH (1998). Evaluating Behavioral
and Neuroimaging Data on Past Tense Processing. Language,
74, 104-122.
Ullman, MT, Corkin, S, Coppola, M, Hickok, G, Growdon, JH,
Koroshetz, WJ, & Pinker, S (1997). A neural dissociation within
language: Evidence that the mental dictionary is part of
declarative memory, and that grammatical rules are processed
by the procedural system. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9,
266-276.
Westermann, G (1998). Emergent modularity and U-shaped
learning in a constructivist neural network learning the English
past tense. In M. A. Gernsbacher & S. J. Derry (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Westermann, G (2000). A constructivist dual-representation model
of verb inflection. In L. R. Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Westermann, G, Mareschal, D, Johnson, MH, Sirois, S, Spratling,
M, & Thomas, M (2007). Neuroconstructivism. Developmental
Science, 10, 75-83.

1369

