UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Systematicity and arbitrariness in novel communication systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6fr703z6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kirby, Simon
Oberlander, Jon
Theisen, Carrie Ann

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Systematicity and Arbitrariness in Novel Communication Systems
Carrie Ann Theisen (C.A.Theisen@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
Informatics Forum, 10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

Jon Oberlander (jon@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
Informatics Forum, 10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK

Simon Kirby (simon@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit, University of Edinburgh
Dugald Stewart Building, 3 Charles Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK

Abstract
Human languages include vast numbers of learned, arbitrary
signal-meaning mappings but also many complex signalmeaning mappings that are systematically related to each
other (i.e. not arbitrary).
Although arbitrariness and
systematicity are clearly related, the development of the two
in communication systems has been explored independently.
We present an experiment in which participants invent signs
from scratch to refer to a set of real concepts that share
semantic features. Through interaction, the systematic re-use
of arbitrary elements emerges.
Keywords: arbitrariness; systematicity; signs; language
evolution; emergent communication

Introduction
Two of language’s most fascinating properties, arbitrariness
and systematicity, characterize the nature of the mappings
between signals and meanings. A sign is arbitrary when
there is no inherent relationship between the signal and its
meaning. For example, the sounds in the word “house”
have nothing to do with what the word means. In contrast,
some subsets of signs in a language are systematic, in that
signals for similar meanings share an element. The
referring expressions “big house”, “red house”, “big apple”,
and “red apple” are an example. In language, words are
often arbitrary while multi-word phrases are systematic.
How does this property, the systematic re-use of arbitrary
elements, emerge in communication systems?
Recent experimental work has shown that people are able
to successfully communicate in the absence of conventional
communication systems, often by creating novel signs. (de
Ruiter et al., 2007; Galantucci, 2005; Garrod et al., 2007;
Healey et al., 2002; Scott-Phillips, 2009). The first signs
people produce in these situations are often not arbitrary,
but rather iconic or motivated in some other way.
(Galantucci, 2005; Garrod et al., 2007)
Psycholinguistic work has demonstrated how referring
expressions can change during dialogue.
(Garrod &
Doherty, 1994; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). In particular,
conversational partners collaborate to establish definite
references, and allowing their referring expressions to
shorten. (Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). This simplification

causes iconic signs in novel communication systems to
become more arbitrary. (Garrod et al., 2007)
Kirby (2001) demonstrated how, given a set of arbitrary
signs, systematicity might evolve. Simple artificial agents
learn sets of signs and detect chance regularities in them
(e.g., that the words for two red items both contain the
syllable “ka”). Over many generations of agents producing
signals for new meanings (meanings they didn’t learn
signals for) according to the regularities they observed, a set
of signs can become systematic. Kirby et al. (2008)
confirmed the result in human experimental participants.
Taking these two lines of research together, we have one
route to the systematic re-use of arbitrary elements: people
generate signs that are non-arbitrary, those signs become
arbitrary as they simplify, by chance there are a few signalmeaning regularities, generations of people propagate these
regularities, and the language becomes systematic. It’s this
longer history of a communication system, from the birth of
the first sign to a set of signs which systematically re-uses
arbitrary elements, that the current work aims to explore.
Goldin-Meadow et al. (1995)’s study on the emergence of
systematicity in homesign (gestures created by deaf, nonsigning children for use with their caretakers) covers this
range. They found that, in the early stages of the homesign
systems, a particular value of a particular gesture component
(such as a 1” distance between the thumb and index finger)
was used in gestures for just one object. In the later stages,
the homesigners apparently collapsed some distinctions
between objects and applied some values of gesture
components to more than one object, increasing the
systematicity of his or her set of gestures. This work shows
that systematicity doesn’t require complete arbitrariness –
the recurrences between signal components and meaning
components weren’t chance. Unfortunately, we cannot
know whether homesigners systems would have been
systematic from the earliest stages, given similar-enough
objects.
Here we present an exploration of the emergence of the
systematic re-use of arbitrary elements in one controlled
experiment. In this way, we can probe the relationship
between systematicity and arbitrariness as communication
systems develop.

1971

Experiment

partners’ guesses in an MSN Messenger chat window.

Methods
Participants
32 University of Edinburgh students
participated in exchange for £12. All were native British
English speakers. Participants who played together didn’t
know each other.
Apparatus Partners were seated in separate soundproof
booths with computers. The experiment was run using the
Pigeon software (Healey et al., 2002), which presented the
item to draw each trial and provided a shared online
whiteboard.
Participants guessed and corrected their

Stimuli The items were chosen to share salient semantic
features; each item can be thought of as one of five entity
types (such as person or building) that relates to one of ten
themes (such as education or agriculture). There were 26
core items, appearing with different frequencies. These are
shown in Figure 1. Additionally, there were 14 filler items,
occurring just once per game, intended to prevent
participants from assuming that their set of items was
closed. The items occurred in random order. Participants
knew nothing about the items in advance. In particular,
were never exposed to a list of the items.

Figure 1. One set of signs that emerged from the experiment. Each sign is the last occurrence of that item in the game.
Signs are arranged according to the semantic features of the items, not by chronological order of the trials. Italics
distinguish which participant was the Drawer that trial. The set is highly systematic, in that signs in many of the rows and
columns share an element. Also notice how arbitrary the elements have become.

1972

Figure 2. One Mixed Last set of signs. Each drawing in a row or column is the last from a different game of the experiment
(i.e. from different pairs of players). Notice how little systematicity the set has.
Game A team was allowed just one guess per trial. A team
won 1 point for every correct guess but lost 1 point for any
incorrect guess or drawing that included a symbol or
convention. The goal was to win as many points as possible
in the two hours of play. Participants from the three topscoring teams were entered into a prize draw for an
additional £20.
Procedure Each trial, one participant was the Drawer and
other was the Guesser. The Drawer saw an item (such as
professor) on his screen and was allowed to draw
immediately. The Drawer drew with a mouse, had only
black ink, and could not erase anything. The Guesser saw
everything the Drawer drew immediately, on her screen.
The Guesser did not see the Drawer's mouse movements
when he was not drawing, and could not draw herself.
When she was ready, the Guesser guessed by typing into a
chat window. The Drawer stopped drawing immediately

and either confirmed or corrected the guess in the chat
window. Players advanced themselves to the next trial.
Every six trials, the participants switched Drawer and
Guesser roles. The participants played for two hours.

Results: Systematicity
Figure 1 shows one of the systems that emerged from this
game. Notice how systematic it is: the drawings in many of
the rows and columns share an element. For example, the
drawings for items relating to university education (in the
second row) each have a filled-in diamond. As another
example, four of the drawings for activities/situations (in the
second column) have rows of squiggly lines.
To enable analysis of systematicity, each set of drawings
was printed on a page in a table, organized so that rows and
columns contain drawings for similar items (as in Figure 1).
A single coder examined each row and each column for any
element shared among two or more drawings. If there was a

1973

80
60

80
60
40
20
0

Systematicity of Last Signs (%)

100

sets of signs. (MFirst = 47.76, SD = 11.85; MMixed First = 22.28,
SD = 11.67) A Mann-Whitney U Test confirmed that the
First sets of signs have significantly higher systematicity
scores than the Mixed First sets of signs (p < 0.001).
Further, as Figure 4 illustrates, there’s a strong correlation
between the First and Last systematicity of the sets.
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.62, p < 0.05).

0

40

60

80

100

Figure 4. Scatterplot of Last against First Systematicity
(%). The ranking of the First sets of signs by systematicity
correlates with that of the corresponding Last sets of signs.

Results: Arbitrariness

B

60
0

Figure 3. Mean systematicity (%) and confidence
intervals (confidence level = 95%) for First, Mixed First,
Last, and Mixed Last sets of signs. Last sets are more
systematic than Mixed Last. First sets are more systematic
than Mixed First.

40

Mixed First

20

Identification Accuracy (%)

First

80

100

To measure the arbitrariness of the signs produced in the
experiment, we followed Fay et al. (2008) and had new
participants guess what they meant. 12 University of
Edinburgh students, all native British English speakers,
participated in exchange for one chance in a £25 prize draw
for each correct guess. The experiment was run online, and
lasted approximately 15 minutes. Participants learned about
the original game, and that the drawings they’d see would
be from different games and different points in the games,
in random order. Each trial, a participant saw a screenshot
of the whiteboard at the end of the trial in the original game.
He guessed the meaning of it by clicking on one of 26
buttons, one for each possible item. Each participant was
presented with the First drawings of each core item from
one randomly-assigned original game and the Last drawings
of each core item from a different randomly-assigned
original game.

20
Mixed Last

20

Systematicity of First Signs (%)

0

0

Last

A

40

Systematicity (%)

60
40
20

Systematicity (%)

80

100

100

shared element, the coder marked which of the drawings in
that row or column included it.
There are 26 drawings and each drawing is inspected
twice – once as a member of its row and once as a member
of its column. Thus, each set of drawings can receive a total
score of 52. The total score divided by 52 is our
systematicity score (a percentage).
For each of the 12 games from the experiment, we coded
the set of First drawings (the first drawing of each item from
that pair of participants) and the set of Last drawings (the
last drawing of each item). To put their systematicity scores
in context, we constructed 12 sets each of two kinds of
comparison sets: Mixed First and Mixed Last. The Mixed
First (or Last) sets were each composed of the First (or Last)
drawings from different games of the experiment (i.e. from
different pairs of players). For each Mixed set, for each
item (e.g., teacher), we choose at random which of the
games the drawing would be from, with the restriction that
the drawings in each row and each column would be from
different games. Figure 2 shows one Mixed Last set.
The coder marked these 48 sets in random order and
blind.
A different coder marked three randomly chosen sets of
each category independently. Her scores were strongly
correlated with those of the original coder (Spearman’s ρ =
0.82, p = 0.001).
Figure 3A shows the mean systematicity for the Last and
Mixed Last sets of signs. (MLast = 42.79, SD = 18.95;
MMixed Last = 19.39, SD = 6.32) Last sets of signs are more
systematic than Mixed Last sets of signs. That is, signs
drawn at the end of the games re-use elements more than
can be attributed to the tendency across pairs of players to
draw these items the same way (roughly, iconicity) – they
are truly systematic. A Mann–Whitney U Test confirmed
this (p < 0.005).

First

How did Last sets of signs get to be systematic? It turns
out that First sets of signs are also truly systematic. Figure
2B shows the mean systematicity for First and Mixed First

1974

Last

Figure 5. Mean identification accuracy (%) and
confidence intervals (confidence level = 95%) for First and
Last sets of signs. First sets of signs are more accurately
identified than Last.

Figure 5 shows the mean identification rates (as
proportions correct) for First and Last sets of signs. (MFirst =
64.08, SD = 12.37; MLast = 45.42, SD = 6.86) First sets of
signs were more accurately identified than Last sets of
signs. A Mann–Whitney U Test confirmed this (p < 0.001).
This suggests that the signs became more arbitrary over the
course of the games.

Discussion
We’ve presented an experiment in which the systematic reuse of arbitrary elements emerges. Last sets of signs are
systematic, and becoming more arbitrary.
While previous work has explored the “evolution” of
systematicity, this experiment has shown systematicity in
the very first signs people use with each other. It appears to
simply emerge, without explicit design on the part of the
participants, as a natural part of dialogue.
Where does this initial systematicity come from? One
might expect that the first time a player draws a certain item
(say, school bus) with his partner, he draws it no
differently than if he were drawing with a new partner. But
if this were the case, the First sets would have been no more
systematic than the Mixed First sets. Instead, when drawing
items for the first time, players seem to have referenced
previous drawings of related items. Consider Figure 6, in
which one pair’s first drawing of school bus, which
occurred after another primary education item (teacher)
had been drawn, is contrasted with three pairs’ first
drawings of school bus, each of which occurred before
any other primary education item had been drawn. The
former drawing for school bus includes elements found
in the previous drawing of teacher, viz. the chalkboard
and two children - elements not found in the other pairs’
first drawings for school bus.

A

B

C

D

E

Figure 5. One pair’s first drawings for teacher (A)
and then school bus (B), contrasted with three other
pairs’ first drawings for school bus (C – E).
Thus, the systematicity results presented here apply not just
to iconic reference to tangible objects, but to communication
in general.
A common (albeit often implicit) assumption in the
literature is that a novel communication system will first
become arbitrary and then develop systematicity. For
example, Garrod et al. (2007) say they offer an account of

the “evolution of sets of icons into sets of symbols, and of
sets of symbols into symbol systems.” In contrast, the
current work suggests that proper systematicity need not
wait for arbitrariness.
Similarly, the current work shows that, as sets of signs
become more arbitrary, they don’t necessarily become less
systematic. Structure can be retained while the elements
become arbitrary. Garrod et al. (2007) suggested this, but
didn’t explore systematicity directly.
We’ve presented a paradigm that allows one to explore
arbitrariness and systematicity in one experiment. Future
work should explore the many issues surrounding the
interaction of the two properties, as well as the transmission
to others of communication systems which make systematic
re-use of arbitrary elements.

Acknowledgments
We are particularly grateful to Nic Fay for formative
discussions about the paradigm and data to play with, Nik
Swoboda for help with and modifications to Pigeon, and the
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit for
feedback at every stage and hours of piloting. This work
was supported by the European Union Integrated Project
JAST (Joint Action Science and Technology), grant FP6IST2-003747.

References
Clark, H. H. & Wilkes-Gibb, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
De Ruiter, J.P., Noordzij, M., Newman-Norlund, S.,
Hagoort, P., & Toni, I. (2008). On the origin of intentions.
Attention and Performance XXII: Sensorimotor
foundation of higher cognition (pp. 593–610). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Fay N., Garrod S., Roberts L. (2008). The fitness and
functionality of culturally evolved communication
systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences, 363(1509): 3553-61.
Galantucci, B. (2005). An Experimental Study of the
Emergence of Human Communication Systems.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 29(5),
737-767.
Garrod, S., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation,
Coordination and Convention - an EmpiricalInvestigation of How Groups Establish Linguistic
Conventions. Cognition, 53(3), 181-215.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod, T.
(2007). Foundations of Representation: Where Might
Graphical Symbol Systems Come From? Cognitive
Science, 31(6), 961-987.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (1995). The resilience of combinatorial
structure at the word level: morphology in self-styled
gesture systems. Cognition, 56(3), 195-262.
Healey, G. T., Swoboda, N., & King, J. (2002). A tool for
performing and analysing experiments on graphical
communication. People and computers XVI: Proceedings

1975

of HCI2002: The 16th British HCI Group Annual
Conference (pp. 55-68). London: Springer-Verlag.
Healey, P. G. T., Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., & Oberlander,
J. (2002). Interactional context in
graphical
communication. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 441–
446). Mahwah, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure: An iterated learning model of the emergence of
regularity and irregularity. IEEE Journal of Evolutionary
Computation, 5, 102–110.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., and Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
PNAS, 105(31), 10681-10686.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
27(2), 169-226.
Scott-Phillips, T. (2009) The Social Evolution of Pragmatic
Behaviour. PhD Thesis, University of Edinburgh.

1976

