UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Talking it up: How the function of rising declaratives depends on prolongations and listeners'
expectations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nz6b6xc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Tree, Jr., Jean Fox
Tomlinson, John

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Talking it up: How the function of rising declaratives depends on prolongations and
listeners’ expectations
John M. Tomlinson, Jr. (otomlins@ucsc.edu)
University of California - Santa Cruz
Department of Psychology, SSII Rm. 273
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Jean E. Fox Tree (foxtree@ucsc.edu)
University of California - Santa Cruz
Department of Psychology, SSII Rm. 273
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Abstract

(“yeah, because people can separate reality from uh like
video games”), a forward-looking function (Allen, 1986;
Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, 1991; Fletcher et al. 2002;
House, 2007).
Rising declarative pitch, or uptalk (McLemore, 1991), is
sometimes considered a restricted dialectical variation. In
fact, however, uptalk is common in Australian English
(Allen, 1986), Southern British English (Cruttenton, 1998),
and Canadian English (Shokeir, 2008). This suggests that
uptalk is a productive linguistic phenomenon.
We propose that listeners disambiguate the proposed two
functions of uptalk using (1) the temporal context of
prolongations and (2) expectations about the speakers’
knowledge states. In Experiment 1, we tested listeners’ offline interpretations of prolongations and uptalk with respect
to speaker knowledgeableness. In Experiment 2, we tested
the speed at which listeners can monitor for words following
prolongations or uptalk. In Experiment 3, we tested how
listeners’ beliefs about speakers’ knowledge states
influenced their on-line word monitoring performance.

Listeners’ comprehension of phrase final rising pitch on
declarative utterances, or uptalk, was examined to test the
hypothesis that prolongations might differentiate conflicting
functions of rising pitch. In Experiment 1 we found that
listeners rated prolongations as indicating more speaker
uncertainty, but that rising pitch was unrelated to ratings. In
Experiment 2 we found that prolongations interacted with
rising pitch when listeners monitored for words in the
subsequent utterance. Words preceded by prolonged uptalk
were monitored faster than words preceded by non-prolonged
uptalk. In Experiment 3 we found that the interaction between
rising pitch and prolongations depended on listeners’ beliefs
about speakers’ mental states. These results demonstrate that
form/function mappings may need to take temporal
information into account. They also demonstrate that form/
function mappings are not predetermined, but can vary
depending on listener expectations.
Keywords: Prosody; Intonational Meaning; Pragmatics;
Speech Comprehension; Prolongations; Uptalk

Introduction
In the following exchange, Stephanie makes a blanket
statement about violence in video games. What is unusual
about this declarative utterance is that it ends with
something more indicative of interrogative utterances: rising
pitch (* = pitch accent, / = rising pitch):
Stephanie:
Marcus:
Stephanie:

I don’t think* that video games* make
you become violent/
Uh-huh
Yeah, because people* can separate
reality* from, uh, like, video games

Two reasons why Stephanie might raise her pitch at end of
her stated opinion are that (1) she is indicating that she is
unsure of the truth propositional content of her utterance,
either whether she believes it or whether Marcus believes it,
or (2) she believes what she is saying but has yet to provide
further information bolstering her claim. As spelled out in
the literature, these two functions can be differentiated as to
whether they apply to the utterance she just stated (“I don’t
think that video games make you become violent”), a
backward-looking function, or to the subsequent utterance

Intonation in time
A long standing goal of intonational meaning research has
been to make one-to-one mappings between forms and
functions (Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, 1991). In the
autosegmental approach, intonational events are represented
as tones that combine to form phrasal tunes which are
interpreted similarly regardless of temporal realization. We
argue, as do others, that intonation is inherently temporal
(Clark, 2002; Kohler, 2004; Ramus & Mehler, 1999). As a
consequence, how intonation is expressed temporally might
affect its interpretation.
The function of uptalk has been elusive. Gunlogson
(2001) argued that uptalk allows speakers to distance
themselves from the truth-propositional content of their
utterances, shifting the burden of affirming or disconfirming
truthfulness to addressees. This account might explain the
backward-looking function of uptalk, but it does not explain
the forward-looking function. House (2007) proposed that
uptalk has two functions: (1) questioning or testing the
relevance of the speech act to the current discourse context
and (2) indicating continuity, specifically that more
information is pending. Both of these accounts highlight the
Track 2 (Clark, 1996) or procedural (Wilson & Wharton,

1234

2006) meaning of rising pitch. What is unclear is how
listeners assign one or the other function to a particular
intonational token that they hear.
We propose that prolongations interact with uptalk to
yield different interpretations. Prolongations indicate that a
delay is in progress, with fewer and shorter delays following
rather than preceding them (Clark & Fox Tree, 2002).
Recognizing a brief delay can focus listeners’ attention on
upcoming talk (Fox Tree, 2001). If a prolongation co-occurs
with uptalk, we predict that the uptalk will be interpreted
with a forward-looking function. But if uptalk is produced
without prolongation, we predict the interpretation will be
backward-looking. Listeners’ attention could be focused on
the prior information for either reason identified above:
either shifting the responsibility to listeners to determine an
utterance’s truth value, or alerting listeners that they should
attest to the relevance of the utterance.

Prosody and mental state inferences
Although much literature exists on the relationships
between prosodic information and emotional states (see
Murray & Arnott, 1993, for a review), less is known about
the relationship between prosodic information and
inferences about a speaker’s knowledge level. In support of
the hypothesis that uptalk provides listeners with
information about speakers’ knowledge states, listeners
rated speakers’ feelings of knowing lower when speakers’
answers were marked with rising pitch and longer response
latencies (Brennan & Williams, 1995).
We propose that prolongations and uptalk will influence
not only off-line judgments of speaker knowledgeableness
(as demonstrated in part by Brennan & Williams, 1995), but
also on-line processing of information. There is some
precedent for this hypothesis. Information about a speaker’s
ability to produce the names of words influenced on-line
responses to what the speaker said (Arnold, Hudson-Kam,
& Tanenhaus, 2007). If the speaker were considered a
normal language user, hearing a disfluency prompted
listeners to look at previously unmentioned items in an array
of items. But if the speaker were thought to have object
agnosia, listeners did not necessarily look at the
unmentioned items.
More precisely, we propose that listeners will interpret
prolongations and rising pitch differently depending on
whether they believe the speakers to be knowledgeable or
not about what they are saying.

Overview of studies
Our main goal is to assess how listeners understand rising
declaratives. Our main prediction is that prolongations will
interact to differentiate two conflicting functions of rising
pitch, backward-looking vs. forward-looking. We also seek
to identify how listeners establish these relationships
between intonational form and function.
In Experiment 1, we test the hypothesis that rising pitch
signals knowledgeableness to the listener relative to falling
pitch. Results from studies on the feeling of knowing predict
that rising pitch should be interpreted as less knowledgeable
than falling pitch. Feeling of knowing studies do not provide

a prediction for prolongations.
In Experiment 2, we test the effect of rising pitch and
prolongations on the monitoring of upcoming information.
When listeners expect a brief delay after hearing an uh,
attention is focused on upcoming talk and word monitoring
is faster (Fox Tree, 2001). Prolongations mark ongoing
delays, anticipating briefer delays after them than before
them (Clark & Fox Tree, 2002). Similar to uhs (Fox Tree,
2001), listeners may focus on upcoming words after
prolongations; that is, prolongations may direct listeners’
attention forward rather than backward. Earlier studies make
no prediction for the effect of pitch on word monitoring.
In Experiment 3, we test the role of listener expectations
on on-line speech comprehension. Half the participants were
told that speakers had memorized facts from cue cards and
had trouble reproducing them later because they we not
experts in the relative domain. Half were told that the
speakers were experts in a domain related to the content of
what they were saying. If listeners interpret rising pitch and
prolongations with a predetermined set of rules, then
reaction times should be similar between the expert and
non-expert conditions. But if listeners take information
about speakers into account when listening to talk, reaction
times might differ. For example, if the speakers are thought
to be non-experts, then rising pitch may serve a backwardlooking function yielding slower reaction times. But if
speakers are thought to be experts, rising pitch may serve a
forward-looking function yielding faster reaction times.

Experiment 1
Listeners rated utterance pairs on how accurate speakers
were in the knowledge they were conveying.

Methods
Participants Twenty UCSC students participated in this
experiment in exchange for course credit. There were 12
women and 8 men. All participants were native speakers of
English.
Materials Forty-eight utterance pairs were selected from a
specially compiled corpus of spontaneous speech. Speakers
created spontaneous sentence frames to convey celebrity
facts to an addressee who attempted to select the celebrity
out of an array. For example, upon reading place of birth:
Brooklyn, the speaker might say to the addressee, “This
actor was born in Brooklyn, New York.” The utterance pairs
consisted of two sentences spontaneously produced by the
same speaker; for example, “I have two children. I was the
Princess of Wales.”
The first utterance of the pair had either rising prolonged
pitch (N = 12), rising non-prolonged pitch (N = 12), falling
prolonged pitch (N = 12) , or falling non-prolonged pitch (N
= 12). Rising and falling pitch were distinguished using
ToBI guidelines (Beckman & Ayers, 1994). Rising pitch
consisted of either H* L-H% or H* H-H%, whereas falling
pitch consisted of either H* H-L% or H* L-L%. Prolonged
and non-prolonged syllables were differentiated

1235

qualitatively by examining the nature of the rise or fall:
Falls and rises that peaked or reached their nadir at the
beginning of the nucleus were considered non-prolonged,
where falls and rises that didn’t peak or reach its nadir until
the coda were considered prolonged. Prolonged and nonprolonged syllables were also differentiated quantitatively.
Prolonged syllables averaged 501 ms (SD = 156 ms; range
228 ms – 433 ms), whereas non-prolonged syllables
averaged 291 ms (SD = 133 ms; range 313 ms – 940 ms).
For each utterance with a rising contour, a matched
utterance was digitally created with a falling contour.
Likewise, for each utterance with a falling contour, a
matched utterance was digitally created with a rising
contour. In this way, the same item could be heard with and
without uptalk. Prolongation was treated as a between-item
variable.

Table 1: Mean ratings for Experiment 1.
Condition

Means (SD)

Non-prolonged fall

4.96 (0.76)

Non-prolonged rise

4.91 (0.87)

Prolonged fall

4.28 (1.07)

Prolonged rise

4.44 (.87)

Discussion
An off-line rating experiment testing listeners’ assessments
of speakers’ knowledgeableness showed that prolongations
decreased ratings of knowledgeableness. Surprisingly, rising
pitch did not influence listeners’ judgments as predicted by
earlier studies.
One possible reason why these off-line ratings did not
yield an effect of rising pitch is that listeners may have been
unsure how to interpret the two hypothetical functions of
rising pitch in this task. In Experiment 2, we test the
predictions of the forward-looking and backward-looking
hypotheses with an on-line task.

Figure 1: Example item.

Experiment 2

Design Two lists were created so that each participant heard
either the original or the manipulated version of an item.
The lists were counterbalanced so that (1) original and
manipulated versions were matched across lists, (2) half the
items on each list were manipulated and half were not, and
(3) rises and falls were equally likely to occur on a list.
Procedure Participants were told that the speakers they
would listen to were recalling facts they had learned about
celebrities, and that the speakers may have muddled their
facts. Participants judged the likelihood that the speaker
correctly reported the facts. The items were presented
aurally with a screen displaying a 1 (not accurate) to 7
(accurate) Likert scale.

Listeners monitored for words that followed a sentence that
ended with either a prolongation, uptalk, both a
prolongation and uptalk, or neither a prolongation nor
uptalk.

Methods
Participants Twenty undergraduates participated in this
experiment in exchange for course credit. There were 13
women and 7 men. All participants were native speakers of
English.
Materials The same 48 stimuli were used as in Experiment
1. In addition, 48 filler stimuli were created. The filler
stimuli were of two types. The first had the target word in
the first utterance. The second did not contain the target
word. The experiment contained half of each type of filler.
Design The design was similar to Experiment 1.

Results
Here and in the subsequent two experiments, two-way
repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted to test the
effects of rising pitch and prolongations.
Items containing prolonged syllables at the end of the first
utterance in the pair were rated as less accurate (M = 4.36
SE = 0.18) than items with non-prolonged syllables (M =
4.94 SE = .21; F(1, 19) = 14.92, p<.001). Items containing
rising pitch at the end of the first utterance in the pair (M =
4.68 SE = 0.17) were rated similarly to items with falling
pitch (M = 4.62, SE = 0.19; F(1, 19) = .362, p = .56). There
was no interaction, F(1, 19) = 1.90, p = .31. See Table 1.

Procedure Each trial had the following structure. First, a
500 ms tone was heard indicating that the participants
should focus their attention on the computer screen. The
tone was followed by a 500 ms pause. A word appeared on
the computer screen for 1000 ms, followed by a blank
screen for 1000 ms, followed by the onset of the audio item.
During the audio item, listeners pressed a button upon
hearing the word presented visually previously on the
screen. All target items and half of the fillers required a
button press. The other half of the fillers required no button
press. Targets were in variable positions in the second

1236

utterances. Responses above 1500 ms and below 150 ms
were excluded to eliminate false alarms and misses.

listeners use beliefs about speakers’ mental states in
mapping intonational forms to different functions. In
Experiment 3, we test how listener beliefs affect processing.

Experiment 3
Listeners replicated Experiment 2 with new information
about the speakers they would be hearing. About half were
told that the speakers were non-experts who had effectively
memorized the facts off cue cards and had trouble
remembering them during the game. The other half were
told that the speakers were knowledgeable experts on the
facts they were saying.

Methods

Figure 2: Trial presentation for Experiments 2 & 3.

Results
Listeners monitored words faster after hearing prolonged
syllables in the previous utterance (M = 550 SD = 93) than
non-prolonged syllables (M = 600 SD = 123; F(1, 19) =
4.43, p < .05). There was no effect of rising pitch (F(1, 19)
= 0.7, p = .41), but there was an interaction between
prolongations and rising pitch (F(1, 19) = 5.31, p < .04).
Listeners monitored words fastest after prolonged rises (M =
525 SD = 87) and slowest after non-prolonged rises (M =
653 SD = 158). See Table 2.

Participants Forty-two undergraduates participated in this
experiment in exchange for course credit. There were 24
women and 18 men. All participants were native speakers of
English.
Materials The same materials were used as in Experiment
2.

Condition

Means (SD)

Non-prolonged fall

546 ms (88 ms)

Design The design was similar to Experiments 1 and 2,
except that Experiment 3 was effectively two separate
experiments. In one, 22 participants were told that the
speakers were non-experts in the fields they were talking
about; that is, they knew little about pop culture, cinema,
politics, and so on. In the other, 20 participants were told
that the speakers were experts in the fields they were talking
about. For example, they were led to believe that a person
talking about politicians was a political science major and
that a person talking about actors was a film major.

Non-prolonged rise

653 ms (158 ms)

Procedure The procedure was the same as Experiment 2.

Prolonged fall

575 ms (100 ms)

Results

Prolonged rise

525 ms (87 ms)

In the non-expert condition, there was no main effect of
prolongations (F(1, 21) = 1.95, p = .17) and no main effect
for rising pitch (F(1, 21) = 0.44, p = .52). There was,
however, a significant interaction between prolongations
and rising pitch (F(1, 21) = 9.85, p < .01). These data are
similar to those of Experiment 2, minus the effect of
prolongations. See Table 3.
In the expert condition, there was also no main effect of
prolongations (F(1, 19) = .01, p = .92) and no main effect
for rising pitch (F(1, 19) = 0.353, p = .56). Unlike the nonexpert condition, however, there was no interaction between
prolongations and rising pitch (F(1, 19) = 1.87, p = .19). See
Table 4.

Table 2: Mean reaction times for Experiment 2.

Discussion
Words were monitored for fastest when they followed
sentences ending in prolonged rising pitch. Words were
monitored for slowest when they followed sentences ending
in non-prolonged rising pitch. These data show that
prolongations can differentiate the two conflicting functions
of rising pitch. Listeners gain a general processing
advantage when comprehending material following
prolongations. At the same time, prolongations interact with
rising pitch in a way that makes prolonged uptalk more
helpful for processing upcoming information and nonprolonged uptalk more harmful for processing upcoming
information.
In a model with predetermined form-function
relationships, these data would suggest that prolonged rising
pitch equals forward-looking, and non-prolonged rising
pitch equals backward-looking. But it may be the case that

1237

Table 3: Mean reaction times for Experiment 3 non-expert
condition.
Condition

Means (SD)

Non-prolonged fall

521 ms (114 ms)

Non-prolonged rise

611 ms (138 ms)

Prolonged fall

570 ms (129 ms)

Prolonged rise

513 ms (115 ms)

Table 4: Mean reaction times for Experiment 3 expert
condition.
Condition

Means (SD)

Non-prolonged fall

509 ms (113 ms)

Non-prolonged rise

550 ms (155 ms)

Prolonged fall

560 ms (187 ms)

Prolonged rise

506 ms (111 ms)

Discussion
When listeners believed that speakers were non-experts,
they interpreted rising pitch and prolongations similarly to
when they were provided with no information about
speakers (Experiment 2). However, when listeners thought
that speakers were experts, their word monitoring was no
longer affected by rising pitch or prolongations. This is
supporting evidence that listeners establish relationships
between linguistic form and function by first presupposing
speakers’ mental states.

General Discussion
Temporal context, in this case prolongations, can affect offline judgments of speaker knowledgeableness as well as
how rising pitch influences on-line speech comprehension.
At the same time, listener beliefs about speakers can affect
whether prolongations and uptalk have any influence at all.
In Experiment 1, listeners considered utterances with
prolongations as lacking in knowledgeableness. In contrast
to expectation, uptalk had no effect on listener judgments. It
may be that the off-line rating task was not sensitive enough
to capture how listeners interpret rising pitch with the
stimuli we used. In earlier studies, rising pitch indicated
lower feeling of knowing with respect to the answers to
questions. In our study, rising pitch was used with
declarative statements. With declarative statements, there
could be two interpretations for rising pitch, forwardlooking and backward-looking.

In Experiment 2, prolongations gave listeners a processing
advantage for monitoring words in the subsequent utterance.
Although rising pitch alone had no effect, there was an
interaction between rising pitch and prolongations.
Prolonged rising pitch engendered the fastest reaction times
for monitoring words in the subsequent utterance. Nonprolonged rising pitch engendered the slowest reaction times
relative to all other conditions. This supports the hypothesis
that prolonged rising pitch is forward-looking, and that nonprolonged rising pitch is backward-looking.
In Experiment 3, the interaction between rising pitch and
prolongations was replicated for the group of listeners who
believed that the speakers they were hearing did not really
know what they were talking about. The interaction
disappeared for another group of participants who believed
that the speakers were experts on what they were talking
about. Moreover, the data from Experiment 3 and from
Arnold, Hudson Kam, & Tannenahus (2007) shows how
inferences about speakers’ mental states factors into the
comprehension of Track 2 (Clark, 1996) or procedural
(Wilson & Wharton, 2006) meaning. Where and how does
this type of meaning arise? Our data would predict that this
type of information is interpreted online during inferences
about speakers’ mental states.
While the lack of an effect of prolongations in Experiment
3 demonstrated that the findings in Experiment 2 were not
driven by a confounding variable (for example, that
prolonged items varied from non-prolonged items in a
systematic way), we have no firm understanding of why the
prolongation effect disappeared. Inspection of the means
suggests that the Experiment 2 prolongation effect may have
been driven by the much slower reaction times to the short
rises. This suggests that listeners may have treated the doubt
expressed in Experiment 2 by the short rises as more serious
than the doubt expressed in Experiment 3 by the short rises.
Evidence suggests that listeners assumed that speakers were
not knowledgeable in Experiment 2 (as the results are
similar to the non-expert condition in Experiment 3), but
listeners were not explicitly told this. A short rise may have
made listeners pay more attention to the utterance just
produced in Experiment 2 because listeners were not primed
to expect doubt (as they were in the non-expert condition of
Experiment 3). Consequently, they may have taken the
doubt more seriously and focused more on the utterance
preceding the short rise.
The experiments presented here demonstrate that
intonational events can be interpreted differently depending
on temporal and situational context. Future research should
examine how the functions of other intonational events
might vary in different temporal and situational contexts.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the following assiduous research
assistants: Lisa Jenson, Sarah Jerz, Ben Radosevich, Shane
Hihara, Jeannine Mesina, and Jack Emery.

1238

References
Allen, K. (1984). The high rise terminal contour. Australian
Journal of Linguistics, 4, 19-32.
Arnold, J. E., Hudson Kam, C. L., & Tanenhaus, M. K.
(2007). If you say thee uh you are describing something
hard: The on-line attribution of disfluency during
reference comprehension. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33(5),
914-930.
Beckman, M. E., & Ayers, G. M. (1994). Guidelines for
ToBI Labeling.
Brennan, S. E., & Williams, M. (1995). The feeling of
another's knowing: Prosody and filled pauses as cues to
listeners about the metacognitive states of speakers.
Journal of Memory and Language, 34(3), 383-398.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. (2002). Speaking in Time. Speech
Communication, 36, 5-13.
Clark, H. H., & Fox Tree, J. E. (2002). Using uh and um in
spontaneous speech. Cognition, 84, 73-111.
Cruttenden, A. (1997). Intonation (2nd ed.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Fletcher, J., Stirling, L., Mushin, I., & Wales, R. (2002).
Intonational rises and dialog acts in the Austrailian
English Map Task. Language and Speech, 45(3), 229-252.
Fox Tree, J. E. (2001). Listeners' uses of um and uh in
speech comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 29(2),
320-326.
Gunlogson, C. A. (2001). True to Form: Rising and Falling
Declaratives as Questions in English. Unpublished
Doctoral Dissertation, University of California Santa
Cruz.
House, J. (2007). The role of prosody in constraining
context selection: A procedural approach. Nouveux
cahiers de linguistique française, 28, 369-383.
Kohler, K. J. (2004). Prosody revisited: Function, time, and
the listener in intonational phonlogy. Paper presented at
the Proc. International Conference: Speech Prosody 2004,
Nara, Japan.
McLemore, C. A. (1991). The Pragmatic Interpretation of
English Intonation: Sonority Speech. Unpublished
Doctoral Dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
Murray, I. R. & Arnott, J. L. (1993). Toward the simulation
of emotion in synthetic speech: A review of the literature
on human vocal emotion. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 93(2), 1097-1108.
Pierrehumbert, J., & Hirschberg, J. (1990). The Meaning of
Intonational Contours in the Interpretation of Discourse.
In P. R. Cohen, J. Morgen, & M. E. Pollack (Eds.),
Intentions in Communications (pp. 271-311). Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Ramus, F., & Mehler, J. (1999). Language identification
with suprasegmental cues: A study based on speech
synthesis. Journal of the Acoustic Society of America,
105(1), 512-521.

Shokier, V. (2008). Evidence for the stable use of uptalk in
South Ontraio English. Working Papers in UPenn
Linguistics, 14(2), pgs. 16-21.
Wilson, D., & Wharton, T. (2006). Relevance and prosody.
Journal of Pragmatics, 38(10), 1559-1579.

1239

