UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Limits and Possibilities of Unconscious Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09k917hn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Reynvoet, Bert
Van den Bussche, Eva

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Limits and Possibilities of Unconscious Processing
Eva Van den Bussche (Eva.Vandenbussche@kuleuven-kortrijk.be)
Bert Reynvoet (Bert.Reynvoet@kuleuven-kortrijk.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven
Belgium

Keywords: unconscious
cognitive control

processing;

masked

priming;

The existence of unconscious perception is largely
acknowledged. However, the limits and possibilities of
unconscious processing remain unclear. We used two
different approaches to clarify this. First, we conducted a
large-scale meta-analysis of masked priming studies to
examine the depth of unconscious processing. Second, we
contrasted a manipulation on a conscious versus an
unconscious level in order to shed light on whether
unconscious processing extends to high cognitive levels,
similar to conscious processing.

The Depth of Unconscious Processing
Dehaene and colleagues (1998) asked participants to
classify numbers as smaller or larger than 5. Using a masked
priming paradigm they observed that congruent trials,
where prime and target evoke the same response (e.g. 1-3)
were responded to faster than incongruent trials, where
prime and target evoke different responses (e.g. 1-8).
Moreover, the primes elicited neural activity in the motor
cortex. The authors concluded that unconscious primes are
semantically processed. Ever since then, the depth of
subliminal priming has been topic of heavy debate and
several authors have proposed competing non-semantic
(where unconscious information is thought to be processed
non-semantically) and semantic (where unconscious
information is thought to be processed semantically)
accounts. In order to shed light on whether subliminal
primes can be processed up to a semantic level, we (Van
den Bussche, Van den Noortgate & Reynvoet, in press)
conducted a meta-analysis where published and unpublished
masked priming studies were statistically combined. We
found strong support for the claim that unconscious
information can be processed semantically: masked priming
was significant even when non-semantic influences were
minimized or eliminated. However, our results also showed
that non-semantic processing of subliminal information can
additionally boost priming effects.

Conscious versus Unconscious Processing
One way to study the limits and possibilities of unconscious
processing is to contrast the effects of a manipulation
introduced on a conscious versus an unconscious level (Van
den Bussche, Segers & Reynvoet, 2008). Accumulating
evidence shows that unconscious information is susceptible
to several conscious top-down modulations. However, it

remains unclear whether unconscious information is able to
exert cognitive control itself. A context factor (the
proportion of Arabic numbers versus number words) was
manipulated within a masked priming paradigm either
consciously (at the target level) or unconsciously (at the
prime level). The results indicated that the conscious
manipulation could be used strategically to enhance task
performance. However, the unconscious manipulation did
not directly modulate the priming effects. Still, even though
our results suggested that an unconscious stimulus was
unable to exert direct cognitive control, it seemed to be able
to induce indirect control, through metacognitive processes.

Conclusion
Accumulating evidence shows that unconscious information
can be processed up to a high semantic level, it is
susceptible to several conscious top-down modulations and
seems able to exert (indirect) control on some cognitive
processes. This suggests that unconscious processing
extends to a sophisticated cognitive level.

References
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Le Clec'H, G., Koechlin, E.,
Mueller, M., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., van de Moortele, P.
F., & Le Bihan, D. (1998). Imaging unconscious semantic
priming. Nature, 395, 597-600.
Van den Bussche, E., Notebaert, K. & Reynvoet, B. (in
press). Masked primes can be genuinely semantically
processed: A picture prime study. Experimental
Psychology.
Van den Bussche, E., & Reynvoet, B. (2007). Masked
priming effects in semantic categorization are
independent of category size. Experimental Psychology,
54, 225-235.
Van den Bussche, E., & Reynvoet, B. (2008). The
asymmetry between top-down effects and unconscious
cognition: Additional issues. Consciousness and
Cognition, 17, 1361-1363.
Van den Bussche, E., & Reynvoet, B. (in press). The
mechanisms of subliminal semantic priming: A state of
the art. In E.B. Hartonek (Ed.), Experimental Psychology
Research Trends. New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Van den Bussche, E., Segers, G., & Reynvoet, B. (2008).
Conscious and unconscious proportion effects in masked
priming. Consciousness and Cognition, 17, 1345-1358.
Van den Bussche, E., Van den Noortgate W., & Reynvoet,
B. (in press). Mechanisms of masked priming: A metaanalysis. Psychological Bulletin.

1452

