UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Comprehension of “Left” and “Right” in a Referential Communication Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/91g0d6nr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fitneva, Stanka
Song, Yi

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Comprehension of “Left” and “Right” in a Referential Communication Task
Stanka A. Fitneva (Fitneva@Queensu.ca)
Department of Psychology, Queen’s University
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada

Yi Song (7ys4@Queensu.ca)
Department of Psychology, Queen’s University
Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada
Abstract
The study examined the role of establishing local conventions
in the interpretation of left and right. 32 adults participated in
a referential communication game carrying commands like
“Put the red cup to the left of the green.” The results suggest
that local conventions strongly influence the interpretation of
the two spatial terms but global expectations about the usage
of the terms also play a role.
Keywords: perspective taking; spatial cognition; eye
tracking.

Introduction
Computing the meaning of spatial relation terms,
especially of directional terms like left and right, is difficult
and time consuming (e. g., Bryant & Tversky, 1991; Farrell,
1979; Franklin & Tversky, 1990; Maki & Braine, 1985;
Maki, Grandy, & Hauge, 1979). Left and right are acquired
late in development， after other conceptually similar terms
like front/back and above/below (Fisher & Kamenzuli,
1987; Internicola & Weist, 2003). They take longer to
produce and understand (Franklin & Tversky, 1990) and
when other options are available, adults appear to avoid
using left and right (Mainwaring, Tversky, Ogishi, &
Schiano, 2003). The explanation of the left/right confusion
has been historically attributed to the bilateral symmetry of
the nervous system (i.e., the existence of projections into
both hemispheres) and the conceptual complexity of the
referential frames evoked by the terms (Corballis & Beale,
1976; Maki, Grandy & Hauge, 1979). Another explanation
is the intrinsic ambiguity of left and right (Mainwaring et
al., 2003; Schober, 1993). In face-to-face conversations,
utterances like “Put the red cup to the left of the green”
require establishing whose perspective should be
considered: the speaker’s or the addressee’s?
Language users rely on a set of conventions in
interpreting the meaning of linguistic expressions (Lewis,
1979/1991). There are global conventions, which are shared
by the broader linguistic community and represent general
patterns of word use. These conventions are reflected in
dictionaries. There are also local conventions which develop
in the course of communication within a subgroup of the
community (e.g., family members) or with a single other
individual (e.g., Brennan & Clark, 1996; Garrod &
Anderson, 1987). As an example of the distinction, consider
the word “mother.” Its dictionary definition is “a female

parent.” Spoken amongst family members, however,
“mother” identifies a specific individual and thus not just a
female parent but also possibly an accomplished musician
and a great cook. In the present study, we examined the
extent to which adults’ processing of left and right is
influenced by local conventions established in conversation.
The influence of local conventions in conversation is
illustrated by Brennan and Clark (1996). In their study,
when participants saw a dress shoe together a high-heel shoe
and a sneaker, they labeled it a loafer rather than a shoe,
which is a more common label. This was expected because
participants had to distinguish the dress shoe from the other
shoes. However, when afterwards participants saw the dress
shoe in the context of unrelated objects, they still referred to
it as a loafer. Here, a loafer is overinformative and a shoe
would suffice. People’s tendency to follow and rely on the
recently established conventions in conversation provides a
compelling account of these findings.
Research has consistently shown that speakers tend to
assume the listener’s perspective in providing spatial
descriptions (Mainwaring et al., 2003; Schober, 1993). For
example, Schober (1993) presented participants with a
modified version of the referential communication task
(Glucksberg, Krauss, & Weisberg, 1966). They saw scenes
depicting two identical objects (in addition to indicating the
place from which the addressee is looking at the scene) and
the participants’ task was to guide the addressee to picking
one of them. There was a limited number of ways to
describe the scenes. The participants could either adopt their
own perspective, saying something like “it’s the one on my
left,” or the listener’s perspective, saying something like
“it’s the one on your right.” Schober (1993) found that most
of the time, speakers took the addressee’s perspective. This
finding was replicated by Mainwaring et al. (2003) who also
showed that this usage is modulated by the speaker’s
assumptions about their own and the addressee’s cognitive
load. Schober (1993) and Mainwaring et al. (2003)
suggested that speakers take the addressees’ perspective
because it is easier to translate a visual scene into language
(the speaker’s task) than language to a visual representation
(the addressee’s task). Regardless of the explanation, the
global convention for the usage and interpretation of spatial
terms of reference in the referential communication task
appears to involve the addressee’s perspective.
Despite the prevalence of using left and right from the
addressee’s perspective, speakers mix spatial perspectives

2687

about half of the time (Schober, 1993; Taylor & Tversky,
1996). Thus, while addressees may rely on global
information about the use of left and right, locally
established precedents could be particularly useful in their
interpretation.
In the present study, we used the referential
communication task to examine addressees’ interpretation
of left and right over time. On critical trials, the participants,
who sat across a confederate, had to carry out commands
like “Put the red cup to the left of the green.” In the first
third of the study – the Establish period – the physical
display revealed whether the speaker was taking the
listener’s or her own perspective in using left and right (see
Figure 1). In the second third of the study – the Test period
– we examined whether addressees relied on the previously
established local convention of interpreting left and right in
the absence of physical supports. In the last third of the
study – the Break period – we examined whether switching
perspectives incurred cognitive costs for the addressees.
There were two conditions in the study – Speaker and
Listener – named after the perspective used in the Establish
period. We refer to the point-of-reference cup (the green one
in the above example) as the anchor cup.
The first question we asked is what are the temporal
dynamics of establishing a local convention for the meaning
of left and right. To examine this question, we compared
participants’ performance over the six trials in the Establish
period. If addressees draw on the tendency of speakers to
adopt the listener’s perspective, then performance in the
Listener condition would be faster. Performance in the
Speaker condition would be slower because it requires
deviating from the global convention. If addressees rely
exclusively on local conventions in interpreting left and
right, then any problems in the beginning would be due to
the lack of precedent, which is common to both conditions.
The Test period tested whether the interpretation of left
and right will be maintained in the absence of
physical/perceptual constraints. This period contained
ambiguous trials, in which the anchor cup was flanked by an
empty slot on each side. We expected that the placement of
the cup will show consistency with the previously
established perspective. Our analyses focused on the time it
took to carry out the commands, and the proportion of time
participants spent looking in the region suggesting that they
interpreted the command the same way as in the establish
trials. We expected that both measures would show that the
addressees expected that the speakers would maintain the
same perspective in issuing the commands. Of critical
interest was whether there was a difference in the degree to
which this was true in both conditions. If local conventions
have only transient effect, then the perseverance in
perspective-taking might be greater in the Listener condition
than in the Speaker condition. This is because the test trials
allow the participants in the Speaker condition to exercise
their default, listener-centered interpretation of the
command, grounded in the global convention of left/right
usage. If so, participants in that condition could spend less

time looking at the consistent location and have longer
response times.
If the interpretation of the spatial terms is entirely
determined by the local conventions developed during the
Establish period, then we would not expect any differences
between conditions.
We also examined how participants would respond to a
change in the perspective from which the speaker uses left
and right. After the test trials, there were six more ‘Break’
trials. For the participants who received speaker trials in the
Establish period, these were listener trials, and for the
participants who received listener trials in the Establish
period, these were speaker trials. If addressees rely on local
conventions, the costs of switching from an established
precedent to a new perspective should be similar in both
conditions. However, if they rely on the global convention,
there would be higher costs in switching from interpreting a
term from one’s own perspective to interpreting it from
another’s perspective than in switching from interpreting a
term from another’s perspective to interpreting it from one’s
own perspective.

2688

white

blue

pink

green

yellow

red

grey
Figure 1. Illustration of the displays in speaker and
listener trials. “Put the red cup to the right of the
green” suggest a speaker-centered use of the spatial
terms while “Put the red cup to the left of the
green” a listener-centered use. When the display is
rotated vertically 180°, the same commands
demand a listener–centered and a speaker-centered
interpretation respectively.

Method
Participants
There were 16 undergraduates, all monolingual speakers of
Canadian English, in each of the two condition. Additional
six participants were recruited but not included in the study
because of equipment failure (failure to calibrate or capture
video). All received course credit for their participation.

Apparatus
A 5 x 5 plywood structure was used to position seven
different color cups (blue, green, pink, red, gray, white, and
yellow). Each slot was approximately 21 cm by 25 cm. Eye
movements were recorded using Applied Science
Laboratories head-mounted eye-tracker with 60Hz sampling
rate. A magnetic head-tracker allowed for the automatic
extraction of the spatial coordinates of the point of gaze. We
recoded the video from the scene image for later coding of
the nonverbal behavior of the confederate. An additional
camera provided a side view of the participant and the
display and enabled coding the arm movement and the final
placement of the cup.

Design and Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to condition. The
participant met the confederate in a waiting room and the
experimenter ushered both into the lab. Both were given a
letter of information about the study that described it as
examining how people give and follow commands. The
letter also outlined the roles of the speaker and the
addressee. The pair was instructed to work as efficiently as
possible. After signing the consent form, the confederate
and the participant participated in a draw, which was fixed
so that the participant always took the role of an Addressee.
The participant was then taken to the testing room and the
eyetracking equipment calibrated. The confederate sat
across, wearing reflective sunglasses.
No specific instruction were given about communication
during the study. To clarification questions, the confederate
responded by nodding (reaffirming the guess of the
participant). In very few cases, where no guess was
apparent, the confederate responded by pointing because
this most clearly disambiguated the command.
Each trial began with the experimenter positioning the
seven cups in the display. Then a card was handed to the
confederate. The card supposedly contained a picture of
how the display should end up looking like. In reality, it
contained a series of commands that the confederate had to
give. The critical instruction, containing a ’left’ or a ‘right’
term was always second. The other three commands
contained instructions like “Move the red cup one slot
down.”
There were three types of trials. On listener and speaker
trials, the anchor cup was in an end column so it was
flanked by just one empty slot. On these trials the physical
display determined the interpretation of the spatial term and

suggested either a listerner-centered interpretation or a
speaker-centered interpretation. On ambiguous trials, the
anchor cup was flanked by an empty slot on each side.
There were 18 trials. The first six trials differed between
conditions. For the participants in the Listener and Speaker
conditions, they were respectively listener and speaker
trials. The six ‘test’ trials were the same for both groups and
were always ambiguous trials. The last six ‘break’ trials
were either listener or speaker trials. They required a change
in perspective in the interpretation of the left and right
terms.
We constructed six displays and another six were added
to the set by rotating the original ones around the vertical
axis. Thus, a cup that was in the left half of a display would
be in the right half of the rotated one. The participants saw
one version of each display in the Establish part and one in
the Break part. Two different random orders were used for
presenting the trials in the Establish and Break parts and
order was counterbalanced across subject.
The displays used in the test trials were different from
those in the other parts of the study. An example of a
command if the display in Figure 1 were used would be
“Put the white cup to the left of the pink.” There were three
commands with left and three with right in each of the three
parts of the experiment.

Results
A preliminary analysis targeted establishing that our
dependent variables, especially the eye movement measures
are driven by interpretation of the verbal command rather
than the nonverbal behavior of the confederate. Two coders
blind to the hypotheses watched the scene camera
recordings of the ambiguous trials when the commands
were given. They did not hear the commands but knew
which cup was the anchor cup. They were asked to guess
which flanker slot the confederate wants to get filled. The
correlation between the two coders’ guesses was not
significant, suggesting that there were no reliable nonverbal
cues that could influence participants’ interpretation of the
spatial terms.

Behavioral Data
Cup Placement In the Establish and Break periods there
was only one slot where the cup being moved could be
placed. Thus, naturally, cup placements were always
consistent with an interpretation of the commands from the
speaker’s perspective on Speaker trials and an interpretation
of the commands from the listener’s perspective on Listener
trials. In the Test period, cup placements were consistent
with the precedent from the Establish period 100% of the
time. After Listener trials, the participants showed listenercentered interpretation of the spatial terms and after Speaker
trials, they showed speaker-centered interpretation of the
spatial terms.

2689

Figure 3. Percent of time spent looking in the
region showing egocentric interpretation of left
and right, in test trials.

Figure 2. Response times in each
condition by period and trial
Response Time Figure 2 shows the average response times
in the three periods of the study by condition and trial.
Response time was defined as the period from the offset of
the last word in the command, which identified the color of
the anchor cup, to the moment the cup being moved was
placed. These time points were identified from the video
from the side camera. The average response times in each
period were submitted to a 2 x 3 repeated measures
ANOVA with condition as a between-subject variable and
period as a within-subject variable. One participant was
dropped from this analysis because of missing data. The
analysis revealed a significant interaction between period
and condition, F(2, 58) = 10.55, p < .001. As Figure 2
shows, this interaction was due to the fact that the response
times of the participants in the speaker condition were
longer than the response times in the listener condition in
the first two periods (Establish and Test) but shorter in the
Break period. Post-hoc tests showed that only the difference
between conditions in the Establish period was significant.

Looking Data
The analyses of the looking data focused on the ambiguous
test trials because there were very few fixations outside of
the displays during listener and speaker trials. We examined
two looking measures: the location of first fixation
following the end of the command and looking time. For
both measures, fixations were coded as listener-centered or
speaker-centered if they were in the columns immediately
adjacent to the column in which the anchor cup was.
First Fixations The location of first fixations was analyzed
using generalized estimating equations, which is a technique
designed to handle repeated measures categorical data. The
proportion of listener-centered first fixations was 29% and
20% in the Listener and Speaker conditions respectively.
The difference between conditions was not significant χ2(1)
= .84, p > .05. The lack of difference suggests that the
precedents in the Establish trials did not significantly
influence first fixations in the Test period.

Looking Time The second measure we examined was the
proportion of time participants spent looking at the region
suggesting listener-centered interpretation of the spatial
term relative to the total number of fixations suggesting
listener-centered and speaker-centered interpretation. Only
fixations in the period from the end of the command to the
placement of the cup being moved were considered. Figure
3 shows the average proportion of time participants spent
looking at the slots consistent with an egocentric
interpretation of the commands. The data were submitted to
a repeated measures ANOVA with condition as a betweensubject variable. Participants in the Listener and Speaker
conditions spent 65% and 10% respectively looking at the
slots showing an egocentric interpretation of the commands.
The difference was statistically significant, F(1, 29) =
101.46, p < . 001.

Discussion
The goal of this study was to examine the role of local
conventions in the interpretation of the spatial terms left and
right. The placement of the cups during the Test period
clearly showed that addressees expected that the speaker
would continue to use the two spatial terms in the same way
as in the Establish period. Moreover, the analyses of the
looking time data showed that addressees were more likely
to look at the region consistent with a listener interpretation
of the commands if they had received Listener trials in the
Establish period than if they had received Speaker trials.
These findings provide strong evidence for the role of local
conventions in the interpretation of left and right.
The experiment also provided evidence for addressees’
expectations based on the global use of the terms.
Specifically, the response time data showed a significant
difference between conditions in the time it took
participants to execute the commands in the Establish
period. Participants in the Listener condition were faster as
predicted from the research showing that speakers usually
take the listener’s perspective in giving commands
(Mainwaring et al., 2003; Schober, 1993). There was also no

2690

difference between conditions in the proportion of first
fixations in the regions consistent with a listener
interpretation of the commands in the Test period. Although
this finding contradicts the looking time data in suggesting
that the Establish period had no effect on the interpretation
of the spatial terms in the Test period, it should be
interpreted with caution. First fixation were often not in the
target regions and thus, it is based on only one quarter of all
trials. Furthermore, while first fixations are sensitive to the
processes of referential interpretation in reading, they may
reflect visuo-spatial information in speech processing, e.g.,
the distribution of cups around the anchor cup, and thus
provide a noisier measure of on-line speech comprehension.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates the
importance of local conventions in the processing of spatial
terms. The picture that the results reveal, however, is one of
interaction between global, stored representations and local,
dynamically evolving ones.

Mainwaring, S., Tversky, B., Ohgishi, M., & Schiano, D.
(2003). Descriptions of simple spatial scenes in English
and Japanese. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 3(1),
3-42.
Maki, R., & Braine, L. (1985). The role of verbal labels in
the judgment of orientation and location. Perception,
14(1), 67-80.
Maki, R., Grandy, C., & Hauge, G. (1979). Why is telling
right from left more difficult than telling above from
below? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 5(1), 52-67.
Schober, M. F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47(1), 1-24.

Acknowledgments
We thank Bronwen Fullerton, Courtney Fitzgerald, Scott
Ross, Myriam Leduc-Robert, and Ashley Frambach for help
with data collection and coding.

References
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Bryant, D., & Tversky, B. (1992). Assessing spatial
frameworks with object and direction probes. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society, 30(1), 29-32.
Bryant, D., Tversky, B., & Franklin, N. (1992). Internal and
external spatial frameworks for representing described
scenes. Journal of Memory and Language, 31(1), 74-98.
Farrell, W. (1979). Coding left and right. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 5(1), 42-51.
Fisher, C., & Camenzuli, C. (1987). Influence of body
rotation on children's left-right confusion: A challenge to
bilateral symmetry theory. Developmental Psychology,
23(2), 187-189.
Franklin, N. (1995). Parsing surrounding space into regions.
Memory & Cognition, 23, 397-407.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181–218.
Glucksberg, S., Krauss, R. M., & Weisberg, R. (1966).
Referential communication in nursery school children:
Method and some preliminary findings. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology.
Internicola, R., & Weist, R. M. (2003). The acquisition of
simple and complex spatial locatives in English: A
longitudinal investigation First Language, 23, 239 -248.
Lewis, D. (1979/1991). Scorekeeping in a language game.
In S. Davis (Ed.), Pragmatics: A Reader (pp. 416-427).
New York: Oxford University Press.

2691

