UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of extensional information in conceptual combination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5v74g16p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Storms, Gert
Vanpaemel, Wolf
Voorspoels, Wouter

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of extensional information in conceptual combination
Wouter Voorspoels (wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, concat, Tiensestraat 102,
3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Wolf Vanpaemel (wolf.vanpaemel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, concat, Tiensestraat 102,
3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Gert Storms (gerrit.storms@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, concat, Tiensestraat 102,
3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Abstract
In this study, we evaluated the role of extensional information
in the representation of complex concepts. For 10 complex
concepts, typicality was predicted using a traditional featurebased prototype model, an instantiation-based spatial
exemplar model and an instantiation-based spatial prototype
model. Results clearly indicated that the extension of a
complex concept plays an important role in its representation,
and little or no variance in the observed typicality gradient
was accounted for exclusively by the prototype model.
Keywords: natural language categories;
combination; computational models;

conceptual

Two important aspects of human language are
compositionality
and
productivity.
In
everyday
conversation, simple semantic concepts (e.g. ‘sports’,
‘weapons’, ‘clothing’) are continuously combined, adapted
and specified into more complex concepts (‘outdoor sports’,
‘dangerous weapons’, ‘warm clothing’) that better fit the
intended meaning. The resulting linguistic structures are
generally effortlessly comprehended by listeners or readers.
Indeed, language comprehension and production seem to
necessarily imply “… the combination of concepts into
larger and larger structures as guided by the syntax of
language” (Murphy, 2002, p. 443).
An important topic in research concerning semantic
concept representation – and moreover, an important test of
the generality of theories on natural language concepts – is
how people arrive at the interpretation of complex concepts,
such as ‘homicidal green penguin’ (Osherson & Smith,
1981). While context and language syntax definitely play a
role in interpreting these larger structures, it is obvious that
the interpretation of the combination of relatively simple
concepts into more complex concepts is for a large part
determined by the meaning, and thus the representation, of
the relatively simple1 concepts ‘penguin’, ‘homicidal’ and
‘green’ (e.g. Hampton, 1997).

1
We use the term ‘simple’ to denote concepts for which a well
established, lexicalized expression exists.

Challenges to a prototype view of complex concepts
Following the main approach in research concerning natural
language categories, theories of conceptual combination are
traditionally based on a prototype view on concepts. In this
view it is assumed that simple, semantic concepts are
represented by a prototype a summary representation often
assumed to be the average of the category (e.g., Hampton,
1993). The concept ‘weapons’, for example, is assumed to
be a summary representation of what weapons are like on
average.
Extending this approach to the domain of conceptual
combination, several models have been developed that use
this notion of a prototype to give an account of how people
interpret complex concepts such as ‘dangerous weapons’ or
‘red apple’ (Murphy, 1990; Smith, Osherson, Rips & Keane,
1988). In these models, a concept is typically seen as a
schema, consisting of dimensions (e.g. color, shape, size)
and possible values on these dimensions. The schema
representation of a concept such as apple may contain the
dimensions colour, shape, texture and size. The dimension
for color, would contain possible values ‘red’, ‘green’ and
‘brown’, each of which has a certain salience within the
concept. When the concept ‘apple’ is combined with another
concept to form for example the complex concept ‘red
apple’, the dimension ‘color’ becomes dominated by the
value ‘red’, and the dimension of color is weighed more
heavily. The net result is that the dimension ‘color’ becomes
more diagnostic in determining whether something is a red
apple than the dimension color would be in a judgment of
whether something is an apple. In short, the conceptual
combination ‘red apple’ results in a modification –
essentially a reweighing of features – of the prototype of the
concept of ‘apple’.
There are however two major challenges for these
prototype models of complex concepts. First, several
intuitions and observations suggest that the extension of
complex concepts – i.e., the set of things in the world the
concept refers to – also plays in the representation (Murphy,
1990; Gray & Smith, 1995). For example, Medin and

2432

Shoben (1988) have shown that a metal spoon is judged to
be more typical of ‘spoons’ than is a wooden spoon,
whereas a wooden spoon is judged more typical of ‘large
spoons’ than is a metal spoon. This is problematic for the
prototype based models since there is no a priori reason why
modifying the size dimension of the concept ‘spoon’ affects
the salience of a certain value on another dimension.
However, many instances of the category ‘large spoon’ are
made of wood, and it seems people use their knowledge of
the extension of the concept ‘large spoon’ to judge
typicality. The importance of extensional information in
conceptual combination is often referred to as extensional
feedback (e.g. Hampton, 1997). Despite clear evidence, well
specified and empirically grounded ways of implementing
‘extensional feedback’ in models of conceptual combination
have yet to be developed.
A second and perhaps even greater challenge for
prototype models of conceptual combination, is the recent
rise of the exemplar view in semantic concept research.
According to this view, categories are represented by
previously encountered instances of a category. The concept
‘weapons’ thus is assumed to be represented by members of
the category. Recent research contrasting prototype models
and exemplar models in the prediction of typicality strongly
suggests that semantic concepts are represented by instances
rather than by an abstract summary representation (e.g.,
Voorspoels, Vanpaemel & Storms, 2008). Obviously, these
findings are problematic for the traditional models of
conceptual combinations, since these theories are based on
prototype representations of simple concepts.

Outline
Both the notion of extensional feedback and the success of
the exemplar view in studies concerning simple concepts,
point to the necessity of a systematic study of extensional
information in conceptual combination. The present study
aims at a systematic evaluation of the role of extensional
information in conceptual combination, starting from recent
models used in simple concept research. More specifically,
we contrasted two different prototype models –which
neglect extensional information – with an instantiation
based exemplar model – which takes the category extension
into consideration – in the prediction of the typicality
gradient of 10 complex concepts.
One prototype model is based on the idea of conceptual
combination as the modification of a prototype in the sense
of a reweighing of the features of the modified concept. This
model will be referred to as the feature-based prototype
model. The two other models – the second prototype model
and the exemplar model– are based on an underlying spatial
representation. The key idea behind the exemplar model is
that a complex concept is represented by a number of
instances that are activated. In the spatial prototype model, a
complex concept is represented by the average of a set of
instances. The spatial models both rely on an instantiation
principle (Heit & Barsalou, 1994), which essentially posits
that certain judgments about concepts are made by

activating 1 or more members of the category the concept
refers to.
We used the typicality gradient of the complex concepts
as an evaluation criterion for the models. The notion of
typicality gradient refers to the observation that some
members of a category are better examples of the category
than are others. Cows are generally seen as more typical
examples of the category ‘mammals’ than are duckbilled
platypi, or whales. Typicality has been shown to be an
influential variable in a wide range of cognitive tasks (for a
review see Hampton, 1993), and one of the most important
variables in semantic concept research. As such, typicality
can be considered an important criterion in evaluating
theories of concepts: a theory of concept representation that
can not account for the typicality gradient is no good.
In the next sections we will first give an overview of the
data we used in the present study followed by a detailed
overview of the three models. After this, we will present and
discuss the results of the model evaluations.

Data
The dependent variable in this study is a measure of graded
structure. To derive a feature-based prototype measure of
typicality for the complex concepts, we used previously
published feature applicability ratings and newly collected
feature importance ratings. To obtain a spatial
representation, we used previously published similarity
ratings. To implement the instantiation principle, we
collected categorization decisions.
Stimulus set Complex concepts were created starting from
5 common, simple natural language categories (‘sports’,
‘musical instruments’, ‘vehicles’, ‘clothing’ and ‘weapons’)
taken from a recent norm study (De Deyne et al., 2008).
Each of these categories contains between 20 and 30
(verbal) instances.
For each of the 5 common concepts, we construed two
intuitively non-overlapping complex concepts, (i.e., not
sharing instances), resulting in 10 complex concepts, which
were specifications of the basic categories: ‘indoor sports’
and ‘outdoor sports’, ‘musical instruments used in rock
music’ and ‘musical instruments used in classical music’,
‘vehicles used for the transport of people’ and ‘vehicles
used for the transport of goods’, ‘summer clothes’ and
‘winter clothes’, ‘weapons used in wars’ and ‘weapons used
for sports’.2 The complex concepts construed in this way
contained at least some of the members of the simple
concepts from which they were derived. For example, the
simple concept ‘sports’ entails members such as
‘basketball’, ‘voleyball’ and ballet – which intuitively are
‘indoor sports’ – but also members such as ‘rugby’, ‘skiing’
and ‘sailing’ – which intuitively are ‘outdoor sports’.

2
These are (free) translations of the stimuli that were actually
used.

2433

Typicality ratings We used a goodness-of-example3
measure to assess the typicality of an instance for a
category. All instances of each simple concept were rated
for goodness-of-example for each associated complex
concepts by 20 to 26 participants. Reliabilities, estimated
using split half correlations and corrected with the
Spearman-Brown formula ranged from .91 to .98. A
typicality score for each instance towards the relevant
complex concept was obtained by averaging the typicality
ratings across participants.
Feature applicability and feature importance ratings For
each of the simple concepts, De Deyne et al., 2008 report an
exemplar by feature matrix, containing between 32 and 39
features for the concepts used in this study. These matrices
contain judgments – elicited from 4 participants – of the
applicability of each feature for each exemplar of a simple
concept. The reliability of the applicability judgments per
concept was evaluated applying Spearman-Brown formula
to split-half correlations, resulting in estimated reliabilities
between .83 and .88 (De Deyne et al., 2008).
We collected additional data capturing the importance of
the features of each simple concept for the derived complex
concepts. For each of the complex concepts in this study, we
asked 10 to 15 participants to rate the importance of the
relevant features4. Applying the Spearman-Brown formula
to the split-half correlations, all reliabilities except one were
estimated between .81 and .93. For ‘weapons used for
sports’, the reliability was .64, which is rather low. These
feature importance ratings will be used as weights for the
calculation of the feature-based prototype model.
Similarity ratings and underlying representations For the
5 simple concepts pairwise similarity ratings were available
from the norm studies (De Deyne et al., 2008). For each
category, all pairwise similarities were judged by 14 to 25
participants. Reliability of the ratings was evaluated using
split half correlations, corrected with the Spearman-Brown
formula, and ranged between .89 and .96.
Categorization decisions Using a simple computerized
categorization task, 35 participants were presented with the
instances of a simple concept and were asked to indicate to
which of the appropriate 2 complex concepts the instance
belonged. The task thus consisted of 5 blocks, one for each
simple concept, and each block consisted of all instances of
a simple concept (thus ranging from 20 to 30 instances). In
each trial, a fixation cross was presented in the middle of the
screen, followed by the stimulus. The stimulus remained on
the screen until an answer was given, for a maximum of 10
seconds. The order of presentation of the instances was
random, as well as the order of the 5 blocks. Categorization
3

Typicality ratings and goodness-of-example ratings are both
measures of graded structure in concepts. They are often seen as
synonymous.
4
i.e. the features of the simple concept from which the complex
concept was derived.

proportions were derived for each of the instances of a
simple concept with respect to the appropriate complex
concepts.

Model review
Feature-based prototype model
In the feature-based prototype model the representation of a
concept is assumed to consist of a set of (weighed) features.
As noted earlier, prototype modification as proposed by
traditional theories of conceptual combination (e.g. Smith et
al., 1988) essentially comes down to a reweighing of the
feature structure. Typicality of an instance towards the
modified concept then is the similarity of the instance
towards the (re-)weighed feature representation. This can
easily be calculated by summing the importance of a feature
multiplied by the degree to which a certain instance has this
feature.
Formally, for an instance i with F features, the typicality
towards complex concept A is given by:

T(i, A ) =

F

∑

j =1

(I

jA

× T ji

)

(1)

in which I jA is the importance of feature j for complex
concept A, and Tji is the applicability of feature j to instance
i.

Spatial models
The predictions of typicality of the exemplar model and the
spatial prototype model are based on underlying spatial
representations of the simple concepts from which the
complex concepts are derived. In such similarity spaces, the
instances of a category are represented as points in an Mdimensional space and the distance between two instances
in the space is inversely related to the similarity between the
instances. Depending on the model – a prototype or an
exemplar model – typicality is translated as the distance
(i.e., the inverse of similarity) towards the average point of a
category, (i.e., the prototype), or the summed distance of the
instance towards all other instances of the. Spatial models
have already been proven to be quite successful in the
representation of basic semantic concepts and more
specifically in accounts of typicality (e.g., Verheyen, Ameel
& Storms, 2007; Voorspoels, Vanpaemel & Storms, 2008).
We obtained an underlying spatial representation for each
of the 5 simple concepts, using the pairwise similarity
ratings as input for a SAS MDS analysis (SAS, V9). Since
determining the optimal number of dimensions for semantic
concepts is not an easy task (Verheyen, Ameel & Storms,
2007), solutions were calculated in 2 to 6 dimensions for all
concepts. Stress values decreased monotonically as a
function of dimensionality, indicating the routine did not get
trapped in a local minimum for any of the solutions.
In the present study we used underlying spatial
representations of the simple concepts – implying that two
complex concepts that are derived from the same simple

2434

concept, share the same underlying spatial representation,
which contains all members of the simple concept. For
example, ‘winter clothes’ and ‘summer clothes’ have the
same underlying spatial representation – i.e., the underlying
representation for the simple concept ‘clothes’ – yet they
will not have the same members. The complex concept
‘winter clothes’ contains instances such as ‘scarf’, ‘mittens’
and ‘beanie’, while the complex concept ‘summer clothes’
contains members like ‘t-shirt’, ‘shorts’ and ‘top’.
The concept representation of a complex concept was
built using an instantiation process, in which a certain subset
of exemplars in the underlying spatial representation is
used. We will in turn describe the spatial prototype model,
the exemplar model and the instantiation principle that is
applied in both models.
Exemplar model According to the exemplar view a concept
representation consists of all members of a category.
Typicality of an instance to a category then is the summed
similarity of the instance towards all members of the
category. For stimulus i with M dimensions, the typicality to
complex concept A is predicted to be:

M
T ( i, A) = − ∑  ∑
j =1 k =1
n

(x

2 1/ 2

ik


− x jk 



)

,

(2)

where the instances j are members of the set (of size n) that
make up the category representation and xik is the coordinate
of instance i on dimension k...
Prototype model A prototype of a category can be
conceptualized as the average instance of the category.
Typicality of an instance to a category according to the
prototype view is the similarity of that instance to the
prototype. Formally, the predicted typicality of instance i to
complex concept A is given by:

M
T (i , A) = − ∑
 k =1

(x

2 1/ 2

)
ik − p Ak






,

(3)

where xik is the coordinate of instance i on dimension k, p Ak
is the coordinate of the prototype of category A on
dimension k and M is the number of dimensions of the
underlying representation. The prototype is found by
averaging across the coordinates of these instances on each
dimension:

1

n

p Ak = n ∑ xik ,

(4)

i =1

in which i is an element of the set of instances, with size n,
that are included in the representation of category A. Note
that the instances included in the calculation of the
prototype will determine the location of the prototype.
The instantiation principle In semantic concept research,
an instantiation principle has been proposed (Heit &
Barsalou, 1996) that essentially states that for category
decisions – such as categorization decisions, but also
typicality judgments – one (optimal) category member is

activated. This principle is generalized in De Wilde,
Vanoverberghe, Storms and De Boeck (2003), such that an
optimal subset of members of the category is activated
instead of only one. As a fictive example: in evaluating
whether a whale is a fish, people might instantiate ‘trout’,
‘shark’ and ‘gold fish’ and base their evaluation on the
similarity of a whale to these instantiated members of the
categoy ‘fish’ rather than activating all previously
encountered examples of fish, as is assumed by traditional
exemplar models.
In the present study, both the prototype and the exemplar
models require a specification of the exact set of category
members that are included in the representation (see
equation (2) and (4)). A proces inspired by the instantiation
principle is easily implemented in formulas (2) and (4) by
choosing the number of instances included and the specific
instances that are instantiated. Based on the categorization
proportions, we made a ranking of instances for each
complex concept in terms of the proportion of people that
judged them as belonging to the category. For each complex
concept we then selected the n (ranging from 2 to 20)
instances which were most agreed upon to belong to the
category (i.e. with the highest categorization proportion for
the category). The resulting set of n “optimal” instances was
then used in the exemplar (equation 2) and prototype model
(equation 4).

Results
The performance of the different models was assessed by
computing the correlation between the empirically observed
and the predicted typicality. For the models based on an
underlying similarity space, predictors of typicality were
calculated for each concept representation including 2 to 20
instances – and this was done for underlying spatial
representations in dimensionalities 2 to 6. This procedure
resulted in two (exemplar or prototype predictor) by 5
(Dimensionality 2 to 6) by 19 (different number of instances
included) predictors for each complex concept. For each
dimensionality the optimal number of instances (i.e.,
resulting in the concept representation that produces the best
correlation with observed typicality) was chosen. Note that
the two models can have optimal subsets with a different
number of instances given a certain dimensionality, since
the optimal set was chosen separately for each model and
for each dimension.
In Figure 1 the performance of these two models is
presented, separately for each dimension. Figure 1 also
shows the performance of the feature-based prototype
model. Since this model is not based on the underlying
spatial representation, it yields only one prediction for each
complex concept, presented by the horizontal dashed line. In
‘outdoor sports’ and ‘weapons used for sports’, the featurebased prototype model yielded a (slightly) negative
correlation with typicality, and was not added in the graph.
As for ‘weapons used for sports’, this might be due to the
low reliability (.62) of the feature importance ratings, which
are essential in the calculation of this measure.

2435

It is clear from Figure 1 that the exemplar model (solid
line) generally outperforms the feature-based prototype
model (dashed line) in all but one category (‘vehicles for
transporting people’). For ‘musical instruments used in rock
music’, the exemplar model predicts typicality better than
the prototype model from Dimensionality 4 onwards, and
for ‘summer clothes’ from Dimensionality 5 onwards. These
findings are in strong favor of the use of extensional
information in the representation of complex concepts.

c
o
r
r
e
l
a
t
i
o
n

based prototype model5 as predictors in a regression
analysis with the observed typicality as criterion. In this
way, we can investigate the differential contribution of the
exemplar and prototype model in the prediction of
typicality. The results of these analyses are shown in Table
1.
Table 1 shows that in the regression analyses the
exemplar model is clearly the dominant predictor. In all
complex concepts, the exemplar model contributes
significantly (at level .01) to the prediction of typicality,
while the feature-based prototype model does not contribute
significantly at level .01 and only in 3 of the 10 concepts, at
level .05. These results strongly suggest that there is little or
no variance in the observed typicality ratings explained by
the feature-based prototype model that is not accounted for
by the exemplar model.
Table 1. R-squared and b-coefficients of the feature-based
prototype predictor and the exemplar predictor for the 10
complex concepts. Note that for the exemplar predictor, the
dimensionality was set at 5.
concept

dimensionality

Figure 1. Correlation between observed and predicted
typicality for the 3 models as a function of dimensionality.
A potential concern in the comparison between the
feature-based prototype model and the exemplar model is
that the feature-based prototype model might have suffered
from the lack of freedom available to the exemplar model.
However, this difference is non-existent for the comparison
between the two spatial models. Note that the prototype
model is based on the same underlying spatial
representations, and uses the same information to select a
subset of instances. The only difference between these two
models is that the exemplar model uses optimally selected
instances as representation, and the prototype model
averages over an optimally selected subset of instances.
Figure 1 shows that the exemplar model also outperforms
the spatial prototype model (dotted line) for the 10 complex
concepts. While differences are rather small for some
complex concepts, the exemplar model consistently predicts
the observed typicality better.
Apart from looking at the performance of each model
separately, it is also worthwhile to investigate whether the
exemplar and the prototype models capture a different
aspect of the variance in typicality. Indeed, it might be that
some important aspect of the typicality gradient is not
explained by the exemplar model, but is only captured by
the prototype model. To check this, we entered the
predictions of both the exemplar model and the feature-

R-squared

prototype

exemplar

Outdoor sports

0,51

-0,005

9,351**

Indoor sports

0,36

0,080

5,814**

Rock music

0,61

0,141*

6,911**

Classical music

0,39

0,021

4,326**

Transport people

0,70

0,080*

4,194**

Transport goods

0,70

-0,010

8,684**

Summer clothes

0,53

0,089

3,479**

Winter clothes

0,57

0,067*

4,088**

War weapons

0,95

0,052

4,183**

0,53

0,163

7,549**

Sport weapons
* p < .05

** p< .01

Discussion
The main aim of the present study was to evaluate the role
of extensional information in the representation of complex
concepts. We compared an exemplar model, which included
extensional information, to two prototype-like models
which deny an explicit role of extensional information, on
their ability to predict typicality in 10 complex concepts.
The feature-based prototype model was based on
reweighing of the features of the concept from which the
complex concept was derived. This model resembles
traditional prototype modification models of conceptual
combination (e.g. Murphy, 1990; Smith et al., 1988). The
spatial instantiation prototype model was based on an
underlying spatial representation, in which the prototype is
defined as the average of a set of optimally chosen
instances. In the instantiation-based spatial exemplar model,
the representation of the complex category was made up by
5
We did not include the spatial prototype model in these
analyses due to problems of colinearity.

2436

a set of optimally chosen instances. In each of the three
models, typicality was defined as the similarity towards the
category for which the predictions were made.
The results clearly favored the exemplar model. First,
considering the performance of the three models separately,
the exemplar model consistently outperformed both
prototype models in the prediction of typicality for all the
complex concepts. These findings suggest that the extension
of a complex concept indeed plays an important role in its
representation. Second, regression analyses including both
the exemplar model’s prediction and the feature-based
prototype model’s prediction demonstrated that only a small
proportion of the variance in the observed typicality ratings
was uniquely accounted for by the feature-based prototype
model. This finding is in line with expectation that
extensional information might play a role more fundamental
than is currently acknowledged in the traditional theories of
conceptual combination – consequently acknowledging the
importance of notions such as extensional feedback.
Three concluding remarks are appropriate here. First, we
observed considerable differences in succes of predicting
typicality for the complex concepts used in the present
study. The role of extensional information however was
obvious for all complex concepts, which does not imply that
other factors – not included in the present study – might also
be important.
Secondly, in this study we left open the essential question
of how the right members of the complex concept are
instantiated. We do not in any way claim that the
categorization data we used in the instantiation process has
any explanatory value nor do we at the moment have a
viable alternative. While the instantiation-based exemplar
model performed well, the crucial question for this model is:
how can we construct novel, unfamiliar complex concept
representations if we have no remembered instances to call
to mind (Hampton, 1997; Rips, 1995). For now, this
obviously is an important shortcoming of the exemplar
model as presented here.
On the other hand, the model is not restricted to using
categorization data. Other variables – such as familiarity or
association strength – with more explanatory strength can be
implemented in the same way. In this sense, the
instantiation-based exemplar model allows the explicit study
of such variables, and could perhaps be a valuable tool in
the systematic study of conceptual combination.
Third, an obvious strength of the instantiation-based
exemplar approach evaluated in this study is that it is
compatible with models used in simple concept research.
The same model can be applied to both the study of
common, simple concepts and the study of conceptual
combination. In this sense, the model could be a step
towards a more unified theory of concepts, covering a
broader range of phenomena.

Acknowledgments

project OT/05/27 sponsored by the Research Counsil of the
university of Leuven. Both of these grants were given to the
second author. Correspondence concerning this article
should be addressed to Wouter Voorspoels, K.U. Leuven
Department of Psychology, Concat, Tiensestraat 102, B3000 Leuven, Belgium.
Email: wouter.voorspoels@psy.kuleuven.be
Website: ppw.kuleuven.be/concat

References
De Deyne, S., Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., Vanpaemel, W.,
Dry, M. J., Voorspoels, W., & Storms, G., (2008).
Exemplar by feature applicability matrices and other
Dutch normative data for semantic concepts. Behavior
Research Methods, 40 (4), 1030-1048.
De Wilde, E., Vanoverberghe, V., Storms, G., & De Boeck,
P. (2003). The instantiation principle re-evaluated.
Memory, 11, 533-548.
Hampton, J. A. (1993). Prototype models of concept
representation. In I. Van Mechelen, J. A. Hampton, R. S.
Michalski, and P. Theunis (eds.), Categories and
concepts: Theoretical reviews and inductive data
analysis. London: Academic Press.
Hampton, J. A. (1997). Conceptual Combination. In K.
Lamberts and D. Shanks (eds.), Knowledge, concepts and
categories. Hove: Psychology Press.
Murphy, G. L. (1990). Noun phrase interpretation and
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 259 – 288.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Fodor, J., Lepore, E. (1996). The red herring and the pet
fish: why concepts still can’t be prototypes. Cognition,
58, 253-270.
Gray, K. C., Smith, E. E. (1995). The role of instance
retrieval in understanding complex concepts. Memory and
Cognition, 6, 665-674.
Heit, E., Barsalou, L. W. (1996). The instantiation principle
in natural language categories. Memory, 4 (4), 413-451.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E. (1981). On the adequacy of
prototype theory of as a theory of concepts. Cognition, 9,
35 – 58.
Rips, L. J. (1995). The current status of research on concept
combination. Mind and Language, 10, 72-104.
Smith, E. E., Osherson, D. N., Rips, L. J., & Keane, M.
(1988). Combining prototypes: A selective modification
model. Cognitive Science, 12, 485-527.
Verheyen, S., Ameel, E., & Storms, G. (2007). Determining
the dimensionality in spatial representations of semantic
concepts. Behavior Research Methods, 39 (3), 427-438.
Voorspoels, W., Vanpaemel, W., & Storms, G. (2008).
Exemplars and prototypes in natural language concetps: a
typicality based evaluation. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 15 (3), 630-637.

The research reported in this article is part of an
interdisciplinary research project (IDO/02/004) and research

2437

