UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cognitive Science of Bilingualism

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/29s677td

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Li, Ping
Van Hell, Janet

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cognitive Science of Bilingualism
Symposium Organizers:
Janet G. van Hell (j.vanhell@pwo.ru.nl)
Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen
Montessorilaan 3, 6525 HR Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Ping Li (pul8@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA

Symposium Presenters:
Ton Dijkstra (t.dijkstra@psych.ru.nl)
Natasha Tokowicz (tokowicz@pitt.edu)
Donders Centre for Cognition,
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, USA

Janet G. van Hell (j.vanhell@pwo.ru.nl)

Laurie B. Feldman

Behavourial Science Institute
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Department of Psychology, the University at Albany, SUNY
& Haskins Labs, USA

Walter J. B. van Heuven
(walter.vanheuven@nottingham.ac.uk)

Ping Li (pul8@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State
University, USA

School of Psychology, University of Nottingham, UK

Li-Hai Tan (tanlh@hku.hk)
School of Humanities, State Key Lab of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, University of Hong Kong, China
Keywords: bilingualism; language processing; language
acquisition; neuroimaging; modeling.

Introduction
The world’s language system is rapidly changing because of
demographic trends, new technologies, and international
communication (Graddol, 2004). One of the consequences is
that the majority of people now speak more than one
language. Such an increasing number of bilingual and
multilingual speakers across the world will not only affect
communication, it will also affect theoretical perspectives in
the cognitive sciences. In line with this trend, the study of
cognition and language in bilingual and multilingual
speakers has gained prominence in the past decade (for
reviews, see Kroll & de Groot, 2005; Li & Green, 2007; van
Hell & Tokowicz, in press). Recent research indicates that
both languages are active in the bilingual mind in on-line
processing and both influence language processing even
when the social and linguistic context calls for only one
language. The implication is that the bilingual cognitive
system is fundamentally permeable across language
boundaries.
The study of bilingualism is of interest in its own right,
but also provides an effective tool to examine fundamental
issues in cognitive science. Studies using bilingual speakers
inform cognitive scientists on basic questions related to
plasticity and constraints in learning, how systems change
depending on the specifics of the input environment, the
resolution of competition across cognitive systems, and
mechanism related to attention, inhibition, and cognitive
control.

This symposium focuses on new developments in
research on the learning, perception, and production of
words – the basic building blocks of a language – in second
language learners and proficient bilinguals. How do
bilinguals juggle two language systems in one mind? Which
cognitive mechanisms do bilinguals use to resolve crosslanguage competition? How do second language learners
integrate new knowledge into an existing cognitive system?
In the symposium we present to CogSci 2009, these and
related questions will be addressed from different angles,
integrating experimental, developmental, modeling,
electrophysiological and neuroimaging perspectives.

Summary of Presentations
In the first presentation, Laurie Feldman focuses on how L1
speakers tune their language behavior to nonnative speakers
and on how nonnative speakers tune their language behavior
to native speakers. She will present recent studies in which
she compared the effect of a foreign and native accent on
the recognition of words in the first language (L1) and
second language (L2). When English materials were
presented in a cross-modal lexical decision task,
morphological facilitation was weaker for native Englishspeaking participants when the primes were pronounced in a
nonnative than in a native accent. By contrast, L2 speakers
of English showed comparable facilitation when primes
were pronounced in their nonnative accent and in a native
accent. Morphological effects in L2 have been documented
(cf. Basnight-Brown, Chen, Shu, Kostić, & Feldman, 2007).
Ongoing work differentiates effects of shared morphology
from shared form in native and nonnative speakers. Results

2077

are revealing about the phonologies that underlie listening
and speaking, and conditions under which aspects of
meaning can offset the impairment due to mismatching
phonologies (accent).
In the second talk, Janet van Hell and Natasha Tokowicz
adopt a developmental perspective and focus on the learning
of words in L2 in ‘late’ learners, individuals who learned
their L2 in middle childhood or later. How do late L2
learners, who start with an already established lexicosemantic system in the L1, add novel words to this system?
According to the influential Revised Hierarchical Model
(RHM; Kroll & Stewart, 1994), learning words in L2 is
fundamentally different from learning words in L1. The
model proposes that during the early stages of L2 learning,
L2 word forms are associated to the corresponding L1 word
forms, and L2 learners will strongly rely on their L1
knowledge when they are processing words in the L2. As L2
learners become more proficient in L2, the RHM states that
direct L2 word-to-concept mappings become stronger. The
RHM is developed to account for L2 learning in adult
classroom learners. Van Hell and Tokowicz examined
whether the model also accounts for other types of learners,
e.g., child L2 learners and learners who learned their L2 in
contextually rich learning situations (e.g., by being
immersed in the L2). They will discuss implications for the
RHM of evidence from behavioral and ERP studies on child
classroom learners, adult learners who learned their L2
when studying abroad, and adult learners who learned L2 in
the classroom.
In the third talk, Ping Li and Li-Hai Tan will present
evidence from functional neuroimaging and computational
studies of bilingual lexical representation. Their research
asks how language-specific experience with typologically
distinct languages might affect the representation of
linguistic categories in the bilingual brain. Previous
neuroimaging research indicates that English verbs and
nouns are represented in frontal and posterior brain regions,
respectively, while such dissociations are absent in Chinese.
Using fMRI they have found that bilingual Chinese-English
speakers display distinct neural patterns in the processing of
nouns and verbs in the two languages, suggesting that
lexical representation may take different forms in the
bilingual brain. These findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that neural circuits for linguistic dimensions are
weighted
and
modulated
by
language-specific
characteristics, and that the bilingual brain is responsive to
the specific characteristics of each language in early
learning. The results are also consistent with their
computational studies, in which connectionist models show
that the structure of lexical representation may be
fundamentally different depending on the onset time of L2
acquisition relative to that of L1. Reorganization of L2
lexical representation independent of L1 is possible only if
the representational structure is plastic enough to allow for
significant competition from L2 to L1.
In the fourth and final presentation, Walter van Heuven
and Ton Dijkstra will revisit the BIA+ model of bilingual

language comprehension (Dijkstra & van Heuven, 2002)
and evaluate its processing and structural assumptions in the
light of the brain sciences. The BIA+ model is based on the
Interactive Activation model developed to account for word
recognition in one language. To a large extent, the BIA+
model has so far been based on and supported by behavioral
data. It is now time to assess to what extent the model is
also supported by neuroimaging and electrophysiological
data. After reviewing the model, Van Heuven and Dijkstra
discuss its distinction between a language processing system
and a task/decision system, and its basic assumptions. Such
a distinction between a language processing system and a
task/decision system is also relevant for the broader area of
cognitive science. They will argue that the BIA+ model can
accommodate fMRI and ERP data. Simulation data with
BIA+ will illustrate its compatibility with some recently
collected electrophysiological data. Finally, they will
discuss how neuroimaging data can provide information
about functional components of the BIA+ model that is hard
to obtain from behavioral studies.
Janet van Hell will give an introduction and overview of
the symposium at the beginning, and Ping Li will provide an
integrative discussion at the conclusion.

Acknowledgments
The work presented in this symposium is supported by
grants NWO#400-03-464 (JvH), NSF#0642586 (PL), and
NICHD grant HD-01994 (to Haskins Laboratories).

References
Basnight-Brown, D., Chen, H., Shu, H., Kostić, A. &
Feldman, L. B. (2007). Monolingual and bilingual
recognition of regular and irregular English verbs: Does
sensitivity to word form vary with language experience?
Journal of Memory and Language. 57, 65-80.
Dijkstra, A., & van Heuven, W. J. B. (2002). The
architecture of the bilingual word recognition system:
From identification to decision. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 5, 175-197.
Graddol, D. (2004). The future of language. Science, 303,
1329-1331.
Kroll, J. F., & de Groot, A. M. B. (2005). Handbook of
bilingualism: Psycholinguistic approaches. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connections between bilingual memory representations.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Li. P., & Green, D. (2007). Neurocognitive approaches to
bilingualism: Asian languages. A special issue of
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 10 (2), 117-210.
Van Hell, J. G., & Tokowicz, N. (in press). Event-related
brain potentials and second language learning: Syntactic
processing in late L2 learners at different L2 proficiency
levels. Second Language Research.

2078

