UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Feedback in Learning Form-Meaning Mappings

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53k5m0j2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dale, Rick
Jeuniaux, Patrick
Louwerse, Max

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Feedback in Learning Form-Meaning Mappings
Patrick Jeuniaux (pjeuniau@memphis.edu)
Rick Dale (radale@memphis.edu)
Max M. Louwerse (mlouwers@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology
Institute for Intelligent Systems
Memphis, TN 38152 USA
mapping.
Like all inductive problems, language learning cannot be
purely based on experience but requires a bias that
constrains the alternatives under consideration (Mitchell,
1997). Theories of language acquisition locate the bias
either in the individual, in the environment, or in both.
At the individual level, the child has been described as
being equipped with innate linguistic knowledge (Anderson
& Lightfoot, 2000), learning preferences (Markman, 1991)
or special cognitive characteristics (Kersten & Earles,
2001). At the environmental level, the child is believed to
benefit from explicit or implicit cues helping the learning
process. Explicit cues consist of the information that the
caregiver intentionally provides to the child in order to
improve his or her language abilities. Implicit cues are the
information that the child, unbeknownst to the caregiver,
can use to infer knowledge of language (Regier, 1996).

Abstract
Word learning is a complex activity whose mechanisms are
not fully understood. For instance, there is an ongoing debate
whether feedback is fundamental to learning the meaning of
words. Three experiments and a simulation aimed to
investigate the importance and role of feedback in learning a
six-word vocabulary of an artificial language. In the
experiments, participants had to guess what object in a visual
array of objects was referred to by an utterance composed of
unknown words. The words referred to objects characteristics
like color, size or shape. Results showed that feedback led to
a superior learning rate. However, some learning did occur
without feedback. A simulation further illustrated possible
mechanisms responsible for learning with and without
feedback. These data are consistent with the idea that the
mechanism by which feedback particularly helps learning
consists of reducing the amount of ambiguity in the
environment.
Keywords: language acquisition, artificial word learning,
feedback,
ambiguity,
computational
modeling,
psycholinguistics

The Role of Feedback

Introduction
Language acquisition involves, at least as a substantial part,
the mapping between word forms and their meaning. There
remain considerable questions about how this mapping
unfolds, and specifically, how feedback works to help
learning, if it does at all. The current study investigates this
issue in three experiments and a computational model
whereby participants learn a six-word vocabulary of an
artificial language.

Learning Form-Meaning Mappings
The notion of meaning can be thought of as a reference to
the perceptual world (Smith & Yu, 2008) or as an
association to other words (Landauer & Dumais, 1997).
Although these accounts are not mutually exclusive, the
grounding in the perceptual world is generally considered as
a more basic and early learning process than the associations
of word forms to each other (Werker, Cohen, Lloyd,
Casasola, & Stager, 1998).
The task that the child faces in acquiring a language is to
establish the appropriate mapping between forms and
meaning. The acquisition of that mapping, as well as the
development of other aspects of language (e.g., syntax),
seems to emerge seamlessly given that most children come
to have a good command of their native language. It is
however not clear by what mechanisms children learn that

Feedback is one of the explicit cues caregivers can use in
the word-learning process. It is a reaction directed to the
child on the basis of one of the child’s behaviors, and can be
either positive or negative. A parent approving a child’s
production is an instance of positive feedback (e.g., yes,
doggie!), while a parent correcting a child’s mistake (e.g.,
calling a dog a cat) is negative feedback (e.g., no, this is not
a cat, it’s a dog).
The role of feedback in language acquisition is still a
matter of some dispute (cf. Chouinard & Clark, 2003). Two
broad types of theoretical postures regarding feedback can
be contrasted: either considering feedback as irrelevant to
language acquisition or considering feedback as relevant but
sometimes present in hidden forms in the child’s
environment. On the feedback-is-irrelevant side, it has been
argued that children generally learn language without
feedback (Brown & Hanlon, 1970; cf. Regier, 1996). On the
feedback-is-relevant-but-hidden side, it has been argued that
feedback is helpful but generally delivered in implicit forms
(Chouinard & Clark, 2003).
In the domain of learning in general, the mechanisms by
which explicit feedback may be helpful are not clear
(Pashler, Cepeda, Wixted, & Rohrer, 2005). Presenting
feedback has been thought of as potentially competing with
the working memory resources, thereby reducing long-term
retention (Scholer & Anderson, 1990), while withholding it
has been thought of as a way of forcing the learner to
engage in deeper processing, thereby increasing long-term
retention (cf. Pashler et al., 2005). On the other hand,

1488

feedback has been presented as an efficient way of focusing
attention on the relevant statistical patterns in the raw input
(Goldstein & Schwade, 2008).
Most studies on the importance and role of feedback have
either been observational (e.g., Brown & Hanlon, 1970) or
computational (e.g., Regier, 1996). An intermediate
approach is to experimentally investigate phenomena which
reveal important aspects of the acquisition process in
children and adults (e.g., Goldstein & Schwade, 2008;
Pashler et al., 2005).
The current study attempts to shed light on the role of
feedback by examining its impact in three experiments, as
well as its potential mechanisms in a simulation. Similar to
Dale and Christiansen (2004) and Yu and Smith (2007),
learning is examined here as the mapping between visual
referents and word forms learned by adults.

dimensions: size (small, large), color (white, black), and
shape (circle, star). The number of words in the utterance
was just sufficient to uniquely refer to the topic, hereby
relying on Grice’s (1975) cooperation principles. The
number and nature of the objects for each scene, and the
choice of topic were randomly generated for each
participant. The mapping between the words and the visual
features was randomly determined at the beginning of the
experiment.

Figure 1: display of the visual scene with four objects and
a two-word utterance

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants attempted to learn the
meaning of words, by guessing what object in the visual
field an artificial utterance is referring to.

Method
Participants 37 students from the University of Memphis
participated for course credit.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
two conditions: feedback (n = 22) or no-feedback (n = 15).
A session had two phases: a training phase and a testing
phase. In the training phase, participants played 140 trials of
the guessing game, in which they learned an artificial
vocabulary composed of six words. A scene made of objects
appeared, followed by an utterance referring to one of the
objects shown on the screen (the topic). The task of the
participant was to click on the object which he or she
believed was the topic of the utterance. After giving their
choice, the participants in the feedback condition were told
if they were correct or incorrect, and the appropriate answer
was highlighted in case of an incorrect answer. Even though
the correct answer was identified, the learner still needed to
infer which feature of the object corresponded to which
word. In the no-feedback condition the participant’s choice
was primarily a guess over time possibly becoming a more
educated guess because of the repetition of words and
objects. For both the feedback and the no-feedback
participants the participants’ knowledge of the vocabulary
was formally evaluated during a testing phase at the end of
the experiment. The testing phase required participants to
choose the correct word from six options.
Materials Each sequence corresponded to the pairing
between the display of an utterance made of one, two or
three artificial words, and a scene made of minimum two
and maximum eight objects (see Fig. 1). The six artificial
words to be learned were non-words based upon Creel,
Aslin, and Tanenhaus (2006). These words corresponded to
six visual features of the object organized according to three

Results
The training performance was calculated as the proportion
of trials in which the participant’s guess was correct. The
feedback condition showed a higher performance (M = .67,
SD = .18) than the no-feedback condition (M = .32, SD =
.08), F(1, 35) = 49.16, MSE = .02, p < .001, ηp² = .58. In
other words, feedback increased the training performance.
The testing performance was calculated as the proportion
of correct answers. The feedback condition showed a higher
performance (M = .70, SD = .36) than the no-feedback
condition (M = .24, SD = .22), F(1, 35) = 19.68, MSE = .10,
p < .001, ηp² = .28.
The probability of choosing the correct word in the testing
phase if the participants’ guess was random was computed
for both feedback and no-feedback conditions. Random
behavior was modelled by assuming a Binomial distribution
with probability p = 1/6 = .17. That probability of obtaining
the experimental data under the assumption of random
behavior was unlikely (p < .001) in the feedback condition
but more likely in the no-feedback condition (p = .10),
casting doubt whether the participants were learning words
in the absence of feedback.
B

B

B

B

Discussion
The results from Experiment 1 show that feedback has a
considerable impact on learning the meaning of words in a
guessing game situation. For the no-feedback condition no
evidence was obtained for learning.
A reason for the absence of learning in the no-feedback
might be the ambiguity of the utterance-scene pairs, which
has shown to be important in form-meaning mappings (Yu
& Smith, 2007). A reduction of ambiguity would then
increase the likelihood of learning word-meaning mappings,
possibly in the no-feedback condition, and shed further light
on the role of feedback in forming these mappings. This
idea is pursued in Experiment 2, in which the ambiguity of
the scene is reduced.

1489

Experiment 2
The possible mappings between the word forms and their
mappings can be represented by a 6 x 6 matrix with cells
representing associations between form and meaning. In
Experiment 1, three dimensions give rise to 66% spurious
associations. By reducing the number of dimensions to two,
this proportion drops to 50%. Under these more auspicious
learning circumstances an increase in training performance
is expected in both conditions.

Method
Participants 43 students from the University of Memphis
participated for course credit.
Materials The material was generated in the same way as in
Experiment 1, except that the visual features belonged to
two rather than three dimensions: size (small, medium,
large), and color (white, grey, black). The same six-word
vocabulary had to be learned by the participants. Due to the
change of dimensionality, the maximum number of objects
in a scene now increased to nine.
Procedure The procedure was identical to the one used in
Experiment 1. The participants were either assigned to the
feedback (n = 25) or the no-feedback (n = 18) condition. An
initial recording error reduced the sample size in feedback
(n = 23) and no-feedback (n = 17) conditions during testing.

Results
As in Experiment 1, the feedback condition showed a higher
training performance (M = .75, SD = .15) than the nofeedback condition (M = .36, SD = .20), F(1, 41) = 55.33,
MSE = .03, p < .001, ηp² = .57. Moreover, the feedback
condition showed a higher testing performance (M = .74, SD
= .29) than the no-feedback condition (M = .35, SD = .29),
F(1, 38) = 16.99, MSE = .09, p < .001, ηp² = .31.
A 2 x 2 ANOVA was conducted on the training
performance of the last third of the trials with the feedback
condition as a first factor, and the experiment (Experiment 1
vs. Experiment 2) as a second factor. Experiment 2 (M =
.59, SD = .26) showed a slightly higher performance than
Experiment 1 (M = .53, SD = .22), F(1, 75) = 5.01, MSE =
.05, p = .03, ηp² = .06. The interaction was not significant.
The Experiment effect was neither significant for testing
performance, nor for training performance, if the full range
of trials was considered.
However, unlike the test results in Experiment 1, the
probability of test performance on the basis of a Binomial
distribution model (as chance) was p < .001 both in
feedback and no-feedback conditions.
B

B

B

B

B

B

Discussion
Overall, a dimensionality reduction from three to two
dimensions shows only a small benefit in training
performance, but one that seems promising. Subsequent
research will need to look into other manipulations to

exhibit a clearer impact of referential ambiguity. Finally,
consistent with the increase in training performance, it
appears that the behavior observed in the no-feedback
condition cannot be attributed to random guessing. In a
nutshell, although these effects are not as strong as
expected, they show that learning improves when ambiguity
is reduced. The evidence is therefore consistent with the
idea that referential ambiguity should be part of the
cognitive model of word learning and feedback. In such a
model, feedback is seen as a source of information which
decreases ambiguity. Experiment 3 aims at testing the
alternative hypothesis that feedback acts as a motivational
factor rather than as a source of information.

Experiment 3
There is a possibility that participants in the no-feedback
condition became unmotivated in their task of solely
guessing form-meaning mappings. Feedback may serve as a
motivational function, encouraging the learner to stay
vigilant about the mappings. We therefore included what
may be coyly termed a “bless-your-heart” condition, in
which positive feedback is provided randomly regardless of
performance (akin to the “bless-your-heart” encouragements
sometimes present in social environments). This condition is
referred to as motivational because it provides intermittent
positive reinforcement. Furthermore, we augmented the
number of scenes to maximize the likelihood of observing
occurrences of learning in the no-feedback condition.
Indeed, it is hypothesized that likelihood of success during
training will increase over time in both conditions, with
feedback showing a faster increase.

Method
Participants 117 University
participated for course credit.

of

Memphis

students

Materials Four lists were created with predetermined
sequences of scenes, randomizing the type and number of
objects in the scene, as well as the nature of the utterance
topic. These lists had the same characteristics as the
sequences generated in Experiment 2, except that the lists
were longer (216 trials instead of 140 trials). The four lists
contained the same scenes but in a different random order.
This feature allowed increasing the control of the stimuli
and reducing the inter-individual variability.
Procedure The participants were either assigned to the
feedback (n = 38), the no-feedback (n = 39) or the
motivational (n = 40) condition. The motivational condition
consisted in randomly displaying the statement good job in
half of the trials, independent of the answer given.

Results
The results are summarized in Fig. 2. Trials are grouped in
eight clusters of 27 trials each. The feedback factor had a
significant impact on the training performance, F(2, 114) =
134.73, MSE = .17, p < .001, ηp² = .74. In order to identify
B

1490

B

the origin of the difference between the three conditions,
multiple comparisons were realized with Tukey’s HSD test.
Because one of the lists did not record all the participants’
responses until the end of the sequence due to a technical
problem, analyses were limited to the seventh cluster, after
learning had in principle occurred. As expected, the training
performance in the feedback condition (M = .93, SD = .14)
was higher than in the no-feedback (M = .39, SD = .36,
Tukey's-HSD = .54, SE = .07, p < .001) and motivational
conditions (M = .39, SD = .31, Tukey's-HSD = .55, SE = .07,
p < .001). The no-feedback and motivation conditions
exhibited no difference (Tukey's-HSD = -.01, SE = .06, p =
.99). Parallel results were found for the testing performance.

Figure 2: training performance across trials in Experiment 3
The position in the sequence of trials was significant, F(1,
114) = 46.120, MSE = 6.02, p < .001, ηp² = .29, showing that
training performance increased from the beginning to the
end of the sequence. Moreover, there was a Feedback x
Trial interaction, F(2, 114) = 10.72, MSE = .13, p < .001, ηp²
= .16, showing that the effect of Trial was different in
function of the feedback condition.
In order to determine the conditions in which performance
increased, three separate repeated-measure analyses were
conducted with Trial as a within-subject factor. These
analyses showed that performance increased for all
conditions, although it was marginally significant in the
motivational condition: feedback (F(1, 37) = 73.77, MSE =
.10, p < .001, ηp² = .67), no-feedback (F(1, 38) = 6.85, MSE
= .17, p = .013, ηp² = .15), and motivational condition (F(1,
39) = 3.89, MSE = .13, p = .056, ηp² = .09).
In order to track down the existence of learning in the nofeedback and motivational conditions, a subsequent analysis
of variance was conducted with training as a repeated
measure, and two factors: feedback condition (no-feedback
vs. motivational) and whether or not the individuals had a
score above chance in the subsequent test. The feedback
condition was not included in that analysis because all the
individuals in that condition were above chance level at
testing. As shown in Fig. 2, individuals above the testing
chance level, showed a linear progression of performance at
training, while the performance is flat for those at chance
level. The effect of being above the testing chance level on
the training performance was significant in the no-feedback
condition, F(1, 75) = 23.21, MSE = .13, p < .001, ηp² = .24,
as well as its interaction with trial, F(1, 75) = 7.19, MSE =
B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

.14, p = .009, ηp² = .09.
B

B

Discussion
The results again show that feedback considerably increases
the training performance compared to a situation without
feedback. The no-feedback and motivational conditions
could not be reliably differentiated. These findings are
consistent with the idea that feedback is a source of
information responsible for decreasing ambiguity in the
appreciation of form-meaning mappings. An equally
consistent account is that the motivational condition is not
properly motivational. The proper role of motivation should
be examined in further research. Finally, the fact that a
subset of individuals show learning gains during training
without feedback clearly illustrates that it is possible to keep
track of some form-meaning mappings in these
circumstances. For simplicity, it is hypothesized that a
common learning mechanism relying on statistical
regularities found in the environment is active in all
conditions. In that framework feedback can be considered as
a way to focus attention on these statistical regularities (as
argued by Goldstein & Schwade, 2008). More formally,
feedback can be seen as a way of reducing the number of
spurious correlations between form and meaning. This idea
is tested in computational simulations presented below.

Simulations
It has been shown that the environment contains a
significant source of cues that facilitate the learning of
language (Regier, 1996). By forming a model of the data,
the learner can compare the expectations which derive from
the model to the incoming data, in order to modify the
model, and hence learn the language. One way of
representing the data is to track word and feature
frequencies across contexts. For instance, the fact that the
word cat is more frequently associated with cats than with
dogs is a source of indirect positive evidence about the
correctness of the association cat-cat, and of indirect
negative evidence about the correctness of the association
cat-dog.
A variety of computational models have shown word
learning without receiving explicit negative evidence (e.g.,
Dienes, Altmann, & Goa, 1999; Frank, Goodman &
Tenenbaum, 2008; Regier, 1996; Siskind, 1996). These
techniques have in common the idea that the discovery of
word meaning results from cross-situational learning. By
keeping track of the frequency of the various possible
mappings between sound and vision across situations, the
language learner is able to map word forms to their
references.

Method
The model implemented a 6 x 6 matrix representing the cooccurrence of word forms and meaning found in the scene.
For each scene, the frequency of co-occurrence was
incremented between any word form found in the utterance
and any visual feature on the display.

1491

The learning mechanism was identical in both feedback
and no-feedback conditions. The difference between the two
conditions was in the features being considered. That is,
without feedback all objects in the scenes had to be
considered as potentially referred to by the utterance,
whereas in the feedback condition only the features of the
right answers needed to be looked at, thereby reducing the
number of potential spurious correlations.
For each scene, the model made a decision through a
constraints-satisfaction procedure based on the current state
of the matrix. The hypothesized topic of the utterance was
chosen as the first object in the scene which satisfied the
best combination of the strongest mappings between forms
and meanings.
The input given to each instantiation of the model was the
same as the one given to each participant in Experiments 13. Simulations 1-3 are therefore named after their human
data counterparts, Experiments 1-3. In order to have a
baseline comparison, random data (appearing in green in
Figure 3) were generated for each scene (1 for success; 0 for
failure), following a Bernouilli distribution with p = 1 / n,
where n was the number of objects in the scene.
To simulate the individual differences between
participants, the trials during which the matrix started to get
updated was randomly distributed. This was aimed at
reflecting the point at which participants began to pay
attention to the form-meaning mapping possibilities. This
“Eureka moment” followed a log-normal density with µ = 3
and σ² = 1, manually chosen to maximize the fit between the
human data from all experiments and conditions and their
simulated counterparts.

Results
Overall, the fit between the data and the outcome of the
simulation was acceptable. On Experiments 1 and 2 alone,
the fit was significant with r = .55, p < .001, R² = .31. The
simulation (left panel of Fig. 3) was consistent with the
experimental results (right panel of Fig. 3) in two respects.
First, feedback had a higher performance than no-feedback
in all simulations: Simulation 1 (F(1, 35) = 49.33, MSE =

.03, p < .001, ηp² = .59), Simulation 2 (F(1, 39) = 13.15,
MSE = .02, p = .001, ηp² = .26), and Simulation 3 (F(1, 116)
= 31.71, MSE = .02, p < .001, ηp² = .36. By the nature of the
computational model, the motivational and no-feedback
conditions were set to be identical, so their comparison does
not constitute an interesting aspect of the analysis. Second,
paired-sample t-tests comparing the model performance to
the baseline confirmed that the models learned in all
simulations except in the no-feedback condition of
Simulation 1.
B

B

B

B

B

B

Discussion
The simulation shows that part of the variability between
the feedback and no-feedback conditions can be explained
by a simple model portraying feedback as a way of reducing
the number of meaningful features under consideration. The
model, however, does not account well for the large interindividual variability, simply because little is known about
what determines these individual differences. Likely
candidates are differences in memory and attention in
performing the task, but the exact details require further
research.

General Discussion
This study provides support for the thesis that feedback
helps artificial word learning by reducing the ambiguity in
the scenes to be processed. This idea is consistent with the
proposition that feedback is important to language learning
because it helps learner to focus their attention on statistical
regularities found in the environment (Goldstein &
Schwade, 2008).
In Experiment 1, feedback induced a clear increase in
learning. The no-feedback actually did not show sign of
learning at all. The same conclusion could be drawn from
the simulation.
In Experiment 2, the vocabulary to be learned was
organized according to a simpler bidimensional structure,
supposed to reduce the ambiguity of the learning situations.

Figure 3. Cumulative training performance (y-axis) in function of the trial (x-axis) for Simulations 1-3 and Experiments 13, distinguishing feedback (red) and no-feedback (blue) condition from random behavior (green).

1492

Whereas Experiment 2 showed a small improvement in
training, Simulation 2 exhibited a clear-cut improvement in
the no-feedback condition. These observations converge
towards the idea that the problem of ambiguity is a key
issue in learning the words in that situation, although
individual differences are likely responsible for a great deal
of variance in performance.
With its longer sequence of trials, Experiment 3
illustrated that learning can successfully occur without
feedback (both in the human data and in the simulation).
Feedback, however, kept having a clear advantage in word
learning. The fact that the no-feedback and motivational
conditions displayed equivalent performances is consistent
with the idea that feedback supports learning by its
informational nature, and not simply by encouraging the
participants to learn playing the game.
Overall, this research exhibits three features. First,
feedback serves as a powerful cue during word learning.
Second, under specific conditions, learning occurs without
such feedback. Third, feedback helps learning by reducing
the amount of ambiguity in the environment. We cannot
argue that individuals adopt the same strategy in feedback
and no-feedback conditions. Rather, it may be that the
reduction of ambiguity is an important factor in explaining
the performance in feedback and no-feedback conditions.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Morten Christiansen, Eve Clark,
Michael Frank, Arthur Graesser, and Kimbrough Oller for
fruitful discussions related to this research.

References
Anderson, S. R., & Lightfoot, D. (2000). The human
language faculty as an organ. Annual Review of
Physiology, 62, 697-722.
Brown, R., & Hanlon, C. (1970). Derivational complexity
and the order of acquisition in child speech. In J. R. Hayes
(Ed.), Cognition and the development of language (pp. 1154). New York: Wiley.
Chouinard, M., & Clark, E. V. (2003). Adult reformulations
of child errors as negative evidence. Journal of Child
Language, 30, 637-669.
Creel, S. C., Aslin, R. N., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2006).
Acquiring an artificial lexicon: Segment type and order
information in early lexical entries. Journal of Memory
and Language, 54, 1-19.
Dale, R., & Christiansen, M. (2004). Active and passive
statistical learning: Exploring the role of feedback in
artificial grammar learning and language. In K. Forbus, D.
Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th
annual meeting of the cognitive science society (pp. 262267). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dienes, Z., Altmann, G. T. M., Gao, S.-J. (1999). Mapping
across domains without feedback: A neural network model
of transfer of implicit knowledge. Cognitive Science, 23,
53-82.

Frank, M. C., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. (2008). A
Bayesian framework for cross-situational word-learning.
In J. C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, & S. Roweis (Eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp.
457-464). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldstein, M. H., & Schwade, J. A. (2008). Social feedback
to infants’ babbling facilitates Rapid Phonological
Learning. Psychological Science, 19, 515-523.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole, & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics, (pp. 41-58). New
York: Academic Press.
Kersten, A. W., & Earles, J. L. (2001). Less really is more
for adults learning a miniature artificial language. Journal
of Memory and Language, 44, 250-273.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Markman, E. M. (1991). The whole object, taxonomic, and
mutual exclusivity assumptions as initial constraints on
word meanings. In J. P. Byrnes & S. A. Gelman (Eds.),
Perspectives on language and cognition: Interrelations in
development (pp. 72-106). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mitchell, T. (1997). Machine learning. McGraw Hill.
Pashler, H., Cepeda, N. J., & Wixted, J. T. (2005). When
does feedback facilitate learning of words? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 31, 3-8.
Regier, T. (1996). The human semantic potential.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schooler, L. J. & Anderson, J. R. (1990). The disruptive
potential of immediate feedback. In Proceedings of the
Twelfth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 702-708, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Siskind, J. M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61, 39-61.
Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Werker, J. F., Cohen, L. B., Lloyd, V. L., Casasola, M., &
Stager, C. L. (1998). Acquisition of word-object
associations by 14-month-old infants. Developmental
Psychology, 34, 1289-1309.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science, 18, 414-420.

1493

