UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Cognitive Consequences of Using Categorical versus Dimensional Classification
Systems: The Case of Personality Disorder Experts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kq0x58q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Ahn, Woo-Kyoung
Kim, Nancy
Rottman, Benjamin
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Cognitive Consequences of Using Categorical versus Dimensional Classification
Systems: The Case of Personality Disorder Experts
Benjamin M. Rottman (benjamin.rottman@yale.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, Yale U., 2 Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT 06520

Nancy S. Kim (n.kim@neu.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, Northeastern U., 125 Nightingale Hall, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, MA 02115

Woo-kyoung Ahn (woo-kyoung.ahn@yale.edu)
Dept. of Psychology, Yale U., 2 Hillhouse Ave., New Haven, CT 06520

Charles A. Sanislow (charles.sanislow@yale.edu)

Dept. of Psychiatry, Yale U., 301 Cedar Street, 2nd Fl., New Haven, CT 06520
Abstract
Features are inherently ambiguous in that their meanings
depend on the categories they describe (e.g., small for planets
vs. molecules; Murphy, 1988). However, a new proposal for
the next version of the DSM (DSM-IV-TR, Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Ed., text revision;
American Psychiatric Association, 2000) advocates
eliminating personality disorder categories, instead describing
patients using only dimensions with the well-known FiveFactor Model. We investigated whether experts in personality
pathology are able to translate dimensional patient
descriptions into their corresponding diagnostic categories in
the current version of the DSM. The results showed that even
experts had considerable difficulty disambiguating the
meaning of the dimensions to determine correct diagnoses
and found the utility of the dimensional system to be lacking.
Implications for categorization research are discussed.
Keywords: Concepts; Categorization; Expertise; DSM; FFM

Introduction
Categories offer many cognitive benefits (e.g., Murphy,
2002). They facilitate communication and cognitive
economy; instead of “large, gray, with a trunk,” one can
simply say or remember “elephant.” Importantly, they also
instantiate the meaning of features (e.g., Kamp, 1975;
Murphy & Medin, 1985; Rosch, 1978). For example, birds’
wings are very different from airplanes’ wings, and the legs
of a zebra are very different from those of a desk. The
importance of feature instantiation has been empirically
demonstrated in various domains. Murphy (1988)
demonstrated that an adjective can assume multiple different
meanings when paired with different common nouns (e.g.,
open hand means dealt face up while open eye means alert).
Brooks and Hannah (2006) found that people interpret
ambiguous perceptual features (i.e., diagnostic of two
categories they learned) by using another, unambiguously
diagnostic feature also present in the exemplar. Yet despite
such findings, there is a recent proposal in personality
psychopathology that neglects the issue of feature
instantiation. The main goal of the current study is to (i)
provide basic research on whether the cognitive advantages

of feature instantiation are less important for people with a
high degree of domain expertise, and (ii) offer translational
research making practical suggestions for mental disorder
nosology.

Classification Systems of Personality Pathology
The current categorization system of personality pathology,
the DSM-IV-TR classifies maladaptive personality into 10
discrete personality disorders (categories), each defined by
unique criteria (features). For example, to be diagnosed
with Antisocial Personality Disorder (PD), one must have,
pervasively and across contexts, at least 3 of the 7
symptoms shown in Figure 1a.
There is currently an ongoing debate about whether the
DSM should be dimensionalized rather than using
categories. In particular, a proposal for personality
pathology that has received much recent attention is based
upon the Five Factor Model of personality (FFM; e.g., Costa
& McCrae, 1992; see Clark, 2007 for a review). The FFM
proposal advocates abandoning discrete personality
disorders, instead describing people using ratings along 30
traits or facets grouped into 5 factors. Figure 1b shows an
FFM profile of a prototypic patient with Antisocial PD.

Ambiguity and Utility of the FFM
The FFM is a promising candidate for the DSM-V because
it has been shown to be biologically-based, universal,
temporally stable, and can avoid problems with the DSM-IV
Axis II categories including high comorbidity and arbitrary
diagnostic thresholds (Widiger & Trull, 2007). Before
adopting any new system, however, it is important to assess
whether it can fulfill various clinical functions, including
making treatment plans and prognoses, communicating with
patients or other clinicians, and describing a patient’s global
personality or important personality problems (First et al.,
2004; First, 2005). Such clinical utilities discussed in the
psychopathology literature are strikingly similar to the
functions of categories discussed in the cognitive literature
(e.g., inductive inferences, communication; Murphy, 2002).
Accordingly, we contend that abandoning categories, as

2825

1a
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors as indicated by repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest.
Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for personal profit or pleasure.
Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead.
Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults.
Reckless disregard for safety of self or others.
Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent work behavior or honor financial obligations.
Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from another.

1b
Neuroticism
Anxiousness
Angry Hostility
Depressiveness
Self-consciousness
Impulsivity
Vulnerability

2.00
3.93
2.70
1.63
4.22
2.07

Extraversion
Warmth
Gregariousness
Assertiveness
Activity
Excitement-Seeking
Positive Emotions

2.00
3.48
4.07
4.00
4.30
3.52

Openness
Fantasy
3.48
Aesthetics 2.78
Feelings
2.41
Actions
4.07
Ideas
3.26
Values
3.48

Agreeableness
Trust
Straightforwardness
Altruism
Compliance
Modesty
Tendermindedness

1.70
1.41
1.41
1.81
1.70
1.52

Conscientiousness
Competence
2.52
Order
2.74
Dutifulness
1.52
Achievement Striving 2.33
Self-Discipline
1.85
Deliberation
1.96

Figure 1: A sample description of a patient with Antisocial Personality Disorder using (a) the DSM-IV-TR symptoms and
(b) the Five-Factor Model of Personality facet scores from Samuel and Widiger (2004).
suggested by the FFM proposal, will lead to cognitive
difficulties. In this section, we outline some key problems.
Because it lacks categories, the FFM may be unable to
instantiate the meanings of features; that is, each of the 30
traits may assume different meanings in different contexts
(Mischel & Peake, 1982; Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Westen,
2006). For instance, a clinician might interpret a low score
on the ‘Gregariousness’ facet to mean paranoid fears (as in
Paranoid Personality Disorder), fear of not being liked by
others (Avoidant PD), or indifference to others (Schizoid
PD). A high score on ‘Anger’ can mean temper tantrums
(Histrionic PD) or a lack of control over anger (Borderline
PD; Benjamin, 1993). Thus, an FFM description alone,
without the context of categories, may be ambiguous.
This ambiguity can pose problems not only for making
diagnoses, but also for determining prognoses, developing
treatment plans, and carrying out other clinical functions.
For instance, the FFM’s lack of categories may impair its
utility for communicating about and remembering patients;
saying that a patient has “paranoid personality disorder” is
considerably easier than discussing 30 facet scores. This
problem would also be exacerbated by the fact that users
would have to integrate information across the 30 facets to
form a coherent image of the patient. Taken together, the
FFM’s vague descriptors, lack of categories, and many
dimensions could impede reasoning about patients.
Previous studies comparing the clinical utility of the FFM
with that of the DSM have yielded mixed results, with some
supporting the FFM (e.g., Samuel & Widiger, 2006) and
others not (e.g., Spitzer et al., 2007; Sprock, 2003).
However, in all of those studies, the utility of the FFM was
assessed within the context of a patient vignette or personal
knowledge about a patient, potentially disambiguating the
descriptors. For example, if a clinician knows that her
patient is avoidant, she can rate the patient low on
gregariousness for a specific reason (e.g., fear of not being
liked by others) and, as a result, may judge the FFM as
useful within the context of the additional information.
Since the case vignette could disambiguate the FFM’s facets

and also offer diagnostic information (e.g., Avoidant PD),
which could further disambiguate the facets, the tasks in
these previous studies were not capable of revealing any
potential ambiguity in FFM patient descriptions.
In a recent study (Rottman, Ahn, Sanislow, & Kim, 2009)
we assessed the FFM’s ambiguity, using a method
analogous to the back-translation paradigm commonly used
in cross-linguistic studies. For example, if a stimulus in
English is translated into Japanese, to ensure that the
Japanese version contains the intended content, a separate
translator back-translates the Japanese version into English
and compares the back-translation with the original. In
previous work, other researchers translated prototypic DSM
patient descriptions into FFM profiles (Samuel & Widiger,
2004; 2006). Rottman et al. (2009) therefore tested whether
clinicians could accurately back-translate Samuel and
Widiger’s (2004; 2006) FFM descriptions into DSM
diagnoses. If FFM patient profiles are inherently
ambiguous, then clinicians should have difficulty providing
the correct corresponding DSM diagnosis, as one FFM
profile could be mapped onto multiple DSM diagnoses.
Indeed, we found that without categorical information or
vignettes (e.g., Figure 1b), practicing clinical psychologists,
psychiatrists, and social workers had difficulty recognizing
DSM diagnoses, although they showed little difficulty when
the same disorders were presented in the DSM format (e.g.,
Figure 1a). This suggests that when DSM diagnoses are
translated into FFM profiles, critical information is lost. The
clinicians also rated the FFM as having less clinical utility
than the DSM. In sum, the dimensional FFM appears to be
difficult to use alone, without the instantiating effects of
accompanying categories or vignettes.

FFM and Expertise
Our previous study (Rottman et al., 2009) examined
practicing clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and social
workers, who were not necessarily personality disorder
experts. It is possible that domain experts may overcome the
above-mentioned challenges of working with the FFM.

2826

For example, experts likely have more knowledge and
theories about the causal workings of personality disorders,
which could make it easier for them to identify important
correlations between facets (see Ahn, Marsh, & Luhmann,
2002; Wattenmaker et al., 1986 for such demonstrations in
the cognitive literature). As a result, experts may integrate
information across the 30 facets to form a more coherent
concept of a patient, resulting in better recognition of DSM
diagnoses. For instance, although a low score on the
‘Gregariousness’ facet may be ambiguous on its own, a
combination of low ‘Gregariousness’ and low ‘Trust’ scores
may indicate that a patient has Paranoid PD, whereas a
combination of low ‘Gregariousness’ and high ‘SelfConsciousness’ scores may indicate that a patient has
Avoidant PD. (See Chase & Simon, 1973 for a related
chunking phenomenon with chess experts.) The current
study tests whether personality disorder experts can better
recognize the DSM diagnoses and find the FFM to be more
clinically useful, presumably because they can use
configurations of facet scores to disambiguate the meaning
of patient profiles.

Study
Methods
Participants As in Lynam and Widiger (2001), we
operationalized expertise in personality pathology as having
published research on personality disorders. Specifically,
we searched the PsycInfo database for authors who had
published at least three papers with the keyword
“Personality Disorder” in peer-reviewed journals, and who
had published at least one article from January 2006 through
mid-November 2008 (the time of the search). We then
excluded those for whom we could not find contact
information and those who were highly likely to be familiar
with Rottman et al. (2009). Recruitment emails were sent to
476 researchers in December 2008. At the beginning of the
study, we requested that participants verify that they
consider personality disorders to be among their primary
research interests and that they have been conducting
research on personality disorders for at least four years. This
allowed us to exclude those who collaborated on personality
disorder papers only because of expertise in other fields
(e.g., statisticians). Seventy-three participants completed the
experiment. The experiment took 29 minutes on average,
and participants were compensated with either a $60 gift
certificate to an online retailer or a $60 check.
Materials and Design Twelve different cases were
described in both the FFM and DSM styles. Ten of these
cases described prototypic patients for the 10 DSM-IV
personality disorders. The remaining two were comorbid
cases with two personality disorders each, as comorbid
cases have been argued to be more representative of realworld patients (e.g., Bornstein, 1998). The FFM scores were
taken from previous studies (Samuel & Widiger, 2004 for
the prototypic cases; Samuel & Widiger, 2006 for the

comorbid cases), in which practicing clinicians thought
about these cases and rated each on the 30 FFM facets.
When presenting the cases to participants, we provided both
the average rating for each facet and a plot of the facet
scores, anchored by high (e.g., “fearful, apprehensive” for
anxiousness) and low (e.g., “relaxed, unconcerned, cool” for
anxiousness) adjectives (Rottman et al., 2009).
For the DSM condition, each prototypic case comprised
all the DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for that personality
disorder (e.g., Figure 1a). The comorbid DSM case
descriptions were taken from Rottman et al. (2009), in
which clinicians in a pretest identified all the DSM-IV-TR
personality disorder symptoms they found to be present in
the comorbid vignettes (Samuel & Widiger, 2006).
The 12 cases were divided into two groups, each
containing five prototypic cases and one comorbid case. For
diversity, each group included at least one disorder from the
three clusters of personality disorders in the DSM-IV, and
the diagnoses of the comorbid case did not match the
diagnoses of any of the prototypic cases in the group. To the
extent that it was possible, we also matched the two groups
of prototypic cases for difficulty of diagnosis, as previously
determined in Rottman et al. (2009).
Each participant saw one group of six cases presented in
the FFM style and the other group in the DSM style. Thus,
descriptive style (DSM vs. FFM) was a within-subject
variable. The pairing of cases with descriptive style,
presentation order of the two groups, and order of the styles
were counterbalanced across participants. The order of the
six cases within each group was randomized.
Procedure The study was performed online using Qualtrics
software. Participants were told that they would be
presented with descriptions of adult patients and were asked
to imagine that these patients were referred to them along
with a patient description from a previous consultation.
Participants were told that the patients “do not have
schizophrenia or any other psychotic disorder, and their
symptoms do not occur due to the direct effect of any
general medical condition.” This instruction was included to
prevent participants from avoiding giving personality
disorder diagnoses for reasons not of experimental interest
(e.g., a schizoid personality disorder diagnosis is not
allowed if it occurs exclusively during the course of
schizophrenia). Finally, participants were instructed not to
consult the DSM or other references during the experiment.
Next, participants were presented with the first group of
six cases in the DSM or FFM style. After each individual
case, participants were asked to “provide any DSM-IV
diagnoses you believe this patient to have.” Participants
rated their confidence in each diagnosis on a seven-point
scale (where 1 = “not confident at all,” 4 = “somewhat
confident,” and 7 = “very confident”).
After the first group of cases was presented, participants
rated the utility of the descriptive system that they just saw
by answering the following six questions on a five-point

2827

scale (1 = “not at all,” 2 = “slightly,” 3 = “moderately,” 4 =
“very,” 5 = “extremely”):
1) “How informative is this description in making a
prognosis for this person?”
2) “How informative is this description in devising
treatment plans for this person?”
3) “How useful do you feel the system used to describe
this person would be for communicating information
about this individual with other mental health
professionals?”
4) “How useful do you feel the system used to describe
this person would be for communicating information
about the individual to him or herself?”
5) “How useful is the system used to describe this person
for comprehensively describing all the important
personality problems this individual has?”
6) “How useful was the system used to describe this
person for describing the individual’s global
personality?”
Participants then performed the same series of tasks for
the second group of cases. Finally, participants provided
demographic information and rated their own familiarity
with the diagnostic systems (1 = “not at all familiar,” 4 =
“moderately familiar,” 7 = “extremely familiar”).

in the FFM condition (M=.48, SD=.33), t(72)=6.32, p<.01.
Again, the direction and amount of the difference roughly
replicated the results from the clinicians in Rottman et al.
(2009; .60 in the DSM condition and .21 in the FFM).
We also examined incorrect diagnoses, defined as any
DSM diagnosis mismatching the correct diagnosis, and any
non-DSM-IV diagnosis. Participants gave significantly
more incorrect diagnoses per case in the FFM (M=.79,
SD=.48) than DSM condition (M=.16, SD=.35), t(71)=9.82,
p<.01 (Figure 2b). For the comorbid cases, they also gave
more incorrect diagnoses in the FFM (M=.81, SD=.84) than
in the DSM condition (M=.30, SD=.64), t(72)=4.52, p<.01.
Again, these results differed little from those of the
practicing clinicians in Rottman et al. (2009).

Results1
Demographics Fifty-one Ph.D.’s, 16 M.D.’s, 3 M.A.’s, 2
M.D./Ph.D.’s, and 1 M.S.W. participated. Participants had
published a median of 15 papers on personality disorders
(Mean=24, Range=[3,160]). Of these, 66% were also
practicing clinicians. Because the DSM-IV is the current
diagnostic system, participants were more familiar with the
DSM than the FFM, t(72)=7.70, p<.01. The current
participants were more familiar with the DSM (M=6.40,
SD=.95) and, more importantly, with the FFM (M=4.97,
SD=1.66) than the clinicians in Rottman et al. (2009;
M=5.68, SD=1.26, for the DSM; M=2.17, SD=1.65, for the
FFM, t(174.26)=4.89, p<.01,2 for the DSM; t(252)=12.24,
p<.01, for the FFM).

Figure 2: Correct and Incorrect Diagnoses for Prototypic
Cases (95% Confidence Intervals)
Note. 1 PD = Personality Disorder. 2 Clinicians’ data were
taken from Rottman et al. (2009).
Confidence in Diagnoses The confidence ratings reflect
participants’ difficulty in providing accurate diagnoses
(Figure 3; collapses prototypic and comorbid cases). A 2
(correct vs. incorrect diagnosis) × 2 (DSM vs. FFM)
repeated-measures ANOVA3 found that participants were
more confident for correct than incorrect diagnoses,
F(1,25)=75.24, p<.01, ηp2=.75, and were more confident in
the DSM than in the FFM condition, F(1,25)=45.15, p<.01,
ηp2=.64. In addition, there was a significant interaction,
F(1,25)=53.15, p<.01, ηp2=.68, because the experts were
much more confident in correct than incorrect diagnoses for
the DSM; participants were more aware of the accuracy of
their diagnoses in the DSM condition.

Diagnoses For each prototypic case, participants almost
always gave the correct diagnosis in the DSM condition
(M=.99 of cases, SD=.06) and were much more accurate
than in the FFM (M=.62 of cases, SD=.25), t(72)=12.36,
p<.01 (Figure 2a, Experts). These results closely replicate
Rottman et al. (2009). Although the personality disorder
experts in the current study provided more accurate
diagnoses than the practicing clinicians in Rottman et al.
(2009), they did so in both the DSM and FFM (Figure 2a).
For the comorbid cases, participants were also more likely
to give correct diagnoses in the DSM (M=.77, SD=.26) than
1

Where appropriate, comparisons are made between the current
data from personality disorder experts and previous data (Rottman
et al., 2009, Experiment 1) from clinicians not necessarily
specializing in personality disorders. Due to differences in design,
inferential statistics are not always possible.
2
Equal variances not assumed.

Utility Ratings Paired t-tests revealed that participants
found the DSM to be more useful than the FFM on three
measures (prognosis, treatment plans, and communicating
with professionals; (t’s(69)>2.19, p’s<.05; see Figure 4).
Participants rated the FFM as more useful than the DSM for
communicating with patients, t(69)=3.03, p<.01, possibly
3

This analysis included only participants who gave at least one
correct and incorrect diagnosis in both the DSM and FFM.

2828

Figure 3: Confidence Ratings (Std. Error)
because the DSM disorder names are considered to be
stigmatizing and because the FFM facets are common terms
rather than technical disorder names. There was no
difference for global personality description and
comprehensively describing all important personality
problems, p’s >.10. All of these patterns of results also hold
when only including data from the condition presented first.

Figure 4: Utility Ratings (Std. Error)
Notes. Questions: (1) Making a prognosis; (2) Devising
treatment plans; (3) Communicating with mental health
professionals; (4) Communicating with patients; (5)
Comprehensively describing all important personality
problems; (6) Describing global personality.

General Discussion
Implications for the next version of the DSM
The FFM has been considered a highly promising candidate
for describing personality pathology for the next version of
the DSM. The five factors appear to provide reliable and
valid summaries of personalities, and they can capture
almost infinite varieties of personalities as opposed to just
10 personality disorders (Widiger & Trull, 2007). Despite
these advantages, the current results, in conjunction with
those reported in Rottman et al. (2009), suggest that it may
be premature to adopt the FFM as a diagnostic tool for
practicing clinicians. In the current study, experts in
personality disorders (validated through publication records)

had difficulty back-translating the FFM profiles of even
highly familiar prototypic personality disorder cases.
These results are consistent with previous cognitive
theories on two levels of specificity in representing features,
termed informational vs. instantiated (Brooks & Hannah,
2006), or global vs. local (Solomon & Barsalou, 2001). For
instance, “flying” is informational/global, whereas “birdlike flying” and “bee-like flying” are instantiated/local.
Categories (e.g., birds) allow people to instantiate
informational/global features, and develop more accurately
nuanced and refined local/instantiated concepts (Brooks &
Hannah, 2006). However, in the absence of categories, as in
the current task and in a version of the FFM proposal, such
instantiation is not feasible. We found that the loss of
disambiguating information affects even domain experts.
Our experts also judged the clinical utility of the FFM to
be low in a number of aspects, further suggesting that they
found the FFM descriptors to be ambiguous. For instance,
an abstract patient description (e.g., a neurotic, anxious, and
introverted person) neither reveals the causes of the
patient’s pathology, nor does it help to make treatment plans
and predictions about the course and outcome of the patient.
One obvious solution for the feature ambiguity problems
demonstrated in the current study would be to provide
disambiguating information. Thus, the FFM could be used
as a supplement to diagnosis, which would provide
categorical information, rather than as a stand-alone
diagnostic tool for practicing clinicians. For example, a
clinician could first identify that a patient has a particular
personality disorder (e.g., Avoidant), and then use the FFM
to further describe the patient, thereby instantiating the
meanings of the FFM descriptors. For example, rather than
thinking about a patient as ‘withdrawn’, a clinician could
think of the patient as ‘withdrawn due to paranoid fears’ (as
in Paranoid PD) or ‘withdrawn due to indifference to others’
(Schizoid PD). The instantiated descriptors will likely be
more clinically meaningful and useful for clinicians than the
ambiguous ones.

Implications for Research on Expertise
Rottman et al. (2009) speculated that the feature
instantiation problems found in their study with practicing
clinicians might be ameliorated with extensive training in
the domain. Yet the current study demonstrated that the
considerable training required in becoming a personality
disorder researcher did not successfully reduce the effect of
these problems. At first glance, these results may appear at
odds with previous demonstrations of experts’ impressive
categorization and memorization abilities in their domain of
expertise (e.g., Chase & Simon, 1973). For instance, Tanaka
and Taylor (1991) showed that dog experts use subordinate
category labels as quickly and frequently as they use basiclevel category labels. Yet such demonstrations concern
experts’ rapid pattern recognition of objects presented with
instantiated, unambiguous features (e.g., pictures of dog
features). What the current study showed instead was a lack

2829

of pattern recognition at an abstract level, an issue in itself
deserving empirical investigation.
Nonetheless, it is also possible that a different form of
training, unlike that of our participants, who after all were
initially trained using the DSM system, could teach people
to more productively use informational/global features.
Furthermore, it is possible that different domains require
experts to learn different types of information. For expertise
in mental disorders, learning more accurate and nuanced
instantiations of features may be necessary to differentiate
patients, but for mathematics, expertise may require
focusing on abstract informational or definitional concepts.
Consequently, different domains may require classification
systems that focus on different types of information.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship (Rottman), and NIMH Grants MH57737 (Ahn)
and MH73708 (Sanislow). We thank Rachel Litwin for
coding and recruiting participants.

References
Ahn, W., Marsh, J. K., Luhmann, C. C., & Lee, K. (2002).
Effect of theory-based feature correlations on typicality
judgments. Memory & Cognition, 30, 107-118.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders: Text revision (4th
Ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
Benjamin, L. S. (1993). Interpersonal diagnosis and
treatment of personality disorders. NY: Guilford Press.
Bornstein, R. F. (1998). Reconceptualizing personality
disorder diagnosis in the DSM-V: The discriminant
validity challenge. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 5, 333-343.
Brooks, L. R., & Hannah, S. D. (2006). Instantiated features
and the use of “rules.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 135, 133-151.
Chase, W. G. & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Clark, L. A. (2007). Assessment and diagnosis of
personality disorder: perennial issues and emerging
reconceptualization. Annual Review of Psychology, 58,
227-57.
Costa, P.T.J., & McCrae, R.R. (1992). Revised NEO
personality inventory: professional manual (NEO-PI-R).
Odessa, Fl: Psychological Assessment Resources.
First, M. B. (2005). Clinical Utility: A Prerequisite for the
Adoption of a Dimensional Approach in DSM. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 114, 560–564.
First, M. B., Pincus, H. A., Levine, J. B., Williams, J. B. W.,
Ustun, B., & Peele, R. (2004). Clinical utility as a
criterion for revising psychiatric diagnoses. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 946-954.
Kamp, H. (1975). Two theories about adjectives. In E.
Keenan (Ed.), Formal Semantics of Natural Language.
Cambridge: Cambridge U.P. 123-55.

Lynam, D. R., & Widiger, T. A. (2001). Using the FiveFactor Model to represent the DSM-IV personality
disorders: An expert consensus approach. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 110, 401-412.
Mischel, W., & Peake, P. K. (1982). Beyond déjà vu in the
search for cross-situational consistency. Psychological
Review, 89, 730-755.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective
system theory of personality: Reconceptualizing
situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in
personality structure. Psychological Review, 102, 246-68.
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts.
Cognitive Science, 12, 529-562.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch
and B. B. Lloyd (eds.), Cognition and Categorization.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rottman, B. M., Ahn, W., Sanislow, C. A., & Kim, N. S.
(2009). Can clinicians recognize DSM-IV personality
disorders from Five-Factor Model descriptions of patient
cases? American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 427-433.
Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2004). Clinicians’
personality descriptions of prototypic personality
disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders. 18, 286-308.
Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2006). Clinicians’
judgments of clinical utility: a comparison of DSM-IV
and Five Factor Models. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 115, 298-308.
Solomon, K. O., & Barsalou, L. W. (2001). Representing
properties locally. Cognitive psychology, 43,129-169.
Spitzer, R. L., First, M. B., Shedler, J., Westen, D., &
Skodol, A. E. (2008). Clinical utility of five dimensional
systems for personality diagnosis: A “consumer
preference” study. Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease, 196, 356-374.
Sprock, J.
(2003).
Dimensional versus categorical
classification of prototypic and nonprototypic cases of
personality disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 59,
991-1014.
Tanaka, J. W., & Taylor, M. (1991). Object categories and
expertise: Is the basic level in the eye of the beholder?
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 457-482.
Wattenmaker, W. D., Dewey, G. I., Murphy, T. D., &
Medin, D. L. (1986). Linear separability and concept
learning: Context, relational properties, and concept
naturalness. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 158-194.
Westen, D. (2006). Drizzling on the 5+3 factor parade: A
response to Trull. In T. Widiger & E. Simonson (Eds.),
Research Agenda for DSM-V: Dimensional Classification
of Personality Disorder. DC: American Psychiatric P.
Widiger, T. A, & Trull, T. J. (2007). Plate tectonics in the
classification of personality disorder: shifting to a
dimensional model. American Psychologist, 62, 2 71-83.

2830

