UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Intervention Trigger Model: Computational Modelling of Air Traffic Control

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1mh4q2cn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Pompanon, Charles
Raufaste, Eric

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Intervention Trigger Model: Computational Modelling of Air Traffic Control
Charles Pompanon (pompanon@univ-tlse2.fr)
Université de Toulouse and CNRS (UMR 5263, CLLE-LTC)
Toulouse, France

Éric Raufaste (raufaste@univ-tlse2.fr)
Université de Toulouse and CNRS (UMR 5263, CLLE-LTC)
Toulouse, France

Two different strategies for conflict detection

Abstract

Putative decision-making strategies have been proposed,
mainly based on cues such as aircraft altitudes, headings,
or ground speeds (Bisseret, 1995; Niessen, Eyferth, &
Bierwagen, 1999; Rantanen & Nunes, 2005). On the radar
screen these cues are grouped in data blocks, close to each
aircraft representation. Two decision-making strategies using
those cues are now recalled.

Two models of hierarchical decision making in a conflict
detection task were compared (Niessen, Leuchter, & Eyferth,
1998; Rantanen & Nunes, 2005) using eye-tracking data.
30 experienced air traffic controllers individually processed a
series of 56 trials. In each trial, 15 participants had to decide
whether two aircraft displayed on a simulated radar screen
would be in conflict, i.e., whether their horizontal and vertical
distances would eventually violate legal separation rules, the
15 others had to decide whether an intervention would be
required to avoid a conflict. Results showed that none of the
two models could fully account for the data. These results led
us to produce a new model of hierarchical decision-making,
implemented in the cognitive architecture ACT-R 6.0.
Keywords: Air Traffic Control; Computational modelling;
Decision-making; Eye-tracking.

The MoFL model. Niessen et al. (1998, 1999) studied how
the data displayed on a radar screen were selected. Based on
empirical data, they devised a post-hoc global model of traffic
control (“Modell der Fluglotsenleistungen” that embeds the
following strategy for conflict detection.

Introduction

1. If aircraft are on crossing airways or on the same airway,
next step; otherwise “no conflict” and exit;

Air traffic controllers (ATCos) are in charge of the flow and
security of the traffic in the sector under their responsibility.
According to Seamster, Redding, Cannon, Ryder, and Purcell
(1993), an important subtask for ATCos is to maintain
situation awareness (Endsley, 1995) so as to determine
events that require an action, in particular to prevent aircraft
conflicts. A conflict is defined by the simultaneous violation
of two safety rules: two aircraft must always remain separated
(1) at least by 5 nautical miles (NM) on the horizontal plane1 ;
and (2) at least by 1000 feet on the vertical plane. ATCos
have to detect potential conflicts and to take any necessary
action to avoid them. Recently, Stankovic, Raufaste, &
Averty, 2008 provided a three-variable model that explains
about 50% of the variance in experts’ conflict judgments.
Yet, it is not a process model. Bisseret (1995) argued
that ATCos detect conflicts on the basis of a lexicographic
decision rule. Despite this idea was confirmed by various
studies (e.g., Niessen et al., 1998; Niessen & Eyferth, 2001;
Eyferth, Niessen, & Spaeth, 2003; Rantanen & Nunes, 2005),
authors do not agree about the structure of the lexicographic
tree. This paper brings new data that enlighten the order
of micro-decisions involved in conflict detection. Our
propositions were encapsulated in a new model of conflict
detection. It was implemented in the ACT-R cognitive
architecture (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998; Anderson et al.,
2004; Anderson, 2007) and satisfyingly fitted RT data.

2. Are aircraft on different altitudes and not vertically moving? If yes, “no conflict” and exit; otherwise next step;

1 Here, we focus on the case of “en route” traffic (i.e., not around
taking-off and landing) at constant altitudes.

2 A speed vector is a line showing the aircraft future positions
during the next minute(s) to come.

3. A mental anticipation of the future positions of the aircraft
is performed, using “speed vectors”2 . It provides an
estimate of the likelihood of a conflict.
4. Anticipation accuracy is estimated from the range of the
anticipation and, when a potential conflict is suspected, the
time available before conflict occurrence.
5. According to their evaluations controllers can make a
decision: If the anticipation is deemed safe, then decide
accordingly and exit; Otherwise, further monitoring is
requested.
The hierarchical model. More recently, Rantanen and
Nunes (2005) proposed a model more precisely focused
on conflict detection in en-route controllers. To test their
model, the authors asked ATCos to decide whether or not two
aircraft displayed on a simulated radar screen were actually
in conflict. They proposed that . . .
1. If altitudes are vertically separated by at least 1000 feet,
then “no conflict” and exit; otherwise next step;
2. If the aircraft are on diverging trajectories or if the
aircraft have parallel headings and a sufficient horizontal
separation, then “no conflict” and exit; otherwise next step;

2262

3. If the aircraft cruise “at the same speed and have a distance
difference to the point where their trajectories intersect that
is at least the minimum required lateral separation” (p.
345), then exit; otherwise last step;
4. Compute the minimal distance at the Closest Point of
Approach (hereafter referred to as Dth , following the
terminology of Stankovic et al., 2008). If Dth is below
the minimum lateral separation then decide “conflict”;
otherwise, exit.
The differences between the models raise at least two
issues. The MoFL model suggests that divergence is
considered first. Thus, altitude should not be considered
in case of divergent trajectories. To the contrary, Rantanen
and Nunes’ model–which we will denote by the “RN
model”–suggests that Altitude is considered first, then, only
in the case where altitude are the same, trajectory angles
would be considered. Another feature distinguishes the two
approaches: Rantanen and Nunes consider conflict judgment
whereas in the MoFL model, the decision to intervene or not
is the outcome of the conflict-analysis step. This difference
might be a source of process variations because conflict
judgments are not the normal product of a controller and it
can be argued that conflict judgment require more deliberate
processing, which could explain more attention paid to
symbolic information such as altitude. We propose a new
experiment (1) to study the order of information acquisition;
(2) to check if asking conflict judgments (“Conflict” vs. “no
conflict”) or intervention decisions (“would intervene” vs.
“would not intervene”) affects data acquisition; (3) to provide
data for fitting a computational model of the task.

quite obvious that there is no conflict. Thus, in experimental
scenarios with enough uncertainty to require computing of
Dth , the intersection point of the two trajectories will likely be
gazed at. Thus, in a lexicographic approach, the intersection
area must be looked at in last position.
RTs. The order of taking evidence into account should
affect reaction times: in scenarios that require deeper
investigation through the decision tree, reaction times should
be longer. Thus, the two models predict an order of
increasing RTs that parallels the order of fixations. In
particular, as regards the first and second cues, the predictions
derived from the MoFL and the RN model are opposite:
ceteris paribus the former predicts shorter RTs for divergent
trajectories–regardless of altitudes, whereas the latter predicts
shorter RTs for trajectories of different altitudes–regardless of
divergence. In summary, if we note “SA” and “DA” the same
and different altitude scenarios, “Div” the diverging angle
trajectories, and “other” the non diverging trajectories, the RT
patterns predicted by the two models are as follows.
MoFL: DA-Div = SA-Div < DA-other < SA-other
RN: DA-Div = Da-other < SA-Div < SA-Other
It can be divided into a part common to the 2 models and
a part that distinguishes the two models. The common part is
DA-Div < SA-other. The part that discriminates is:
MoFL: SA-Div < DA-other
RN: Da-other < SA-Div
Finally, the RN model predicts that, among the SA
scenarios, those where aircraft have the same speed will
be processed faster than those where aircraft speeds are
different.

Hypotheses
Lexicographic strategies can be characterized by the order of
processing pieces of evidence. Also, criteria coming first in
the decision tree should be associated with faster responses.
Hence, RTs and eye-tracking data seem relevant to study a
lexicographic strategy.

Experiment
Method

Altitudes and aircraft representation. According to the
MoFL model, the first information intake should be the
aircraft headings to assess the divergence of the trajectories.
Only after should altitudes be looked at. Following the
Rantanen and Nunes (2005)’ model, the first information
intake should concern flight levels, so as to compare altitudes.
For same-altitude pairs of aircraft, trajectory vergence would
then be tested. Ideally, one would test convergence by
tracking fixations of the aircraft representations (including
the speed vector). However, testing divergence may not
always require a specific gaze at aircraft representations.
Indeed, parafoveal vision might be sufficient to inform the
controller about divergence. Finally, Dth would be evaluated.
By definition Dth corresponds to the distance between the
two aircraft at th , the moment when they are closest on the
horizontal plane. At this very moment, the two aircraft should
be in the surroundings of the intersection point unless it is

Participants. 30 experienced controllers in two groups
participated on a voluntary basis, with experience defined as
the number of years after the graduation from the ENAC: N =
15, age M = 36.6 (SD = 8.8), experience M = 9.7 (SD = 7.1);
and N = 15, age M = 38.9 (SD = 7.1), experience M = 13.1
(SD = 7.6).3
Apparatus and procedure. A simulated radar screen displayed the pairs of aircraft. Each aircraft (see Figure1) was
represented by a triangle shape continued by a speed vector
that indicated the heading and the anticipated location after
a 1mn lag. The length of the speed vector was directly
proportional to the aircraft speed. A data block close to each
aircraft presented symbolic information. From top to bottom:
horizontal speed in knots, denomination (the “call sign”),
altitude in flight levels4 .

2263

3 the
41

French national civil aviation training institution
FL= 100 feet.

2.5 NM or 7.5 NM. Of the 56 scenarios, 9 offered a conflict
configuration. Each participant viewed the complete set of
scenarios only once. In addition to the repeated measures,
the design comprised a between variable: 15 participants,
were asked to provide a conflict judgment (“conflict” vs. “no
conflict”) and 15 participants had to provide an intervention
judgement (“would intervene” vs. “would not”).
DVs were RTs in ms, and eye-tracking data about 4 areas of
interest (AOI): the aircraft representation (including its speed
vector), flight levels, symbolic speeds and the crossing point
area. A representation of these AOI can be found in Figure 1.
At the trial level we computed the rank of visit to each
AOI. Eye tracking data from the various scenarios were also
aggregated according to the hierarchical model criteria: 28
trials for each of the same and different altitudes conditions
(SA and DA) were grouped into 12 trial for convergent
headings, 4 for each of the 0°and 180° angles, and 8 for
divergent angles. Within each aggregation level we computed
the median rank of first visit and the proportion of cases
where each AOI was neglected (not visited at all).
For each participant we computed the median rank of
visit to each AOI. Friedman nonparametric tests for k-paired
groups were used to test the order of AOI visits. Wilcoxon
tests for two paired groups were used to test differences
between AOIs ranks.

Figure 1: Screenshot of an aircraft cruising at the constant
altitude of FL 410. Its speed is 440 kts. A scale representing
5NM was presented at the bottom left of the display. Here,
dashed lines represent the areas of interest (AOI) used
to compute eye fixations, but they were not visible by
participants.
An ASL501 eye-tracker from Applied Science Laboratories was used, set to a sampling rate of 50Hz. After the initial
calibration, the instructions were displayed. Participants were
told to judge if a pair of aircraft would be in conflict should
no action be done. The experiment comprised six practice
trials with no feedback, then 56 experimental trials. Time was
limited to sixty seconds per trial. All along the trials, aircraft
positions were refreshed every ten seconds. To control for the
initial gaze location, a white cross was presented first. The
aircraft representations were displayed by the experimental
program only after it had detected that the cross–at mid
distance between the two aircraft–was being fixated.

Results
Fixations. Results on rank comparisons can be found in the
upper part of Table 1. Friedman tests were significant for
all conditions (χ2s (2, N = 30) > 13.00; ps < .01). Altitude
was the first information intake in all situations excepted
for divergent scenarios. This result corroborated the RN
model and disconfirm the MoFL model predictions. Indeed,
even in the conditions of divergent trajectories, aircraft
representations were not looked at in first place (the best rank
was second in both DA-Div and in DA-others conditions).
Within SA condition (SA-Conv, SA-0°and SA-180°), one can
see that rank orders differed with the angular configuration
of trajectories. For SA-Conv conditions, altitudes were first,
speeds second, intersection third and aircraft fourth. For
0° angle, altitudes were first, speeds second and aircraft third.
For 180° angle, altitudes were first, and symbolic speeds and
aircraft shared the third rank.

Task. Half of the ATCos had to tell whether they would
intervene, the others had to tell whether the aircraft were
in conflict. For the sake of simplicity and to focus on the
process of conflict detection, participants were instructed that
altitudes, speeds and headings were constant. They were
asked to produce their judgment as accurately as possible
and to give their responses as soon as they were sure of their
diagnosis.
Variables and analysis. A total of four independent variables were used in a repeated-measures design (7 Angles of
convergence × 2 Altitudes × 2 Speeds × 2 Dth , giving 56
scenarios. The parallel headings corresponded to the angles
of convergence 0° (one aircraft followed the other), and
180° (aircraft in opposition). Converging angles were 45°,
90°, 135°. Diverging angles were 45°and 90°. Altitudes
could be either equal or different by at least 10 FL. Speeds
were either equal or different by 10 to 60 knots. Horizontal
separation at the closest point of approach (Dth ) was either

Response times. We averaged the response times according
to the scenario categories defined in the hypotheses section:
DA-Div, SA-Div, DA-SS and DA-DS (as DA-others), SASS and SA-DS (as SA-others). A six-factor ANOVA was
significant (F(5, 140) = 160.33 ; p = .001 ; MSE = .05).
Results are shown in Figure 3. Post-hoc comparisons showed
no difference between:
• DA-Div and SA-Div scenarios,
• DA-SS and DA-DS scenarios,
• SA-SS and SA-DS scenarios.

2264

Table 1: Median rank of first visit to AOIs. SA: same altitude; DA: different altitudes; Conv and Div= Convergent and divergent
angles.
AOI

Div

Altitude
Symbolic speed
Aircraft
Intersection

1.88
2.45
1.67

DA
Others

SA-conv

1.5
2.6
1.89

SA
SA-0° SA-180°

1.16
2.27
3.71
2.85

1.07
2
2.93

1.15
2.37
2.47

Div
1.5
1.9
2.59

Table 2: Mean response times in seconds. SA: same altitude; DA: different altitudes; SS:same speeds; DS: different speeds;
Div= divergent angles.
Divergent angles
DA-Div
Judment
Conflict Dection
Intervention

M
2.16
1.98

SD
0.52
0.45

Not divergent angles
Different altitudes
Same altitude
DA-SS
DA-DS
SA-SS
SA-DS

SA-Div
M
2.24
1.91

SD
0.64
0.48

M
2.60
2.52

Response times could be ranged as follow: (DA − Div =
SA − Div) < (DA − SS = DA − DS) < (SA − SS = SA − DS).
Instruction (i.e. providing a intervention judgment or a
conflict judgment) had a significant effect on RTs (F(1, 28) =
5.84; p = .02; MSE = 0.4). Post-hoc pairwise comparisons
showed that only in SA-SS and SA-DS conditions the
« conflict detection » group response times were higher than
the « intervention » group’s.

Discussion
We contrasted two models of the conflict detection task,
the MoFL model and the RN model. Divergent angles
produced shorter reaction times than all others scenarios:
divergence was the first information processed. In contrast,
the RN model predicted that altitudes are processed before
convergence, which is clearly not compatible with our
data. The RN model also predicted that SA-SS scenarios
should be processed faster than SA-DS scenarios. Post-hoc
comparisons did not confirm this pattern. Our data were
globally compatible with the MoFL model. Yet in the
MoFL model the anticipation step amounts to evaluate the
speed vector length without specifying how speed vectors
are processed. Moreover, it is unclear how trajectory angles
are accounted in decision strategies (except for divergent
angles). One can be surprised that divergent aircraft scenarios
provided fastest RTs while aircraft were only looked at late.
We propose that when ATCos look at an aircraft altitude
they also get the heading through parafoveal processing. As
perceptual processing is faster than symbolic comparison,
divergence can be processed before altitudes.
We now propose a new model of conflict intervention,
which integrates the points above: the Intervention Trigger
Model (ITM).

SD
0.33
0.52

M
2.55
2.38

SD
0.53
0.48

M
5.39
3.75

SD
1.40
0.72

M
5.07
3.98

SD
1.06
1.02

A new model and an implementation
This three-step model (see Figure 2) is compatible with our
results. As in the Rantanen and Nunes model, it embeds
the idea of a lexicographic processing where the next fastest
decision criterion is investigated first. At the beginning of
the process, the model is like the MoFL: when relevant,
divergence is processed first. The second step is to compare
altitude, and the third test is a series of processes leading
to the estimation of the Dth . As soon as altitudes are
compared, the model processes symbolic speed. Next, it
pays attention to the aircraft representation. We suppose that
aircraft representations aid ATCos who try to estimate the
distance between both aircraft (0°or 180°cases) or between
either each aircraft and the intersection point (convergent
angle cases). ATCos would compute these distances to
estimate the Dth . If the evaluation of the Dth is under the
minimal horizontal distance of separation then ATCos should
intervene, otherwise they need not intervene.
We assume that the Dth estimation depends on the angular
configuration of the trajectories:
• when aircraft have the same heading (0°), knowing the
relative position of the fastest aircraft is a relevant strategy.
Indeed, if the fastest aircraft is ahead the slowest then
there is no risk: the slowest aircraft will never catch the
fastest one up. If the fastest aircraft is behind the slowest,
the fastest aircraft will catch up the slowest, and then the
controller will intervene.
• When aircraft are on opposite headings (180°), ATCos
have to estimate the distance between the two trajectories.
If this distance is below the separation norm, then the
controller must intervene, otherwise he does not have to.

2265

Level-1.

Are aircraft on divergent headings ?

is no need to intervene. In the opposite, the fastest will
catch the slowest up and the model will intervene.

Yes

No

No conflict

Level-2.

• Opposite headings (180°) The model will assess the
distance between the two lines. It will encode one
aircraft trajectory. It will then move its attention to the
second aircraft. Then it evaluates the distance between the
encoded first aircraft line and the second aircraft. If this
distance is below a criterion then the model requires an
intervention, otherwise there is no need to intervene and
the model stops the process.

Are aircraft vertically separated by 1000 ft?
No

Yes
No conflict

Convergent angles

Level-3.

Pattern Recognized?
No
Intervene

Yes
Do associated
action

180° angle

Dth < threshold?
No
No Conflict

Yes
Intervene

0° angle

Pursuer faster?
No
No Conflict

• Convergent headings. The model will first assess the
situation as a whole. If the configuration is recognized by
the model, it immediately requires an intervention (e.g.,
aircraft are too close each other) or not (e.g., aircraft a
enough separated). If the model cannot make its decision,
it assesses the distances between each aircraft and the
perceived intersection point of the trajectories. Afterwards,
the two distances are compared to decide which aircraft is
closer to the intersection point. If the fastest aircraft is the
closer, there is no need to intervene, otherwise, the model
will intervene.

Yes
Intervene

Figure 2: A model of Intervention Trigger in en-route air
traffic controllers, as a function of altitudes, angles, relative
speeds and Dth . “Pattern recognized” refers to known
configurations that lead to an associated response. For
example, one aircraft is by far closer to the intersection
of the trajectories and also flies faster, which requires no
intervention.

Implementation and simulation
An ACT-R 6.0 implementation was built5 and tested against
the scenarios and data from the Experiment reported here,
limited to the intervention condition. 15 simulated subjects
processing 56 scenarios each were simulated. Reaction times
were recorded and aggregated as a function of the conditions
of the scenarios (i.e., DA-Div, SA-Div,DA-otthers, SA-SS,
SA-DS). All ACT-R parameters were set to the default values
they have in the architecture, except Retrieval Threshold
(-1.5) and Activation Noise (0.01). A total of 111 productions
were included in the model. The correlation fit was r = .994,
the mean deviation was less than 250 ms (Figure 3).

• When aircraft are on convergent headings, it is possible
that ATCos learn to recognize a set of geometrical configurations as being a threat (or not). For configurations
out of this set the controller would doubt and therefore
might engage more deliberate processing of distance so
as to gain accuracy. For example, if an aircraft is by far
closer to the intersection point than the other aircraft, no
further processing is required. Now, if two aircraft are
at about the same distance from the intersection point,
then the controller must intervene unless some very salient
difference between speeds provides a simple solution.

Conclusion and Perspectives

Strategies included in the model

Speed information intake. At this level, aircraft are at the
same altitude and do not diverge. Then the model needs
to know aircraft speeds for computing the Dth . The model
encodes the two aircraft speeds and compare them. It encodes
either which aircraft is faster or the fact that they have the
same speed. As a function of the angular configuration of the
trajectories it will make a decision.

In this paper we reported an experiment that enabled us
to clarify an incoherence between two models of decisionmaking in ATC. However, neither model could account for all
the data. So we proposed a new model that takes advantages
of the features of ACT-R architecture, in particular the
interplay between perceptual and motor modules, and central
cognition. Several computational models of the Air Traffic
Control task exist (e.g., S. M. Lee, Ravinder, & Johnston,
2005; Callantine, 2005; Niessen et al., 1998; Taatgen, 2001,
2002; F. Lee & Taatgen, 2002) but few consider the details
behind the triggering of interventions. Raufaste (2006)
provided a conflict detection model based on Rantanen and
Nunes (2005) model. This model differed from the current
in the strategies used along the decision making process.
For example, the perceptual processing of the divergence
occurred first but was not effective until the model checked

• Pursuit (0°). As mentioned above, the strategy is to assess
which aircraft is ahead. If the fastest aircraft is ahead, there

5 Annotated ACT-R model available at http://w3.ltc.univtlse2.fr/raufaste/ACTR/ITM/

Perceptual processing and altitudes. The model starts to
seek for altitudes. When the first altitude is encoded, the
model also encodes the aircraft heading. It does the same for
the second aircraft. Before comparing altitudes, the model
compares the headings. If headings are divergent, the model
exits the decision process. Otherwise, it recalls the altitudes
kept in memory. If altitudes are separated enough, the model
exits the process, otherwise it follows the next step.

2266

5
4.5
ATC
ACT-R model

Response ttimes (s)
R

4
3.5
3
2.5
2

r=.994
Mean dev=0.242s

15
1.5
1
0.5
0
DA-Div

SA-Div

DA-SS

DA-DS

Divergent angles

SA-SS

SA-DS

other angles
Experimental conditions

Figure 3: Response times as a function of scenarios
the vertical separation. Moreover, speed processing was
first based on the comparison of the length of the speed
vectors and not on symbolic speeds. Finally, this model
could account for pursuit and opposite heading scenarios but
convergent heading scenarios were not simulated. Thus, not
only the current model has a better fit (the correlation fit in
Raufaste, 2006, was r = .92 and the mean deviation was about
600ms) but it provides a more comprehensive modelling.
Also, contrary to the previous model, no emphasis is placed
on the process by which the crossing point of trajectories is
computed, which is in agreement with the low number of
fixations devoted to intersections reported here.
Obviously, the IT Model needs to be improved in many
ways. For example, the sample of scenarios used for
the experiment did not cover all cases of conflict. Many
others experiments are needed to be able to describe a
comprehensive set of likely strategies. Moreover, this
model does not take in account individual differences. But
undoubtedly, the main next step will be to take altitude
changes into account.

Acknowledgments
Charles Pompanon was granted by the Fondation
d’Entreprise EADS. Special thanks to the air traffic
controllers of CRNA of Bordeaux, France.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How can the human mind occur in
the physical universe? New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., & Qin, Y. L. (2004). An integrated theory of
the mind. Psychological Review, 111, 1036–1060.
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic
components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Bisseret, A. (1995). Représentation et décision experte.
psychologie cognitive de la décision chez les aiguilleurs du
ciel. Toulouse: Octares Editions.
Callantine, T. J. (2005). Performance evaluation of a
computational model of en route air traffic control. In
Proceedings of the thirteenth international symposium on
aviation psychology (pp. 86–91). Oklahoma City.
Endsley, M. R. (1995). Toward a theory of situation
awareness in dynamic systems. Human Factors, 37, 32–64.
Eyferth, K., Niessen, C., & Spaeth, O. (2003). A model of air
traffic controllers’ conflict detection and conflict resolution.
Aerospace Science and Technology, 7, 409–416.
Lee, F., & Taatgen, N. (2002). Multi-tasking as skill
acquisition. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual
conference of the cognitive science society (p. 572-577).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Fairfax, VA: August, 2002.
Lee, S. M., Ravinder, U., & Johnston, J. C. (2005).
Developing an agent model of human performance in
air traffic control operations using APEX cognitive
architecture. In Proceedings of the 2005 winter simulation
conference, Vols 1-4 (pp. 979–987). Orlando, FL.
Niessen, C., & Eyferth, K. (2001). A model of the air traffic
controller’s picture. Safety Science, 37, 187–202.
Niessen, C., Eyferth, K., & Bierwagen, T. (1999). Modelling
cognitive processes of experienced air traffic controllers.
Ergonomics, 42, 1507–1520.
Niessen, C., Leuchter, S., & Eyferth, K. (1998). A psychological model of air traffic control and its implementation.
In F. Ritter & R. Young (Eds.), Proceedings of the second
european conference on cognitive modelling (ECCM-98)
(pp. 104–111). Nottingham, UK: Nottingham University
Press.
Rantanen, E. M., & Nunes, A. (2005). Hierarchical conflict
detection in air traffic control. International Journal of
Aviation Psychology, 15, 339–362.
Raufaste, E. (2006). ATC in ACT-R: A model of conflict
detection between planes. In Proceedings of the thirteenth
annual ACT-R workshop (p. 102-107). Pittsburgh, PA,
USA.
Seamster, T. L., Redding, R. E., Cannon, J. R., Ryder, J. M.,
& Purcell, J. A. (1993). Cognitive task analysis of expertise
in air traffic control. International Journal of Aviation
Psychology, 3, 257–283.
Stankovic, S., Raufaste, E., & Averty, P.
(2008).
Determinants of conflict detection: A model of risk
judgments in air traffic control. Human Factors, 50,
121–134.
Taatgen, N. A. (2001). A model of individual differences
in learning air traffic control. In Proceedings of the
fourth international conference on cognitive modeling (p.
211-216). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Taatgen, N. A. (2002). A model of individual differences in
skill acquisition in the Kanfer-Ackerman air traffic control
task. Cognitive System Research, 3, 103-112.

2267

