UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Simplicity on Financial Decision-Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/93t637s5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Berg, Nathan
Gigerenzer, Gerd
Martignon, Laura
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Simplicity on Financial Decision-Making
Marco Monti (monti@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Department for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition,
Königin-Luise-Straße 5
14195 Berlin Germany

Laura Martignon(martignon @ph-ludwigsburg.de)
University of Education, Ludwigsburg,
Reutealee 46
71634 Ludwigsburg Germany

Gerd Gigerenzer(sekgigerenzer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Department for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition,
Königin-Luise-Straße 5
14195 Berlin Germany

Nathan Berg, (nberg@utdallas.edu)
School of Economic, Political, and Policy Sciences (EPPS) - University of Texas-Dallas
Mail Station GR31 - 800 West Campbell Road
Richardson, TX 75080-3021

Abstract
This paper reports new experimental and survey data
collected from bank customers at several Italian banks. These
data aim to uncover the decision processes used by investors,
including their investment goals, the information sets they
consider, and the number of factors that actually influence
high-stakes financial decisions. Most subjects use a strict
subset of the information available to them, ignoring variables
that standard economic models typically assume drive
investors’ behavior. Rather than random trembling which
would predict that omitted variables are dropped at random,
fast and information-frugal heuristics appear to explain the
information search and decision behavior of many subjects
observed in this study, reflecting a lexicographic hierarchy of
risk, time horizon and cost, in that order. A simple
combination of a fast and frugal tree and a tallying rule
predicts about 80% of investors’ decisions.
Keywords: behavioral finance, decision making, heuristics.

1. Introduction
Bank customers are not experts, and yet they make highstakes decisions that can change their welfare for better or
worse. This raises the question of how non-experts actually
go about making financial decisions and the processes that
provide good empirical descriptions of their purposeful
investment behavior. We report new evidence from
customers at Italian mutual banks about the simplicity of
non-experts’ judgments, including how many pieces of
information they typically consider, and the heuristic rules
that map information in their consideration sets into actual
decisions.
A growing literature in economics and psychology
documents that decision makers typically do not incorporate
all available information into their decisions, even when that
information is statistically valid, non-redundant (i.e., non-

collinear with other predictors), and costless to acquire
(Chewning & Harrell, 1990; Lee & Lee, 2004; Berg &
Hoffrage, 2008). If search is limited rather than exhaustive,
how are the pieces of information considered mapped into
actual behavior? Gigerenzer, Todd and the ABC Group
(1999) put forward a positive theory regarding simple and
information-frugal decision rules that have surprisingly
attractive theoretical properties (e.g., accuracy in prediction
tasks, as in Gigerenzer & Brighton, 2009; Martignon &
Laskey, 1999, and Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996) and solid
empirical support based on lab experiments.
Fast and frugal heuristics have been shown to perform
well at prediction in a variety of domains (Gigerenzer, Todd
and the ABC Group, 1999); they make inferences with very
little knowledge and computational effort, largely by using
only a small subset of the available information. They make
no trade-offs and proceed lexicographically through each
factor associated with the pair of objects being compared.
Under certain circumstances, such heuristics can be as
accurate as weighted linear models, falling only slightly
behind the Bayesian approach (Martignon & Laskey, 1999
in Gigerenzer, Todd and the ABC Group, 1999) that takes
all relevant factor correlations or conditional dependencies
into consideration.
One simple decision heuristic that can be applied to
binary decisions, such as whether to invest in stocks or
bonds, is the take-the-best (TTB) rule, which ignores all
correlations among predictors (i.e., the features of different
investments being considered by an investor) and uses them,
one by one, in a lexicographic decision tree that requires no
weighting or averaging. TTB is a rule that maps two lists of
features (or “cues” in the jargon of psychology, or
“predictors” in the jargon of economics), one list for each of
the two alternatives being considered, into a binary
inference or decision. A key part of TTB’s success in out-

1846

of-sample prediction is its noncompensatory, or
lexicographic, structure according to which each feature is
considered one at a time following a fixed ordering. If the
first feature points in the same direction for both of the
alternatives, then TTB makes no decision on the basis of
that feature and the next feature is considered. As soon as
one characteristic or feature points clearly in favor of one of
the two alternatives, TTB makes the decision on the basis of
that feature, ignoring all other features that could have been
compared. Thus, TTB is fast and frugal, in the sense of
depending only on a strict subset of the available
information regarding the features of investments.
In contrast to TTB, the neoclassical model used in most
analyses of financial decision-making assumes that decision
makers exhaustively search the elements in their feasible
sets, weigh costs and benefits of all features associated with
each element of this set and, after weighting all relevant
information, select the investment that is the global
maximizer. TTB and the neoclassical model make
predictions about the process that investors use when
making a high-stakes decision. It implies that all
information receives some weight (aside from the trivial
cases of perfectly correlated pieces of information, or those
that do not correlate at all with payoffs). Therefore, process
tracing of bank consumers’ decisions should, according to
the neoclassical model, reveal that all investment features
are looked up, and that all of them are integrated
systematically into observed choice behavior. The
neoclassical model implies that no relevant information is
discarded or ignored. In terms of investors’ goals, the
neoclassical model implies that investor’s behavior proceeds
as if it is maximizing something, so that (at least for an
interior optimum) goals should be described in terms of
solving something akin to first-order equations, where
marginal benefits just offset marginal cost.
The TTB model makes different predictions than the
neoclassical model. Using experimental and survey data
collected from Italian bank customers, this paper contributes
to reveal that there is evidence that clearly rejects the
neoclassical model and fits a lexicographic fast and frugal
decision tree akin to TTB. Furthermore, normative
assessment of the performance of real bank customers’
decision processes (relative to the neoclassical benchmark)
indicates that heuristic strategies appear to serve investors
reasonably well. Whereas the biases and heuristics literature
frequently assigns an automatic negative normative value to
any decision procedure that deviates from the neoclassical
ideal, we identify attractive normative properties of the fast
and frugal heuristic approach to investment decisionmaking. TTB and similar lexicographic decision-tree
heuristics consider the features of investments sequentially
in a ranking determined by some measure of the goodness
of each feature rather than considering all their intercorrelatedness. This helps reduce the cognitive processing
required to execute the strategy and can improve robustness
and accuracy of predictions (Gigerenzer & Brighton, 2009).

The experimental tasks that our subjects faced required
them to search freely for information, unlike most
experimental economics treatments of financial decisions, in
which subjects are provided with a complete set of summary
statistics such as expected values, variances and
covariances, required by standard models such as Capital
Asset Pricing Model.
In our case, participants could decide how much
information they wanted to look at. Most chose not to look
up all the information that was freely available to them and
a significant proportion explored only a small set and
overlapping of investment features (repeatedly looking up
the same piece of information). Subjects exhibited
remarkably similar information search behavior across
trials, reporting that they spent on average only a short time
on all portfolio decisions. Moreover, the bank customers
indicated that, although they were handling meaningful
amounts of money, they made investment decisions with
relatively little cognitive effort. By far, the most important
features of investments in the eyes of our subjects were risk,
time horizon, and costs (brokerage fees), in that order.
Information exploration was characterized by frugality and
simplicity. Finally, investors’ decisions can be described by
a fast and frugal heuristic that has a very simple
representation.

2. Methodology
The research project as a whole was developed in two
steps. We first interviewed 20 professional financial
advisors and 80 bank customers of the Italian mutual bank1.
These interviews provided information on both the
perspective of the advisors on the customers and that of the
customers on the advisors concerning investment strategies.
Data collected from these interviews were used to design the
test taken by 15 customers (from the sample of 80
interviews). In this paper we focus on the results of the test
and their analysis. Data collected from the test were
analyzed both, at the aggregate level, and, at the individual
level (within subject approach), by considering each single
subject (across the 15 customers that took the test).

2.1 The instruments
The data treated here2 consist of test results which track
information look-ups and decisions in a hypothetical
investment task. The hypothetical investment task was not
incentivized by tying subjects’ payments to the task. We
discuss the rationale for this approach below and why we
are confident that this design produces useful insights about
inter-subject variability in terms of information usage in
investment decision-making.
Fifteen customers were tested with a sequence of four
experimental tests, based on Java Language. Our intention

1847

1
Cassa Rurale Giudicarie Valsabbia Paganella
Data collected trough the questionnaires will be presented in
another paper dealing with the customer and advisor relationship
and advice taking strategy.
2

was to analyze subjects taking decisions in a naturalistic
environment with maximally realistic investment tasks.
Therefore, the information setup in portions of the
investment task we asked our bank customer subjects to
perform, relied in part on information about the investment
features mentioned by them and advisors in the
questionnaires and calibrated with realistic and typical
values of expected return, risk, etc.

2.2 Experimental Design
We investigated decision strategies by considering three
factors: the overall amount and the type of information that
subjects need for taking their decisions, and the approach
they follow in the information-search process.
Participants in our research were customers of an Italian
mutual bank. A mutual bank is a nonprofit institution whose
aim is to support the economic well-being of people living
in a specific region. We selected this type of bank because
its financial advisors are neither under the pressure of
budget goals nor conditioned by other economic incentives
that may distort their presentation of financial products.
Participants were randomly extracted from the bank
database, which contains data on all active customers. The
only requirement participants had to fulfill was to have
deposits of at least 40,000 euros.
The computer-administered investment tasks were
performed at different branch locations of the bank in
Trento, Italy. The interviewer read the instructions to each
participant and also explained the aim of the test. Each
experimental session lasted approximately 75 min. (60 min.
for the questionnaire interview and 15 min. for the
investment tasks). Investors were not remunerated. They
voluntarily participated in the tests and showed great
enthusiasm, viewing their participation as a contribution to
the quality of their mutual bank.
Tests were conducted on a touch-screen-based interface
programmed in Java language. We chose touch-screen
technology to facilitate the interaction of elderly investors,
with dynamic information provided by the computer.
Each subject was placed in front of the touch-screen and
trained on how to manage each single task. A personal
computer ran a Java Virtual Machine, which recorded all the
experimental data and, thus, all investors’ decisions.
Each test was composed of four different phases that gave
subjects a chance to implement a neoclassical strategy of
exhaustive search of investment features while measuring
the subjects’ actual usage of information about features.
The task began by asking customers to choose between two
investments, later extending the number of possible choices
to six. Subsequently, customers were asked to design their
preferred investment portfolio, basing their choices on
investment labels and features. In the last phase, they were
asked to repeat their assets allocation, based only on
investment features and no labels. This facilitated a withinperson test of the effect of labels on individuals’ portfolio
choice.

Test Phase 1: Pair-Wise Investment Choice When asked
to choose between two investments, subjects were invited to
explore a 6 x 2 matrix displaying in each of two rows the
two alternative investments (Investment 1, Investment 2)
and in each column six investment features: risk, time
horizon, cost, liquidity, capital loss, returns. There were no
constraints on how customers should look up feature
information even if there was a constraint on the number of
possible features looked up. Of the 12 features they could
look up only 63. The test began with a black matrix on the
screen initially hiding all the information content.
Information popped up in a “flipping cards” fashion when
the subject touched the display. Each subject was asked to
explore those features that they considered helpful for
identifying their preferred investment (see Figure 1). Each
subject performed, on average, around four different trials at
this test phase.

Figure 1: Graphic user interface for Test Phase 1
Test Phase 2: Extended Information Search - Financial
Market Exploration The information provided was now
arranged in a 7 x 6 matrix, displaying the same feature
profile of an investment in each row for six different
investments typically available in banks, namely, bank
accounts, bonds issued by the mutual bank, by the
government, by insurance companies, and balanced mutual
funds (with a roughly 50-50 portfolio in corporate bonds
and blue chip stock equity) and stocks.
Here again, the test is similar to the test Phase 2. Customers
performed one exploration trial and were subsequently
invited to continue the test by selecting their favorite
investments portfolio (i.e., a set of weights on categories
that add to 1) within the presented investment categories
(see Test Phase 3).
Test Phase 3: Investment Portfolio – Categorization and
Selection Unlike in Test Phase 2, in Phase 3 investors were
now provided with the full information matrix uncovered
from the very beginning of the test and they were asked to
form a portfolio by allocating 100 units.

3

The advisors’ questionnaires revealed that there are
limits, due to time constraints and to constraints in
customers’ understanding of financial information, to the
exchange of the information on the investments. The upper
limit usually considered is 6 pieces of information.

1848

Figure 3 illustrates the matrix: The first column reported the
name (label) of the investment, the set of white boxes
revealed the investment features and the last column
collected the investors’ allocating decisions; with each touch
of the box the allocated amount for that investment was
increased by 5%.
Test Phase 4: Investment Portfolio 2 - “Blind”
Categorization and Selection This phase was identical to
the preceding one with the only difference that now the first
column of the investments labels was hidden (see Figure 4);
no changes were introduced for the other information.

At time 1, risk was looked up in 89.2% of the cases. At
Time 2, risk still was looked up in 41.5% and time horizon
in 40% of the cases. At Time 3, cost was looked up in
35.4% and time horizon in 26.2% of the cases, and so on.
This analysis reveals that, within the first two times, risk
and time horizon are the most explored investment features.
From Time 4 onwards, there appears to be no strong
preference for any of the remaining features. During Times
1, 2 and 3 the preferred exploration path was risk -> time
horizon -> cost. Figure 2 shows the aggregate view looking
at the total number of cue look-ups in the grand pool of all
customers over the six-step time path.

3. Test Results
The tests results are presented in two blocks, one concerning
the information search and the other concerning the decision
strategies adopted by participants.

3.1 Part I: Information Search
In examining the approach followed by subjects in
exploring financial information, we started by considering
how much information an investor needed in order to arrive
at his or her financial decision. We investigated the
information search processes occurring both in Test Phase 1
(pair-wise investments comparison) and in Test Phase 2
(extended information search - financial market
exploration).
Amount and Type of Explored Information In Test Phase
1, 86% of customers looked at all six pieces of information.
In Test Phase 2, customers considered, on average, less than
half of the available information (45%), revealing a clear
preference for smaller information sets to act upon (Table
1); subjects probably focused on those subsets of financial
products that mostly captured their interest.
Feature
Exploration (in %)
Risk
76.2
Time horizon
48.8
Costs
47.6
Liquidity
41.7
Coupon
39.3
Minimum Amount
38.1
Cost Before
26.2
Redemption
Mean
45.4
Standard deviation
15.5
Table 1: Average Amount of Information Investigated
from Each Single Investment Feature in Test Phase 2.
Information Search over Time In Test Phase 1,
participants sequentially explored at most 6 different pieces
of information dealing with the investment features in 65
trials; therefore, we analyzed data according to the 6
exploration steps denoted by t1… t6. This sequential analysis
reveals results consistent with Table 1; information
concerning risk, time horizon and costs are looked up first

Figure 2: Information Gathered for Each Cue Over Tim in
Test Phase 1.
We also estimated a Markov transition matrix with
empirical probabilities of moving from one investment
feature to another in the 6-step information search process.
At the beginning, the feature most likely to be explored is
risk (89%). The next feature after risk most likely to be
explored is either time horizon (35%) or risk once again
(23%). The next feature most likely to be explored after
time horizon is either cost (46%) or time horizon once again
(16%).
Payne’s Analysis of Information Exploration Following
the approach to information search analysis proposed by
Payne, Bettman, and Johnson (2004), we looked at two
types of exploration paths: feature-wise and investmentwise. A feature-wise path corresponds to an investor
focusing on just one feature and exploring it across
investments. An investment-wise path corresponds to an
investor exploring features belonging to just one investment
at a time.
Data collected in Test Phase 2 show that 8 out of the 14
participants (57%) adopted an investment-wise path; they
focused their attention on information pertaining to a single
investment at a time. The simultaneous protocol analysis
revealed that most of those customers began their
explorations from the investments they had already
experienced in real life. The other customers explored the
available information by adopting mixed strategies; some of
them completely explored the information dealing with risk
by adopting a cue-wise approach, while others gathered

1849

information across all the investments without revealing a
predominant approach.

3.2 Decisions
In order to understand to what extent a decision tree (Figure
3) is able to capture a single investor’s choice rule we
introduce some definitions. Define the cue profile of an
investment as a binary vector of 1’s and 0’s, according to
whether cue values are “positive” or not and ordered by the
sequence: risk, time horizon, liquidity, costs (intermediary
fees), other costs4, and returns. Based on the fast and frugal
heuristic model (Gigerenzer, Goldstein, 2006) investment
features are all transformed to binary values to simplify their
comparison. The convention for assigning the values 1 or 0
to a cue reflects the preferences revealed by customers in
their interviews. If risk, say, is medium or low, it is assigned
the value 1. Similarly, if time horizon is medium or short, its
value is 1, and if cost and liquidity are medium or low, they
are also assigned the value 1. If the investment has no cost
before redemption date this cue is assigned a 1, otherwise 0,
and if there are “returns during the holding time” then this
cue is assigned a 1, otherwise 0.

Subject Id.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Mean
Standard
Deviation

Scores
90%
80%
100%
50%
38%
90%
100%
88%
100%
88%
70%
60%
80%
40%
100%
78.3%
21.8%

Table 2 (left): Decision Heuristic Predictions.
Figure 3 (right): Fast and Frugal Tree for Heuristic on Risk,
Time Horizon and Costs and in Addition Tallying.

4

The heuristic that best modeled our data,
lexicographically examines only the one cue that was
explored most, namely risk, and processes all the remaining
cues by means of a tallying rule (Figure 3); tallying is a
heuristic that can be described by a linear model with
weights equal to one for each investment feature. In this
context, tallying means counting the number of 1’s for both
investments and choosing the investment with a higher
score. For instance, if Investment A has a cue profile,
(011111) and B has a cue profile (100000), then B is
preferred because the first cue is treated lexicographically.
As an example, if A is an investment with a cue profile
(100101) and B is an investment with a cue profile
(100100), investment A is chosen over investment B
because its profile contains more 1’s after the first entry.
How well does the previously described heuristic predict
the choices observed in the Test Phase 2 task? Predictions
for each subject are presented in Table 2.
By Fast and Frugal Tree we mean a tree that has at least
one exit at each level; it is “minimal” among trees using all
cues, because it has a minimal number of nodes (Martignon,
Katsikopoulos & Woike, 2008).The tree in Figure 3 predicts

For instance, costs for selling it before the redemption date.

78.3% of the observed investment decisions in the
experimental investment task of Phase 2. One of its key
features is that, for most investors, there is no compensating
trade-off for high risk investments. High risk investments
are eliminated from consideration in the lexicographic
formulation depicted in Figure 7. The second key feature is

1850

that, beyond this lexicographic step to avoid high-risk
investments, customers adopt a simple tallying rule that
counts 1 for each cue value that matches their system of
preferences, otherwise 0, and choose the investment with
the higher score. In other words, rather than weighting
different features differentially, the model suggests that
investors simply count the number of features over which
one investment dominates another one.
The Importance of Recognition for Portfolio Design We
now present the effects of investment labels on subjects’
classifications of investments. In Test Phase 4 all the 15
participants performed one task dealing with what we called
“blind categorization”. We collected data on participants’
performances in reproducing the same investments
allocation task they had already performed in Test Phase 3
but now without providing them with the investment names
or labels, but just with their features. The idea was to test
how consistent their choices remained when provided with
just the investment features and not with their names.
The first result we obtained was that participants did not
excel in the blind classification task. Given that participants
paid most attention to risk, they should have split
investments in two different categories, namely, high-risk
investments versus medium- and low-risk investments, even
when investment labels were absent. The empirical evidence
shows us that 9 out of 15 participants (60%) made important
errors, that is, they invested in much riskier portfolios than
before and with asset allocations that diverged from the
original ones, on average, by 69% (calculated on the amount
of the originally invested money). These results give us a
perspective on how people perceive, represent, and act upon
financial information and reveal a delicate aspect for
potential manipulation of decisions. The results confirm the
power of the Recognition Heuristic: when it is not
applicable, customers perform poorly5.
4. Summary and Conclusions
The aim of this research was to investigate how average
investors make financial decisions. We focused on two
components of their decision processes: information search
and decision. We interviewed 80 customers of an Italian
mutual bank, of whom 15 were also tested in an interactive
lab experiment. For this experiment, we designed
naturalistic environments based on the information we
collected from the customers and advisors’ interviews: We
preserved the characteristics of investment choices usually
offered to those same bank customers. The experiment
consisted of 4 tests. In Test Phase 1 we let customer choose
5

By Recognition Heuristic we mean a simple strategy that
allows individuals to infer, for example, which of the two objects
has a higher value on some criterion based on the fact the
recognize one and not the other (e.g. which investment has a
higher expected return). The recognition heuristic for such tasks is
simply stated: If one of the two objects is recognized and the other
is not, then infer that the recognized object has the higher value
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002).

between 2 investments constrained to looking up 6 possible
feature variables at most. In Test Phase 2, by contrast, they
had to choose between 6 types of investment and could still
exploring the same financial features. Subjects in Test Phase
2 consulted less than half of the information at their
disposal. The exploration of information is characterized by
frugality and simplicity. We modeled customers’ choices by
means of a fast and frugal tree trough which we predicted
namely 80% of investors’ decisions. They consider only 1
feature lexicographically, as non compensated by others,
and treats the remaining ones with a tallying rule. For our
customers to tally features, when they do not know them
well is simpler than establishing a ranking. The second
experimental task was portfolio choice, designed to check
whether providing participants with all the investment
features but no labels/names can affect their behavior. We
discovered that, when labels are missing, customers tend to
select different and riskier investments than the original
ones (namely when labels available). That is, the way
financial products are presented to average investors plays a
significant role in their investment decisions.

Acknowledgements
We thank Davide Donati, general director of the Cassa
Rurale Giudicarie Valsabbia Paganella and all the board of
executives for their full support for conducting this research.
We also thank Marcel Jentsch for his valuable help in
programming and designing interactive interfaces.

References
Chewning, E., & Harrell, A. (1990). The effect of
information overload on decision makers’ cue utilization
levels and decision quality in financial distress decision
task. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 15(6), 527–
542.
Gigerenzer, G. (2004). Fast and frugal heuristics: The tools
of bounded rationality. In D. Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.),
Handbook of judgment and decision making. (pp. 62–89).
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103(4), 650–669.
Katsikopoulos, K., & Martignon, L., (2006). Naive
Heuristics for Paired Comparision: Some Results on Their
Relative Accuracy, Journal of Mathematical Psychology,
50(5), 488-494.
Lee, B. K., & Lee, W. N. (2004). The effect of information
overload on consumer choice quality in an on-line
environment. Psychology & Marketing, 21, 159–183.
Martignon, L., & Hoffrage, U. (2002). Fast, frugal, and fit:
Simple heuristics for paired comparison. Theory and
Decision, 52(1), 29–71.
Payne, J., Bettman, R., Johnson, E. G. (2004). Fast and
frugal heuristics: The tools of bounded rationality. In D.
Koehler & N. Harvey (Eds.), Handbook of judgment and
decision making. (pp. 62–89). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

1851

