UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of concreteness on children’s ability to detect common proportion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8v71d1kd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Kaminski, Jennifer
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of concreteness on children’s ability to detect common proportion
Jennifer A. Kaminski (kaminski.16@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
210A Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science, Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Gentner & Ratterman, 1991, Vosniadou, 1989). By such
accounts, domain-specific knowledge is the primary
predictor of ability to attend to relations. In support of this
position, there is considerable evidence that while young
children may fail to reason analogically (i.e. based on
relational structure) in many instances, they can reason
analogically in contexts that are familiar to them (see
Gentner, Ratterman, Markman, & Kotovsky, 1995 for
discussion). For example, Gentner (1977a, 1977b) found
that when 4-year-old children were shown a picture of a tree
and asked, “If a tree had a knee, where would it be?”, they
interpreted the relational correspondence and responded as
accurately as adults. Additionally, Brown and Kane (1988)
conducted a study of preschool children, aged 3 to 5 years.
Children learned problem-solving strategies presented to
them through example problems. The problems involved
simple biological mechanisms such as mimicry and
camouflage. Young children did reason analogically to
apply solution strategies to solve analogous problems.
Domain-specific knowledge appears to be an important
factor in relational development.

Abstract
Two experiments were conducted to investigate
kindergartener’s ability to recognize common proportions
across different instantiations. Both experiments varied
between subjects the degree of concreteness of the
instantiations used during training. In Experiment 1, when
explicit training was given, participants who learned with either
the concrete or generic material successfully transferred their
knowledge to match common proportions involving novel
objects. However, in Experiment 2 when no explicit instruction
on proportion was given (participants were only shown two
examples), only participants who were shown the generic
examples successfully matched proportions with novel object.
Participants who were shown concrete examples were unable to
do so. These findings suggest that simple relations such as the
concept of proportion can be picked up spontaneously from
generic instantiations, while concrete instantiations do not
promote this spontaneous structure learning.
Keywords: Cognitive Science; Psychology;
Transfer; Relations, Structure Recognition.

Education;

Introduction

Concreteness

The ability to recognize common relations across
different situations is essential for many cognitive tasks
such as interpretation of analogies, acquiring abstract
concepts (i.e. bigger than), as well as much of mathematical
reasoning.
One finding that has emerged from research on analogy is
that the ability to detect common relational structure is not
always easy and tends to improve through the course of
development. Most researchers agree that a relational shift
occurs in development (e.g. Gentner, 1988; Gentner &
Ratterman, 1991). Early in development, children are more
likely to attend to object-level similarities between systems
or displays and overlook relations. Later in development,
people become more likely to attend to relational
similarities. For example, when given a simple metaphor
such as a plant stem is like a straw, children’s interpretation
is often based on superficial attributes, such as both are thin
and straight. Adults tend to interpret such metaphors
through deeper relations; in this case, both can carry water
(Gentner, 1988).
One category of theoretical accounts of relational
development is that the relational shift is knowledge-driven
(Brown, 1989, Brown & Kane, 1988; Gentner, 1988,

Another factor that has been shown to affect reasoning
and the detection of common relations is the concreteness of
the learning material. The term “concrete” is often
interpreted as something tangible, the opposite of abstract or
intangible. We suggest that concrete and abstract are not
dichotomous, but rather lie on a continuum over which the
amount of communicated information varies. For a fixed
relational concept, instantiation A is more concrete than
instantiation B if A communicates more information than B.
By this interpretation, physical objects are more concrete
than images of objects because the physical objects
communicate additional information such as sensory
information. Also, familiar and contextualized entities are
more concrete than unfamiliar or decontextualized entities
because more is known about familiar, contextualized
entities than about the later. Therefore, for example,
contextualized mathematics problems are more concrete
than decontextualized, strictly symbolic mathematical
equations.

335

children and, further along in development, concreteness
can hinder adults’ ability to recognize relational structure
and transfer more complex knowledge. However, little
research has been conducted on how concreteness affects
children’s ability to recognize novel relations that are more
complex than simple analogies but less complex than
advanced mathematical concepts.

Effects of Concreteness on Relational Tasks
DeLoache and her colleagues (DeLoache, 1995a, 1995b,
1997, 2000) have investigated the development of children’s
symbol use. Successful symbol use requires the detection of
common relations. For example, to effectively use a map as
a symbol for a real location, one must recognize the
common relations between entities on the map and their
real-world analogs. Young children have difficulty using
concrete, perceptually rich objects as symbols. In a series of
studies, 2½ to 3-year-old children were shown a 3dimensional scaled model of a real room and told that a
stuffed animal was hidden in the actual room. The
experimenter then placed a miniature toy in the model
telling the children that the location of the miniature toy in
the model corresponded to the location of the actual toy in
the real room. The children were then asked to retrieve the
real toy. Only 16% of the children were able to make
errorless retrieval of the actual toy. The children were then
asked to retrieve the miniature toy. The accuracy of the
miniature toy retrieval was 88% implying that the poor
performance on the retrieval of the actual toy was not due to
inability to remember the location, but an inability to realize
that the model symbolically represented the actual room. In
subsequent studies, the salience of the model was decreased
by putting it behind a glass window. Under this condition,
more than half of the participants accurately retrieved the
toy. Similarly, when children were shown the location in a
picture and not a 3-dimensional model, 80% of participants
ably retrieved the real toy. In sum, decreasing the
concreteness of the object increased the ease of its symbolic
use.
By 3 years of age, most children are successful in such a
task. However, when the 3- year-old study participants were
encouraged to play with the model first only 44% of them
successfully retrieved the toy, compared to 78% of 3-yearolds who retrieved the object with no opportunity to play.
The physical interaction with the model made it more
difficult for the children to treat it as a symbol.
Not only has concreteness been shown to affect children’s
analogical reasoning, there is also evidence that it can
hinder the ability of adults to detect common relations
(Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2006). Undergraduate
students who learned a novel mathematical structure
through a concrete example were unable to recognize the
same structure in a novel context. At the same time,
students who learned the concept through generic black
symbols were very accurate in recognizing the structure in a
novel context. The hindering effect of concreteness on
adults’ ability to recognize underlying relational structure is
also suggested by studies of analogical transfer in which
learners were unable, or less able, to transfer complex
knowledge to novel analogues when the knowledge was
acquired in a concrete format (Goldstone & Sakamoto,
2003; Goldstone & Son, 2005; Kaminski, Sloutsky, &
Heckler, 2008; Sloutsky, Kaminski, & Heckler, 2005).
Taken together, prior research shows that concreteness
can hinder the detection of simple relations for young

Overview
The purpose of the present research was to consider how a
simple relation that underlies a more advanced mathematical
concept is acquired by young children through instantiations
of different degrees of concreteness. The relation considered
was that of proportion, which is the foundation of the
concept of fraction. Two experiments investigated the effect
of concreteness on children’s ability to acquire and transfer
knowledge of proportions.
Kindergarten students were asked to match common
proportions across instantiations involving images of
different objects. Concreteness of the training material was
varied between subjects. All training and testing was
presented on the computer; to manipulate the degree of
concreteness, proportions were either instantiated through
generic black and white circles or through more concrete,
perceptually rich cupcakes.
In Experiment 1, participants were first given training in
common proportion and then asked to match common
proportion instantiated through novel items. The goal of
Experiment 2 was to investigate the effect of concreteness
on children’s ability to spontaneously detect common
proportions.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were twenty-six kindergarten
students recruited from middle-class, suburban schools in the
Columbus, Ohio area (10 girls and 16 boys, M = 5.9 years,
SD = .24 years).
Materials and Design The task was to match common
proportions across different displays of items. Participants
were randomly assigned to one of two conditions: Generic or
Concrete. In the Generic condition, all training represented
proportions as black circles out of black and white circles. In
the Concrete condition, all training presented proportions as
cupcakes with sprinkles out of cupcakes with and without
sprinkles.
The experiment had two phases. The first phase consisted
of training and a test of learning. Specifically, participants
were presented with two examples and two “non-examples”
of common proportions. The first example showed two
instantiations of 1/4. This was followed by a non-example
showing 1/4 is not the same proportion as 2/4. The second
example showed two instantiations of 2/3. The following
non-example showed that 2/3 is not the same proportion as

336

2/5. Figure 1 presents the example of two instantiations of
2/3 for both the Generic and Concrete conditions.
Participants were then given six multiple-choice questions
with feedback. Participants selected one of four response
choices: (1) the correct response, (2) correct numerator, but
incorrect denominator, (3) correct denominator, but incorrect
numerator, and (4) incorrect numerator and incorrect
denominator.
For example, one question presented a
proportion of 4/6 and response choices were 4/6, 4/5, 3/6, and
3/5. The order of the answer choices was counter balanced
across question trials.

blue cars out of blue and yellow cars. Response choices
involve proportions of bears with flags out of bears with and
without flags. These choices show: (1) the correct response
of 2/3, (2) correct numerator, but incorrect denominator, 2/4,
(3) correct denominator, but incorrect numerator, 1/3, and (4)
incorrect numerator and incorrect denominator, 3/4.

Figure 2: Example of a test question for Experiments 1
and 2.
Procedure Participants were asked to play a matching game
with the experimenter. All training and test questions were
presented on the computer. The experimenter told the child
that the goal of the game was to match common proportions.
During training, the experimenter verbalized which
instantiations presented the same proportion and why. For
example, in the Generic condition when showing two
instantiations of 2/3 (see Generic condition of Figure 1), the
experimenter gestured to the top group and stated, “Here is a
group of circles. There are three circles all together and two
are black”. Then she gestured to the bottom group and
stated, “This group of circles has the same proportion of
black because there are three circles all together and two of
them are black”. Explanations in the Concrete condition
were completely isomorphic to those of the Generic
condition. Participants proceeded through the test questions
at their own pace. The experimenter recorded their responses
through the computer.

Figure 1: Example of common proportion from training
phase of Experiments 1 and 2 (Generic condition on left,
Concrete condition on right).
Following training, participants were given a six-question
test of learning which presented novel proportions in the
same format as the training (i.e. circles for the Generic
condition and cupcakes for the Concrete condition). For
each question, there were four possible response choices of
the same format as those presented for the questions with
feedback.
The second phase of the experiment was a transfer task in
which participants were given 29 multiple-choice questions
involving novel objects. Each question presented a proportion
of blue cars out of a set of blue and yellow cars. The
questions used proportions with denominators (i.e. total
number of items in a display) ranging from 2 to 8. For
example, one question presented a proportion of 1/2; another
question presented a proportion of 3/8. Four possible response
choices were presented in the same format as the feedback
and learning test questions. Response choices represented
proportions using different objects. Many different items
were used for response choices and included: black and
white squares, red and white squares, red and green apples,
connected grey and white bars, connected green and white
bars, slices of pizza (present or missing), bears with and
without flags, light windows and dark windows of a house,
partially full bus seats, partially full table of people, and
partially remaining chocolate bar. An example test question
is shown in Figure 2: a proportion of 2/3 is represented as

Results and Discussion
Children were able to successfully match common
proportions. Learning scores in both conditions were well
above a chance score of 25% (see Figure 3), one-sample ttests, ts > 8.1, ps < 0.001. No differences were found
between conditions, independent-samples t-test t(24) = 0.85,
p = 0.40.
Transfer test scores were also above chance in both
conditions (see Figure 3), one-sample t-tests ts > 4.5, ps <
0.002. There were no differences between conditions,
independent-samples t-test t(24) = 0.86, p = 0.40.

337

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

instantiations have less extraneous information and
therefore are more likely to allow attention to relations.
Therefore, it is possible that concrete instantiations of
proportion also divert attention from relational structure, but
our training allowed participants to overcome this difficulty.
If generic instantiations of proportion are more likely to
draw attention to common relations than are concrete
instantiations, then differences in proportion-matching
ability should be found when participants are not given the
benefit of explicit instruction involving comparisons
between instances of the same proportion and of different
proportions. The purpose of Experiment 2 was to consider
this possibility; participants were given no detailed training,
only two examples of common proportions.

Concrete
Generic

Learning

Transfer

Figure 3: Mean Test Scores in Experiment 1 (% Correct).
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.
Chance score is 25%.

Experiment 2

While no significant differences were found between
conditions, there was a trend of better performance in the
Generic condition on both learning and transfer tests. This
trend suggests the possibility that generic instantiations may
have an advantage over concrete instantiations under
different training conditions. The training in Experiment 1
may have allowed participants to overcome potential
obstacles of concreteness.
There are two aspects of the experiment that may have
significantly promoted the abstraction of the proportion
relation and minimized differences between conditions.
First, training questions presented two instantiations
simultaneously leading participants to directly compare the
two. It has been well-documented that comparison of
instances leads to better abstraction of relations than
sequential presentation of instances (e.g. Catrambone &
Holyoak, 1989; Loewenstein, Thompson, & Gentner, 1999;
Gentner, Loewenstein, Thompson, 2003). Also, training
involving non-examples encouraged participants to contrast
the relational differences between the two proportions.
Furthermore, test questions also presented multiple
instantiations which may have encouraged participants to
compare and contrast the different instances.
In addition to the format of both training and testing
promoting comparison, another facilitating factor is that
participants were given explicit training in which the
experimenter directly stated and gestured to commonalities
and differences across proportions. This explicit instruction
may have encouraged attention to be focused on relations.
Therefore, the design of the experiment might have allowed
participants to overcome the potential hurdle of abstracting
common relations from concrete instances.
It has been argued that in many situations, concrete
instantiations hinder analogical transfer because the
extraneous information communicated through concrete
instantiations captures attention and diverts it from
relational structure (Kaminski, Sloutsky, Heckler, 2008;
Kaminski, Sloutsky, Heckler, in press). Because attention is
diverted to the superficial, the learner is unable to detect
common relations across isomorphic situations. Generic

Method
Participants Twenty-four kindergarten students were
recruited from middle-class, suburban schools in the
Columbus, Ohio area (10 girls and 14 boys, M = 5.7 years,
SD = .23 years).
Materials, Design and Procedure The materials and
procedure of this experiment were similar to those of
Experiment 1. However, no explicit training on proportion
was given, participants were only shown two examples of
common proportion (involving 1/4 and 2/3). As in
Experiment 1, there were two between-subject conditions,
Generic and Concrete. Participants in the Generic condition
saw the examples presented with black and white circles,
while participants in the Concrete condition saw examples
with cupcakes with and without sprinkles. After these two
examples, participants were given a transfer test involving
novel objects; this was the same 29-question transfer test
used in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Mean test scores differed significantly between conditions,
independent samples t-test, t(22) = 2.89, p < .001, with
participants in the Generic condition scoring higher than
those in the Concrete condition (see Figure 4). In the Generic
condition, scores were above a chance score of 25%, onesample t-test, t(11) = 5.78, p < 0.001. Scores in the
Concrete condition were not above chance, one-sample ttest, t (11) = 1.48, p = 0.17. Therefore, without explicit
instruction, participants who saw the concrete examples
were unable to recognize common relations between
instantiations. At the same time, participants who saw the
generic examples were able to recognize the common
relations and were also able to abstract the concept of
proportion to recognize it when presented through novel
items.

338

References
Brown, A. L. (1989). Analogical learning and transfer:
What develops? In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
Similarity and Analogical Reasoning (pp. 369-412).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, A. L. & Kane, M. J. (1988). Preschool children can
learn to transfer: Learning to learn and learning by
example. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 493-523.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 1147–1156.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995a). Symbolic functioning in very
young children: Understanding of pictures and models.
Child Development, 62, 736-752.
DeLoache, J. S. (1995b). Early understanding and use of
symbols: The model model. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 4, 109-113.
DeLoache, J. S. (1997). Manipulatives as symbols: A new
perspective on the use of concrete objects to teach
mathematics. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 18, 37-54.
DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual representation and young
children’s use of scale models. Child Development, 71,
329-338.
Gentner, D. (1977a). Children's performance on a spatial
analogies task. Child Development, 48, 1034-1039.
Gentner, D. (1977b). If a tree had a knee, where would it
be? Children's performance on simple spatial metaphors.
Papers and Reports on Child Language Development, 13,
157-164.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology 95 (2) 393408.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). London:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Ratterman, M. J., Markman, A., & Kotovsky,
L. (1995). Two forces in the development of relational
similarity. In T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford (Eds.),
Developing cognitive competence (pp. 263-314).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Goldstone, R. L. & Sakamoto, Y. (2003). The transfer of
abstract principles governing complex adaptive systems.
Cognitive Psychology, 46(4), 414-466.
Goldstone, R. L. & Son, J. Y. (2005). The transfer of
scientific principles using concrete and idealized
simulations. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 14,
69-110.

Figure 4: Mean Test Scores in Experiment 2 (% Correct).
Note: Error bars represent standard error of mean.
Chance score is 25%.

General Discussion
This research considered kindergarten children’s ability to
acquire the concept of proportion and tested their ability to
recognize common proportions presented with novel items.
Participants were trained with either generic instantiations
or concrete instantiations. When participants were shown
only two examples, those who saw generic examples were
able to spontaneously abstract the relational structure. They
successfully recognized common proportions in the test
items. Participants who saw concrete examples failed to
recognize common proportions. These results extend
previous findings on the effect of concreteness on learning
and transfer of relations by demonstrating that concreteness
can hinder young children’s ability to acquire relational
knowledge, including relations that are foundational to the
acquisition of later mathematical knowledge.
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that there are ways of
overcoming the obstacle of concreteness through the design
of learning material. Specifically, comparison of concrete
instantiations with explicit instruction highlighting common
relational structure can allow learners to acquire the concept
of proportion and transfer that knowledge to novel
instantiations.
While educational design incorporating comparison may
allow learners to successfully abstract simple mathematical
relations such as proportion, it is unclear whether the
process of comparison can erase the advantage of generic
instantiations over concrete instantiations for more
advanced abstract concepts. Because generic instantiations
may allow near spontaneous pick up of relations, they may
have an advantage for learning more complex mathematical
concepts even when learning involves direct comparison.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the Institute of
Educational Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education
(#R305B070407.) to V. M. Sloutsky and J. A. Kaminski.

339

Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2006).
Effects of concreteness on representation: An explanation
for differential transfer. In R. Sun & N. Miyake (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXVIII Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of abstract examples in learning math,
Science, 320, 454-455.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M, Heckler, A. F. (in
press). The devil is in the superficial details: Why generic
instantiations promote portable mathematical knowledge.
Child Development Perspectives.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 586-597.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kaminski, J. A., & Heckler, A. F. (2005).
The advantage of simple symbols for learning and transfer.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 508-513.
Vosniadou, S. (1989). Analogical reasoning as a mechanism
in knowledge acquisition: A developmental perspective.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 413-437). New York:
Cambridge University Press.

340

