UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Goals on Memory for Human Mazes in Real and Virtual Space

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0426507k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Coventry, Kenny
Johnson, Angie
Thompson, Emine Mine

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Goals on Memory for Human Mazes in Real and Virtual Space
Angie Johnson (angie.johnson@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

Kenny R. Coventry (kenny.coventry@northumbria.ac.uk)
Cognition and Communication Research Centre, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK

Emine Mine Thompson (emine.thompson@northumbria.ac.uk)
Built Environment Visualisation Centre, Northumbria
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST

Abstract
Walking around one’s environment is usually associated with a
goal. However, little is known regarding the influence of goals on
memory for distance and time in ‘cognitive maps’. In two
experiments we investigated the effect of goals of varying urgency
on immediate memory for distance and time in real human mazes
and virtual reality (VR) versions of the same mazes. Experiment 1
compared the effect of goals varying in urgency on memory for
distance and time in a straight- line real space human maze and a
VR maze. Experiment 2 examined the effect of goals on a real
maze with multiple turns. Results show that goals effect distance
estimation for straight line paths in both real space and VR space.
However, evidence of the influence of goals is mediated by the
number of right-angled turns in real space.
Keywords: Spatial Cognition; Real Space; Virtual Reality; Goals.

Introduction
When learning about where places are in the environment
and how to get to those places, it is necessary to develop
‘cognitive maps’ of the world. Cognitive maps are mental
representations of the environment (Tolman, 1946; Downs
& Stea, 2005) that contain information about landmarks
(objects), where they are placed, and the distance separating
them. However, there are systematic distortions between
metric distance and time and estimated distance and time
that challenge the view that cognitive maps are topographic.
According to Montello (1997), memory for distance is
distorted by a range of factors, including time and effort
spent moving from place to place, and environmental
structures and features such as the salience of landmarks in
the environment (Jansen-Osmann & Wiedenbauer, 2006).
For instance, there is evidence that distances in paths with
several right angle turns are perceived to be longer than
paths of the same length with fewer turns (Sadalla &
Magell, 1980).
Golledge (1987) has noted that individual differences
contribute to discrepancies between physical and perceived
distance, and in particular individual differences in
executive capacity, attention and choice of strategies. This
provides support for Briggs’ (1973) suggestion that
cognitive distance is a combination of individual behaviour
and environmental characteristics.
In spite of the vast literature relating to cognitive maps,
there is a distinct paucity of research examining the effect of

goals whilst travelling through an environment on distance
perception. There is some evidence for enhanced recall of
learned environments if the goal type and recall methods are
congruent. For instance Taylor and Naylor (1999) found
route goals enhanced performance on route perspective
tasks and this was replicated with survey goals and survey
perspective tasks, suggesting a context dependency on the
development of cognitive maps. In contrast, Rossano and
Reardon (1999) identified goal specificity as an inhibitory
factor in the development of survey knowledge, claiming
goals sacrifice schematic development, possibly by
diverting attention from the environment and focusing more
resources towards the goals. However, this research does
not examine the more basic function that goals serve.
Individuals very rarely walk through an environment
without a purpose. Usually one travels somewhere for a
reason, such as visiting a friend, buying groceries, or going
to work. Moreover, often the goals vary in urgency and
desirability.
Imagine that you are required to deliver medicine to a
friend who is critically ill in hospital. Imagine instead that
you have to deliver some bad news to a friend, such as the
news that they have failed their exams. One could envisage
that these differences in urgency may influence the
perception of how far (and for how long) one has walked the
same distance. Evaluating the influence of goals of varying
urgency on distance and time estimation is the main goal of
the present paper.
In light of testing the effect of goals on distance and time
estimation, it is also of interest to establish whether the
influence of goals may be mediated by the structural
features the environment possesses and the nature of the
media in which the environment is presented – this is the
second goal of the paper.
There is growing interest in the similarities and
differences between real and virtual worlds. Virtual Reality
(VR) has been utilized in several areas such as the military,
fire fighting and industrial training in hazardous conditions
(Burdea & Coiffet, 2003). There has also been a recent trend
in the employment of VR by the UK health services, not just
for training purposes, but to familiarise patients with their
potential environments. In addition, the US health service is
currently investigating VR as a potential aid for patients
suffering from post traumatic stress disorder (Moses, 2008).

1752

In spite of the considerable interest in VR as a research
tool, the evidence that VR is ecologically valid is somewhat
mixed. For instance, with respect to perception, VR
distances are reported as being shorter than equivalent
distances in reality, and there are problems with ‘perceptualmotor’ coupling contributing to reported differences for
speed perception (Witmer & Sadowski,1998, Banton et. al,
2005). In contrast, it has been claimed that VR augments
real space research, such as distance knowledge, acquisition
of route and survey knowledge (Jansen-Osmann & Berendt,
2002; Ruddle, Payne & Jones, 1997). But what of goals in
virtual spaces?
Although VR may be classed as an economical and
potentially safe alternative, there is still a basic expectation
that goals will reveal differences between real and virtual
tasks. The experiments below therefore compare
performance in real human mazes and exact virtual analogs
of those mazes when participants are asked to perform tasks
varying in goal urgency.

Experiment 1
Real Space and Virtual Environment
This experiment examined the effect of goals varying in
urgency on memory for distance (metres) and time taken to
travel (seconds) a straight line route in real space (a human
maze), and in an identical VR version of the maze.
Methodology
Participants took part in a ‘role play’ experiment in real (a
human maze constructed out of large polystyrene blocks) or
virtual space. The methodology was designed to control for
potential confounding variables such as visual cues, walking
pace, and time spent within the environment. This was
achieved by ensuring participants could walk comfortably
and unconsciously to the sound of a metronome, preset to
their natural walking pace (following Bugman & Coventry,
2008). The real maze was covered in clear tarpaulin to
reduce visual cues, while allowing light to still filter
through.
The ‘role play’ scenarios were selected from a pilot study
where participants were asked to rate various scenarios in
terms of urgency. Two scenarios were selected for this
experiment as being of high and low urgency, also
corresponding to differences in an individual’s predicted
speed of walk under such circumstances: High Urgency – delivering medication to a friend
critically ill in hospital.
 Low Urgency – delivering exam results to a friend,
and opening the envelope so that you know that
they have failed.
 Control condition – no scenario
Paths were marked with tape on the floor to identify the
start and end of the task. The requirement that participants
walk in time with a metronome eliminated the possibility
that participants would simply walk more quickly (or run)
through the maze in the more urgent scenarios. The

experimenter discretely timed the participants’ duration in
the maze to ensure that participants adhered to the
metronome beats.
Real Space Human Maze 1
The maze consisted of 26 polystyrene blocks, dimensions
1.2 x 2.1 x 0.3 metres. 11 polystyrene blocks were set up
side by side, creating one wall 2.1 metres in height. A
further 13 blocks were placed 1 metre opposite, creating a
path 1 metre wide with additional blocks perpendicular to
the longest wall at either end to ensure that the entrance to
and exit from the maze were not visible to the participants.
Finally, the maze was covered with clear tarpaulin. The total
distance, using the central route of the maze, was 15.4
metres (Figure 1, Figure 2a). The beginning and end of the
paths were distinguished with tape on the floor to provide
the experimenter with the cue for timing the journey.
Virtual Human Maze
The computer model depicted an exact replica of the realn
space maze 1 and was created using 3DStudioMax software
(see Figure 1). The model was then transferred to VR4Max
to establish immersion and navigation capability. The model
was extremely realistic, replicating light and textures that
gave the strong impression of the original maze. The Virtual
Environment used for the Virtual Human Maze condition
consisted of Intel Xeon X5450 CPU 2 x Quad (8 cores
running at 3.00Ghz) GPU: Nvidia Quadro FX 5600, and
StereoWorks DLP Passive Stereo Projection System that
was based on a rigid rear projection screen with dimensions:
244x183cm, with images projected by two Christie Digital
DS+25 high resolution projectors. The VR condition was
passive and the pace pre-programmed according to the
individual’s natural walking speed. A ‘head bob’ of 1.5cm
was used to enhance the perception of natural walking
(Masaad, Lejeune & Detrembleur, 2007).

1753

Figure1a: Real Space

Figure 1: Still images showing real maze (left) and the
VR maze (right).

Figure 2a. Allocentric View – Straight Maze

Figure 2b. Allocentric View – Maze with turns

Presentation
The study was presented to participants as a role play task.
They were told that they were going to be transported to the
experimenter’s Polystyrene Block World (Maze), and that a
scenario was going to be described to them where they
would have to deliver an object whilst imagining themselves
in that scenario. The importance of the role play scenario
was emphasized so that participants would take the scenario
seriously to make it as real as possible. At the end of the
study they were advised that they would be required to
answer questions about their role play experiences. The
participants were not aware that they were being tested for
their memory for distance or time during the task.
Experimental Design
To examine the influence of goals on distance and time
estimation, the experiment employed a 2 (route: Real Space
(RS) vs. Virtual Space (VS) x 3 (scenario: High Urgency vs.
Low Urgency vs. Control) between-subjects design.
Participants
Ninety Eight individuals were recruited to take part from
Newcastle city centre and were paid a nominal fee for
participation (or given course credit if they were students).
Participants were aged between 18 and 54 years old (mean
age = 25.98, SD= 8.1). Participants were randomly allocated
and evenly distributed for age and gender across all
conditions. No participant had any previous experience of
the building in which the real space maze was constructed
or of the Virtual Environment.
Procedure – Real Space
Participants’ were tested individually in a session lasting
about 30 minutes. Initially, participants were met in an area
separate from the maze; they were then instructed to walk
along a pre-designated reference path at their natural
walking pace to establish step length & speed of walk. The
speed of the metronome was then set to the speed of walk,
and participants were again asked to walk along the path to
the sound of the metronome to practice walking in time with
the clicks. Next, participants were advised that they were
going to be blindfolded and transported to the ‘Polystyrene

Block World’. Once the participant was blindfolded they
were guided to the end of the 8 metre reference path, spun
around three times and then guided to the beginning of the
real or virtual maze.
At the beginning of the maze the experimenter then
reminded the participants that they were to take part in a
‘role play task’. When confirmation was received that they
were ready to take part, the experimenter then instructed the
participant to visualise the assigned scenario. After the
visualisation the experimenter gave the participant a
medicine bottle or a folded exam result manuscript to
deliver at the end of the task. Participants in the control
condition did not receive an object. When participants were
confident of the importance and urgency of task, they were
then asked to remove their blindfold and commence their
journey. Participants were timed, discretely, during their
duration in the maze and, on completion, were then asked a
series of questions concerning distance estimation, time
estimation, and levels of anxiety and urgency experienced.
Procedure - Virtual Space
The procedure was the same as for the real space, with the
exception that participants also walked the reference path in
the virtual maze prior to taking part in the role play so that
they could get used to being in VS. The participants were
blindfold and seated in front of the screen during the period
of transition from exposure to the practice path and the main
maze.
Immediately after crossing the end line for the route,
participants were asked a range of questions including how
long (in metres) they thought the route was, how long they
thought they had spent in the maze, and how urgent they
perceived the task to be.
Results
Preliminary Analyses
A series of between participants one-way ANOVAs were
first run in order to check that participants across scenarios
did not differ in their walking speeds and times spent in the
maze. No significant differences were found for the pace of
walk for the Real Space (RS), F(2,39) = 0.05, p > 0.05 or
the Virtual Space (VS), F(2,53) = 1.89, p > 0.05 between
scenarios. There were also no significant differences in the
times spent in the maze between scenarios for the RS,
F(2,39) = 0.22, p > 0.05or the VS, F(2, 53) = 2.4, p > 0.05.
Main Analyses
Responses from 3 participants (6.7%) in the RS and 4
(8.9%) from the VS were excluded, as their distance
estimations were extreme. Therefore outliers, identified as
exceeding a criterion of 2 standard deviations from the
mean, were excluded. Responses from 42 participants in the
RS and 56 from the VS were included in the following
analyses.
Table 1 illustrates the mean distance estimates by scenario
and environment type.

1754

Table 1: Mean distance estimations (m) in Experiment 1
Scenario
Distance
(15.4 metres)
Control
High Urgency
Low Urgency

Real Space

X (σ)
13.94 (11.45)
23.07 (22.50)
10.42 ( 6.59)

path type; a straight line path. Experiment 2 examines the
effect of scenario on distance estimates for a path with many
turns in real space.

Virtual Space

X (σ)

Experiment 2
Real space – Route Angularity
This experiment employed a real maze with 8 turns in order
to establish whether the effect of scenario is robust across
environments with different spatial structures.

10.33 ( 7.39)
15.19 (13.72)
10.97 ( 7.15)

Distance estimation
To examine the influence of urgency between RS and VS
environments, a 2 condition x 3 scenario between subjects
ANOVA was performed on distance estimations. There was
no significant main effect of condition F(2,92) = 2.07, p >
0.05, and no reliable interaction between condition and
scenario, F(2,92) = 0.91, p > 0.05. However there was a
main effect of scenario, F(2,92) = 4.22, p < 0.01; the high
urgency condition was associated with larger estimates than
either the low urgency or control conditions (both p<0.05).
Time estimation
Time estimation was calculated as a ratio (= estimated
time/actual time), in order to provide comparable reports
across conditions.
There was no significant main effect of condition on time
estimation, F(2,92) = 2.46, p > 0.05, or of scenario, F(2,92)
= 2.58, p = 0.08 . The interaction between condition and
scenario was also non-significant, F(2,92) = 2.25, p > 0.05.
Urgency
The urgency reports were significant according to scenario
F(2,92) = 32.61, p < 0.001, but not for condition, F(2,92) =
0.31, p > 0.05, and there was no interaction between
condition and scenario, F(2,92) = 0.16, p > 0.05. A
significant correlation was found between the level of
urgency reported and the distances estimated, r = 0.226, p <
0.05. This analysis confirms that participants engaged with
the role-play task.

Discussion
The results confirmed the expectation that goals distort
distance estimation in real space and goals were also found
to influence distance estimation in virtual space. This
supports Jansen-Osmann and Berendt’s (2002) claim that,
despite the lack of proprioceptive information, VR is a valid
methodological tool for the investigation of the mechanisms
of spatial cognition.
Self-report urgency ratings after the experiment suggested
that participants immersed themselves in the role-play
appropriately. Additional self-report anxiety levels also
supported this view.
The results provide evidence that goals affect the
perception of distance in both real and virtual space.
Moreover, the effect of scenario was very marked, with over
double the mean distance estimate for the high urgency real
scenario compared to the low urgency real scenario.
However, these data pertain only to a single environment

Real Space Human Maze 2
The maze was built from the same material as in
Experiment 1 and consisted of 28 polystyrene blocks,
dimensions 1.2 x 2.1 x 0.3 metres – more blocks were
required to accommodate the variance in width at the rightangled turns. The maze consisted of 8 turns; 4 x right and 4
x left angled (Figure 2b). The maze was designed so that it
exited directly into a lobby where the experimenter was
waiting, out of the field of view of the participant. Again,
the total distance, using the central route of the maze was
15.4 metres and floor markers provided the experimenter
with the cue for timing the journey.
Method
The method used was exactly the same as in Experiment 1.
Participants
Sixty participants were recruited to take part from
Newcastle city centre and were paid a nominal fee for their
participation. Participants were aged between 18 and 53
years old (mean age = 25.75, SD= 9.3). Again, participants
were randomly allocated and evenly distributed for age and
gender across all conditions. No participant had any
previous experience of the building in which the real space
maze was constructed.
Procedure.
The procedure was exactly the same as in Experiment 1.
Results
Preliminary Analyses
One-way between participants ANOVAs found no
significant difference across scenarios for participants’
walking pace for the real space F(2,53) = 0.47, p > 0.05.
There was also no significant difference in the time spent in
the maze between scenarios, F(2,53) = 0.11, p > 0.05
Main Analyses
Responses from 4 participants (7%) were excluded, using
the same criteria as Experiment 1.
Table 2 shows the mean distance estimates by scenario.

1755

Table 2: Mean distance estimations by scenario in
Experiment 2
Scenario
Distance
(15.4 metres)
Control
High Urgency
Low Urgency

Straight Path

X

Turns
(σ)

13.94 (11.45)
23.07 (22.50)
10.42 (6.59)

X

(σ)

18.12 (6.37)
13.16 (7.15)
15.8 (7.85)

General Discussion

Distance estimation
The influence of urgency was investigated between the
straight path and the path with 8 right-angled turns (i.e.,
running a combined analysis for the real maze data in
Experiments 1 and 2). A 2 path type x 3 scenario between
subjects ANOVA revealed no significant main effect of path
type, F(2, 92) = 0.003, p > 0.05, or of scenario, F(2,92) =
1.59, p > 0.05. However there was a significant interaction
between path type and scenario, F(2,92) = 4.56, p < 0.01.
An effect of scenario was found for the real maze with
straight lines, as established before, but no such effect was
present for the real maze with multiple turns.
Time estimation
Several participants claimed that they found it difficult to
keep in step with the metronome whilst turning corners,
resulting in participants spending less time in the maze with
turns (Mean = 13.8 seconds) than in the straight line maze
(mean = 11.8 seconds), p< 0.001. Therefore time
estimations were converted to ratios: estimated time/actual
time. There was a significant main effect of path type on
time estimation F(2,92) = 12.32, p < 0.001. Participants
reported spending more time in the environment with turns
than in the straight-line environment. However, there was
no significant main effect of scenario for time estimation
F(2,92) = 2.75, p > 0.05, and no interaction between path
type and scenario F(2,92), 0.88, p > 0.05.
Urgency
The urgency reports were significantly different across
scenarios, F(2,92) = 17.64, p < 0.001, but not across path
types, F(2,92) = 1.54, p > 0.05. Also, there was no
interaction between path type and scenario, F(2,92) = 1.00,
p > 0.05. There was also no significant correlation between
the level of urgency reported and the distance estimated, r =
0.34, p > 0.05.

Discussion
The more complex environmental structure with multiple
turns did not produce the same findings with regard to
scenario as those found for the straight-line path in a real
human maze. However, this difference cannot be explained
as a function of differences in perception of urgency across
conditions; urgency ratings were reliably different between
scenarios for the path with many turns just as they were for
the straight-line path.

The absence of the distortion of distance estimation for
the role-play task in the complex environment may be a
result of environmental complexity; participants reported
difficulty in keeping to the sound of the metronome at the
turns. This may also explain the failure to find the
established effect of number of turns on distance estimation
found in past studies (e.g., Sadalla & Magel, 1980;
Bugmann & Coventry, 2008).

People usually go somewhere for a reason – from visiting
the dentist to going to see a movie. It is therefore important
in terms of ecological validity when studying cognitive
maps to include tasks that involve meaningful goals. In two
experiments we tested whether urgency of goals influences
distance and time estimations in environments varying in
structure (straight line path versus path with turns) and
media (real versus virtual environments).
The results for the straight line path (Experiment 1) show
the powerful influence goals exert on immediate memory
for distance travelled. Greater urgency is associated with
greater distance estimates in both real and virtual space.
Moreover, there was a reliable correlation between urgency
ratings and distance estimates, suggesting that individual
differences in perceptions of urgency may also play a role in
perception of distance (consistent with Golledge, 1987,
1999). This effect cannot be explained by the amount of
time spent traversing the path given that time and speed of
walk were strictly controlled. In addition the absence of
differences in scenario effects as a function of media
supports the robustness of VR as a methodology despite
acknowledged limitations with regard to simulating real life
experience (Campos et. al, 2007).
Surprisingly an effect of scenario was not found for the
real human maze containing many turns. This may indicate
that environment structure mediates the goals involved in a
task. However, an alternative explanation seems more
likely; participants walking in the human maze with many
turns found it difficult to walk in time with the metronome
clicks on turns, distracting them from the role play task at
hand. If this is the case, then running the VR version of the
task with many turns will be necessary to arbitrate between
these explanations; an effect of scenario should be present in
VR if the second explanation holds given that no problems
at turns occur in VR. We are currently exploring this
possibility.
Theoretically, one can ask why urgency of goals
influences distance estimation. Bugmann and Coventry
(2008) have suggested that the extent to which attention is
engaged during a task affects memory for distance. So
urgency may lead participants to consciously engage with
the task more, consistent with Bugmann and Coventry’s
‘attentional shift’ hypothesis. One way of testing this
hypothesis is to get participants to ‘think aloud’ while they
are performing a task; longer protocols should also lead to
increased distance estimates.

1756

In summary, the present data suggest that goals may well
influence immediate memory for route distance. A further
series of studies in progress aims to identify the precise
mechanisms involved.

Acknowledgements
Thanks go to Graham Kimpton, Built Environment
Visualisation Centre, Northumbria University, for his cooperation and development of the Virtual Environment.
Thanks are especially due to Patrick Olivier at the Culture
Lab, University of Newcastle, for the use of polystyrene
block materials and consenting to the access to Space 4,
and also to Phil Heslop, University of Newcastle, for his
active co-operation in the maze experiments.

References
Banton, T., Stefanicci, J., Durgin, F., Fass, A., & Proffitt, D.
(2005). The perception of walking speed in a virtual
environment.
Presence-Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 14, 4, 394-406.
Briggs, R. (1973). Urban Cognitive Distance. In Downs, R.
M. & Stea, D. (Eds.), Image & Environment; Cognitive
Mapping and Spatial Behavior. (2005 Ed) p368. Aldine
Transaction; New Jersey.
Bugmann, D., & Coventry, K. R. (2008). Action and the
Representation of Distance in Cognitive Maps Acquired
Through Imagined Traversal: The Development of a New
Methodology. Memory & Cognition 36 (3), 518 – 533.
Burdea, G.C. & Coiffet, P (2003) Virtual Reality
Technology. (2nd ed) p 285. New Jersey, Wiley-IEEE Press.
Campos, J., Nusseck, H. G., Wallraven, C., Mohler, B. J., &
Bülthoff,
H.
H.
(2007).
Visualization
and
(Mis)Perceptions in Virtual Reality. Tagungsband 10.
Workshop Sichtsysteme, 10-14. (Eds.) Möller, R. Shaker,
Aachen, Germany (11).
Downs, R.M., & Stea, D. (1977). Maps in minds.Reflections
on cognitive mapping. New York: Harper and Row.
Golledge, R.G. (1987). Environmental cognition. In D.
Stokols, & I. Altman (Eds). Handbook of Environmental
Psychology. John Wiley & Son.
Golledge, R.G. (1999). Wayfinding behaviour: Cognitive
mapping and other spatial processes. Baltimore: The John
Hopkins University Press.
Jansen-Osmann, P. & Berendt, B. (2002). Investigating
distance knowledge using virtual environments.
Environment & Behavior, 34, 178-193.
Jansen-Osmann, P., & Wiedenbauer, G. (2006) Distance
cognition in virtual environmental space: Further
investigations to clarify the route-angularity effect.
Psychological Research, 70, 43–51
Massaad, F, Lejeune. T. M., & Detrembleur, C. (2007). The
up and down bobbing of human walking: a compromise
between muscle work and efficiency. Journal of
Physiology, 58, 22, 789-799.
Montello, D.R. (1997). The Perception and Cognition of
Environmental Distance: Direct Sources of Information. In
Hirtle, S. C. & Frank, A. U. (Eds.), Spatial information

theory: A theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings of COSIT
'97. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1325. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag. (pp. 297-311).
Moses, A (2008). Virtual Reality May Help PTSD Patients.
Retrieved 21/04/2009 from
http://www.healthfinder.gov/news
Rosanno, M.J. & Reardon, W.P. (1999) Goal Specificity
and the Acquisition of Survey Knowledge. Environment
and Behavior, Vol. 31 No. 3, May 1999 395-412
Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., & Jones, D. M. (1997).
Navigating buildings in desk-top virtual environments:
Experimental investigations using extended navigational
experience. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
3, 143-159.
Sadalla, E. K., & Magel, S. G. (1980). The perception of
traversed distance. Environment and Behavior, 12, 65-79.
Siegal, A. W., & White, S. H. (1975). The development of
spatial representations of large-scale environments. In
Reese, H. W. (Ed.), Advances in child development and
behaviour (Vol. 10, pp9-55). New York: Academic Press.
Taylor, H. A., & Naylor, S. J. (1999). Goal-directed effects
on processing a spatial environment. Indications from
memory and language. Memory & Cognition , 27, 309-

19.
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208.
Witmer, B.G., & Sadowski, W.J. (1998). Nonvisually
Guided Locomotion to a previously viewed target in real
and virtual environments. Human Factors, 40, 478-488.

1757

