UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Time Course of Lexical Competition in Young and Older Adults

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5f76s20z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Revill, Kathleen Pirog
Spieler, Daniel

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Time Course of Lexical Competition in Young and Older Adults
Kathleen Pirog Revill (kate.pirog@psych.gatech.edu) & Daniel H. Spieler (spieler@gatech.edu)
School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology
654 Cherry Street, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

presbycusis, an age-related reduction in auditory sensitivity
starting at high frequencies and progressing into the lower
frequencies with age (Humes et al., 1994). However,
cognitive changes also affect older adult performance above
and beyond what is predicted by auditory thresholds. In the
visual word processing literature, the lexical frequency of
the target word itself has been shown to have a larger
influence on older compared to younger adults (Spieler &
Balota, 2000). In spoken word recognition, factors like
neighborhood density and neighborhood frequency (the
average lexical frequency of all of the words in the
neighborhood) affect word identification in both young and
older adults (Sommers, 1996; Sommers & Danielson, 1999).
Like young adults, older adults have more difficulty
identifying ‘difficult’ words (words from high density, high
frequency neighborhoods) than ‘easy’ words (words from
low density, low frequency neighborhoods). However, the
disadvantage for difficult words is increased for older adults
even after equating for acuity.
While neighborhood structure and density affect the time
course of lexical competition in young adults (Magnuson et
al., 2007), little is known about age differences in the time
course of competition. Some evidence is available from
gating paradigms. Here, listeners hear increasing fragments
of a word and are asked to identify the word. Older listeners
needed to hear slightly more of a word than younger
listeners (57% versus 52% respectively) before correct
identification (Wingfield, Aberdeen, & Stein, 1991).
Because participants make responses long after the offset of
the word fragment, this evidence is only a very indirect
measure of the time course of recognition.
If older adults need to hear more of a word before
identification occurs, then lexical activation may simply
build more slowly in older compared to younger listeners.
This slowed time course of activation need not influence the
overall pattern of competition between target words and
phonologically related “cohort” competitors. However,
older adults’ increased difficulty with identification of
words in hard neighborhoods and the observation of larger
effects of lexical frequency in visual word identification
studies suggest that age differences may result from
increased competition from high frequency competitors
instead of an overall delay in lexical activation. More direct
information about the time course of lexical activation and
competition is needed to distinguish these alternatives. If the
age difference is due to differences in the resolution of
competition, then we would expect differences in the
patterns of activation primarily when competitors compete
strongly with the target word, for example, when the target
is a low frequency word and the competitor is high in

Abstract
Although hearing loss accounts for much of the difficulty
older adults have comprehending spoken language, cognitive
factors also play a role. There is evidence that, relative to
younger listeners, older listeners have more difficulty
recognizing a word when it has many lexical competitors, but
little is known about the time course of lexical competition in
older adults. We monitored the eye movements of sixteen
young adults (18-30 years) and sixteen older adults (60-80
years) as they followed spoken instructions to click on objects
displayed on a computer screen. We manipulated the lexical
frequencies of the target word and the phonologically similar
competitor. Older listeners were more likely than younger
listeners to fixate competitors during comprehension only
when the competitor was high frequency. Simulations using a
model of spoken word recognition suggest that these age
differences may arise from a combination of differences in the
effect of frequency and competitor inhibition.
Keywords: cognitive aging; spoken word recognition; visual
world paradigm.

Introduction
Theories in cognitive aging have long focused on the
seeming difficulty that older adults have in selecting
between competing representations during processing
(Hasher & Zacks, 1988). Indeed, older adults are
disadvantaged in situations when multiple mental
representations compete for selection. While this can be
seen most clearly in areas such as attentional control (e.g.,
Spieler, Balota, & Faust 1996), selection during language
processing is also adversely influenced. For example, during
language production, older adults have particular difficulty
in lexical selection (LaGrone & Spieler, 2006). Here, we
focus on another aspect of selection, namely the need to
select the correct word from a set of competing lexical
candidates during spoken language comprehension. Because
spoken language input arrives incrementally, competition
occurs between similar word representations during
moments of temporary ambiguity. In most current models of
spoken word recognition (SWR), the acoustic input
activates multiple lexical candidates that compete for
eventual recognition (though see Norris & McQueen, 2008
for a Bayesian perspective on activation and competition).

Spoken Word Recognition and Aging
Although language abilities are frequently cited as being
relatively preserved in old age, older adults do have
difficulty with spoken language comprehension under a
variety of circumstances. Most of this difficulty (up to 80%
of the variance in some studies) can be attributed to

261

frequency. When competition is low, the activation patterns
should be similar.

received course credit for participation; older adults were
paid $10/hr.

Using Eye Movements to Examine the Effects of
Age on the Time Course of Lexical Competition

Materials. Fifteen pairs of cohort competitors were selected
as critical stimuli. Twelve pairs consisted of two
monosyllabic words that differed only at the final consonant
(or consonant cluster), and three pairs consisted of two
bisyllabic words with overlapping first syllables. One
member of each pair had a relatively low frequency
(11.1/million ± 12) and one had a relatively high frequency
(110.9/million ± 72) according to the CELEX English
database (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & van Rijn, 1993). Each
pair of objects appeared in two critical trials (along with two
phonologically unrelated objects), once with the HF word as
the target and once with the LF word as the target. All
words referred to picturable items. Matching pictures were
selected from a commercially available full-color digital
picture set, with the majority coming from a subset that has
been normed for name agreement across young and older
age groups (LaGrone & Spieler, 2006). An additional 145
pictures were selected from this set for use as distracters on
critical trials and on filler trials.
The stimuli were recorded by a male native speaker of
American English. Each word was embedded in the
sentence “Click on the TARGET.” To minimize variability
in target onset times while keeping coarticulation cues as
natural as possible, the phrase “the TARGET” was excised
as a unit out of each utterance and spliced onto a single
“Click on” phrase. The “Click on” instruction was 534 ms
long, and the duration of the “the TARGET” phrase was, on
average, 702 ms for the critical trials and 701 ms for the
filler trials.

In general, people look at things that are related to their
current thoughts and upcoming actions. The visual world
paradigm takes advantage of this by measuring patterns of
eye fixations to objects or pictures while listeners hear
spoken words. In goal-directed tasks, participants’ eye
movements are closely time-locked to the unfolding spoken
instruction. Fixation proportions can be used as an index of
lexical activation and competition across time (Allopenna,
Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 1998; Magnuson et al., 2007).
The relative effortlessness of eye movements gives us an
important advantage over prior examinations of age
differences in spoken word recognition. Many experimental
tasks impose secondary demands on participants (for
example, planning and executing a button push or a spoken
response) that can contribute to age differences unrelated to
the process of interest. Eye movements are a natural and
low-effort form of responding that impose minimal
secondary demands on listeners. Here, we observe the time
course of eye fixations of younger and older listeners while
they hear words that vary in terms of likely competition
from other words in the lexicon.

Using TRACE to Explore Mechanisms of Increased
Lexical Competition in Older Adults
An additional benefit of using the visual world paradigm to
explore age differences in the time course of spoken word
recognition is that fixation proportions can be linked to the
activation levels of lexical representations in the TRACE
model of speech processing (Allopenna et al., 1998;
McClelland & Elman, 1986). We use an implemented
model (jTRACE, a recent reimplementation by Strauss,
Harris, & Magnuson, 2007) to better understand how
cognitive factors lead to differences in the time course of
young and older adult spoken word recognition.

Procedure. The experiment consisted of 80 trials: twenty
practice trials, thirty critical trials and thirty filler trials.
Each cohort pair appeared in two critical trials, once with
the high frequency item as the target and once with the low
frequency item as the target. On the filler trials, the
frequencies of the targets were closely matched to the
frequencies of the target items in the critical trials (HF filler
targets ~ 116.5/million, LF filler targets ~ 11.2/million).
During the experiment, participants were seated
approximately 60 cm in front of a computer monitor.
Participants’ eye movements were monitored using an
EyeLink head-mounted eyetracker sampling at 250 Hz.
Auditory stimuli were presented over Sennheiser HD 280
Pro headphones. Before beginning the experiment, the
eyetracker was calibrated and validated using a standard
nine-point calibration routine.
At the beginning of each trial, participants fixated and
clicked on a central fixation cross to correct any drift from
the initial nine-point calibration. Four pictures, each
spanning approximately 5 degrees of visual angle, appeared
on the screen. On cohort trials, two cohort competitors and
two phonologically unrelated distracter items were present.
The spoken instruction began five hundred milliseconds
after the pictures appeared. Participants then clicked on the

The Experiment
Methods
Participants. Sixteen young adults (ages 18-23, mean 19.6)
with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and self-reported
normal hearing were recruited from the Georgia Tech
community. All were native English speakers. In addition,
16 community-dwelling older adults (ages 69-80, mean
73.6) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision were
recruited from the surrounding community. All were native
English speakers with self-reported good hearing and no
history of neurological disease. All of the younger adults
and 12 of the 16 older adults reported using a computer on a
daily basis; the remaining older adults reported occasional
computer use and were capable of using a mouse to point to
and click on items on a computer screen. Young adults

262

named picture. Both eye movement and mouse response
data were collected.
The first twenty trials were practice trials used to
familiarize participants with the task. The remaining sixty
trials were presented in a different pseudo-random order to
each participant so that critical and filler trials were
intermixed and so that only one member of each cohort pair
was the target in the first half of the experiment. In addition,
target and cohort position on the screen were
counterbalanced to ensure that common scanning patterns
did not bias the overall likelihood of target or cohort
fixations during preview.

fixation proportion

1

HF Target (YA)
HF Target (OA)
LF Cohort (YA)
LF Cohort (OA)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

fixation proportion

All participants were able to perform the task with a high
degree of accuracy (mean accuracy = 98.3% correct, all
participants > 90% correct). Data from incorrect trials was
excluded from further analysis. Older adults took
approximately 425 ms longer than young adults to click on
the correct picture once it was named, regardless of whether
the target was high or low frequency. A 2 (Age) by 2
(Target/Distracter Frequency) mixed factor ANOVA
examining the time between the onset of the target word and
the mouse click on the correct object showed significant
effects of lexical frequency [F (1,30) = 13.9, p < 0.01] and
age [F (1,30) = 53.7, p < 0.001], but no interaction [F < 1].
Fixation proportion curves were calculated from the eye
movement data for the target, cohort competitor, and an
averaged unrelated distracter for each individual in each
condition. As shown in Figure 1, both young and older
adults show the typical cohort effect, with early looks to
both the target and the competitor and a gradual decline in
competitor fixations as the target is disambiguated.
Although the time from the onset of the critical word to the
mouse click differed in young and older participants for
high frequency target words, the fixation proportion curves
look remarkably similar, suggesting that when competition
demands are low (i.e. the target has a large frequency
advantage over a low frequency cohort competitor), young
and older adults show comparable effects of lexical
competition (Figure 1, top panel). Traditional analysis of
variance models are less than ideal for assessing time course
data from the visual world paradigm (Mirman, Dixon, &
Magnuson, 2008). Following examples from Singer &
Willett (2003) and Mirman et al (2008), we used growth
curve analysis to examine the time course of target
activation. Growth curve analysis is specifically designed to
assess individual change over time, and though it has
primarily been used for exploring the time course of
development or other types of longitudinal data, it can also
be used for data collected at a rapid rate over a shorter time
scale. When considering target activation data arising from
eye movements in the visual world paradigm, a simple
linear fit is not adequate. To capture the general sigmoid
form of these curves, we used a third order orthogonal
polynomial to fit the data. The two most important
parameters of the model for capturing differences in target

1200

1100

1000

900

800

700

600

500

time (ms) from target onset

1

Results

400

300

200

0

LF Target (YA)
LF Target (OA)
HF Cohort (YA)
HF Cohort (OA)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1200

1100

1000

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

0

time (ms) from target onset

Figure 1: Fixation proportion curves
activation curves are the intercept, which shifts the vertical
height of the curve and can measure differences in overall
activation levels (as estimated by participants’ eye
movements), and the linear term, which reflects the overall
angle of the curve and can account for differences in the rate
of rise of activation. The model’s baseline fit with
participant as a random factor is evaluated using a deviance
statistic based on the log likelihood. We can then ask if
adding Age as a fixed effect results in a significant
improvement in model fit. Turning first to the low
competition condition (high frequency target, low frequency
competitor), there was no benefit in adding the age term to
the intercept or to the linear model (Table 1), indicating that
young and older adults’ fixation proportion curves were
not significantly different. In contrast, under high
competition conditions (low frequency target, high
frequency competitor) we find clear age differences in the
Table 1: Growth Curve Analysis

263

Model

-2LL

High
Frequency
Target

Base
Age * Intercept
Age * Slope

118710.2
118709.9
118709.5

∆D
-0.3
0.4

Low
Frequency
Target

Base
Age * Intercept
Age * Slope

120321.3
120312.3
120310.7

-9.0
1.6

p<
n.s.
n.s.
0.05
n.s.

target fixation curves (Figure 1, bottom panel). Older adults
show significantly less activation of the target, as evidenced
by an improvement in model fit when Age is added to the
linear term.
Turning to the pattern of fixations on competitors, the
form of the competitor activation curve is less suited to
simple growth curve analysis. We have no strong parametric
function for modeling these curves and a nonparametric
polynomial function is less well suited to the form of the
competitor fixation curves. Specifically, these functions
often generate large residuals near the ends of the functions.
Instead, we calculated a relatively simple measure
corresponding to the amount of time spent fixating the
competitor (equivalent to the area under the curve) for each
subject in both frequency conditions. Again, young and
older adults fixated the competitor equally often when the
cohort was low frequency [t (30) = 0.73, p > 0.1]. However,
older listeners spent more time relative to younger listeners
looking at the cohort competitor when it was high frequency
[t (30) = 2.01, p = 0.053].
The results suggest that when competition is low, older
and younger listeners have equivalent time courses for
spoken word processing. However, when spoken word
recognition is made more difficult (here, by high frequency
cohort competition), older adults show evidence of
increased activation of the competitor and decreased
activation of the target word.

Theories in cognitive aging have long focused on the
seeming difficulty that older adults have in selecting
between competing representations during processing
(Hasher & Zacks, 1988). We have also noted that in
language production, lexical level competition is
particularly age-sensitive. In spoken word recognition, the
disadvantage for ‘difficult’ words from high density
neighborhoods in the Sommers and Danielson studies
(1999) was attributed to inhibitory deficits. We can
specifically influence competition between representations
by reducing the within-level reciprocal inhibitory
connections.
Finally, there is some evidence in visual word recognition
that frequency may actually exert a greater influence on
processing in older compared to younger adults (Spieler &
Balota, 2000). Here, we can allow the frequency sensitive
weights between the phoneme and word layer to take on a
broader distribution, resulting in a magnification of the
influence of frequency on recognition.

Methods
We use a recent reimplementation of the TRACE model
(jTRACE; Strauss et al., 2007) to examine whether any of
these four parameters may capture age-related differences
seen in the eyetracking data from our young and older
adults. Following others, we link lexical activation levels to
fixation proportion-like response probabilities using the
Luce choice rule (for a more complete explanation of the
linking hypothesis between eye movement data and TRACE
activations, see Allopenna et al., 1998).
Parsimony is our guiding principle in the attempt to
model the effect of age in these data. Rather than seeking
the best fit with a combination of these parameters, we ask
whether parametric variations in any of these single
parameters give results that leave the high frequency
target/low frequency competitor pattern relatively
unaffected while showing increased cohort competition for
the low frequency target/high frequency competitor
condition. To adequately capture the age differences in the
empirical data, we would like to see very modest changes in
fixation probabilities for high frequency targets and low
frequency competitors. In contrast, for low frequency targets
and high frequency competitors, we look for an increased
maximum fixation probability for the competitor and
continued greater fixation probabilities for the competitor
throughout the trial.
For the frequency simulation, all other model parameters
were set to the default levels (Strauss et al., 2007). In order
to include an effect of lexical frequency in the external
noise, internal noise, and inhibition simulations, the weights
was set to and held at the value of 0.13 recommended by
Dahan et al (2001). See Table 2 for the values of the
manipulated parameters used in the simulations. The
original 201-word lexicon included with TRACE was used
for all simulations. We selected a set of four words (dip 
“deep”, did  “deed”, rul  “rule”, trat  “trait”) with
phonological and frequency properties comparable to our

TRACE Modeling of Empirical Results
To better understand the mechanisms that might lead to
older listeners’ increased susceptibility to competition, we
used an implemented model of spoken word recognition,
TRACE (McClelland & Elman, 1986; Strauss et al., 2007),
to capture the pattern of age differences. Although the
implemented version of TRACE has a large number of
parameters, we can distinguish between those parameters
that have explanatory power and those that are merely
implementational. We focus on four parameters that are
reasonable candidates for attempting to capture age
differences based on prior research.
We have noted that age-related hearing loss (presbycusis)
is common in individuals over the age of 65 and mild
hearing difficulty is likely experienced by our older adults
despite their self-report of good hearing abilities and highly
accurate performance in the experimental task. External
noise is often used with young adult subjects to degrade
their performance to older adult levels in speech processing
tasks. Similarly, within the model we can degrade the
quality of input to the model by injecting noise into the
model’s input representations.
The notion that increasing age results in a generalized
increase in internal noise is also one that has a long history
in cognitive aging (Myerson et al., 1990; Welford, 1981).
We can increase the amount of internal noise by injecting
random normally distributed noise to the inputs to units at
each level of the model.

264

Table 2: TRACE Parameters
Min : Step Size : Max
0 : 0.2 : 0.6
0 : 0.005 : 0.3
0.1 : 0.005 : 0.3
0.13 : 0.03 : 0.22

experimental stimuli. Each parameter value was tested with
the high frequency target (dip) and the low frequency target
(did). Since the internal noise (stochasticitySD) parameter
makes TRACE output nondeterministic, the data from
fifteen runs of the simulation at each frequency level (the
same as the number of trials per condition in our study)
were averaged together.

Results
All of the parameters tested resulted in orderly changes in
the target and competitor fixation probability functions.
Although degradation of the input and internal noise are
theoretically distinct influences, adding noise to the input
and adding noise to all layers of the model had similar
effects overall, though adding internal noise does increase
the variability in the model’s output since it makes the
output of TRACE nondeterministic. The noise simulations
fail to capture the salient features of the data. Specifically,
increased noise lowers the peak of the competitor activation
curve regardless of competitor frequency (Figure 2 a and b).
When the strength of the inhibitory connections within the
word layer is decreased, the asymptotic height of the target
activation curve decreases as competition from the cohort
competitor exerts an influence over a longer period of time
1

1

c

60

60

c y c le s

Figure 2: TRACE simulations. Panels a, c, and e show HF targets, LF cohorts; panels b, d, and f
show LF targets, HF cohorts.

265

70

50

50

70

40

30

70

60

c y c le s

50

40

30

0
20

0
10

0

0

0 .2

70

0 .2

60

0 .2

50

0 .4

40

0 .4

30

0 .4

20

0 .6

10

0 .6

0

f

0 .8

0 .6

40

0

70

d

0 .8

c y c le s

c y c le s

1

20

b

0 .8

0
1

0

c y c le s

1

60

0

50

0
40

0

30

0 .2

20

0 .2

10

0 .2

70

0 .4

60

0 .4

50

0 .4

40

0 .6

30

0 .6

20

0 .6

10

0 .8

0

0 .8

30

e

0 .8

20

a

10

1

10

Parameter
NoiseSD (input noise)
StochasticitySD (internal noise)
Gamma.W (word-layer inhibition)
Frq Wts P-W (frequency)

(Figure 2 c and d). This effect is more pronounced for low
frequency targets and high frequency competitors, as seen in
our data. However, there remains a relatively large effect on
the high frequency target fixations that is not present in the
data. This occurs because the reduced competition allows
the initially modest activation of the low frequency
competitor to continue to collect fixations throughout
processing. The empirical data does not appear to show such
continued competition when the target is high frequency.
Increasing the influence of frequency on the phoneme to
word connections captures some salient aspects of the
empirical results (Figure 2 e and f). Note that when the
target is a high frequency word, increasing the influence of
frequency facilitates the target fixations and there are
smaller changes in fixations on the low frequency
competitor. In the empirical data, older listeners do not
show a faster time course for target fixations. However,
given the ubiquitousness of age differences in overall
processing speed, the lack of any age difference for high
frequency targets may be consistent with some facilitation
in this condition counteracted by general age differences in
processing speed. More importantly, note that for high
frequency competitors, the height of the fixation curve is
increased, and this difference is preserved throughout
processing.
Across these parameters, we would argue that an
increased influence of frequency is the most consistent with
the empirical results. Of course, aging is a relatively global
factor that we would not necessarily expect to selectively
influence only a single parameter. Nonetheless, we would
suggest that an increased influence of frequency, similar to
that seen in visual word recognition, provides a relatively
parsimonious account for the empirical age differences.

recognition: Evidence from eye movements. Cognitive
Psychology, 42, 317-367.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R.T. (1988). Working memory,
comprehension, and aging: A review and new view. The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 22, 193-225.
Humes, L.E., Watson, B.U., Christensen, L.A., Cokely,
C.G., Halling, D.C., & Lee, L. (1994). Factors associated
with individual differences in clinical measures of speech
recognition among the elderly. Journal of Speech and
Hearing Research, 37, 456-474.
LaGrone, S., & Spieler, D.H. (2006). Lexical competition
and phonological encoding in young and older speakers.
Psychology and Aging, 21, 804-809.
Magnuson, J.S., Dixon, J.A., Tanenhaus, M.K., & Aslin,
R.N. (2007). The dynamics of lexical competition during
spoken word recognition. Cognitive Science, 31, 1-24.
McClelland, J.L., & Elman, J.L. (1986). The TRACE model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 1–86.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J.A., & Magnuson, J.S. (2008).
Statistical and computational models of the visual world
paradigm: Growth curves and individual differences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 475-494.
Myerson, J., Hale, S., Wagstaff, D., Poon, L.W., & Smith,
G.A. (1990). A mathematical theory of age-related
cognitive slowing. Psychological Review, 97, 475-487.
Norris, D., & McQueen, J.M. (2008). Shortlist B: A
Bayesian model of continuous speech recognition.
Psychological Review, 115, 357-395.
Singer, J.D., & Willett, J.B. (2003). Applied longitudinal
analysis: Modeling change and event occurrence. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Sommers, M.S. (1996). The structural organization of the
mental lexicon and its contribution to age-related changes
in spoken word recognition. Psychology and Aging, 11,
333-341.
Sommers, M.S., & Danielson, S.M. (1999). Inhibitory
processes and spoken word recognition in young and
older adults: The interaction of lexical competition and
semantic context. Psychology and Aging, 14, 458-472.
Spieler, D.H., & Balota, D.A. (2000). Factors influencing
word naming in younger and older adults. Psychology and
Aging, 15, 225-231.
Spieler, D.H., Balota, D.A., & Faust, M.E. (1996). Stroop
performance in healthy younger and older adults and in
individuals with Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
& Performance, 22, 461-479.
Strauss, T.J., Harris, H.D., & Magnuson, J.S. (2007).
jTRACE: A reimplementation and extension of the
TRACE model of speech perception and spoken word
recognition. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 19-30.
Welford, A.T. (1981). Signal, noise, performance, and age.
Human Factors, 23, 97–109.
Wingfield, A., Aberdeen, J.S., & Stine, E.A. (1991). Word
onset gating and linguistic context in spoken word
recognition by young and elderly adults. Journal of
Gerontology, 46, P127-P129.

General Discussion
In the experiment and simulations described above we
found that older adults were differentially affected by high
competition demands, which resulted in fewer fixations to a
low frequency target and increased fixations to a high
frequency phonological competitor. However, the time
course of lexical activation in young and older adults is
quite similar when competition demands are low. These data
are consistent with previous research indicating that older
adults have a harder time than young adults do identifying
‘difficult’ words with many phonological competitors
(Sommers, 1996; Sommers & Danielson, 1999), though the
task used here (following spoken instructions) is more
naturalistic than the overt word identification responses used
in previous research. In addition, the eyetracking data lends
itself to comparisons with transformed lexical activations
from the TRACE model of speech processing and spoken
word recognition (Allopenna et al., 1998). Consistent with
the visual word processing literature we find that a
parameter that affects the strength of lexical frequency
effects captures some of the salient properties of our dataset.
Cognitive aging research is often complicated by the fact
that older adults generally respond more slowly than young
adults in almost any task, necessitating that some sort of
correction be made to equate performance in the baseline
condition. This is often accomplished by varying the task
difficulty for young and older adults or by scaling the
resulting data, both of which can complicate interpretation
of the results. While mouse click reaction times were indeed
slower for older adults across the experiment, the fixation
proportion curves arising from the eye movement data did
not significantly differ with age when competition demands
were low. Since no data scaling is necessary to equate older
and younger adult performance in this condition, we do not
have to manipulate the data in the high competition
condition where we do observe an age difference. The
results shown here are consistent with the results of other
studies of age-related change in spoken word recognition
using different methodologies but do not require the task or
data manipulations required by other techniques.
Furthermore, an existing implemented model of adult
spoken word recognition allows researchers to explore the
effects of possible explanatory mechanisms. This indicates
that the visual world paradigm can be an important and
informative tool for studying age differences in language
processing.

References
Allopenna, P., Magnuson, J., & Tanenhaus, M.K. (1998).
Tracking the time course of spoken word recognition
using eye-movements: Evidence for continuous mapping
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 419-439.
Baayen, R.H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX lexical database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J.S., & Tanenhaus, M.K. (2001).
Time course of frequency effects in spoken-word

266

