UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The interface between language and thought: Current directions.

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zm6d09n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Davidoff, Jules
Goldstone, Robert
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Interface between Language and Thought:
Current directions.
Moderators:
Debi Roberson (robedd@essex.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Essex,
Colchester, CO4 3SQ, UK

Asifa Majid (Asifa.Majid@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1,
6500 AH, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Keywords: Language; Categorization; Discrimination; Color;
Number; Grammatical Gender; Emotional Expressions.

Language for Number: The Limits of
Numerical Cognition without Linguistic
Input.

Motivation
The symposium showcases new research across a
range of fields and using a variety of methodologies that
address the complexities of the interactions between
linguistic processing and cognition. Much recent
research has demonstrated that language and cognition
interact at a variety of levels (e.g. Roberson, Pak &
Hanley, 2008), but also that there are limits to the
possible effects of language on cognition (e.g.Majid,
Boster & Bowerman, 2008). All six speakers and both
moderators currently investigate this relationship in
more than one area of cognition and bring a wide
perspective to the topic. The symposium seeks both to
illuminate and to broaden an ongoing debate within
Cognitive Science as to the extent to which linguistic
processing influences and interacts with perception and
classification. The presented research also addresses the
issue of the extent to which human categorization is
flexible.

How giving two things the same label can
increase, or decrease, their
discriminability.
Robert L. Goldstone
Indiana University
A common result in the literature on how
language affects perception is that objects become
increasingly perceptually similar if they are assigned a
common label. In a recent series of studies, we
(Gureckis & Goldstone, under review) have found
situations where objects that share a category label
become less confusable if they belong to separate
clusters within the category. The results show that
learners are sensitive to multiple sources of structure
including, but not limited to, object labels. A
computational model is presented to account for the
results whereby multiple levels of encoding (i.e., at the
item-, cluster-, and category-level) simultaneously
contribute to perception. Overall, the act of labeling
objects has multiple perceptual consequences:
dimension-wide attentional stretching/shrinking,
stretching/shrinking of regions within a dimension, and
fusing separate perceptual components.

*Elizabet Spaepen, Marie Coppola, Susan GoldinMeadow,
University of Chicago, USA
Elizabeth Spelke,
Susan Carey
Harvard University, USA
Data from cross-linguistic and cross-cultural
studies suggest that representations of large exact
numbers may require access to a conventional count list.
Because cultures that lack a conventional counting
system differ in many ways from those that have these
devices, however, the effects of language and culture are
difficult to disentangle. In this talk, we examine deaf
adults in Nicaragua who receive no conventional sign
language input but still participate in a numerate culture.
These adults’ use of number gestures (i.e. finger
configurations), as well as their nonverbal numerical
cognition are consistent with the thesis that a
conventionalized count list is critical to representing and
using the system of exact integer concepts. Even adults
who are well integrated into a numerate society do not
spontaneously use exact integer concepts in
communicative or cognitive tasks, in the absence of
these linguistic devices.

Some limitations to the default role of
language in perceptual categorization.
Jules Davidoff
Centre for Cognition, Computation and Culture
Goldsmiths, University of London, UK
In the human adult, there is now growing
agreement that language networks are active in color
comparisons. New evidence will be presented to confirm
the absence of color categories in the monkey and for
the involvement of language in other perceptual
categorization tasks in the human. However, a
reassessment is given of published data using the
matching-to-sample paradigm. Varying the range of
stimuli, new modeling data give a similar strong

37

tendency to divide the range of colored stimuli into two
equal groups in Western (English or French) speakers
and in a remote population (Himba). The boundary
depended on the range of stimuli and hence overrides
natural or language induced color categories. A
distinctive stimulus (focal color) in the range affected
the equal division though observers again made a
boundary. Monkeys did not categorize the stimuli. Most
important for the role of language, range differences did
not affect the names given to the colors by either
Western or Himba observers. Other experiments will be
reported for which range differences are immaterial to
color boundaries (categorization).

Integrating linguistic and perceptual
information: How language
informs the processing of emotional
expressions.
Orly Fuhrman, Nathaniel Witthoft, *Lera
Boroditsky
Stanford University
How do people integrate linguistic information
with visual information? When does linguistic context
interact with and inform perceptual processing? We
examined the role of language in shaping the processing
of emotional expression in faces. In classical theories
of emotion processing, facial expressions of emotion are
posited to be processed automatically, in a way that is
not guided by context or cultural knowledge. Our results
show that the processing of facial expressions can be
informed by linguistic context. People integrate
linguistic information with available perceptual
information, and when a fruitful integration is possible,
linguistic information can bias rather low-level aspects
of the perceptual processing of facial expressions.

Mrs. Giraffe and Mr. Elephant: The
influence of grammatical gender on
German children’s deductive reasoning
about biological properties of animals.
*Mutsumi Imai
Keio University, Shonan-Fujisawa, Japan
Henrick Saalbach & Lennart Schalk
ETH, Switzerland

willingness to deduce the premise about sex-specific
properties to the target animal, while they drew
inference about non-sex-specific biological properties
according to the animal's typicality. Japanese children's
willingness to make deductive inference was predicted
only by typicality of the target animal both for the sexspecific and non-sex-specific properties. Grammatical
gender also influenced German adults' deductive
inference of sex-specific biological properties. We
discuss how grammatical gender interacts with universal
constraints in German speakers' inference about sexspecific and non-specific biological properties.

How words affect visual processing.
Gary Lupyan
University of Pennsylvania
Through the association of verbal labels (words)
with their visual referents, hearing a word like "chair"
may modulate the visual system, temporarily turning it
into a better "chair detector." I will present data showing
that hearing a word enables participants to more
effectively process stimuli that match the label - in
parallel and throughout the visual scene- compared to
baseline conditions in which participants have identical
information, but do not hear the actual verbal label.
These results provide strong evidence that verbal labels
modulate visual processing at all levels: from attentional
deployment, to selection, and even simple detection of
briefly-presented stimuli. The effects appear to be
automatic, transient, and sensitive to the strength of the
association between the label and visual stimulus. The
results are interpreted in light of the literature on topdown effects on visual processing. These findings
provide a mechanism for recently-reported Whorfiantype effects in the visual processing of color.

References
Majid, A., Boster, J.S. & Bowerman, M. (2008). The
cross-linguistic categorization of everyday events: A
study of cutting and breaking. Cognition, 109, 235250.
Roberson, D., Pak, H.S. & Hanley, J.R. (2008).
Categorical perception of colour in the left and right
visual field is verbally mediated: Evidence from
Korean. Cognition, 107, 752-762.

In German, grammatical gender assignment is
independent of the referent's biological sex (e.g., even a
male giraffe is grammatically treated as feminine, and
referred to by the female pronoun). We investigated
whether grammatical gender affects German speakers'
deductive reasoning about sex-specific biological
properties. For this purpose, we tested German- and
Japanese-speaking children and adults on a series of
deductive reasoning tasks. The grammatical gender
contributed more strongly than the animal's typicality
(how typical the target animal was as a member of the
animal category) for predicting German 5-year-olds'

38

