UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of language in eye-witness memory: Remembering who did it in English and
Japanese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4k31500t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Boroditsky, Lera
Fausey, Caitlin
Long, Bria

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of language in eye-witness memory:
Remembering who did it in English and Japanese
Caitlin M. Fausey (cmfausey@stanford.edu)
Bria L. Long (bria@stanford.edu)
Lera Boroditsky (lera@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, 450 Serra Mall, Bldg 420
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
Abstract
Does language play a role in how people interpret and remember
causal events? One source of variation in causal event
descriptions is agentivity, such as the difference between “She
broke the vase” (agentive) vs. “The vase broke” (non-agentive).
In this paper, we examined English and Japanese speakers’
descriptions of intentional and accidental events, as well as their
memory for the causal agents of these events. While both groups
of speakers used agentive language to describe intentional
events, English speakers described accidents using more
agentive language than did Japanese speakers. Similarly,
English and Japanese speakers remembered intentional agents
equally well but diverged in their memory for accidental agents,
with better accidental agent memory in English than in Japanese.
These results extend recent findings from a similar paradigm
examining causal agent language and cognition in speakers of
English and Spanish (Fausey & Boroditsky, submitted). It
appears that patterns of language use shape how people interpret
and remember causal events.

Introduction
During President Obama’s recent swearing-in ceremony,
the delivery and repetition of the presidential oath deviated
from protocol so much that a do-over was carried out the
next day. According to one journalist’s account of the
errors, “The main problem was that the word ‘faithfully’ had
floated upstream in the constitutional text” (Liptak, 2009).
To English ears, such non-agentive language sounds
evasive. Agentive language like “Chief Justice Roberts
misplaced a word in the oath” (Zeleny, 2009), sounds more
like a typical English description, even for accidental
events. Is this preference for agentive accident descriptions
universal across languages? If not, do non-linguistic patterns
of causal cognition also vary across speakers of the world’s
languages?
In this paper, we examine causal language and cognition
in speakers of English and Japanese. We find that speakers
in each linguistic community talk about and remember
intentional events in similar ways, but differ in how they
talk about and remember accidental events. Our results
contribute to a growing set of findings that suggest
correspondences between patterns in causal language and in
causal cognition.
Language and event cognition. Recent research has
provided clear evidence of cross-linguistic differences in
how people think about colors (e.g., Roberson & Hanley,
2007; Winawer et al., 2007), space (e.g., Levinson, Kita,
Haun & Rasch, 2002; McDonough, Choi, & Mandler,

2003), and objects (e.g., Boroditsky, Schmidt, & Phillips,
2003; Imai & Gentner, 1997; Lucy, 1992), among other
domains. However, research on the role of language in event
cognition, specifically the manner of motion, has provided
mixed results (e.g., Billman & Krych, 1998; Gennari,
Sloman, Malt & Fitch, 2002; Gentner & Loftus, 1979;
Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Papafragou, Massey, & Gleitman,
2002). In this paper we examine the role of language in a
different aspect of events: agentivity in causal events.
The domain of causal events provides a rich testing
ground for a specific linguistic relativity hypothesis:
Talking about causal agents improves memory for causal
agents. Linguistic descriptions can guide attention to the
parts of events that are described and habitually talking
about certain elements of events repeatedly directs attention
to those elements. As a result, people may deploy attention
in language-consistent ways even when they don’t overtly
describe events (Boroditsky, Ham, & Ramscar, 2002;
Slobin, 1996). In this paper, we examine whether people
whose language environments include more agentive
language remember causal agents better than people whose
language environments include less agentive language.
Causal agents in language and cognition: English and
Spanish. In a recent investigation by Fausey and Boroditsky
(submitted; henceforth referred to as F&B), English and
Spanish speakers viewed videos of intentional and
accidental events, were then tested on their memory for the
agents of these events, and later described the events.
Results revealed that English and Spanish speakers
described intentional events similarly, using mostly agentive
language. For accidental events, however, English speakers
used more agentive language than Spanish speakers did. In
Spanish, accidents were often described with non-agentive
expressions using se, as in “Se rompió un huevo” (An egg
cracked) and “Se abrió el paraguas” (The umbrella
opened). Results from the non-linguistic memory task
mirrored the patterns in language. English and Spanish
speakers remembered the agents of intentional events
equally well, but English speakers remembered the agents of
accidents better than Spanish speakers did.
In F&B’s second study, English speakers were primed
with either agentive or non-agentive language and then
attempted to remember causal agents. People who were
exposed to agentive language in the separate priming task
remembered agents better than those exposed to nonagentive language. These results suggest that patterns of

2426

language use can shape how people interpret and remember
causal events.
Causal agents in language and cognition: Japanese.
F&B’s initial study was motivated by linguistic analyses
that had suggested that Spanish speakers focus on event
outcomes more often than English speakers do and that
Spanish speakers also frequently use non-agentive language
to signal accidentality (Filipovic, 2007; Maldonado, 1992;
Martinez, 2000; Slobin & Bocaz, 1988). Linguistic analyses
of Japanese have also suggested that the frequency of nonagentive expressions may be higher in Japanese than in
English, making Japanese an interesting extension of F &
B’s previous findings.
Verbs are thought to be especially salient in Japanese and
typical verb forms in Japanese may differ from typical verb
forms in English. For example, Teramura (1976) noted that
even when an event involves someone who could be
described as a causal agent (e.g., “He dropped the pen”), it
is often more natural in Japanese to describe such events
using
non-agentive
expressions
like
“PEN-ga
ochiteshimatta” (“The pen dropped, unfortunately”), or
even sentences that include only a verb like
“ochiteshimatta” (“dropped, unfortunately”). In a recent
study, Fukuda and Choi (2006) reported that the intransitive
usage bias in Japanese appears to be strong enough to
influence early language learning such that Japanese
speaking children start producing intransitive verbs before
transitive verbs, which contrasts with patterns seen in
English speaking children. Verbs may be especially salient
in Japanese because nouns and pronouns in Japanese are
often optional and inferred from context (Fernald &
Morikawa, 1993). The form of the verb may therefore be a
potent cue for how to frame an event.
Agentive and non-agentive language in Japanese.
Alternatives to simple transitive event descriptions can take
many forms in English and in other languages. In this
research, we focus on transitivity contrasts like “He popped
the balloon” versus “The balloon popped”. In Spanish, this
kind of non-agentive expression is marked by using se (e.g.,
“Se rompió el globo”). In Japanese, we focus on nonagentive expressions marked by a combination of the
intransitive form of the verb and the particle “ga” attached
to the affected object.
In Japanese, two different verbs are often used for the
transitive and intransitive description of the same action.
These two verbs often share the same stem. One example is
waru/wareru 割る／ 割れる (to break). An agentive use
would be 卵を割った (Tamago-wo watta / (I) broke the
egg). A non-agentive use would be 卵が割れた (Tamagoga wareta / (The) egg broke). Other verbs in Japanese have
the same form for both transitive and intransitive uses, and
the presence of “ga” marks the non-agentive expression.
One example is hiraku 開く (to open). An agentive use
would be 彼がドアを開いた (Kare-ga DOA-wo hiraita /
He opened the door) and a non-agentive use would be ドア
が開いた (DOA-ga hiraita/ (The) door opened).
In this study, we aimed to find out how English and
Japanese speakers talk about and remember intentional and

accidental events. We used the same paradigm as F&B, with
new video stimuli.
Videos in this study featured Japanese actors, in contrast
to the Caucasian actors featured in the videos used by F&B.
In cross-cultural research about attention to human agents,
one necessarily confronts potential challenges in
interpreting memory patterns due to cross-race recognition
effects (e.g., Malpass & Kravitz, 1969) – in many cases,
either the exact stimuli or the “same race” status is held
constant across the two groups, but not both at the same
time. In the current paradigm, such concerns may be
minimal because all participants attempt to remember agents
for two kinds of events and the relationship between these
kinds of events within each community is of interest. That
is, the design permits analysis of main effects as well as a
predicted interaction across communities. In this study, we
sought to extend our understanding of English speakers’
memory patterns by testing them using different video
stimuli than used by F & B and also to examine Japanese
causal description and memory patterns using stimuli most
likely to invoke natural processing.
In this paper, we compared English and Japanese
speakers’ descriptions and memory for intentional and
accidental events. Participants first completed a simple
control memory task. This task was unrelated to event
cognition and served as a baseline measure of memory
performance. We then showed English and Japanese
speakers videos of intentional and accidental events. After
viewing the events, participants were tested on their
memory for the agents of these events. After the memory
test, participants viewed the videos again and provided a
verbal description for each video.

Experiment: Who did it and what happened?
Participants
49 English speakers (Stanford University; 33 female,
Mean age = 19.06 years) and 70 Japanese speakers (Keio
University, Jochi University, Tokyo Kogyo University,
Surugadai Law School, all in Tokyo, Japan; 34 female,
Mean age = 20.94 years) received course credit or were paid
for their participation. Participants were selected to be age
25 or younger and functionally monolingual.
English speakers reported learning only English before
age 12 and did not currently use another language. Exposure
to English in Japan is almost inevitable, including in school
before age 12. Thus, we selected Japanese speakers based
on their self-rated proficiency speaking and understanding
English. Using a 5-point scale in which 5 indicated “nativelike”, Japanese speakers who rated themselves as 3 or lower
for an English proficiency measure were included.

2427

General study set-up
Text materials. Participants read instructions and other
text in either English or Japanese. English and Japanese
texts were developed simultaneously, and all Japanese text
was verified by a native Japanese-English bilingual.
Design and procedure. All participants did three tasks:
A. Object-orientation memory: The first task was a
control memory task that assessed participants’ memory for
object orientations. This was designed to be a measure of
memory performance unrelated to causal events. In addition
to serving as a baseline memory measure, this task also
helped acclimate participants to computerized memory tests.
B. Causal agent memory: The second task presented
participants with videos of causal events and tested their
memory for the agents of those events.
C. Event descriptions: Finally, participants completed an
event description task in which they described the events
they had seen in the agent memory task. Importantly,
participants did not describe any events until after the
memory task. Each task is described in more detail below.

Part A: Object-orientation memory
Materials, Design and Procedure
45 color drawings were used (courtesy of Michael J. Tarr,
Brown University, http://www.tarrlab.org/). During
encoding, participants saw pictures of 15 objects (e.g.,
chair, trumpet) presented on a computer screen one at a time
for two seconds each. Each object appeared in one of three
possible orientations, counterbalanced across participants.
Participants were instructed to pay attention to the images
and were told that their memory would be tested. They
received no information about which aspect of the stimuli
would be tested.
After the encoding phase, participants were given a brief
distracter task (counting the number of white squares (11)
on a 4x4 grid of black and white squares), followed by the
memory test. For the memory test, participants were shown
the three possible orientations of each object and asked to
indicate which one they had seen previously. Participants
completed this test at their own pace without feedback. One
random ordering of learning and test trials was presented to
all participants.

Part B: Causal agent memory
Video materials. Intentional and accidental versions of 16
unique events were videotaped (Table 1), one set for the
encoding phase and another set for the test phase. For the
encoding phase, videos of eight events (both intentional and
accidental versions) featured one actor in a white shirt and
videos of another eight events (both intentional and
accidental versions) featured a different actor in a black
shirt. For the test phase, videos featured a third actor in a red
shirt in both the intentional and accidental versions of all 16
events. This made for a total of 64 videos. The same silent
videos served as stimuli for both English and Japanese
speakers.

Table 1: Events.
Crumple can
Spill rice
Drop keys
Turn off light
Knock box

Knock cups
Crack egg
Open umbrella
Close drawer
Rip paper
Pop balloon

Release balloon
Close book
Break pencil
Stick sticker
Open door

Note. Events are listed in the order of most agentive
to least agentive accident descriptions in Japanese.
Encoding. During the encoding phase, participants
viewed 16 videos each showing a different event. Half of
the videos featured the actor in the white shirt, half the actor
in the black shirt, and half of the videos showed intentional
actions and half showed accidental actions. Which events
were presented in the intentional or accidental versions was
counterbalanced across participants. Videos were presented
in one of two pseudo-random orders that ensured that no
more than three videos of the same agent or the same
intention appeared in a row.
The 16 videos in the encoding phase were presented
sequentially, with a 1200 millisecond pause between videos.
Participants were instructed to pay attention to the videos
and were told that their memory would be tested, but were
not given any extra clues about what would be tested. After
viewing all 16 videos, participants were instructed to count
to 10 as a brief distracter task.
Test. Recognition memory test trials consisted of a probe
video followed by still photos of the two agents from the
encoding phase (Figure 1). In the probe videos, a third actor
appeared as the causal agent of the same events that had
been presented during the encoding phase. For example, if a
participant had seen the “accidental balloon popping” event
during encoding, they would see this same event acted by
the new agent in the test phase. For each probe video,
participants were asked, “Who did it the first time?” (「最初
に誰がそれをしましたか？」)1 and responded by pressing a
key associated with the side of the screen of either the
white-shirt man or the black-shirt man. Participants were
tested only on the events they had seen during encoding,
presented in a different pseudo-random order from the
encoding phase, and received no feedback.

1

45 participants received this wording; 25 participants received the
wording 「第一回目に誰がそれをしましたか？」We used the
second phrasing after discussions with several native Japanese
speakers revealed differing opinions about the best translation for
the English question. Question wording did not interact with
patterns of memory for intentional versus accidental agents and so
data were pooled.

2428

Table 2: Example accident descriptions.
Japanese

Who did it the first time?
English

Agentive
Non-agentive
黒い男性が鉛筆を折った。
えんぴつが折れた。
(The black male broke the pencil.)
(The pencil broke.)
男の人が本をとじた。
本が急に閉じました。
(The man closed the book.)
(The book suddenly closed.)
He broke his pencil.
A guy was writing
and his pencil broke.
A sitting man is surprised
when he closes his book.

The person’s open
book closed.

Figure 1: Example agent memory test trial.

Part C: Causal event descriptions
Materials, Design and Procedure
After participants completed the agent memory task, they
were again shown the same 16 videos they had seen during
encoding and this time were asked to provide a linguistic
description for each video. In each description trial,
participants viewed a video and were then prompted to
answer the question “What happened?” (「何がおこりまし
た か ？ 」 ) English speakers typed their responses and
Japanese speakers either typed or wrote their responses at
their own pace and received no feedback.

Results
We first report the results of the event description phase of
the study, and then the memory results.
Seventeen participants were excluded from analyses for
one of the following reasons: (a) chance performance on the
control memory task (3 Japanese), (b) a z-score greater than
|2| on the Memory Difference Score (Intentional Memory
minus Accidental Memory) (4 English, 4 Japanese), or (c) a
z-score greater than |2| on the Description Difference Score
(Intentional Descriptions minus Accidental Descriptions) (2
English, 4 Japanese). The Difference Scores were the basis
for the analyses of interest in this study, and we wanted to
be sure that outliers did not drive any observed crosslinguistic differences.

Results: Event Descriptions

Across all participants, 2.94% of the descriptions did not
describe the event and were excluded from analyses. All
descriptions were coded by two independent raters, with
high point-to-point reliability (95.93% English, 93.75%
Japanese). Disagreements were resolved upon discussion.
See Table 2 for example agentive and non-agentive accident
descriptions in English and Japanese.
Agentive vs. Non-agentive language use. Because these
data were not normally distributed, we report nonparametric
analyses (Mann-Whitney U and sign test). Intentional events
were described equally agentively by both English and
Japanese speakers (English Median = 100%, Japanese
Median = 100%, U = 1176.00, p = .398). Accidental events
were described more agentively by English speakers than by
Japanese speakers (English Median = 75.00%, Japanese
Median = 62.50%, U = 889.00, p = .01) (Figures 2 and 3).
We computed a difference score for each participant as
the proportion of intentional events described using agentive
language minus the proportion of accidental events
described using agentive language. Speakers in both
communities used more agentive language to describe
intentional events than to describe accidental events
(English p < .001, Japanese p < .001), but this distinction
was more pronounced for Japanese speakers (Median =
37.50%) than for English speakers (Median = 25.00%), U =
908.00, p = .014.

Description coding. Descriptions were coded as agentive
if the sentence mentioned the causal agent in a transitive
sentence that described the change-of-state event. A
canonical agentive description would be “He popped the
balloon”. Descriptions were coded as non-agentive if the
change-of-state event was described intransitively. A
canonical non-agentive description would be “The balloon
popped”. In Japanese, non-agentive descriptions were
characterized by an intransitive verb as well as the particle
“ga” with the affected object (e.g., 「風船が割れてびっくり
した。」 , Balloon-ga popped-intransitive was surprised).
Some non-agentive descriptions in each language took the
form “Someone was doing X and then Y happened”, in
which the agent was linguistically separated from a changeof-state event that was described intransitively.

2429

Figure 2: Within-language variation in accident descriptions.

Intentional

Accidental

Intentional

Accidental

Figure 3: Causal event descriptions in English and Japanese.
Median proportion agentive descriptions is plotted.

Figure 4: Causal agent memory in English and Japanese.
Mean proportion correct is plotted; error bars are 1 SEM.

In addition to these differences, there were also some
similarities in how English and Japanese speakers
described events. The within-language pattern of
variation in accidental event descriptions was consistent
across the two language groups, rho = .82, p < .001. For
example, in both linguistic communities speakers were
more likely to use agentive language when describing the
egg-breaking event than when describing the pencilbreaking event. The cross-linguistic difference in
accident descriptions, however, was consistent across
events, p = .035 (sign test).
To sum up, English speakers and Japanese speakers
described causal events differently. While speakers in
each community described intentional events using
agentive language, they differed in their descriptions of
accidental events. When describing accidents, English
speakers used more agentive language than did Japanese
speakers. Answers to the question “What happened?”
vary by linguistic community when describing accidents.

effects. Numerically, intentional agents were remembered well
by both English (M = 71.22, SE = 2.87) and Japanese (M =
70.98, SE = 2.39) speakers. Accidental agents, however, were
better remembered by English speakers (M = 73.55, SE = 2.83)
than by Japanese speakers (M = 65.89, SE = 2.83).

Discussion
English and Japanese speakers remembered the agents of
intentional events equally well. However, they differed in
their memory for the agents of accidental events, with
English speakers remembering accidental agents better than
Japanese speakers. Accidents were also the locus of
differences in language use across the two communities,
with English speakers more likely to describe accidents
saying “He did it” than were Japanese speakers.

General Discussion

Results: Memory for object orientations
English speakers (M = 69.61, SE = 2.17) showed
marginally better memory for object orientations than did
Japanese speakers (M = 64.86, SE = 1.75), t(100) = 1.72, p
= .088. One reason may be that English speakers were more
familiar with computerized studies in laboratories and knew
what to expect, while Japanese speakers “warmed up”
during this task. We included people’s control memory
score as a covariate in analyses of memory for agents.

Results: Memory for causal agents
Mirroring the pattern of event descriptions, English and
Japanese speakers remembered intentional agents equally well
but diverged in their memory for accidental agents (Figure 4). A
repeated-measures 2x2 ANOVA with event type
(Intentional, Accidental) as a within-subjects factor and
language group (English, Japanese) as a between-subjects
factor revealed a reliable interaction between event type and
language group F(1,99) = 5.79, p = .018 and no main

In this study, English speakers and Japanese speakers
used agentive expressions to talk about intentional events
and remembered intentional agents equally well. When it
came to accidents, however, cross-linguistic differences in
both language and memory were observed. English speakers
described accidents using more agentive language than
Japanese speakers did and also remembered agents of
accidents better than Japanese speakers did. Importantly,
these memory patterns were observed in a task that
participants completed before they had used any language to
describe the events.
Cross-linguistic differences in memory patterns were
localized to a particular kind of event (accidents). Given
other findings about cross-cultural differences in attention
(e.g., Masuda & Nisbett, 2001), other patterns of results
might have been predicted. For example, global differences
in Japanese and English speakers’ attention – such as
relative attention to context versus focal objects – might
have led to overall lower memory for causal agents in

2430

Japanese speakers compared to English speakers. Crosslinguistic differences in noun and pronoun use (with lower
frequency in Japanese compared to English) might also have
resulted in overall lower agent memory in Japanese
speakers. Instead, we found evidence for memory
differences only for those events in which patterns of action
descriptions also differed. Thus, this study refines our
understanding of cross-cultural differences in attention to
events and suggests that patterns in verb use may be one
mechanism that drives these differences (see F&B Study 2
for evidence that changing the agentivity of the local
linguistic context changes people’s memory for causal
agents).
This study (a) replicates patterns of memory for agents of
intentional and accidental events in English speakers with a
new stimulus set, (b) extends evidence for cross-linguistic
variation in non-agentive language use, adding to our
understanding of usage biases in causal event descriptions
across the worlds’ languages, and (c) replicates previous
findings that accident descriptions covary with memory for
accidents, extending evidence for this pattern to another
linguistic community.
Causal agents in English, Spanish and Japanese. Fausey
and Boroditsky (submitted) reported a novel cross-linguistic
phenomenon about causal cognition. They found that
compared to English speakers, Spanish speakers were less
likely to talk about agents of accidents and also less likely to
remember the agents of accidents. The data reported here
suggest that Japanese language and cognition patterns also
contrast with those of English speakers.
Causal cognition happens in linguistic contexts: people
talk about the causal events that they observe. Together,
these studies suggest that language can shape how people
interpret and remember causal events.

Acknowledgments
We thank M. Gutierrez, A. Inamori, N. Saji, and H. Tily for
help collecting data, M. Takashima and Y. Tomiyama for
help with Japanese translations, and Dr. Mutsumi Imai for
generously lending use of her lab space at Keio University.

References
Billman, D., & Krych, M. (1998). Path & manner verbs in action:
Effects of skipping or exiting on event memory. Proceedings of
the 20th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., & Phillips, W. (2003). Sex, syntax,
and semantics. In D. Gentner & S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.),
Language in Mind: Advances in the study of Language and
Cognition.
Fausey, C.M., & Boroditsky, L. (submitted). Whodunnit: Memory
for accidental agents differs in English and Spanish speakers.
Fernald, A. & Morikawa, H. (1993). Common themes and cultural
variations in Japanese and American mothers’ speech to infants.
Child Development, 64, 637-56.
Filipovic, L. (2007). Language as a witness: Insights from
cognitive linguistics. The International Journal of Speech,
Language and the Law, 14, 245-267.
Fukuda, S., & Choi, S. (2006). Early Verbs in Japanese and
Korean Children: Toward a Transitive or Intransitive Bias?

Paper presented at the San Diego Linguistics Circle, SDSU.
Gennari, S., Sloman, S.A., Malt, B. C., and Fitch, W.T. (2002).
Motion events in language and cognition. Cognition, 83, 49-79.
Gentner, D., & Loftus, E.F. (1979). Integration of verbal and visual
information as evidenced by distortions in picture memory.
American Journal of Psychology, 92, 363-375.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study of early
word meaning: universal ontology and linguistic influence.
Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Levinson, S.C., Kita, S., Haun, D. & Rasch, B. (2002). Returning
the tables: Language affects spatial reasoning. Cognition, 84,
155-188.
Liptak, A. (2009, January 20). I do solemnly swear…(Line
please?). New York Times. http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/
2009/ 01/20/i-do-solemnly-swear/
Loftus, E.F. & Palmer, J.C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile
destruction: An example of the interaction between language
and memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
13, 585-589.
Lucy, J.A. (1992). Grammatical Categories and Cognition: A Case
Study of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Maldonado, R. (1992). Middle voice: The Case of Spanish se.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, UCSD.
Malpass, R.S., & Kravitz, J. (1969). Recognition for faces of own
and other race. JPSP, 13, 330-334.
Martinez, I. (2000). The effects of language on children’s
understanding of agency and causation. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Michigan.
Masuda, T. & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically vs.
analytically: Comparing the context sensitivity of Japanese and
Americans. JPSP, 81, 922-934.
Papafragou, A., Massey, C., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Shake, rattle,
‘n’ roll: the representation of motion in language and cognition.
Cognition, 84, 189-219.
Roberson, D., & Hanley, J.R. (2007). Color categories vary with
language after all. Current Biology, 17, 605-606.
Slobin, D.I. (1996). From “thought and language” to “thinking for
speaking”. In J.J. Gumperz & S.C. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking
linguistic relativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Slobin, D.I., & Bocaz, A. (1988). Learning to talk about movement
through time and space: The development of narrative abilities
in Spanish and English. Lenguas Modernas, 15, 5-24.
Teramura, H. (1976) Naru’hyoogen to ‘suru’ hyoogen: nichiei
‘tai’ hyoogen no hikaku. Nihongo to Nihongo Kyooiku
Mojihyoogenhen, National Language Center.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., Wade, A., &
Boroditsky, L. (2007). The Russian Blues reveal effects of
language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, 104, 7780-7785.
Zeleny, J. (2009, January 21). I really do swear, faithfully: Obama
and Roberts try again. New York Times. http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/01/22/us/politics/22oath.html.

2431

