UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Attention on the Detection of the List Length Effect in Recognition
Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/17s8s2cv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dennis, Simon
Kinnell, Angela

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Attention on the Detection of the List Length Effect in
Recognition Memory
Angela Kinnell (angela.kinnell@gmail.com)
School of Psychology, Level 4, Hughes Building, North Terrace
University of Adelaide, South Australia, 5005.

Simon Dennis (simon.dennis@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Ohio State University,
1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH, 43210 USA

Abstract
The list length effect in recognition memory has been the
subject of recent debate. Many studies have identified the
effect, however Dennis and Humphreys (2001) argued that
previous list length effect findings were the result of a
failure to control for four potential confounds. The list
length effect can be used to discriminate between item and
context noise models of recognition memory. Item noise
models predict the effect, while context noise models do
not. In this paper, the role of attention on the detection of
the list length effect is explored. The attention task at study
was manipulated; participants either rated the pleasantness
of study items or read the words only. In addition, the
design was either retroactive or proactive. The results
suggest that it is the proactive design in which the list
length effect is evident. When the retroactive design is
used in conjunction with the pleasantness rating task, there
is the most even performance across list lengths and a
nonsignificant effect of list length. This is consistent with
context noise models of recognition.
Keywords: recognition; list length; memory models.

The source of interference in recognition memory has
been the subject of recent debate. Some researchers have
argued that interference to the memory trace for a
particular item comes about as a consequence of the other
items on the study list (e.g. Cary & Reder, 2003; Gillund
& Shiffrin, 1984; Gronlund & Elam, 1994; Murdock,
1982). At the other end of the spectrum, Dennis and
Humphreys (2001) have argued that interference comes
from all of the previous contexts in which that particular
item has been seen. Alternatively, interference could arise
through a combination of the two (Criss & Shiffrin, 2004).
Arising from these different approaches are a number of
different mathematical models of recognition memory
designed to fit several well-documented recognition
findings. There has recently been some question as to
whether one of these findings, the list length effect, is a
real effect or is the result of one or more confounds
(Dennis & Humphreys, 2001). The list length effect
refers to the finding that recognition performance is
superior for shorter rather than longer lists. The existence,
or non-existence, of the list length effect can be used to
help differentiate between these models of recognition
memory.

Item Noise Models
The item noise approach is based upon the idea that it is
the other items on the study list that interfere with one's
ability to recognize a test probe. There are numerous
mathematical models of recognition memory that define
interference as arising from other list items. These include
global matching models (GMMs) such as the Theory of
Distributed Associative Memory (TODAM; Gronlund &
Elam, 1994; Murdock, 1982), Minerva II (Hintzman,
1986), the Matrix model (Pike, 1984) and Search of
Associative Memory (SAM; Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984) as
well as the Retrieving Effectively from Memory model
(REM; Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997) and the Subjective
Likelihood Model (SLiM; McClelland & Chappell, 1998).
In these models a reconstruction of the study list
context is used, often implicitly, to retrieve the items that
appeared on the study list from memory. These are then
compared to the test probe, with the level of activation
integrated across all items. If this level of activation is
above a certain threshold, the individual will respond
“yes” indicating that they recognize the word from the
study list. If this activation fails to reach the threshold, a
“no” response will ensue. A longer study list means that
more items must be matched to the cue resulting in greater
interference as each new item introduces more variability.
Thus, a list length effect is predicted by item noise models
(Clark & Gronlund, 1996).

Context Noise Models
Alternatively, interference could arise from the other
contexts in which a word has been encountered in the past
and any interference from other items is negligible
(Dennis & Humphreys, 2001). Context noise models are
much fewer in number than item noise models and include
the Bind Cue Decide Model of Episodic Memory
(BCDMEM; Dennis & Humphreys, 2001) and the model
of Anderson and Bower (1972). In BCDMEM, the test
probe is used to cue retrieval of previous contexts in
which that word has been encountered. These contexts are
then compared to the reinstated study context. The
stronger the global match between these, the higher the
level of activation with the result being a “yes” response.
Failure to reach the activation threshold will result in a
“no” response. Other study list items do not affect

502

performance as their memory traces are not activated at
any point in the retrieval process.
It is also possible that neither item noise nor context
noise alone can account for interference in recognition,
but rather it may be that a combination of the two is
involved (e.g. Criss and Shiffrin, 2004).

The List Length Effect
The existence of the list length effect in recognition has
been very well documented (e.g. Bowles & Glanzer,
1983; Cary & Reder, 2003; Gronlund & Elam, 1994) and
as a result its existence has been somewhat ubiquitously
accepted in the literature on recognition memory.
Nevertheless, a number of published studies have
reported nonsignificant effects of list length (e.g. Jang &
Huber, 2008; Murnane & Shiffrin, 1991; Schulman,
1974). Dennis and Humphreys (2001) argued that
previous studies which had identified the list length effect
had failed to control for four possible confounds; retention
interval; attention; displaced rehearsal and contextual
reinstatement. When they controlled for these confounds,
they found no significant difference in recognition
performance between a 24 word and a 72 word list.
Controlling for the potential confounds seems to have had
an impact on the results. Each of these confounds will
now be discussed.
Retention Interval Retention interval is defined as the
amount of time elapsed between the presentation of a
target at study and again at test. The shorter retention
interval for short list items would favor performance on
that list and could result in a list length effect finding.
Retention interval can be controlled using either a
retroactive or proactive design. In the retroactive design,
a period of filler activity follows the short list such that
the duration of the short list and filler is equal to that of
the long list. In this design it is the first words of the long
list (the same number as in the short list) that are tested.
The proactive design is the converse of this with filler
activity preceding the short study list and the last words of
the long list being tested.
Displaced Rehearsal Displaced Rehearsal becomes an
issue when retention interval is controlled and only some
long list items are tested while all short list items are
tested. In this case, any rehearsal of short list items will
be beneficial to performance while there is no such
guarantee with rehearsal of long list items. In addition,
the filler following the short list in the retroactive design
provides an opportunity to rehearse short list words, while
in the long list words are continually presented.
Displaced rehearsal can be controlled by ensuring that
the filler activity is engaging and/or making the
recognition test incidental.

Contextual Reinstatement Reinstating the study context
at test is important in both item and context noise models
of recognition memory. The more accurate this reinstated
study context is, the better the recognition performance is
likely to be. Context varies with the passing of time with
more scope for variability in the long list which would
negatively impact performance.
In the retroactive design, the filler activity following the
short list before the test list can act to encourage
participants to reinstate the study context. When the test
list immediately follows the long list, contextual
reinstatement is not encouraged.
Including an extended period of filler activity between
study and test for both long and short lists can encourage
contextual reinstatement in both length conditions.
Dennis, Lee and Kinnell (2008) found a nonsignificant
effect of list length when contextual reinstatement was
controlled in this way and a list length effect when no
control was implemented. A Bayesian analysis of the
same data favored the error-only model in both
conditions. On this basis, it appears that while controlling
for contextual reinstatement is important, it is not the most
telling of the potential confounds.
Attention The final potential confound of the list length
effect is attention. It is likely that participants will tire
over the course of the long list to a greater extent than in
the short list and pay less attention to the items. This is
more problematic in the proactive design (Cary & Reder,
2003; Dennis & Humphreys, 2001; Underwood, 1978)
when it is the final items of the long list that are tested and
compared to performance on the short list.
Having participants perform an encoding task that
requires a response during study can help control for
lapses in attention as it ensures that all items will have
been processed to some level, regardless of fatigue. Since
there may be no way to completely eliminate attentional
lapses in the proactive condition, using the retroactive
condition may also control for attention.

The List Length Effect Revisited
In 2003, Cary and Reder carried out a partial replication
of Dennis and Humphreys’ (2001) Experiment 1. Their
third experiment included controls for the four potential
confounds listed above. However, under these conditions,
Cary and Reder (2003) identified a list length effect.
There were a number of differences between the studies of
Cary and Reder (2003) and Dennis and Humphreys
(2001) that should be noted.
The first difference was that Cary and Reder’s
experiment involved a 1:4 (20:80 words) list length ratio
while Dennis and Humphreys’ study had a 1:3 (24:72
words) ratio meaning it is more likely that a length effect
would be identified in the former experiment. Secondly,
Cary and Reder included a two minute period of filler
activity as a control for contextual reinstatement while
Dennis and Humphrey had eight minutes of filler. The

503

study of Dennis et al. (2008) suggests that two minutes
may not be sufficient to encourage contextual
reinstatement after both lists. The two experiments also
differed in the way that the results were analyzed. Cary
and Reder collapsed results from both the retroactive and
proactive design conditions together for analysis. Given
that the length effect is more likely in the proactive
condition due to lapses in attention, this may have
influenced the results. The aim of the present experiment
is to investigate the role of attention on the detection of
the list length effect in recognition memory using a
variation on the methods of Dennis and Humphreys
(2001) and Cary and Reder (2003).

The Experiment
Method
Participants Participants were 160 Psychology students
from the University of Adelaide. Each received either
course credit or a payment of $12 in exchange for their
participation. All gave informed consent.
Design This experiment had a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 factorial
design with the factors being list length (short or long),
word frequency (low or high), attention task (pleasantness
rating or read only) and design (retroactive or proactive).
List length and word frequency were within subjects
factors while attention task and design were between
subjects manipulations.
The word frequency
manipulation was included as a check of the power of the
experimental design.
Materials The stimuli for this study were 140 five and six
letter words from the Sydney Morning Herald Word
Database (Dennis, 1995). Half of the words were of high
frequency (100-200 occurrences per million) and half
were low frequency (1-4 occurrences per million). All
lists had the same number of five and six letter, and high
and low frequency words. All words were randomly
assigned to lists with no participant seeing the same word
twice, except for targets.
Procedure Participants were first given an overview of
the study and allowed to practice the computerized sliding
tile puzzle used as the filler task.
Participants studied one short (20 word) and one long
(80 word) list, the same list lengths as in Cary and Reder's
(2003) study. Each study word appeared for 3000ms.
Test lists were made up of 20 targets and 20 distractors.
All lists had half high frequency and half low frequency
words. All words were presented in lower-case letters in
the center of a computer screen.
Participants were split equally into two attention task
conditions.
In the pleasantness rating condition,
participants were asked to rate the pleasantness of each
word on the study list on a six point Likert scale (1: least

pleasant, 6: most pleasant) by clicking the appropriate
button while that word was being displayed on screen.
Participants were told that if they missed rating one of the
words within the 3000ms they should rate the next word
instead. In the read only task condition, participants
simply read the words of the study list as they appeared on
the screen. No response was required.
Within each condition, the design of the lists was either
retroactive or proactive. Participants were again divided
equally into these conditions. In the retroactive design,
the short list was followed by a three minute period of
sliding tile puzzle filler and the first 20 words of the long
list were included as targets at test. In the proactive
design, there was three minutes of puzzle filler before the
beginning of the short list and the last 20 words of the
long list were tested.
Participants were given 15 seconds notice before the
onset of the test list which was in the form of the yes/no
recognition paradigm. Each word was presented in the
middle of the screen above two response buttons marked
“yes” and “no”. Participants were instructed to respond
“yes” if they recognized the word from the study list and
to respond “no” if they did not recognize that word by
clicking on the appropriate button. The test list was self
paced and a response was recorded for each test word.
The targets were either the entire study list (short list), the
first 20 words of the long study list (retroactive design) or
the last 20 words of the long list (proactive design).
Contextual reinstatement was encouraged following
both short and long lists with an eight minute period of
sliding tile puzzle filler activity before each test list.
The experiment was counterbalanced for order, within
each condition half of the participants began with the
short list and the other half began with the long list.

Results
The results of this experiment were analyzed using both
a standard repeated measures analysis of variance
(ANOVA) as well as the Bayesian analysis developed by
Dennis et al. (2008; see this paper for further details). This
method allows comparison of two competing models on a
given set of data. With regard to the list length effect, we
are interested in whether there is a systematic difference
in discriminability in the short list compared with the long
list. The two models are the error-only model (no
systematic difference) and the error-plus-effect model.
Inferences are made for each subject as to which model
better reflects their performance. Results are reported as a
pair of values indicating the posterior probability that at
least 90% of subjects conform to the error-only or the
error-plus-effect model, respectively. Note it is possible
that neither of these results occur if, for instance, half of
the subjects follow an error-only model and half follow an
error-plus-effect model.
A major benefit of this method of analysis is that it
allows for the accumulation of evidence in favor of the
null hypothesis. This is important in the present case

504

where the failure to identify a significant effect of list
length is also theoretically interesting.
List Length Overall A 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 (length x frequency
x task x design) repeated measures ANOVA yielded a
nonsignificant effect of list length on d' (F(1,156) = 2.71,
p = .1) and the hit rate (F(1,156) = 1.21, p = .27).
However, there was a statistically significant effect of list
length on the false alarm rate (F(1,156) = 11.01, p = .001,
ηp 2= .07).
For comparison with the results of Cary and Reder
(2003) a 2 x 2 x 2 (length x frequency x design) repeated
measures ANOVA was carried out for the pleasantness
task condition.
Analysis revealed a nonsignificant
interaction between list length and design on d' (F(1,78) =
2.09, p = .15), the hit rate (F(1,78) = 3.70, p = .06) and the
false alarm rate (F(1,78) = .02, p = .89). Cary and Reder
(2003) obtained the same result and on that basis
collapsed the retroactive and proactive conditions. In the
present analysis, the conditions will remain separated.

There was, however, a statistically significant effect of list
length on the hit rate (F(1,39) = 9.95, p = .003, ηp 2= .20).
It should be noted, however, that in this condition,
performance on the long list was superior to that of the
short list, meaning that this result is significant in the
opposite direction to that previously identified in the
literature. Bayesian analysis of the d' values again found
in favor of the error-only model (.78, .06).
Pleasantness Proactive Condition In the pleasantness
proactive condition, repeated measures ANOVAs yielded
statistically significant effects of list length on both d'
(F(1,39) = 11.55, p = .002, ηp 2= .23) and false alarm rate
(F(1,39) = 6.72, p = .013, ηp 2= .15). There was no
significant effect on the hit rate (F(1,39) = 2.42, p = .13).
In contrast to the ANOVA d' results, the Bayesian
analysis found in favor of the error-only model (.68, .13).
Thus, while the ANOVA suggested a positive list length
effect, the Bayesian analysis favored the error-only model,
suggesting that it may be a minority of participants
driving the effect in the ANOVA.
Read Only Proactive Condition A repeated measures
ANOVA in the read only proactive condition yielded a
significant effect of list length on d' (F(1,39) = 8.26, p <
.001, ηp 2= .17). There was, however, a nonsignificant
effect of list length on both the hit rate (F(1,39) = 2.40, p
= .13) and the false alarm rate (F(1,39) = 3.65, p = .06),
although the false alarm rate was close to significance.
The Bayesian analysis of d' values was ambiguous for this
condition (0.46, 0.27).

Figure 1: d' values for each of the four attention
conditions. Bars represent 95% within subjects confidence
intervals.
Pleasantness Retroactive Condition In the pleasantness
retroactive condition, repeated measures ANOVAs found
a nonsignificant effect of list length on d' (F(1,39) = .38, p
= .54, see Figure 1 for short and long list d’ in each
condition) and the hit rate (F(1,39) = .21, p = .21) while
the effect on the false alarm rate was marginally
significant (F(1,39) = 3.95, p = .054). Similarly, the
Bayesian analysis of the d' values found in favor of the
error-only model (.81, .01).
Read Only Retroactive Condition Repeated measures
ANOVAs in the read only retroactive condition yielded
nonsignificant effects of list length on d' (F(1,39) = 3.06,
p = .09) and the false alarm rate (F(1,39) = .60, p = .44).

Figure 2: A significant word frequency effect was
identified in both hit and false alarm rates in each
condition. Bars represent 95% within subjects confidence
intervals.
Word Frequency A 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 (length x frequency x
task x design) repeated measures ANOVA yielded a

505

significant effect of word frequency on d' (F(1,156) =
232.79, p < .001, ηp 2= .60) in the overall data. Planned
comparisons were carried out on the word frequency data
in each of the four conditions, collapsing across list
length. There was a significant word frequency effect for
d’, hit rates and false alarm rates in each of the four
conditions using both the standard ANOVA analysis and
the Bayesian analysis (see Figure 2 for hit and false alarm
rate word frequency data). These findings suggest that the
power of this experiment was not so poor that we were
unable to detect effects of any kind.

General Discussion
The experiment reported here aimed to explore the
possible confounding effect of attention on the detection
of the list length effect. Results indicated that attention
does play a significant role. Most importantly, a list
length effect was identified when the proactive condition
was used as a control for retention interval but there was
no significant effect when the retroactive design was used.
This is not unexpected given that the proactive design
involves the last 20 words of an 80 word list being tested
as targets and this performance is compared to that of a 20
word short list. In this case, the amount of attention paid
to each block of words is likely to differ and give rise to
the list length effect. In the retroactive design, however,
all targets in both test lists were presented at the beginning
of both the long and short list study blocks where there
should be no differences in attention.
In their third experiment, Cary and Reder (2003)
included both retroactive and proactive designs. In their
analysis, the data were collapsed across these conditions
into one, based on the finding of a nonsignificant
interaction between list length and study design. The
results of experiment 1 suggest that collapsing the data in
this way may have been problematic. We also found a
nonsignificant interaction between list length and design
and when we collapsed across the study design condition
as Cary and Reder (2003) did, we also identified a
positive list length effect when the pleasantness rating
task was used at study. However, as has already been
noted, a positive list length effect was identified in the
proactive design only. This finding suggests that the
nonsignificance of the interaction effect should not be
used as justification for collapsing across conditions and
that this may have altered the interpretation of Cary and
Reder’s (2003) findings. On the basis of the present
experiment, it appears that the design of the experiment is
important and that it is the proactive condition which
drives the effect.
The results also indicated that the task (pleasantness
rating vs. read only) used to control attention at study does
not have a large influence on the list length effect finding.
Nevertheless, the Retroactive Pleasantness condition, that
is the most controlled condition, had the smallest effect
size. Interestingly, the Retroactive Read condition had the
first case, to our knowledge, of a reverse list length effect

with long list performance superior to that of the short list
(although this effect was only marginally significant).
The current results support the assertion by Dennis and
Humphreys (2001) that the history of positive list length
effect findings may have been influenced by a failure to
control for four possible confounds; retention interval,
attention,
displaced
rehearsal
and
contextual
reinstatement. When controls for these confounds are
implemented, the effect of list length is nonsignificant.
More specifically, using the retroactive design to control
for retention interval, including a pleasantness rating, or
similar, task at study in an attempt to hold the attention of
participants and encourage them to process all words and
the inclusion of an extended (eight minute) period of filler
activity before the test list of both long and short lists
leads to more equivalent performance across list lengths.
Of course, the implementation of these controls may never
be perfect. However, when all controls are in place, as the
results of the present experiment has shown, there is no
significant effect of list length in recognition memory.

Implications for models of recognition memory
The absence of the list length effect in recognition
memory presents some problems for existing
mathematical models of memory and item noise models in
particular.
These models have been designed to
accommodate and predict a positive list length effect
finding. Conversely, the null list length effect finding
lends support to context noise models of recognition
which do not predict such an effect. The specific
implications for several well known models of recognition
memory will now be discussed.
Global matching models The GMMs all predict a list
length effect in recognition memory. While these models
differ from each other, they all predict the effect in a
similar way. The test probe cues the retrieval of all study
list items from memory which are then compared to the
test probe. The results of these comparisons are summed
to produce a global level of activation which is compared
against a criterion in order to decide whether to produce a
yes or a no response. While the effect of increasing list
length on the means of the signal and distractor
distributions is equivalent, the inclusion of more items
results in an increase in the variance of these distributions,
performance drops and a list length effect is predicted
(Clark & Gronlund, 1996).
The present nonsignificant list length effect findings are
problematic for the GMMs. The global matching process
necessarily involves all retrieved study list items in the
decision process and as such a list length effect is
predicted under all conditions. Furthermore, it seems
doubtful that these models can be easily modified to
capture the null list length effect finding. If one reduces
the amount of interference in these models to the
insignificant levels required to capture the current results
then the models would no longer be able to account for

506

the increases in the probability of saying “yes” to items
presented at test that are similar to study items. The
primary purposes of the introduction of the global
matching assumption are undermined.
Bind Cue Decide Model of Episodic Memory
BCDMEM (Dennis and Humphreys, 2001) is a context
noise model of recognition memory. The test word is the
cue and all previous contexts in which that word has been
encountered are retrieved from memory. If one of the
retrieved contexts matches the reinstated study context a
'yes' response will result. The greater the number of
contexts in which an item has been seen, the greater the
interference and the poorer the recognition performance.
This happens regardless of the length of the study list as
other list items are not considered during retrieval. Thus,
BCDMEM does not predict a list length effect and is
consistent with the results of the experiments presented
here.

Conclusions
In summary, the results presented here suggest that there
is no significant effect of list length in recognition
memory when potential confounds are controlled. This
finding is consistent with context noise models of
recognition memory. This nonsignificant effect of list
length, however, challenges the majority of existing
mathematical models of recognition memory which
assume that interference is a result of other list items.
Even if one is unwilling to accept that there is no item
interference at all in recognition for words, the current
experiments demonstrate that the contribution of this kind
of interference is extremely small. Certainly, item noise
does not deserve to command the central role that it has in
mathematical models of recognition over the past three
decades.

References
Anderson, J.R., & Bower, G.H. (1972). Recognition and
retrieval processes in free recall. Psychological Review,
79, 97-123.
Bowles, N. L., & Glanzer, M. (1983). An analysis of
interference in recognition memory. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 307-315.
Cary, M., & Reder, L. M. (2003). A dual-process account
of the list-length and strength-based mirror effects in
recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 49,
231-248.
Clark, S. E., & Gronlund, S. D. (1996). Global matching
models of recognition memory: How the models match
the data. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3, 37-60.
Criss, A. H., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2004a). Context noise and
item noise jointly determine recognition memory: A
comment on Dennis and Humphreys (2001).
Psychological Review, 111, 800-807.

Dennis, S. (1995). The Sydney Morning Herald word
database.
Available:
http://psy.uq.edu.au/CogPsych/Noetica.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise
model of episodic word recognition. Psychological
Review, 108, 452-478.
Dennis, S., Lee, M. D., & Kinnell, A. (2008). Bayesian
analysis of recognition memory: The case of the listlength effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
361-376.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review,
91, 1-67.
Gronlund, S. D., & Elam, L. E. (1994). List-length effect:
Recognition accuracy and variance of underlying
distributions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 1355-1369.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review,
93, 411-428.
Jang, Y., & Huber, D. E. (2008). Context retrieval and
context change in free recall: Recalling from long-term
memory drives list isolation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34,
112-127.
Knowlton, B. J., & Squire, L. R. (1995). Remembering
and knowing: Two different expressions of declarative
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 21, 699-710.
McClelland, J.L., & Chappell, M. (1998). Familiarity
breeds differentiation: A subjective likelihood approach
to the effects of experience in recognition memory.
Psychological Review, 105, 724-760.
Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.
Murnane, K., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1991). Interference and
the representation of events in memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 17, 855-874.
Pike, R. (1984). A comparison of convolution and matrix
distributed memory systems. Psychological Review, 91,
281-294.
Schulman, A. I. (1974). The declining course of
recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 2, 14-18.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM - retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145-166.
Underwood, B. J. (1978). Recognition memory as a
function of length of study list. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 12, 89-91.

507

