UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Sensory Nature of Knowledge: Generalization vs. Specification Mechanisms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1rf9188b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Brunel, Lionel
Riou, Benoit
Vallet, Guillaume
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Sensory Nature of Knowledge: Generalization vs. Specification Mechanisms
Brunel Lionel (lionel.brunel@univ-lyon2.fr), Vallet Guillaume (guillaume.vallet@univ-lyon2.fr), Riou
Benoit (benoit.riou@univ-lyon2.fr) & Versace Rémy (remy.versace@univ-lyon2.fr)
Université Lumière Lyon 2. Laboratoire d'Etude des Mécanismes Cognitifs (EMC)
EA 3082. 5 avenue Pierre Mendès France, F 69676, Bron cedex.

Abstract
The aim of the present study was to show the
perceptual nature of conceptual knowledge and the
dialectic between conceptual and episodic
knowledge. We used an original paradigm adapted
from Brunel, Labeye, Lesourd, Versace study (in
press) . This paradigm is divided into three phases.
The first one consists in learning a variable
association between a geometrical shape and a
white noise. The second phase consists in a shortterm priming paradigm where a prime shape
(either associated or not with a sound in the first
phase) preceded a pure tone. The participants have
to categorize this sound as low-pitched or highpitched sound. At least, the third phase consists in
a recognition phase about the learning phase. The
results have provided evidence supporting the
assumption that memory mechanisms are not
dissociated
from
perceptual
mechanisms.
Moreover, through the manipulation of the
shape/sound association in the learning phase, we
have demonstrated that generalization mechanism
allowed a stimulus to benefit from the feature
belonging to its category, whereas specification
mechanism allowed a stimulus to keep its
specificity compared to the category.
Keywords: Generalization, specification, memory trace,
single-memory theory

Introduction
Memory is one of the most important cognitive functions.
Over the last decade, the cognitive psychology tried to
examine, isolate some processes and mechanisms relevant
for this function. Despite dissensions in the literature,
authors acknowledge two sets of “memory capacities”:
the generalization and the specification capacity.
According to Tulving (1985), these capacities
depend on the existence of two independent memory
systems: the semantic and episodic systems. The semantic
memory is involved in the processing of general amodal
knowledge and the episodic memory is involved in the
processing of specific modal knowledge (our memories).

Whereas Tulving argued that these two kinds of memory
are dissociated and differ in the abstractness of the
information they retain, other authors are more cautious
(e.g Barsalou, 2008; Witthlesea, 1987).
For example, Barsalou (e.g., 1999; 2005) has
taken a particular interest in the perceptual nature of
concepts and has developed the idea of “concept
simulators”. According to Barsalou, in order to categorize
a hammer’s picture as a tool, the neural systems for
vision, action, audition, touch, etc., re-enact the
experience of a hammer. This re-enactment is thought to
involve the activation of sensori-motors areas, but also of
associative areas that register the configurations of
sensory features at both the intramodal and intermodal
levels. Any given simulator can produce an unlimited
number of simulations which will be corresponding to the
multimodal representations of a concept's different
instantiations. The exemplar that is actually generated
depends on a number of different factors (context,
subject’s state, goals, etc.).
Moreover, Whittlesea (1987) explained that dualmemory accounts, which suggest dissociations between
episodic and abstract information, can also be interpreted
as a single-memory account (for a review see Versace,
Labeye, Badard, Rose, in press). In this approach,
abstraction and specification are no longer dissociated.
According to Versace et al. (in press), the
memory that encodes the perceptual components of our
experiences is therefore should involve the systems which
are associated with the perceptual mechanisms rather than
take the form of specific and differentiated memory
systems. Thus, all forms of knowledge emerge from the
activation, integration, and synchronization of these
multiple systems. In a single-memory system, episodic
and abstract knowledge could emerge from activation and
integration of the same memory traces.
Therefore, the general goal of this research is to show
that episodic and conceptual knowledge could emerge
from activation and integration of the same memory
traces. In our view, a stimulus should acquired the same
meaning (should be generalized) as a set of other stimuli,
if all its features are also presents in the majority most of
the other stimuli. This stimulus is then considered as
entering the same category as the other stimuli and can

2789

then acquire the properties shared by most of the majority
of these stimuli of this category. The generalization
mechanism should be much more difficult if this stimulus
has a specific property (a property which is not possessed
by that the other stimuli of the category don't have). In
this case, this stimulus should be discriminated from other
stimuli and then it shouldn't acquire their properties of the
other stimuli. However, the specification in memory of a
stimulus from a set of other stimuli should also require a
minimum of homogeneity from the other stimuli. If the
other stimuli are very dissimilar from each other, then the
discrimination of the isolated stimulus should be strongly
reduced.
To test these assumptions we used a paradigm
divided into three phases. In the first phase (learning
phase), the participants have to discriminate simple
geometrical shapes (a circle and a square). Then, in the
second phase (priming phase), they were tested in a shortterm priming paradigm in which a shape (either
associated or not with a white noise in the first phase)
preceded a pure tone that they had to categorize as lowpitched or high-pitched sounds (with a 500 ms SOA). At
least, in the third and last phase (recognition phase), they
first had to find the shape which was not presented with
sound (isolated sound shape) between shapes presented
with noise during the learning phase (non-isolated sound
shape). And then, they had to find the shape which was
presented with sound (isolated silent shape) between
shapes presented without noise (non-isolated silent shape)
during the learning phase.
In this experiment, the circle and the square were
displayed in four different levels of gray. For one, e.g. a
square, 3 sub-types of this shapes (3 squares of different
grey), named called “non -isolated shapes”, were
systematically presented simultaneously with a white
noise, and the last shape (“isolated shape”) was
systematically presented alone (without sound). The
reverse was true for the other shapes (the circle in our
example): 3 of these circles (non -isolated shapes) were
systematically presented alone (without sound) and the
last circle (isolated shape) was systematically presented
simultaneously with white noise. These associations were
counterbalanced for half of the participants. Our
hypothesis was that the isolated shape should be
generalized to the shape category in the first case (the
isolated square in our example), since all its features (a
grey square) were shared by the other squares. On the
contrary, in the second case, the isolated shape (the
isolated circle) should remain distinctive from the other
stimuli of the same shape, since it has a specific feature
(associated with a white noise), and because all the others
circles have a great homogeneity. These hypotheses were
assessed in the second phase, where participants were
tested in a short-term priming paradigm as described
above. Brunel et al. (in press) demonstrated that the
presentation of a prime shape that was associated with a
sound in a learning phase reactivates the auditory
component (see also Meyer et al., 2007) and facilitated
the processing of a target sound with a 500 ms SOA. In

the present experiment, the same sound stimuli and the
same SOA were used. Therefore, we hypothesized that
the prime non-isolated sound shape (presented with sound
into the learning phase, in our example the squares) would
facilitate processing of the target sound in comparison to
the prime non-isolated silent shape (presented without
sound into the learning phase, in our example the circles).
Moreover, the prime isolated shape presented without
sound in the learning phase (in our example a square)
would also facilitate the processing of targets sounds like
non-isolated sound shape. In this case, an exemplar
acquires the properties shared by most of the stimuli of
the category. On the contrary, the prime isolated shape
presented with sound in the learning phase (in our
example a circle) would facilitate the processing of the
targets sounds unlike non-isolated silent shape. In this
case, an exemplar has a specific property (a property that
the other stimuli of the category don’t have).
To provide more evidence to our hypotheses,
participants were also tested in a third phase in two
successive recognition tasks. If the specification
mechanism was involved into the learning phase,
participants should be able to recognize the isolated shape
which was associated to a sound during the learning phase
among non-isolated silent shapes. On the contrary, if
generalization mechanism was involved into the learning
phase, participants should be unable to recognize the
isolated shape which was presented without sound during
the learning phase.

Experiment
Participants
Thirty-two right-handed voluntary participants were
recruited for the first experiment. All of them were
students at the University Lumière Lyon 2, France, and
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

Stimuli & Material
Very simple stimuli were used to permit the precise
control of the visual and auditory stimuli components.
The visual stimulus was a geometric shape, either a 7cm
side square or 3.66cm radius circle. The auditory stimulus
was a white noise, used in the learning phase, and two
pure tones: a high-pitched one of 312Hz and another lowpitched of 256Hz. All the auditory stimuli were presented
in monophony and lasted 500ms. All squares and circles
could be displayed in four different levels of gray.
The experiment was conducted on a Macintosh
computer (eMac G4). Psyscope software X B41 LDEC8
(Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993) was used
to create and manage the experiment. In addition, a chin
rest was used to maintain a 60cm distance between the
subjects and the monitor.

2790

Procedure & Design
After filling in a written consent form, each participant
was tested individually during a session of approximately
10 minutes. The experiment consisted in three phases
adapted from the study by Brunel, Labeye, Lesourd &
Versace (in press). The first phase (learning phase) was
based on the hypothesis that repeating a sound-shapecolour association, which was not explicitly formulated
by the experimenter, should lead to the integration of
these three different components in memory (see the
procedure in Figure 1a). Moreover, we have manipulated
the association frequency between sound, shapes and
levels of gray. For example, three (non-isolated) squares
were presented with a sound whereas one (isolated)
square wasn't. One (isolated) circle was presented with a
sound whereas the three (non-isolated) other circles
weren't (the gray used for the isolated shape presented
without sound is systemically different from the gray used
for the isolated shape presented with sound. The colour of
the isolated shapes was counterbalanced). Consequently,
each trial consisted in presenting a shape (a square or a
circle) for 500ms and one of these shapes was
simultaneously presented with the white noise. The
participants were told that their task was to judge, as
quickly and accurately as possible, whether the shape was
a square or a circle. They indicated their response by
pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard. All visual
stimuli were presented in the center of the screen, and the
intertrial interval was 1,500ms. For half of the
participants, the squares were generally presented with the
white noise and the circles were generally presented
without sound, while the opposite arrangement was used
for the other half of the participants. Each shape was
presented 40 times (10 times for each of the 4 gray scale
levels) in a random order. Half of the participants used
their right index finger for the square and their right
middle finger for the circle, with response fingers being
reversed for the other half of the participants.

1500 ms :
Until next
trial
3*With AND 1
Without
White
Sound OR 1 With
AND
3*without
white sound

500 ms

3*With AND 1
Without
White
Sound OR 1 With
AND
3*without
white sound

500 ms

immediately followed by a target which was either the
high-pitched or the low-pitched sound. The participants
had to judge as quickly and accurately as possible
whether the target sound was low-pitched or high-pitched
by pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard. It is
important to mention here that all the participants were
instructed to keep their eyes open during the whole phase.
As the target appeared immediately when the prime
disappeared, the SOA between the prime and the target
was also 500ms. All visual stimuli were presented in the
center of the screen, and the intertrial interval was
1,500ms. Each participant saw a total of 80 trials, i.e. 40
with each target sound, and half of them (20) were
presented with a prime shape that had been generally
associated with the white noise during the learning phase
and the other half with a prime shape that had generally
not been presented with this noise. The order of the
different experimental conditions was randomized

high-pitched

OR

OR

low-pitched

500 ms

Until subject’s
response

Figure 1b: Organization of the trials in the second phase.
The third phase consisted in a recognition task
(see the procedure in Figure 1c). Participants had to
perform two successive recognitions. It is important to
highlight that all the participants were informed that they
would had to perform this task but they weren't informed
about the nature of the questions. First, the participants
had to find the shape which was not presented with sound
(isolated sound shape) between shapes presented with
noise during the learning phase (non-isolated sound
shape). And then, they had to find the shape which was
presented with sound (isolated silent shape) between the
shapes presented without noise (non-isolated silent shape)
during the learning phase. They indicated their response
by pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard. The
order of the questions was counterbalanced.

Figure 1a: Organization of the trials in first phase.
The second phase consisted in a short-term
priming paradigm (see the procedure in Figure 1b). The
prime was one the two shapes presented during the
learning phase (a square or a circle). For all participants
the prime was presented for 500ms. The prime was

2791

1

2

3

4

Table 1. Mean Response Times (RTs; in milliseconds)
and mean percentages of correct responses in each
experimental condition (Standard errors are in
parentheses)

Which was the square presented without noise
during the first phase?

1

2

3

4

Which was the circle presented with noise
during the first phase?

Figure 1c: Organization of the trials in third phase.

Results
Learning phase
The mean correct response latencies and the mean
percentages of correct responses were calculated across
subjects for each experimental condition. Latencies below
250 ms and above 1,250 ms were removed (this same cutoff was used throughout the entire experiment and never
led to exclusion of more than 3% of the data). Separate
analyses of variance were performed on latencies and
percentages of correct responses, with subjects as random
variables, sonority of the shape (shape generally presented
with a sound or generally not) as a within-subject factor,
and isolation (isolated vs. non-isolated shape manipulated
through the frequency of the association during the
learning phase) as a within-subject factor.
The analyses performed on the correct responses
(F (1,31) = 6.03; p<.05) and on latencies (F (1,31) =
22.77; p<.01) revealed a significant interaction between
shape sonority and isolation. These results are consistent
with the idea that subjects performed the shape
discrimination task accurately (overall level of correct
response is 96.75%) and that they are influenced by the
non-systematic association between sound and shape (see
Table 1). Isolated shapes are processed faster when they
are presented with sound between shape associated
without sound and isolated shapes are processed slower
and less accurately when they are presented between
shapes associated with sound.

Shape
Sonority

Isolation
Non-isolated
Isolated
RT(ms) CR(%) RT(ms)
CR(%)

Silent
Sound

533 (19)
527 (21)

97,4(0.7)
97,1(0,6)

484 (15)
570 (22)

98.1(0.8)
94.4(1.3)

Priming Phase
Separate analyses of variance were performed on
latencies and percentages of correct responses, with
subjects as random variables, prime type (prime generally
associated or generally not associated with a sound in the
learning phase), and isolation (isolated vs. non-isolated
shape manipulated through the frequency of the
association during the learning phase) as a within-subject
factor.
The analyses performed on the correct responses
revealed neither a significant main effect nor any
interaction. This result could be explained by ceiling
effects since the overall level of correct responses was
95.53%. As far as for the latencies were concerned and, as
expected, our analyses revealed a significant interaction
between prime type and isolation, F(1,31) = 4.21; p<.05.
As showed in Figure 2, priming effects didn't
only depend on the prime type. Planned comparisons
showed that for non-isolated shapes, the responses were
significantly faster when the prime consisted in the shape
which had been associated with the white noise during the
encoding phase (sound prime) than when the prime
consisted in the shape that had not been associated with
the white noise (silent prime), F(1,31) = 6.12; p<.01 (for
similar results see Experiment 1 of Brunel et al study, in
press). On the contrary, for isolated shapes, the responses
were not significantly different (F<1).
However, for isolated shapes, responses were
significantly faster than for non-isolated silent prime
(Fisolated.silent.prime(1,31)
=
10.92;
p<.01
and
Fisolated.sound.prime(1,31) = 8.30; p<.01) but responses were
not significantly different than for non-isolated sound
prime (Fisolated.silent.prime<1 and Fisolated.sound.prime<1).

2792

570
560
550
540
530
520
510
500
490

Sound Prime
Silent Prime

Non-isolated

Isolated

Figure 2: Mean RT’s, as a function of Isolation and for
each prime type. Error Bars represent standard error.
Recognition Phase
We calculated a percentage of correct recognition for each
kind of question. Then, we tested (Student t test) if these
scores were significantly different from chance (25% one on four-).
When participant had to find the isolated shape
which was not presented with sound (isolated sound
shape) between shapes which were presented with noise
during the learning phase (non-isolated sound shape), the
percentage of correct recognition was 21,79% and didn’t
significantly differ from chance (t=-0,42; p=.33).
When participants had to find the isolated shape
which was presented with sound (isolated silent shape)
between shapes presented without noise (non-isolated
silent shape) during the learning phase, the percentage of
correct recognition was 50% and did significantly differ
from chance (t=2,78; p<.01)

Discussion
One of theoretical aims of the present study was to show
that memory mechanisms are not dissociated from
perceptual mechanisms and involve shared neuronal
systems. Our study clearly shows that the activation of an
auditory memory component (a component that is not
really present) is able to influence the sensory processing
of a sound presented later. In the priming phase, nonisolated sound prime shapes facilitated the processing of
the target.
More specifically, the aim of this research was to
assess the generalization and discrimination mechanisms
in a same and unique paradigm. Our results have showed
that, in the learning phase, isolated shapes were
differently processed than non -isolated shapes and also
differently recognized in the third phase. The most
interesting finding of this experiment is that the isolated
sound shape (like non-isolated sound shape) can facilitate
the sensory processing of a sound presented later (priming
effect). Nevertheless, the isolated sound shape wasn't
presented with sound during the learning phase and wasn't
later recognized. How did the isolated sound shape have
benefited from a feature that was never presented with?
We propose that this is a generalization mechanism which
brings an exemplar to benefit from one relevant feature of

a category (e.g. prototype conception in exemplar models,
Nofosky, 1986).
On the contrary, the isolated silent shape
(associated with sound during the learning phase) was
able to facilitate the processing of the target sound while
non-isolated silent shapes were presented without sound
during the learning phase. Moreover, the isolated silent
shape was accurately recognized in the third phase. How
did the isolated silent shape keep its specificity? We
propose that specified knowledge in memory depends on
the specificity the features of the stimulus (number of
dimensions which differs from the other stimuli; e.g. trace
distinctiveness conception, Brunel, Oker & Versace,
2008) and, probably the most important, on the accuracy
of the memory integration mechanism (see Source
Monitoring Framework, Johnson, 1997).
In conclusion, we need to conduct further
research in order to examine the automaticity of the
generalization mechanism and the links between
generalization and specification mechanisms.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol system.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 557 – 609.
Barsalou, L.W. (2005). Abstraction as dynamic
interpretation in perceptual symbol systems. In L.
Gershkoff-Stowe & D. Rakison (Eds.), Building
object categories (389-431). Carnegie Symposium
Series. Majwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded Cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Brunel, L., Labeye, E., Lesourd, M. & Versace, R. (in
press). The sensory nature of episodic memory: sensory
priming due to memory trace activation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition.
Brunel, L., Lesourd, M., Labeye, E. & Versace, R. (in
revision). The sensory nature of knowledge: sensory
priming effect in semantic categorization. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Brunel, L., Oker, A. & Versace, R. (2008). Trace
distinctiveness and feeling of recollection. Poster for
the 3rd Recollection workshop. France : Paris, 18th
December.
Cohen J.D., MacWhinney B., Flatt M., and Provost J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive
environment for designing psychology experiments.
Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 25(2), 257-271.
Meyer, M., Baumann, S., Marchina, S., & Jancke, L.
(2007). Hemodynamic responses in human
multisensory and auditory association cortex to
purely visual stimulation. BMC Neuroscience, 8 (14).
Johnson, M.K. (1997). Source Monitoring and Memory
distortions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B, 352, 1733-1745.

2793

Nofosky, R. M.(1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Tulving, E.E (1985). How memory systems are there?
The American psychologist, 40 (4), 385-398.
Versace, R., Labeye, E., Badard, G. & Rose, M. (in
Press). The Contents of Long-Term Memory and the
Emergence of Knowledge. The European Journal of
Cognitive psychology.
Whittlesea, B. W. A. (1987). Preservation of specific
Experiences in the Representation of General
Knowledge. Journal of experimental psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 13 (1), 3-17.

2794

