UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
“The Block Makes It Go”: Causal Language Helps Toddlers Integrate Prediction, Action, and
Expectations about Contact Relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0qm2g1rk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bonawitz, Elizabeth Baraff
Ferranti, Darlene
Horowitz, Alexandra
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

“The Block Makes It Go”: Causal Language Helps Toddlers Integrate Prediction,
Action, and Expectations about Contact Relations
Elizabeth Bonawitz1, Alexandra Horowitz1, Darlene Ferranti2, & Laura Schulz1
1

(liz_b@mit.edu) Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
2
Division of Hospital Medicine, Northwestern University; Chicago, IL 60611 USA
Abstract

Some researchers have suggested that correlation information and
information about action are bound in a single representation:
“causal knowledge”. If children have only observed correlation
information, do they spontaneously try to generate the effect? Do
they represent the relationship as potentially causal? We present
three action and looking-time studies that suggest that even when
toddlers (mean; 24 months) predict that one event will follow
another, they neither initiate the first event to try to generate the
second (as preschoolers, mean 47 months, do spontaneously), nor
do they expect that the predictive relations will involve physical
contact. Toddlers succeed at both of these inferences when the
events are described using causal language. This suggests that
causal language plays a role in helping children recognize the
relationship between prediction, action, and contact causality.
Keywords: Causality; Language; Cognitive Development

No action from association
Classical conditioning and operant learning are two ways in
which animals learn relationships in the environment.
However, animals do not naturally bind these kinds of
information together: Pavlov’s dog may learn to drool at the
sound of a bell in anticipation of dinner, but will not
spontaneously ring the bell to bring dinner (e.g., Gopnik &
Schulz, 2004; Tomasello & Call, 1997; Blaisdell, 2008). In
contrast, when adult humans observe correlated events, we
can represent the events as potentially causally connected
and can successfully intervene to determine whether or not
one event is a direct cause of the other. This suggests that
for adults, correlation information and information about
action are bound in a single representation: “causal
knowledge”. We do not know however, to what extent
infants and young children can move from prediction to
action, nor to what extent children infer that physical events
that predict one another may involve spatial contact.
Researchers have long speculated about the relationship
between correlation information and causal knowledge, and
in particular, about the relationship between prediction and
action. Philosophers have suggested that only a cognitively
sophisticated being would recognize “that the very same
relationship that he exploits in intervening also can be
present both when other agents intervene and in nature even
when no other agents are involved” (Woodward, 2004).
Similarly, psychologists have suggested that causal
knowledge requires understanding causal relations as stable
relations among diverse events, not merely relations “that
involve rewards or punishments (as in classical or operant
conditioning), and not just events that immediately result
from (one’s) own actions (as in operant conditioning or
trial-and-error learning)” (Gopnik et al., 2004). The

implication is that human beings may be unique among
animals in having the single representation (causal
knowledge) that encodes the potential commonality between
non-agentive covariation in the world and covariation
between agent actions and outcomes.
In our first experiment, we look at whether older and
younger children can use a predictive relationship between
two events to initiate the target action and anticipate the
outcome of their own action. In the second experiment, we
test the hypothesis that causal language might help children
recognize the relevance of predictive relations to their own
interventions. In the third experiment, we eliminate the
action measure and use a violation of expectation paradigm
(manipulating the presence or absence of contact causality)
to assess whether toddlers simply have difficulty bridging
the gap between prediction and action or whether, in the
absence of causal language, they also fail to expect that
predictive relations respect principles of contact causality.

Experiment 1: From prediction to action
We introduce children to several trials of a novel event: all
children see a block contact a base, after which a toy
connected to the base lights up and spins. Following these
observations, we ask whether children predicatively look to
the toy when the block touches the base, and whether
children (spontaneously or with prompting) touch the block
to the base and then look to the toy. Our primary question is
whether children use the evidence from the observation
trials to infer that their action might generate the target
outcome. Note that simply performing the action might not
mean that the child expects the action to generate the
outcome. To ensure that the child acts with the expectation
that the outcome might result, we coded children’s
predicative looks to the toy after performing the action.

Methods
Participants. Sixteen preschoolers (m=47mos; rng: 37-60
mos) and 14 toddlers (m=24 mos; rng: 19-30 mos) were
recruited from a large metropolitan science museum.
Materials. A large stage blocked a confederate from view.
A purple block was attached to a concealed lever which slid
across a slit in the stage, creating a track for the block, and
leading to a second block (base) which remained fixed to
the left of the stage. An orange wire attached the base to a
toy airplane in the stage’s upper left corner. The airplane
was controlled by a button on the back of the airplane which
could be surreptitiously activated by the confederate and
which caused the toy to spin and light up.

81

Procedure. All children were tested individually in a quiet
corner of the museum. There were three phases: an
Observation Phase, an Action Phase, and (for those children
who failed to intervene spontaneously) a Prompted Action
Phase. (See Figure 1.) Throughout the experiment, the
experimenter looked at the child so that the child would not
follow the experimenter’s eye gaze to the toy.
Observation Phase: At the beginning of the experiment,
the experimenter elicited the child’s attention by saying,
“Watch my show!” The confederate, who was concealed
behind the apparatus, slid the block towards the base, so that
from the child’s perspective the block appeared to move on
its own. When the block contacted the base, the confederate
immediately activated the airplane for 3 seconds. As soon
as the block moved away from the base, the plane slowed to
a stop. Pilot work confirmed that this provided a compelling
causal illusion: adults believed that contact between the
block and the base activated the plane.
This activation sequence was repeated four times. On the
fifth trial (the Predictive look trial), the block contacted the
base, but the confederate did not activate the plane. The
experimenter observed the child to see if the child looked
predicatively up to the plane. If the child failed, the
experimenter added a sixth trial in which the plane
activated, followed by a seventh trial in which it did not. If
the child again failed to look predicatively towards the
plane, they were excluded from the analyses. If the child
looked predicatively towards the toy (on either trial five or
seven), the experimenter concluded with a final trial in
which the block contacted the base and the plane activated.
Action Phase: The experimenter slid the block towards
the child, pointed to the plane and said, “Okay now it’s your
turn. Can you make it go?” Children were given 60 seconds
to play freely. At no point was the plane activated for the
child. If the child performed the target action during the 60
seconds of free play, the experiment ended; if the child
failed to touch the block to the base during the 60 seconds,
she or he moved onto the Prompted Action Phase.
Prompted Action Phase: The experimenter slid the block
almost all the way into the base, stopping just short of the
base and returned it to the child saying, “It’s your turn.” The
child was given another 60 seconds to perform the target
action. If the child failed to perform the complete action
following the prompt, they were excluded from analyses.

Results & Discussion of Experiment 1
Two preschoolers and three toddlers were excluded and
replaced for failing to make the initial predictive look. An
additional three toddlers were excluded and replaced for
failing to perform the action during the Prompted Action
phase. The stringent inclusion criteria meant that we could
be confident that all the children in the subsequent analyses
had both learned the predictive association between the
block and the toy and were able to perform the target action.
Intercoder agreement was 100%.
We coded success on the task generously: children who
predicatively looked to the toy after performing the action,

regardless of whether they performed the action
spontaneously or with prompting, were counted as passing
the task. Children were coded as failing only if they never
predicatively looked to the toy after performing the action.
While almost all preschoolers succeeded at the task
(87.5%), none of the 14 toddlers did. That is, although the
toddlers played freely with the block during the Action
Phase, no toddler performed the target action spontaneously,
and none predicatively looked to the toy after performing
the prompted action. The preschoolers were significantly
more likely to succeed at the task than the toddlers (χ2 =
23.0, p < .0001) and were also significantly more likely to
generate the action spontaneously (and anticipate the
outcome) (χ2 = 13.1, p < .001). (See Table 1.)
The striking discrepancy between the performance of the
younger and older children suggests that only the older
children believed the evidence of the Observation Phase
indicated a possible causal relationship between the block
and the toy1. Though all toddlers both predicted the outcome
of the observed action and performed the target action
(under prompting), they did not show any indication of
understanding that their own actions might activate the toy.

Experiment 2: Causal Language
In Experiment 2, we investigate the possibility that causal
language might help toddlers represent the predictive
relation as a potentially causal relation. There are two
accounts by which causal language might support young
children’s causal reasoning. One possibility is that nonhuman animals (and arguably very young children) have at
least two distinct systems for reasoning about correlated
events: one for processing statistical associations among
events in the world (as in classical conditioning), and
another for processing associations between agent actions
and outcomes (as in operant conditioning, trial and error
learning, and imitative learning; Gopnik et al., 2004;
Gopnik & Schulz, 2004; Woodward, 2004; Tomasello &
Call, 1997). An intriguing proposal is that in any domain of
knowledge where component abilities are ontogenetically
early and phylogenetically broad, language may play a
critical role in uniting otherwise separate inferential systems
(e.g. Spelke, 2003). Because two core component abilities
of causal inference—learning statistical associations
between events and learning the relationship between one’s
own actions and their immediate outcomes—are present
both in early infancy and in non-human animals, it is
tempting to suggest that linguistic representations might
support the integration of these component systems into
adult-like causal reasoning.
If so, it is possible that even during the course of a short
task, hearing the same words used to describe both events
might help children bind together information about
1
Toddlers might have been confused or frightened by the
spontaneously moving block (i.e., because it violates core object
principles; Spelke, 1990), however, their willingness to play freely
with the block during the Action Phase and their success in the
subsequent experiments argues against this construal.

82

Success
(Predictive Look)
Spontaneous Prompted
10
4
0
0
7
1
9
1

Failure
(No Predictive Look)
Spontaneous Prompted
0
2
0
14
5
3
0
6

Action:
Exp. 1: 4’s
Exp. 1: 2’s
Exp. 2: ICL
Exp. 2: ECL
Exp. 2:
Control
1
0
5
10
Table 1: Results of Experiment 1 & 2 by action type and success.

Figure 1: Method and Results for Experiments 1 and 2.

predictive relations and information about action.
Describing the observed correlation (“The block makes the
toy go”) with the same verb as the invitation to act (“Can
you make the toy go?”) might help children recognize the
relevance of observational evidence to their own
interventions. That is, children may infer that the same
words are used because they refer to the same underlying
concept. Eventually children might thus come to recognize
the possibility of causal relations among a broad range of
non-agentive physical events (including cases where no
verbal description of events is provided).
A weaker version of how language could affect children’s
causal representations might suggest that children do form
common representations of agentive and non-agentive
correlations but fail to use predictive information as a basis
for action if they have no additional reason (beyond the
covariation evidence itself) to assume events are causally
related. Many researchers have suggested that neither adults
nor children draw causal inferences merely from covariation
information (Ahn, Kalish, Medin, & Gelman, 1995;
Koslowski, 1996; Shultz, 1982). In the absence of any
knowledge about the causal mechanism that might underlie
the observed relationship, children might realize that one
event predicts another but fail to conclude that the events
are causally related. If so, children would have no basis for
action. Under this interpretation, the tendency to represent
correlated events as viable candidates for intervention
depends upon prior knowledge of a plausible mechanism

linking the events. In this case, causal language (by which
we mean here language familiar to toddlers: “make go”,
“turn on”) might facilitate causal learning by testifying that
an observed relation is indeed causal. That is, children
might treat events as causal (i.e., as supporting
manipulation) simply because they are told that they are
causal (that the block, rather than for instance, some
unobserved common cause, does indeed make the toy go).
Although these accounts are theoretically distinct, they
make a common prediction with respect to this experiment:
if language facilitates young children’s ability to move from
prediction to action – either by helping toddlers bind
together correlational information with representations of
their own actions, and/or because 24-month-olds can rapidly
learn novel causal relations from testimony – then
describing the events of the Observation Phase using causal
language might improve children’s performance.
If so, we can then ask whether the facilitating effect of
causal language is fragile and depends on using precisely
the same words (“The block makes it go”; “Can you make it
go?”) or whether language acts as a fairly robust cue to
children’s causal learning and non-identical but
semantically equivalent words suffice (“The block makes it
go”; “Can you turn it on?”). However, if language merely
improves children’s performance by increasing their
attention to the events, then, relative to Experiment 1,
toddlers’ performance should also improve in a non-causal
language control condition where language is used merely
to attract children’s attention (“Look at my block! Let’s
watch my show! Here it goes!”).

Methods
Participants Forty-eight toddlers were assigned to each of
three conditions; the Identical Causal Language Condition
(ICL) (m=24.5mos; rng: 19-29mos), the Equivalent Causal
Language Condition (ECL) (m=23.6mos; rng: 18-30 mos),
and the Non-Causal Language Control Condition (Control)
(m=23.6mos; rng: 18-30mos).
Materials & Procedure. The same materials used in
Experiments 1 and 2 were used. The procedure was
identical to the procedure in Experiment 1 except for the
previously noted language changes, (See Figure 1).

Results & Discussion of Experiment 2
Coding and inclusion criteria were as with Experiment 1.
Intercoder agreement was high across all conditions (ICL:

83

92%; ECL: 97%; Control: 98%). Three toddlers were
excluded and replaced: 1 for failing to make the initial
predictive look and 2 for failing to perform the target action.
Children in the Control condition replicated the failure of
toddlers in Experiment 1; only 1 of the 16 toddlers (6%)
succeeded at the task, intervening spontaneously and then
looking predictively. Control children were no more likely
to succeed on the task and no more likely to generate the
action spontaneously (and anticipate the outcome) than the
toddlers in Experiment 1 (χ2 = .905, p = NS).
However, the pattern of results reversed for children in
the Identical Causal Language (ICL) condition and the
Equivalent Causal Language (ECL) condition. Eight of the
16 toddlers (50%) in the ICL condition succeeded at the task
and 10 of the 16 toddlers (62%) in ECL condition succeeded
at the task. In both ICL and ECL conditions, the toddlers
were significantly more likely to succeed on the task than
the toddlers in Experiment 1 (ICL: χ2 =9.55, p<.01); ECL:
χ2=13.1, p<.001) and more likely than toddlers in the
Control condition (ICL: χ2 = 7.58, p<.01); ECL: χ2=11.2, p <
.001). The toddlers were also significantly more likely to
generate the action spontaneously (and anticipate the
outcome) than were the toddlers in Experiment 1 (ICL: χ2 =
8.00, p<.01); ECL: χ2=11.2, p<.001), and also more likely
than the toddlers in the Control condition (ICL: χ2 = 6.0, p =
.01); ECL:χ2=9.3, p<.01). There were no differences
between the ICL and ECL conditions on either of these
measures (Overall Success: χ2 = .508, p=NS; Spontaneous
action success: χ2=.50, p=NS), and no differences between
the ECL condition and the preschoolers from Experiment 1
(Overall Success: χ2=2.67, p=NS; Spontaneous action
success: χ2=0.13, p=NS). Additionally, toddlers in the ICL
condition were just as likely to generate the action
spontaneously (and anticipate the outcome) as preschoolers
in Experiment 1 (χ2=1.13, p = NS), but were less likely than
preschoolers to succeed overall (χ2 =2.67, p =.02). (Table 1).
These results suggest that describing observed events with
causal language supports children’s ability to recognize that
non-agentive events support manipulation. Toddlers who
were given causal language cues were just as successful as
the four-year-olds in Experiment 1. The effect of language
was relatively robust, surviving minor changes in wording
as long as the meaning was preserved. Critically, the effect
of language is not entirely general; merely calling children’s
attention to events did not improve their performance.

Language in Representation and Processing
We proposed that causal language could improve children’s
performance either by helping children providing a common
representation for predictive looking events and children’s
own actions, or by testifying that an observed relation is
genuinely causal. However, the results of Experiments 1 and
2 are also consistent with a more deflationary account: the
toddlers’ failure might be one not of competence but of
performance. Myriad developmental studies suggest that
children’s apparent understanding of a concept depends on
whether the dependent measure involves looking or acting

(e.g. Hood, Cole-Davies, & Dias, 2003; Ahmed & Ruffman,
1998). Such results have led some researchers to suggest
that intentional action might, in general, lag behind
predictive looking: either because the demands of planning
and executing motor responses interfere with children’s
ability to access task-relevant information (Baillargeon et al,
1990; Diamond & Goldman-Rakic, 1989; Thelen & Smith,
1994), or because stronger representations are necessary for
acting than for looking (see Munakata, 2001 for review).
Although there are important theoretical distinctions
between these two claims, they are united in suggesting that
a gap between children’s ability to make successful
predictions and their ability to perform effective actions
might reflect changes in children’s ability to manifest their
knowledge under complex task demands. These accounts
assume that difficulties in moving from prediction to action
are due primarily to competing information processing
demands. If so, any information (such as causal language)
that strengthens the representation of a causal relationship
might make it more likely to withstand the demands of
planning and executing a motor act.
One way to look at whether causal language merely
facilitates children’s ability to move from prediction to
action, or whether causal language genuinely changes
children’s underlying representations is to use a dependent
measure of children’s causal understanding that does not
involve action. It has long been suggested that infants and
children expect physical causal events to involve contact
between the agent and patient. While this has primarily been
demonstrated with respect to motion events (Leslie &
Keeble, 1987; Oakes & Cohen, 1990), recent research
suggests that children also assume that agent-initiated
events resulting in an object’s change of state (e.g., a hand
moving towards a box and the box breaking, or making
music) also require contact (Muentener, in review; Kushnir
& Gopnik, 2007)2. If toddlers require causal language to
represent the predictive relationship between the block and
the plane as causal, then in the absence of causal language,
they should make no predictions about whether or not the
block contacts the base; in the presence of causal language,
they should assume the block contacted the base when the
toy is on and did not contact the base when the toy is off.

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3, we use a violation of expectation paradigm
to test whether children infer contact causality from
predictive relations. Using the same stage as in Experiments
1 and 2, we slide the block behind an occluder that partially
covers the base. On a final trial, we remove the occluder to
reveal the block in contact or not in contact with the base.
If language helps children form a ‘causal representation’
of the events, then in the absence of causal language,
children might fail to form a causal representation of the
2
Critically, infants only seem to expect contact when the change
of state is initiated by an agent (e.g., a human hand); consistent
with our findings here, if the event is initiated by another object,
the infants have no expectations about contact causality.

84

Comment [B1]: incorrect

events (consistent with the results of Experiments 1 and 2)
and should thus show no looking-time differences. By
contrast, when causal language is used, children should look
longer at the no contact case than the contact case when the
plane activates but show the reverse pattern when the plane
fails to activate. However if the processing account is
correct and toddlers’ failures in Experiment 1 and the
Control condition of Experiment 2 are due only to the
difficulty involved in initiating motor responses, then
children should expect the block to contact the base when
the toy activates even in the absence of causal language.

Methods
Participants Seventy-two toddlers were randomly assigned
to one of six conditions (m = 23mos; rng: 18-30mos).
Materials & Procedure. Materials were identical to
Experiments 1 and 2 with two exceptions: a blue box was
used to occlude the track during the familiarization trials; a
larger board occluded the whole stage between trials.
Children were assigned to the Language Control
condition, the Causal Language Toy On condition or the
Causal Language Toy Off condition. Within each of these
conditions, half the children were assigned to the Contact
outcome and half to the No-contact outcome. The
experimenter first pointed out the elements of the stage to
the child (the occluder, block, base, and airplane), then
placed the occluder in front of the track so that the base was
visible, but so the trajectory of the block was hidden.
During the Observation phase, the block slid toward the
base, behind the occluder, and appeared to move on its own.
On half the trials, following the block’s movement, the
plane activated, and on half it did not activate. Children’s
looks to the plane were coded on the non-active trials, and
only children who predictively looked on at least one trial
were included in analyses. After each trial, the whole stage
was occluded by the board and the stage reset (the plane
stopped, the block slid back). At the start of each trial,
children in the Language Control were told “Look at this!
Watch the block!” and children in the Causal Language
conditions were told, “Look! The block can make it go!”
For the test trial, the procedure was repeated. Once the
block moved behind the occluder, the plane activated in the
Language Control and Causal Language Toy On
conditions; it did not activate in the Causal Language Toy
Off condition. The experimenter then removed the occluder
revealing either the Contact or No Contact outcome and
waved her hand non-specifically toward the stage saying,
“Look at this!” to elicit the child’s attention. The child’s
looking time was monitored through the camera to avoid
influencing the child’s attention. The trial ended when the
child looked away from the stage for 2 consecutive seconds.

Results & Discussion of Experiment 3
Two toddlers were excluded and replaced for failing to
make a predictive look during the Observation phase. We
coded how long children looked at the stage following the

Figure 2: Looking results for Experiment 3 revealing no
difference in looking between Contact and No Contact outcomes
when children do not receive causal language, but showing
children in the Causal Language Toy On condition looking
significantly less following the Contact trial (Mean = 7.10) than
children in the No-contact trial (Mean = 19.16) (t(22) = -4.15, p <
.001), and a reverse of this pattern of looking for children in the
Causal Language Toy Off condition (Contact Mean = 12.44; No
Contact Mean = 5.25; t(22) = 2.58, p < .01).

removal of the occluder on the test trial. Intercoder
agreement was high (96%).
In the Language Control condition children were just as
likely to look following the Contact test trial (Mean=18.98s)
as children who observed the No-contract test trial (Mean =
17.61s) (t(22)=0.24, p = NS). We ran a two-way analysis of
variance for independent samples on children in the Causal
Language conditions, with activation (toy on or off) as the
first between subjects variable and block-to-base
relationship (Contact, No Contact) as the second.
Comparisons between conditions revealed an effect of toy
activation (averaging across Contact/No Contact outcomes,
children looked less overall when the toy did not activate (F
= 4.31, p = .04)), but there was no main effect of block-tobase outcome (averaging across the two conditions by toy’s
activation, children who saw the Contact outcome looked as
long as children who saw the No Contact outcome).
Importantly, comparisons revealed a significant interaction:
children in Causal Language conditions spent less time
looking at the stage when the evidence was consistent with
contact causality than when it was inconsistent (F(1, 47) =
21.79, p < .0001). (See Figure 2).
When the toy activated but no causal language was used,
children looked equally long at the stage whether the block
was in contact with the base or not. This suggests that even
when toddlers are freed from the necessity of making a
motor response, they fail to form a causal representation of
these events. By contrast, children in the Causal Language
condition showed the predicted pattern of differential
looking; toddlers seemed to expect the block to make
contact with the base when the toy activated and to fail to
make contact when the toy did not. This suggests that in the
presence of causal language, children assume not only that
predictive relations support intervention, but also that the
events respect the principles of contact causality. These
results are consistent with the Representation account,
suggesting that language helps children form a genuinely
causal representation of the events.

85

Conclusions

References

Despite having no difficulty learning the predictive
relationship between events and performing the relevant
action, toddlers succeeded at moving directly from
prediction to action only when the observed events were
described with causal language. Similarly, toddlers
succeeded at moving from prediction to expectations
consistent with contact causality only when the predictive
relations were described with causal language.
As noted, our results are consistent with both a stronger
and a weaker form of the representational change account.
The stronger version suggests a genuine discontinuity
between linguistically unsophisticated toddlers and older
children (and potentially a similar discontinuity between
adult human and non-human animals). Initially, infants and
toddlers might recognize predictive relations, the ability to
support intervention, and physical contact relations as
independent features of events, but not have access to an
adult-like concept of causality, (which entails all three).
Providing a common term for relations with these features
might help children develop an integrated representation.
The weaker account suggests that children have the same
concept of causality as adults but expand their repertoire of
what ‘counts’ as evidence for a causal relation. Infants, for
instance, might treat only agent-initiated action and
Michottean events as ‘causal’ and only gradually (aided by
adult testimony) include a broader range of events.
Although these accounts are theoretically distinct, the
distinction may diminish to the extent that young children’s
initial understanding of causality is constrained. We find it
striking, for instance, that although the setup provided a
compelling causal illusion to both adults and preschoolers,
and even toddlers readily learned the predictive relationship,
toddlers in Experiment 1 never once attempted to bang the
block into the base, despite being prompted to “make the
toy go” and having just seen the block repeatedly strike the
base and the toy activate. If children initially only
recognize a very limited set of relations as potentially
causal, then learning more about particular causal relations
may affect their representation of causality in general.
Future work might investigate the extent to which very
young children engage in such joint inferences (see e.g.,
Kemp & Tenenbaum, 2008; Schulz, Goodman, Tenenbaum
& Jenkins, 2008 for related work). The present study,
however, suggests that even during the course of our short
task, causal language helps two-year-olds perform better
than Pavlov’s dog, by helping them integrate information
about prediction, intervention, and contact causality.

Ahmed, A., & Ruffman, T. (1998). Why do infants make A not B
errors in a search task, yet show memory for the location of
hidden objects in a non-search task? Developmental Psychology,
34, 441–445.
Ahn, W., Kalish, C.W., Medin, D.L., & Gelman, S.A. (1995) The
role of covariation ersus mechanism information in causal
attribution. Cognition, 54(3), p. 299-352.
Baillargeon, R., Graber, M., DeVos, J., & Black, J. (1990). Why
do young infants fail to search for hidden objects? Cognition,
36, 225-284.
Blaisdell, A. P. (2008). Cognitive dimension of operant learning.
In Roediger (Ed.), Cognitive Psychology of Memory. Vol. 1 of
Learning and Memory. Oxford: Elsevier.
Diamond, A., & Goldman-Rakic, P. (1989). Comparison of human
infants and rhesus monkeys on Piaget’s A-not-B task: Evidence
for dependence on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Experimental
Brain Research, 74, 24–40.
Hood, B., Cole-Davies, V., & Dias, M. (2003) Looking and Search
Measures of Object Knowledge in Preschool Children.
Developmental Psychology, 39(1), p. 61-70.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L. E., Kushnir, T., &
Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children:
Causal maps and Bayes nets. Psychological Review, 111, 1-31.
Gopnik, A. & Schulz, L. (2004). Mechanisms of theory-formation
in young children. Trends in Cognitive Science, 8(8), 371-377.
Kemp, C. and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). The discovery of
structural form. PNAS 105(31), 10687-10692.
Koslowski, B. (1996). Theory and evidence: The development of
scientific reasoning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kushnir, T. & Gopnik, A. (2007). Conditional probability versus
spatial contiguity in causal learning: Preschoolers use new
contingency evidence to overcome prior spatial assumptions.
Developmental Psychology, 44, 186-196.
Kushnir, T, Wellman, H., & Gelman, S., (in press). A self-agency
bias in children’s causal inferences. Developmental Psychology.
Leslie, A.M., & Keeble, S. (1987). Do six-month-old infants
perceive causality? Cognition, 25, 265–288.
Muentener, P. & Carey, S. (in review).
Infants' causal
representations of state change events.
Munakata, Y. (2001) Graded representations in behavioral
dissociations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5 (7), 309–315
Oakes, L.M., & Cohen, L.B., (1990) Infant perception of a causal
event. Cognitive Development, 5, 193-207.
Shultz, T.R. (1982). Rules of causal attribution. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 47 (Serial No.194).
Schulz, L.E., Goodman, N.D., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Jenkins, C.A.
(in press). Going beyond the evidence: Abstract laws and
preschoolers' responses to anomalous data. Cognition.
Spelke, E. S. (1990). Principles of object perception. Cognitive
Science, 14, 29-56.
Spelke, E. S. (2003). What makes us smart? Core knowledge and
natural language. In D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.),
Language in Mind: Advances in the Investigation of Language
and Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thelen, E. & Smith, L. B. (1994) A dynamics systems approach to
the development of perception and action. MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. & Call, J. (1997) Primate Cognition, Oxford
University Press, New York
Woodward, J. (2004) Interventionist Theories of Causation in
Psychological Perspective. In Gopnik & Schulz (eds), Causal
Learning. Oxford University Press.
.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Paul Muentener, members of the Early Childhood
Cognition Lab, the Museum of Science, Boston, and the
Boston Children’s Museum. Research supported from the
Elizabeth Munsterberg Koppitz Fellowship from the
American Psychological Foundation to E.B., and the
McDonnell Foundation and James H. Ferry Fund grant to
L.S.

86

