UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The delayed consolidation hypothesis of all-or-none conscious perception during the
attentional blink, applying the ST2 framework

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8k72s3wp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bowman, Howard
Chennu, Sirvas
Craston, Patrick
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The delayed consolidation hypothesis of all-or-none conscious perception during
the attentional blink, applying the ST2 framework
H. Bowman1, P. Craston1, S. Chennu1, B. Wyble2
1

Centre for Cognitive Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems, University of Kent, UK
2
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, USA

Abstract
There is evidence that conscious perception during the
attentional blink is all-or-none, which contrasts with the
finding of a continuum of perceptual strength in masking
experiments. This seems to reveal the underlying
representation of strength that can be found in the brain in the
absence of attentional enhancement. We provide
electrophysiological support for this all-or-none theory. Then,
using principles from the ST2 model of temporal attention and
working memory, we show how this all-or-none pattern can
be explained by the delayed target consolidation that is known
to arise during the attentional blink.
Keywords: Attentional Blink, P300, ST2

Introduction
Intuitively, it would seem that conscious perception is allor-none. For example, bistable visual stimuli, e.g. the
Necker cube or binocular rivalry, exhibit a dichotomy in
perception: one or other stable percept is perceived in its
entirety, without access to intermediate images. In other
words, we either see all of a particular stable percept or
none of it. Consistent with this perspective, (Sergent &
Dehaene, 2004; Sergent, Baillet & Dehaene, 2005) have
argued that conscious perception during the attentional blink
(AB) is all-or-none; that is, targets presented during the
attentional blink deficit are either completely perceived or
completely missed, as revealed by subject visibility ratings.
However, masking experiments in which strength is
systematically varied suggest a continuous (although
probably non-linear) gradation of visibility (Sergent &
Dehaene, 2004, Del Cul, Baillet & Dehaene, 2007). This
paper seeks to explain this seeming inconsistency in
experimental findings, by arguing that all-or-none conscious
perception during the attentional blink (AB) arises because
of the delayed consolidation that is known to occur during
the AB (Sessa et al., 2006; Vogel & Luck, 2002; Bowman et
al., 2008). We do this by presenting a neural model of all-ornone consolidation during the AB, which reuses principles
from the simultaneous type, serial token (ST2) model of
temporal attention (Bowman & Wyble, 2007; Wyble et al.,
2009).
Why, though, should we be interested in the attentional
blink? The AB is the deficit in reporting a second target
(T2) if it is presented between 100 and 500 ms after a
reported first target (T1), when a rapid serial visual
presentation (RSVP) format is employed. The first reason is
that the AB reflects a late stage deficit; that is, T2s that are
missed during the AB are processed for visual and semantic

features (Vogel et al., 1998). Thus, the AB seems to isolate
the extra processing step that is required to encode an
otherwise preconscious representation into working
memory, i.e. to consciously perceive it. A second reason for
being interested in the AB, is that it enables bottom-up
strength and attention to be independently manipulated. A
first requirement for an item to be consciously perceived is
sufficient bottom-up strength. Under normal viewing
conditions, most stimuli are strong enough to be consciously
perceived. However, if stimulus representations are fleeting,
as in RSVP, they will sometimes be too weak to enter
consciousness. Hence, the weaker a neural representation of
a stimulus, the less the likelihood it will enter
awareness (Kanwisher, 2001).
However, this cannot be the sole requirement for
conscious perception, as stimuli that are equally strong in
perceptual terms, in some cases succeed but in others fail to
enter consciousness (Luck et al., 1996, Rees et al., 2000). In
particular, the neural representation of a stimulus also needs
to be attended to before it can enter awareness. Koch &
Tsuchiya (2007) have argued that attention and
consciousness ‘are distinct phenomena that need not occur
together and can be manipulated using distinct paradigms.’
To investigate the influence of target strength and attention
on conscious perception, we thus require an experimental
paradigm where the availability of attention and bottom-up
strength can be manipulated independently (Kim & Blake,
2005); the AB is such a paradigm.
A key aspect of modern cognitive neuroscience is the
identification of neurophysiological correlates of conscious
perception. Within the context of the AB, the P3 component
of the event-related potential (ERP) is viewed as such a
correlate. A P3 component is only evoked by those targets
in RSVP that can be correctly reported (e.g. Kranczioch et
al., 2003). Target items that are missed do not evoke a P3.
The P3 is thus generally seen as an EEG correlate of
encoding items into working memory (Vogel et al., 1998)
and, by the same logic, a number of studies have proposed
that the P3 serves as an index of conscious perception
(e.g. Sergent et al., 2005, Kranczioch et al., 2007). In line
with these previous studies, we use the P3 component as a
correlate of conscious perception for targets in RSVP.
We present EEG data investigating how bottom-up target
strength and the availability of attention modulate conscious
perception of targets in RSVP. We compare the EEG
signatures (specifically, the P3 components) of targets
presented outside and during the AB. We find that bottom
up strength of targets affects the P3 for targets presented
outside the AB, but does not influence the P3 evoked by

2152

targets presented inside the AB. ST2 (a prominent AB
model) cannot account for these findings, thus we describe a
new model that proposes two phases (not to be confused
with the two-stage theory of Chun & Potter (1995)) of target
perception in RSVP. Phase 1 is strongly sensitive to target
strength, while Phase 2 is only weakly sensitive to such
strength. We show how this two-phase strength sensitivity
theory accounts for the experimental results presented and
also all-or-none behavioural visibility ratings (Sergent &
Dehaene, 2004) and P3s (Sergent et al., 2005) during the
AB.

Experimental Findings
Experiment 1. We presented alphanumeric characters in black
on a white background. Stimuli were in Arial font and had an
average size of 2.1°x 3.4° visual angle. Participants viewed RSVP
streams in which a single target was embedded into a continuous
stream of distractors presented at fixation. The target for each trial
was chosen at random from a list of 14 capital letters (B, C, D, E,
F, G, J, K, L, P, R, T, U, V); distractors could be any digit except 1
or 0. The target item’s position in the stream varied between 10
and 54. Items were presented at the unconventionally fast rate of
approx. 20 items per second (item duration 47.1ms; no interstimulus interval) to ensure accuracy was not at ceiling in this
relatively easy task. An RSVP stream consisted of 70 items (total
stream length 3.3 seconds). The EEG sampling rate was 2000Hz
(digitally reduced to 1000Hz at a later stage) and the data was
digitally filtered at low-pass 85Hz and high-pass 0.5Hz during
recording. 20 electrodes were placed at the following locations
according to the 10/20 system: Fp1, Fp2, Fz, F3, F4, F7, F8, Cz,
C3, C4, C7, C8, Pz, P3, P4, P7, P8, Oz, O1, O2, T7 and T8.
Experiment 2. Stimulus presentation was as per Experiment 1
except for a reduction in average stimulus size (1.03° x 0.69°
visual angle) to ensure that the paradigm produced a reliable AB.
RSVP streams were preceded by a fixation cross in the centre of
the screen. After 400ms, the cross turned into an arrow indicating
the side at which the two targets would be presented. After 200ms,
two streams of digits were simultaneously presented at an equal
distance of 2.6° visual angle to the left and right of fixation. The
RSVP stream consisted of 35 items presented for 105.9ms each
with no inter-stimulus interval. In a trial, T1 and T2 were selected
from a list of 18 possible targets (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, L,
N, P, R, T, U, V, Y); distractors could be any digit except 1 or 0.
T1 appeared between position 5 and 17; T2 followed T1 at position
1 (no intervening distractors - lag 1), position 3 (2 intervening
distractors - lag 3) or position 8 (7 intervening distractors - lag 8).
The two-stream paradigm is irrelevant to the presented results, but
was employed for a separate study.
Before the experiment started, participants were told to keep
their eyes fixated on the centre of the screen, as trials with eye
movements would be identified in the EOG and excluded from the
analysis. Participants were told to direct their covert attention
towards the indicated stream and search for the two target letters.
EEG parameters were as per experiment 1.
Empirical Principles. We did not externally vary stimulus
strength (for instance by manipulating contrast). However, Craston
et al. (2009) suggest a relationship between the identity of a target
letter and behavioural accuracy, as well as P3 size. The intrinsic
stimulus characteristics (i.e. the shape of a particular letter) thus
allow us to classify target letters as belonging either to an easy or a
hard target set, which in turn provides us with an indirect measure
of target strength. Target letters were classified based upon the data
published in Bowman & Wyble (2007). Specifically, we ranked
letters according to their average accuracy when used as targets in
Bowman & Wyble (2007). Then we performed a median split,

classifying the top half of letters as easy and the bottom half as
hard.
The analyses presented are based on behavioural and EEG data
from experiments 1 and 2. The data for the single target (target
outside the AB) condition is taken from Experiment 1, whereas the
T2 following T1 at lag 3 (target inside the AB) is from Experiment
2. The continuous data is segmented by extracting a time window
of -200ms to 1000ms for the single target condition, and a time
window of -500ms to 1000ms for the T2 following T1 at lag 3
condition. The single target data is baselined to the -200ms to 0ms
window preceding target presentation and the data for T2 following
T1 at lag 3 is baselined to the -500ms to -300ms window with
respect to target presentation (or the -200ms to 0ms period before
the onset of the T1). The number of trials left in each condition
after artifact rejection are specified in figure 1 (which differs from
behavioural accuracy since it is calculated independent of artifact
rejection). Full details of the experimental methods used can be
found in Craston (2009).

Behavioural results. The prerequisite for the EEG analysis
is a significant difference in behavioural accuracy between
easy and hard letters for both targets presented outside and
inside the AB. When analysing the behavioural data from
Experiment 1, target letters T, K, U, V, L, D and G are
categorised as easy, whereas E, C, B, P, F, J and R belong to
the hard category. For Experiment 2, target letters T, K, U,
V, L, D, G, N and H are categorised as easy, whereas E, C,
B, P, F, J, R, Y and A belong to the hard category. The
difference in the number of letters per category is because
Experiment 2 contained four additional target letters.
However, to re-emphasise, both subdivisions are inherited
from Bowman & Wyble (2007) and are thus a priori.
If we apply this analysis to the T2 following T1 at lag 3
condition, the accuracy scores for targets belonging to the
easy and hard categories are 66% (SEM 4) and 46% (SEM
5), respectively. The difference is highly significant: F(1,17)
= 59.4, MSE < 0.01, p < 0.001. The T2 following T1 at lag 3
condition from Experiment 2 is thus used to investigate
EEG processing inside the AB. In order to investigate the
processing of targets outside the AB, we can employ either
the T1 with T2 presented at lag 8 condition from
Experiment 2 or the single target in RSVP from Experiment
1. The easy/hard analysis for the T1 with T2 presented at lag
8 condition from Experiment 2, however, does not meet our
requirements, since the difference between easy and hard
targets is only marginally significant; easy 87% (SEM 2) vs.
hard 82% (SEM 3), F(1,17) = 4.4, MSE < 0.01, p = 0.051.
This is likely to be due to ceiling effects, as T1 lag 8
accuracy is relatively high for both easy and hard letters.
The single target condition overcomes this problem, as
we increased presentation rate to 50ms per item in
Experiment 1 for accuracy to be below ceiling. Single
targets show a highly significant effect of target difficulty,
mean accuracy is 82% (SEM 4) for easy and 62% (SEM 4)
for hard letters: F(1,19) = 94.1, MSE < 0.01, p < 0.001.
Hence, we employ the single target condition from
Experiment 1 to investigate EEG processing outside the AB.
EEG results. In order to perform a statistical analysis of our
results, we extract the mean (unsubtracted) P3 size per
subject for each accuracy-target difficulty combination for
both targets outside and inside the AB.
Targets outside the AB. Figure 1.A shows that mean P3
size is influenced by our indirect measure of target strength

2153

for correctly reported targets presented outside the AB.
Targets in the Easy-Correct condition (8.9mV, SEM 0.9)
have a significantly larger P3 than targets in the HardCorrect condition (6.7mV, SEM 1.0): F(1,19) = 28.2, MSE
= 1.5, p < 0.001. In addition, there is a significant difference
in P3 size between the Easy-Incorrect and Hard Correct
conditions: F(1,19) = 7.2, MSE = 25.9, p = 0.016. However,
for the incorrectly reported targets, strength has no effect
and the difference in P3 sizes between the Easy-Incorrect
and the Hard-Incorrect conditions is not significant: F(1,19)
= 0.1, MSE = 49.8, p = 0.779.

is presented during the AB. In Craston et al. (2009), we
showed that target difficulty affects the size of the P3 for
individually presented targets (i.e. outside the AB) that are
correctly reported. We proposed that an easy target letter has
more bottom-up strength than a hard letter and this increases
the size of the P3 evoked by easy targets. In line with those
findings, the results presented here illustrate how, for targets
outside the AB, ‘easy-hardness’ affects the P3 if the target is
correctly reported.
We performed the same analysis for targets presented
during the AB, where we know that intrinsic stimulus
characteristics (i.e. whether the target is easy or hard) affect
behavioural report. However, ‘easy-hardness’ does not
influence the P3 for targets during the AB. Figure 1.B
illustrates that there is no significant difference in P3 size
for easy and hard targets, both if the target is correctly or
incorrectly reported. It seems that the P3 is influenced by
different factors depending on whether a target is presented
outside or inside the AB, with the later showing an all (easy
or hard correct) or none (easy or hard incorrect) pattern
(note: the fact that P3s for incorrect trials are not zero in
Figure 1.B is probably because the T1-P3 bleeds into the
early latencies of the T2-P3 and it is this overspill that is
being measured).
In addition, the ST2 model (Bowman & Wyble, 2007)
(and recent revisions of the model, i.e. eST2 (Wyble et al.,
2009)), cannot explain this all-or-none pattern. This is
because, whether inside or outside the AB, bottom-up
strength modulates both behavioural performance and P3
size. Specifically, a stronger target, whether inside or
outside the AB, always has a greater chance of being
encoded into WM and has a larger activation trace.

Neural Modelling
Figure 1: Bar charts displaying the mean P3 size (300600ms with respect to target onset) for each accuracy-target
difficulty combination. Error bars depict the standard error
of the mean. Panel A: targets outside the AB. Panel B:
targets inside the AB.
Targets inside the AB. Individual pairwise comparisons
show that target difficulty does not have a significant effect
on P3 size for targets inside the AB (see Figure 1.B). Both
for correctly reported targets (Easy-Correct 5.0mV (SEM
0.4) vs. Hard-Correct 5.2mV (SEM 0.6); F(1,17) = 0.2,
MSE = 2.5, p = 0.664) and incorrectly reported targets
(Easy-Incorrect 1.9mV (SEM 0.6) vs. Hard-Incorrect 2.6mV
(SEM 0.5); F(1,17) = 1.7, MSE = 2.2, p = 0.209) the
difference between P3 sizes is not significant. The
difference between the Easy-Incorrect and Hard-Correct
conditions, however, is significant (F(1,17) = 26.4, MSE =
3.7, p < 0.001), which suggests that the high p-values in the
previous analyses are not due to a lack of statistical power.
Instead, this indicates that there is indeed no difference in
P3 size between easy and hard targets both when they are
correctly and incorrectly reported.
Discussion. In terms of behavioural accuracy, the strength
of a target letter has an influence on target report both if the
target is presented in isolation (i.e. outside the AB) and if it

We propose a new neural model, which, while still
remaining faithful to central principles of the ST2, can
explain the all-or-none pattern during the AB. This model is
built upon the following ST2 principles.
Simultaneous type representation. ST2 assumes a first
stage of processing in which types are extracted. Types
reflect all featural properties of items, e.g. in the context of
the experiments considered here, the letter identity of the
target and constituent visual features of that letter.
Furthermore, multiple types can be active simultaneously
during stage 1. In ST2, the final layer of stage 1 (which is
type-rich) is the task filtered layer (TFL). A task demand
system ensures that only targets can be active at this layer.
Token-based working memory. It is assumed that the
output layer of stage 1, which enables simultaneous
activation of complete (task relevant) type representations,
feeds into a second stage at which tokens are sequentially
bound to active types. Tokens record instance
specific/episodic information, such as, when an item
occurred relative to other items. In ST2, associating a token
with a type is the process by which items are encoded into
working memory (WM).
Transient attentional enhancement. Detection of a
target initiates a transient attentional enhancer called the
blaster. This mechanism transiently (for around 150 ms)
amplifies all representations in later layers of stage 1.

2154

Furthermore, this enhancement is a major contributor to the
‘virtual’ P3 generated by ST2, the substantial part of which
is observed at late layers of stage 1. In addition, such
transient attentional enhancement amplifies representations
sufficiently to initiate binding of active types to the active
token, i.e. WM encoding.
Delayed consolidation. There is considerable evidence
that the P3 component is delayed during the AB (Sessa et
al., 2006; Vogel & Luck, 2002; Bowman et al., 2008). This
effect is obtained in ST2 since blaster firing is delayed
during the AB (encoding of the first target into WM
suppresses the blaster). Consequently, the model’s analogue
of the P3 and WM encoding/consolidation is also delayed.

traces (which saturate and enter the common attractor) that
eventually get reported as a target during the AB. This is
because it is only these strong traces that generate sufficient
gTFL activation to be reported.

The two-phase strength sensitivity theory
The ST2 model cannot explain our experimental results.
Consequently, we propose a modified theory: the two-phase
strength sensitivity theory, which is based on theoretical
concepts from ST2 with some new principles, and uses
activation equations described in Wyble et al. (2009).
We do not describe early stages of visual processing, but
focus on later stages. Specifically, the task filtered layer
(TFL) from ST2 is expanded into two layers, see figure 2.
These are the localized TFL (lTFL) and the globalized TFL
(gTFL). The first of these is assumed to be locally
prescribed in the ventral visual stream, and not to contribute
to the P3 component, while the latter is assumed to reflect a
more global activation (perhaps, akin to the global brain
scale state in Dehaene et al. (2003)), and is assumed to be
the major contributor to the P3 component.
It is important to note that, in ST2, bottom up strength is
determined by input strength. This input strength ranges
from what we will call strong to weak. The easy/hard
categories are then sampled from this complete range, such
that, the easy/hard sub ranges overlap, with the former
having a higher mean than the latter. We will talk in terms
of the easy (respectively hard) range of values, which
themselves contain a profile of weak and strong values.
lTFL. Focusing first on the lTFL, figure 3 depicts the
activation traces for varying target strengths according to the
two-phase theory. Figure 3 only shows traces that yield a
correct target report at the gTFL. Indeed, the average of all
correct traces is shown for each condition. Thus, the traces
for targets outside the AB are lower in amplitude, since they
generate an earlier blasting and consequently higher
performance. This then ensures that a broader distribution of
traces contribute to the average, thereby pulling it down.
The key elements of lTFL target activation are as follows.
Phase 1 - strongly strength sensitive. Phase 1 is strongly
sensitive to target strength, and targets with different
strength values have different activation profiles.
Phase 2 - weakly strength sensitive. Phase 2 succeeds
phase 1 and is only weakly sensitive to target strength, in the
sense that all strong targets transition to the same activation
level (i.e., the common attractor). Targets with enough
activation strength during phase 1 will have entered a
common attractor state by the time that phase 2 starts. This
common attractor is reached because sufficiently active
lTFL units saturate, thereby losing the differentiation across
the range of strong targets. Furthermore, it is only strong

Figure 2: Revised ST2 model implementing the two phase
strength sensitivity hypothesis. The second stage, binding
types to tokens using a binding pool, is not depicted, but is
inherited unchanged from the basic ST2 model (Bowman &
Wyble, 2007). Links shown between individual pairs of
units are replicated in one-to-one fashion across layers.

Figure 3: lTFL activation traces for seen targets with
varying strengths. It is important to note that traces are
plotted timelocked to the respective target onsets.
As initial support for this hypothesis, an ERP study by
Del Cul et al. (2007) has indeed identified two phases of
target processing, which have different sensitivities to target
strength. Although not an RSVP study, Del Cul et al. (2007)
manipulate target strength using masking. Importantly, they
find an early phase that is highly sensitive to masking
strength and a later phase, which - although not as weakly
sensitive as we are proposing - is certainly a lot less
sensitive than phase 1. This is most evident in figure 8 of
Del Cul et al. (2007), in particular, the panel depicting ERP
activity localised to posterior ventral temporal sources.
gTFL. We now discuss key aspects of the global TFL.
Attentional enhancement. The blaster provides attentional
enhancement to targets. It fires once an item has been
identified as a target. The enhancement increases activation

2155

levels at the gTFL (see figure 4), which in turn initiates
tokenisation (i.e. consolidation into WM) and the P3.
Behavioural accuracy. Only targets that generate
sufficient gTFL activation are deemed to be reported; i.e.,
the area under a gTFL trace needs to cross a threshold, at
which point the gTFL trace is terminated, and the model
registers a correct report. This can be seen in figure 4.
Targets outside the AB. The hypothesised gTFL activation
traces for targets presented outside the AB are the early
traces in figure 4. As a target outside the AB is presented in
isolation, the blaster is available to enhance the target’s
representation as soon as it is detected by the system. Thus,
blaster enhancement occurs during phase 1, which is
strongly sensitive to target strength. As seen in figure 4, the
blaster increases target activation yielding a trace profile
determined by the target’s initial strength value. Weak
targets (at the bottom of the easy or hard ranges), however,
fail to fire the blaster. Consequently, they do not generate
activation at the gTFL.
Phase 1 is critical for determining whether a target can be
reported. Specifically, only Phase 1 targets over a particular
threshold generate a sufficiently large gTFL trace to be
reported. Thus, more targets in the easy category generate
large enough gTFL traces to be reported than in the hard
category. This direct relationship between target strength
and the likelihood of target identification accounts for the
easy-hard effect in behavioural accuracy for targets outside
the AB: Hard targets have an accuracy of 66.7%, whereas
easy targets have an accuracy of 100%.
The P3 is hypothesised to reflect the activation level of a
target at the gTFL. However, the two-phase theory proposes
that gTFL activation levels depend upon lTFL strength.
Consequently, as seen in figure 4, outside the AB, the size
of the P3 is determined by target strength. This accounts for
the easy-hard effect on P3 size in our EEG results.
Furthermore, the two-phase theory can account for the
results in Del Cul et al. (2007), who find that P3 size
increases monotonically with target strength, as measured
by the SOA between the target and the following mask (p <
0.001). It can be assumed that the shorter the SOA between
the mask and the target, the more strongly the target’s
representation is weakened through masking. Shorter SOAs
can thus be associated with lower target strength and, vice
versa, the longer the SOA between target and mask, the
higher the target strength. This is further evidence for target
strength affecting P3 size when targets are presented in
isolation (which, if we extrapolate to our experiment, would
correspond to targets presented outside the AB).
Targets inside the AB. In line with ST2, the two-phase
theory suggests that the blaster is suppressed while T1 is
encoded into WM. During the AB, T2 is presented before
T1’s WM encoding has completed. Consequently, the onset
of the blaster is delayed for a target presented inside the AB
and, as illustrated in figure 4, does not occur until phase 2,
which is only weakly sensitive to target strength.
Weak targets (in the easy or hard ranges) do not have
enough strength at lTFL to fire the blaster once it becomes
available during phase 2. Hence, weak targets presented
during the AB show no activation at the gTFL. Strong
targets (within either the easy or hard ranges) presented

during the AB, on the other hand, have enough strength to
overcome the threshold for entering the lTFL common
attractor during phase 1. These targets are in equal common
attractor states when they fire the blaster. Hence, all targets
that do manage to fire the blaster during the AB generate the
same gTFL trace; see figure 4. The two-phase theory thus
proposes that for targets presented during the AB, activation
levels and thus the P3 are all-or-none.

Figure 4: gTFL activation traces for seen targets. Condition
A: Seen targets presented outside the AB. Condition B: Seen
targets presented during the AB; Note that in Condition B,
activation for the preceding target outside the AB is not
shown, and that the traces for easy and hard targets overlap
perfectly.
The probability of a target being reported is effectively
determined in phase 1. For targets inside the AB, however,
the blaster does not fire until after phase 1. Hence,
behavioural accuracy is determined by a target’s initial
strength. Only strong targets overcome the threshold that
allows entry into the common attractor. Thus, since strong
targets are more frequent in the easy category, they are more
likely to be reported than hard targets. Consequently, for
targets inside the AB, there is an easy-hard effect on
behavioural accuracy scores: Hard targets have an accuracy
of 37%, whereas easy targets have an accuracy of 74%.

Conclusion
As discussed, there is behavioural evidence showing that
participants’ visibility is bimodal during the AB (Sergent &
Dehaene, 2004). Observers were asked to report the extent
to which the target had been perceived using a visibility
scale ranging from ‘Nothing’ (0%) to ‘Maximum visibility’
(100%). For targets inside the AB, the majority of responses
were concentrated around the minimum and maximum of
the visibility scale. For targets presented outside the AB,
however, the responses were gradually distributed with no
clear threshold in visibility rankings. With respect to
visibility, the P3 was also found to be distributed in an allor-none fashion during the AB (Sergent et al., 2005). Trials
with higher visibility scores showed a large P3, whereas
trials with low visibility scores showed virtually no P3.
Like Sergent et al. (2005), we find that the P3 is
unaffected by target difficulty (i.e. shows an all-or-none
pattern) when targets are presented inside the AB. For
targets outside the AB, we find that the P3 varies with target

2156

difficulty, which is in agreement with the gradually
distributed responses from Sergent et al. (2005). If we
assume that visibility rating is governed by gTFL activation
(which would be the natural interpretation), then the twophase theory explains Sergent et al.’s findings.
Sergent et al. (2005) argue that conscious perception is
all-or-none when attention is absent, as is the case during
the AB. We argue though that it is not the absolute
unavailability of attention that causes the all-or-none
pattern. Rather, it is the delay of attentional enhancement
that causes all-or-none during the AB (and consistent with
this hypothesis, we know that T2 consolidation is indeed
delayed during the AB (Vogel & Luck, 2002)). Specifically,
the two-phase theory proposes that, due to the delayed firing
of the blaster during the AB, enhancement of target
activation does not have its effect until phase 2, which is
only weakly sensitive to target strength. In phase 2, targets
have either entered a common attractor at the lTFL, or their
activation is too weak to get reported. Hence, activation
traces show an all-or-none profile at the gTFL.
For targets outside the AB, however, the two-phase
theory suggests that the blaster enhancement occurs during
phase 1, which is sensitive to target strength. Hence, the
strength of the percept varies and one would expect a graded
continuum of conscious perception, as reported in Sergent et
al. (2005). Further, we find a difference in behavioural
accuracy scores between target letters belonging to easy and
hard categories, both outside and inside the AB. This pattern
of accuracy scores is obtained in the model since the
likelihood that a target will be reported is determined by
phase 1, which is strength sensitive.
It is important to consider the scope of the results
presented here. In particular, the finding of an all-or-none
pattern is specifically focused on the attentional blink
window. Thus, we are not claiming to have provided
evidence for all-or-none throughout conscious experience.
Indeed, consistent with Sergent & Dehaene (2004), evidence
for all-or-none was not found for isolated stimuli.
Furthermore, Overgaard et al.’s (2006) critique of Sergent
and Dehaene’s work is focused on the broader all-or-none
hypothesis and is thus largely avoided by the more
restrictive claim considered here. In fact, our particular
conjecture is that all-or-none patterns of conscious
perception arise specifically when the delay between
stimulus presentation and consolidation is long.
Investigating all-or-none patterns in further experimental
contexts where delayed consolidation may arise would be an
important next research step.

References
Bowman, H., & Wyble, B. (2007). The Simultaneous Type,
Serial Token Model of Temporal Attention and Working
Memory. Psychological Review, 114 (1), 38–70.
Bowman, H., Wyble, B., Chennu, S., & Craston, P. (2008).
A reciprocal relationship between bottom-up trace
strength and the attentional blink bottleneck: Relating the
LC-NE and ST2 models. Brain Research, 1202, 25–42.
Craston, P. (2008). Applying Cognitive Electrophysiology
To Neural Modelling Of The Attentional Blink. PhD
Thesis, University of Kent.

Craston, P., Wyble, B., Chennu, S., & Bowman, H. (2009).
The attentional blink reveals serial working memory
encoding: Evidence from virtual & human event related
potentials, Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21 (3),
550–566
Dehaene, S., Sergent, C., & Changeux, J.-P. (2003). A
Neuronal Network Model linking Subjective Reports and
Objective Physiological Data during Conscious
Perception. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 100 (14), 8520–8525.
Del Cul, A., Baillet, S., & Dehaene, S. (2007). Brain
Dynamics Underlying the Nonlinear Threshold for Access
to Consciousness. PLoS Biology, 5 (10), e260.
Kanwisher, N. (2001). Neural events and perceptual
awareness. Cognition, 79 (1–2), 89–113.
Kim, C.-Y., & Blake, R. (2005). Psychophysical magic:
rendering the visible ‘invisible’. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9 (8), 381–388.
Koch, C., & Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and
consciousness: two distinct brain processes. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11 (1), 16–22.
Kranczioch, C., Debener, S., & Engel, A. (2003). EventRelated Potential Correlates of the Attentional Blink
Phenomenon. Cognitive Brain Research, 17 (1), 177–187.
Kranczioch, C., Debener, S., Maye, A., & Engel, A. (2007).
Temporal dynamics of access to consciousness in the
attentional blink. NeuroImage, 37 (3), 947–955.
Luck, S., Vogel, E., & Shapiro, K. (1996). Word meanings
can be accessed but not reported during the attentional
blink. Nature, 383 (6601), 616–618.
Overgaard, M., Rote, J. Mouridsen, K. & Ramsøy, T.Z.
(2006). Is conscious perception gradual or dichotomous?
A comparison of report methodologies during a visual
task. Consciousness and Cognition, 15, 700–708.
Rees, G., Wojciulik, E., Clarke, K., Husain, M., Frith, C., &
Driver, J. (2000). Unconscious activation of visual cortex
in the damaged right hemisphere of a parietal patient with
extinction. Brain, 123 (8), 1624–1633.
Sergent, C., & Dehaene, S. (2004). Is Consciousness a
Gradual Phenomenon? Evidence for an All-or-Nothing
Bifurcation during the Attentional Blink. Psychological
Science, 15 (11), 720–728.
Sergent, C., Baillet, S., & Dehaene, S. (2005). Timing of the
brain events underlying access to consciousness during
the attentional blink. Nature Neuro., 10 (10), 1391–1400.
Sessa, P., Luria, R., Verleger, R. & Dell'Acqua (2006), R.
P3 latency shifts in the attentional blink: Further evidence
for second target processing postponement. Brain
Research, 1137, 131–139
Vogel, E., & Luck, S. (2002). Delayed Working Memory
Consolidation during the Attentional Blink. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9 (4), 739–743.
Vogel, E., Luck, S., & Shapiro, K. (1998).
Electrophysiological Evidence for a Post-perceptual
Locus of Suppression During the Attentional Blink.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 24 (6), 1656–1674.
Wyble, B., Bowman, H., & Nieuwenstein, M. (2009). The
attentional blink provides episodic distinctiveness:
Sparing at a cost. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 35 (2), 324–337.

2157

