UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of Context on Categorization Decisions for Mental Health Disorders

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6xd1w3wd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
De Los Reyes, Andres
Marsh, Jessecae K

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of Context on Categorization
Decisions for Mental Health Disorders
Jessecae K. Marsh (jessecae.marsh@TTU.edu)
Department of Psychology, Texas Tech University, MS 42051
Lubbock, TX 79413 USA

Andres De Los Reyes (adelosreyes@psyc.umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland at College Park, 1147 Biology/Psychology Building
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Abstract
Mental health clinicians engage in an important form of realworld categorization as they diagnose their patients with
mental disorder diagnoses. How are clinicians affected by the
context within which diagnostic criteria of a patient present
when making diagnostic evaluations? The classification
system clinicians are instructed to use is structured around a
statistical approach to assessing diagnosis and does allow for
the interpretation of criterial features through influences like
context. The following experiment tests whether clinicians are
affected by the context within which non-diagnostic
information about a patient is presented. We tested clinician’s
diagnostic judgments for symptoms of Conduct Disorder that
were presented either in a context that should be perceived as
being associated with Conduct Disorder or in a context that
should not be perceived as being associated with Conduct
Disorder. We found that clinicians were influenced by
context, but in surprising ways. Clinicians lowered their
diagnostic judgments for symptoms presented in a low
associative context but did not change their estimates for high
associative contexts as compared to baseline. The effect of
context was also found to vary over the criterial symptoms
that were presented, and this variation was associated with
clinicians’ idiosyncratic ratings of the criterial symptoms.
These results have interesting implications for how clinicians
view their patients and for how context affects categorization
more generally.
Keywords: Categorization; clinical reasoning; theory-based
reasoning.

Introduction
Mental health disorders provide an interesting domain
within which to study real-world categorization. The
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) presents a guideline for mental health clinicians to
use in the categorization of patients into mental disorder
categories (American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2000).
Most mental disorders included are described as lists of
criterial symptoms, with membership in a given category
being gained by displaying a certain number of the
described criterial features. For example, in order to qualify
for a diagnosis of the childhood disorder Conduct Disorder
a patient must meet a series of required criteria (e.g.,
minimum amount of time showing the problematic
behaviors, marked impairment in life functioning) and then
possess any 3 of a possible 15 other criteria that typify

clinically impairing levels of aggressive behavior and a
disregard for rules or social norms. The exact symptoms or
combination of symptoms generally do not figure into
categorization as long as the required number of symptoms
is met.
In order to collect information about the criterial features
that are present in a given patient, mental health clinicians
must go through a difficult process of gathering and
synthesizing different types of information. Patients do not
necessarily provide their diagnostic symptoms in a clear-cut
and easy to parse fashion. Instead, such criterial features are
embedded within a set of extraneous, biographical, nondiagnostic information. Although the DSM acknowledges
that the context within which these behaviors occur should
be taken into account when making diagnostic decisions
(e.g., a child that frequently gets into fights at school for the
sake of self-defense likely does not meet criteria for
Conduct Disorder), such non-diagnostic contextual
information that does not take the form of actual diagnostic
criteria does not play a formal, codified role in diagnostic
classification as delineated in the DSM. The question
becomes, do clinicians use the context within which
diagnostic criteria present to make their category decisions?
Evidence from the cognitive psychology field suggests
that people’s categorization decisions can be affected by the
context in which the features are displayed. For example,
Medin, Goldstone, and Gentner (1993) found that the
context within which an ambiguous stimulus was presented
affected the interpretation of its ambiguous features, and
consequently its categorization. Similarly, Ahn, Novick, and
Kim (2003) found that providing clinicians with an
explanatory context for a person’s mental disorder
symptoms results in the person being categorized as more
‘normal’. Likewise, the stereotype literature has shown that
an ambiguous behavior will be categorized differently
depending on contextual information such as the ethnic
background of the person engaging in the behavior
(Gawronski, Geschke, & Banse, 2003). Generally speaking,
this evidence suggests that people are influenced by the
context within which categorization information is
presented.
The actual structure of DSM categories may further
influence clinicians to rely on contextual information when
evaluating patients. The statistical structure used in the

1953

DSM to describe mental disorder categories does not closely
align with what current research has suggested is the
structure of laypeople’s everyday categories. For example,
research has shown that people are greatly affected by the
knowledge they have about relations between features in
making category decisions (e.g., Ahn, 1998; Murphy &
Medin, 1995; Sloman, Love, & Ahn, 1998). Recent work
has expanded these findings to mental health clinicians and
found that clinicians will endorse causal relations between
features of a mental disorder. Further, the presence of these
relations can affect goodness-of-fit judgments for patients
(Kim & Ahn, 2002). As such, clinicians appear to not
always abide by the strict categorization proscribed in the
DSM, and will instead use their own theories in the
categorization process. This idiosyncratic form of
categorization allows for the influence of context in
diagnosing patients.
The following experiment investigates the influence of
context on mental health professionals’ judgments of
hypothetical patients. Specifically, clinician participants
read vignettes describing youths who have features of
Conduct Disorder in a context that is associated or not
associated with a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder. We chose
Conduct Disorder for our materials because of the large
number of criterial features (i.e., 15) that can describe the
disorder category. As such, we can not only investigate the
general influence of context in making diagnostic decisions,
but also further investigate whether context differentially
affects features within a category.

association with Conduct Disorder. Figure 1 gives an
example of such at item. The top box of this figure lists the
stem that began the life factor description. The two lower
boxes show the conclusion to this life factor that would
describe a low or a high association with Conduct Disorder,
respectively. In this way the Low and High association facts
were equated in the basic premise and differed in the ending
of the statement. The High association facts were worded so
that they did not represent actual features of conduct
disorder, but rather behaviors/traits that would plausibly
occur in a child with a Conduct Disorder diagnosis.
Matched pairs were created to describe three different types
of life factors: child’s family life, friends, and school
environment.
Starting stem
His parents have had a
difficult time finding him
a regular babysitter
because
Low
association
end

… his parents need
a sitter at
inconvenient times
during the day.

Methods
Materials

High
association
end

… people often
refuse to baby-sit
him more than
once.

Figure 1: An example life factor.

In order to test how mental health clinicians are affected by
the context within which patient symptoms present, we first
had to create contextual features that could plausibly be
associated with a mental disorder diagnosis, but did not
provide actual diagnostic information for the diagnosis. We
created a set of hypothetical life factors that described
youths displaying behaviors that would be perceived as
being associated with a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder
(High association condition) and youths displaying
behaviors that would not be perceived as being associated
with a diagnosis of Conduct Disorder (Low association
condition). Each life factor was created in a pair that
matched the basic information of the factor while varying
whether the factor would be predicted to have a low or high

We pretested the materials we created to a group of
clinical graduate students (N=29) to ensure that the factors
were associated with Conduct Disorder. We asked the
pretest participants to “rate the likelihood that each fact
would be present in a child with Conduct Disorder” on a 0
(not very likely) to 100 (very likely) scale. In addition, we
asked the pretest participants to indicate any factors they
believed were actual criterial, diagnostic symptoms of
Conduct Disorder or any other mental disorder. Any factor
that was indicated as being a criterial feature was dropped
from use. As a first rough pass, we selected for use in
further experiments feature pairs (as seen in Figure 1) that

Table 1: Example sets of Low and High association versions of a vignette.
Type of Factor
Family

Friends
School
Environment

Low Association Version
His parents have had a difficult time finding
him a regular babysitter because his parents
need a sitter at inconvenient times during the
day.
His friends' parents tend to like him.
He doesn't like some of his classmates because
they try to cheat off his tests.

1954

High Association Version
His parents have had a difficult time finding
him a regular babysitter because people often
refuse to baby-sit him more than once.
His friends' parents tend not to like him.
He doesn't like some of his classmates because
they wouldn't let him cheat off their tests.

showed a significant difference in association scores
between the high and low version as found through
independent sample t-tests (ps < .05).
From the basic life factors that we selected through
Pretest 1, we created vignettes for use in the main
experiment. Each vignette consisted of one life factor
randomly selected from each of three types of life factors:
factors describing the youth’s family, friends, and school
environment. For each set of three life factors we created a
High and a Low association vignette. Table 1 shows a Low
and a High association vignette constructed from the same
matched pairs of factors.
We conducted an additional round of pretesting on these
newly constructed vignettes. We asked clinical interns (i.e.,
students who had already progressed past the initial years of
graduate or professional training) (N=35) to rate for each
vignette, “How likely would a child with the given life
factors be found to have Conduct Disorder if a full clinical
evaluation was given”, using a scale of a 0 (not very likely)
to 100 (very likely). From the results of Pretest 2, we
selected 15 pairs of vignettes that showed a significant
difference between their High and Low version through
independent sample t-tests (ps < .01) for use in the actual
experiment.
In the main experiment, the presentation of each pretested
vignette was accompanied by the presentation of one of the
fifteen features of Conduct Disorder as described in the
DSM (APA, 2000). These features are as follows: bullies
others; initiates fights; used a weapon; cruel to people;
cruel to animals; stolen while confronting a victim; forced
someone into sexual activity; fire setting; destroyed others'
property (other than by fire setting); broken into someone
else's house, building, or car; lies or "cons" others; stolen
without confronting a victim; stays out at night; run away
from home overnight; and truant from school. Therefore, in
the main experiment participants were presented with
narratives containing four features (3 life factors and one
criterial conduct disorder feature). The fifteen criterial
features were rotated through the vignettes such that
participants read one High and one Low association vignette
displaying each of the criterial features. The ratings of
interest in the primary experiment were made from these
four feature vignettes.

before they could move on to the next vignette. The order of
the vignettes was randomized for each subject.
After the vignette phase, participants made two statistical
and two theory-based judgments of the criterial features that
had been presented alongside the life factors in the
vignettes. Specifically, participants rated for each feature the
statistical prevalence (i.e., the category validity: “what
percentage of youths diagnosed with Conduct Disorder
possess that diagnostic feature”) and diagnosticity (i.e., the
cue validity: “what percentage of youths who display that
feature meet the criteria for having a diagnosis of Conduct
Disorder”). The two theory-based judgments asked for
ratings on the importance to diagnosis (“rate how important
you believe that feature to be in diagnosing a youth with
Conduct Disorder”), and the abnormality of that feature
(“rate how abnormal you believe it is for the average,
normal youth to possess each of the following criterial
features of Conduct Disorder”). We also asked participants
to perform the same likelihood judgments they did for the
full vignette description on each of the criterial features
alone (i.e., likelihood that a child with that symptom would
receive a diagnosis of conduct disorder if a full evaluation
was given). The order of the five judgments was
randomized for each subject.
The experiment was designed as an online survey using
the Qualtrics survey software. Participants completed the
experiment at their own pace through their own home or
office computer.

Procedure

Overall Effects of Context

The primary experiment consisted of two parts: a vignette
rating phase, and an impression judgment phase. In the
vignette rating phase, participants rated 30 separate
vignettes. Fifteen of the vignettes described a High
association context and 15 described a Low association
context. For each vignette, participants rated, “How likely
would a child with the given life factors be found to have
Conduct Disorder if a full clinical evaluation was given”,
using a scale of a 0 (not very likely) to 100 (very likely).
That is, participants made goodness-of-fit judgments for
each vignette. Each vignette was presented as its own screen
of the experiment. Participants had to rate a given vignette

From a strictly DSM perspective, clinicians should not rate
vignettes in the High and Low conditions differently. That
is, since the vignettes were equated on the number of
presented criterial features, then clinicians should rate all of
the vignettes the same. However, if the context within which
these diagnostic features appears affects categorization, then
a difference should be found between the two conditions.
This latter prediction was supported in our data. Figure 2
depicts the likelihood scores averaged across the 15 High
context vignettes (M=54.8) in the far left bar and the scores
averaged across the 15 Low context vignettes (M=29.2) in
the far right bar. The likelihood ratings for the High and

Participants
We recruited professional mental health clinicians who had
been licensed for at least 5 years and had experience in the
treatment of children (N=22) to participate in the main
experiment. We contacted clinicians by posting
advertisements through mailing lists of professional
organizations that cater to clinicians specializing in the care
of youth patients. Participants were entered into a drawing
for a chance of winning a $50 online gift certificate as
compensation. In addition, a $5 donation was made in each
participant’s name to a charity that focuses on child welfare
issues.

Results

1955

Low conditions were significantly different, F(1,21) = 54.0,
p < .001.
We further analyzed the High and Low conditions to
determine how the likelihood evaluations of criterial
features are affected by contextual factors when the features
are presented in the vignettes as compared to the
presentation of those features without context, as measured
in the baseline likelihood measures. The middle bar of
Figure 2 shows the average baseline likelihood judgment for
the criterial features. A repeated measures ANOVA with
judgment type (High, Low, vs. Baseline) as a factor found a
significant main effect of judgment type, F(2, 42) = 25.3, p
< .001. Specific paired t-tests were completed to investigate
the source of this main effect. The baseline judgment
(M=54.0) was significantly higher than the Low condition,
t(21) = 6.40, p < .001. However, there was not a significant
difference between the baseline judgment and the High
condition, p = .86. In short, couching a criterial feature in a
context that has a low association with Conduct Disorder
reduces likelihood judgments compared to judgments for
that feature alone; couching a criterial feature in a high
association context does not create a change over baseline.

therefore treated equally in our likelihood judgments? Our
question of interest is whether these inherent differences in
the nature of criterial features result in differing influences
of context.
The first step in evaluating the effect of context on
individual features was to create a score that could measure
this influence. We calculated a context effect score for each
participant’s criterial feature ratings by subtracting their
rating for the Low condition from their rating in the High
condition for each criterial feature. A large context effect
score would thus be found when context causes great shifts
in ratings between the High and Low conditions, whereas
small context effect scores would be found for features
whose likelihood estimates do not change across conditions.
To determine if these context effect scores differed across
features, we rank ordered the 15 criterial features for each
participant according to their context effect scores. We then
averaged the context effect scores at each rank across
participants. For example, we calculated the average context
effect score across all participants for Rank 1, regardless of
what feature it was, Rank 2, and so on. By doing this, we
can compare across participants how their context effect
scores varied, while ignoring what specific features were
paired with high and low context presentations. For ease of
comparison, we collapsed these rankings into the top five
ranked scores, the middle five ranked scores, and the bottom
five ranked scores. Figure 3 shows the average context
effect scores for the top five (M=45.2), the middle five
(M=26.4), and the bottom five (M=5.17) as separate bars. A
repeated measures ANOVA over rank (top five, middle five,
vs. bottom five) found a significant main effect, F(2, 42) =
102.5, p < .001). Paired t-tests were conducted between the
three groups and significant differences (using Bonferroni
corrected alpha levels) were found for all comparisons: top
vs. middle: t(21) = 9.20, p < .001; top vs. bottom: t(21) =
11.5, p < .001; middle vs. bottom: t(21) = 7.93, p < .001).
These differences indicate that individual criterial features
of Conduct Disorder vary greatly in how they are influenced
by context.

Figure 2: Average likelihood ratings for baseline
compared to High and Low conditions.

Feature Specific Effects of Context
The preceding analyses collapsed ratings across all of the
presented criterial features to look at the general effect of
context. Using such an analysis washes out any individual
differences that may exist between criterial features in their
resilience to the effect of context. Looking at the criterial
features listed in the Methods section, the nature of the
features used as criteria for Conduct Disorder vary greatly in
their severity and underlying character. For example, both
stays out at night and has forced someone into sexual
activity are features of Conduct Disorder that are meant to
be given equal weight in diagnosis. Is it possible that
features that vary so greatly in their composition and
apparent severity are weighted equally by clinicians and
Figure 3: Context effect scores grouped by rank order.

1956

One possible interpretation of Figure 3 is that individual
features of Conduct Disorder may be influenced differently
by context. That is, is there agreement among clinicians as
to which features of Conduct Disorder are inherently more
influenced or interpretable by the context within which they
present? To answer this question, we assessed the level of
agreement across participants in context scores for
individual features. Participants’ context effect scores were
subjected to a Kendall’s W Test to assess overall agreement
between participants in ratings for individual features. Very
low agreement was found, Kendall’s W = .038, p = .62. This
finding suggests that differences in context effect scores
across features are not stable across participants. Instead,
individual participants differ in what features are influenced
in their judgments by context. In short, the effects of context
are dependent on the clinician who is rating the feature as
opposed to being a trait inherent to the criterial feature.
Our analysis so far has suggested that the effect of context
differs across features in a way that is dependent on the
clinician who is doing the rating. To investigate what factors
may be influencing how clinicians are influenced by context
for some features and not for others, we can compare each
participant’s context effect scores to the same participant’s
impression judgments (statistical and theory-based property
ratings) we collected at the end of the experiment.1 For each
participant we calculated the correlation between the context
effect score and the rating they provided for each criterial
feature on each of the four dimensions. (Two subjects were
dropped from these analyses because there was no variation
in their judgments, preventing correlations from being
calculated.) Averaging across participants, we found
negative correlations between context effect scores and
Importance (M = -.11) and Abnormality (M = -.13). These
negative correlations reflect that the more abnormal or
important to diagnosis a feature was rated, the less
likelihood ratings differed for that feature across the High
and Low contexts (i.e., the lower the context effect scores).
Very small correlations were found between Prevalence
(M=.04) and Diagnosticity (M=.01) and the context effect
scores. To test the significance of these correlations, we
used one-sample t tests to compare the correlations across
participants to a value of zero, thereby testing if the
correlations were significantly different from zero. The
theory-based measures showed a relation to the context
effect scores. Importance showed a correlation with context
score that was significantly different from zero, t(19) = 2.64,
p = .016. Abnormality approached a significant correlation,
p = .056. The statistical measures of Prevalence and
Diagnosticity were not significantly different from zero, ps
> .5.

1

Kendall W was also calculated for the statistical and theorybased judgments. Prevalence (W=.514), Importance (W=.210), and
Abnormality (W=.465) all showed significant agreement, all ps <
.001. There was not significant agreement in the Diagnosticity
scores, W=.062, p = .16.

Discussion
The goal of the described experiment was to evaluate if
clinicians are influenced by non-diagnostic context factors
in assessing criterial features of mental disorder categories.
In our experiment we equated the number of criterial
diagnostic features and varied only the non-diagnostic
features in descriptions of hypothetical youths. According to
standardized diagnostic manuals used in the mental health
field (APA, 2000), our vignettes should be equally likely to
receive a Conduct Disorder diagnosis regardless of
condition since they present only one criterial feature of
Conduct Disorder and not the three needed for a diagnosis
(no matter if the non-diagnostic features have a high or low
perceived association with Conduct Disorder). Despite this
proscription, we found that clinicians rate hypothetical
youths that display non-diagnostic features that have a
perceived high association with Conduct Disorder as more
likely to receive a Conduct Disorder diagnosis than youths
who display non-diagnostic features that have a perceived
low association with Conduct Disorder. Interestingly,
context appears to have an asymmetric effect across our
High and Low association conditions. Specifically, the Low
association condition resulted in a significant depression in
likelihood ratings compared to baseline. However, the High
association condition did not show any difference from
baseline.
The finding that context had different effects in the High
and Low association conditions is intriguing for many
reasons. From a cognitive perspective, context would be
expected to have symmetrical effects. That is, if a low
context can reduce ratings, then a high context should
increase ratings. Why did we not find such an increase in
our experiment? From a mental health diagnosis point of
view, one could speculate the opposite finding than what
was shown in our results. Specifically, clinicians are
instructed that a mental disorder diagnosis should not be
provided if the diagnostic symptoms a patient displays are a
normal reaction to life events (APA, 2000). With this idea in
mind, the High association condition should provide a
possible explanation for why the criterial feature is being
displayed (see also, Ahn, Novick, & Kim, 2003). For
example, perhaps having the life factors displayed in the
High association condition of Table 1 would be enough
reason or serve as a good explanation for why a youth
would show a problematic behavior that is diagnostic for
Conduct Disorder. Along this logic, the youth in the Low
association condition looks particularly surprising. Why
would a youth who is coming from a normal, nonproblematic background as depicted in the Low association
condition of Table 1 then show a behavior that is diagnostic
of Conduct Disorder? With this logic, the Low association
condition could in fact look more abnormal and receive a
higher likelihood rating than the High association condition.
It is an interesting direction for future research to determine
why the High association context does not change from
baseline but the Low association context does. Researching

1957

this question can help illuminate how context affects
categorization more generally.
In addition to the general finding of context influencing
ratings overall, our results show that individual criterial
features were differently affected by context. This differing
effect of context for each participant was correlated with
that individual’s theory-based ratings for the criterial
features as opposed to statistical judgments. Specifically,
individual features that were impervious to the effect of
context (i.e., showed the same likelihood ratings in the High
and Low conditions) were given high ratings on their
importance to the diagnosis process. Statistical measures,
such as prevalence and diagnosticity, did not correlate with
the effect of context in our ratings.
Were the measures we took the best predictors of the
context effect scores? While the correlation between
Importance and context effect scores was significant, it was
not an overwhelmingly strong correlation. What other
measures might better predict which features of a mental
disorder are impervious to context and which features are
not? For example, recent research has found that a
clinician’s emotional response to a patient can predict the
therapy outcome for that patient (Marci, Ham, Moran, &
Orr, 2007). Perhaps the emotional response a clinician has
when reading about a problematic behavior can predict how
much the context that feature is presented in will affect its
interpretation. For instance, learning that a patient is cruel
to animals may result in enough of a negative emotional
response that the surrounding contextual features do not
have the opportunity to influence diagnostic evaluations.
This is a rich avenue for future research.

American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders – text revision (4th
ed). (DSM-IV). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association Press.
Gawronski, B., Geschke, D., & Banse, R. (2003). Implicit
bias in impression formation: Associations influence the
construal of individuating information. European Journal
of Social Psychology, 33, 573–589
Kim, N. S., & Ahn, W. (2002). Clinical psychologists’
theory-based representations of mental disorders predict
their diagnostic reasoning and memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 451-476.
Marci, C. D., Ham, J., Moran, E. K., & Orr, S. P. (2007).
Physiologic concordance, empathy, and social-emotional
process during psychotherapy. Journal of Nervous &
Mental Disease, 195, 103-111.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100, 254278.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories
in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review, 92, 289316.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Science,
22, 189-228.

Summary
Mental health disorders are a unique form of category in
that the structure and classification criteria for the category
are explicitly laid out for the categorizer. Mental health
clinicians must discover these explicit criteria from their
patients amidst a large amount of non-diagnostic
information that may or may not be useful for their
diagnostic decision-making. Despite the explicit structure
prescribed for categorization, we found that mental health
clinicians are influenced by the context within which
diagnostic symptoms are presented in unique and
idiosyncratic ways. Future research should focus on
discovering the true nature of how these individual
differences in the assessment of diagnostic criteria come
about. Such research will shed light on the clinical
diagnostic process as well as categorization more generally.

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for
natural kinds and artifacts?: The role of causal status in
determining feature centrality. Cognition, 69, 135-178.
Ahn, W., Novick, L. R., & Kim, N. S. (2003).
“Understanding it makes it normal:” Causal explanations
influence person perception. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 10, 746-752.

1958

