UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The cognitive science of religion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/52c7s7kh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bering, Jesse
Legare, Cristine
Shtulman, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The cognitive science of religion
Cristine Legare (legare@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station #A8000, Austin, Texas 78712 USA

Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 91106 USA

Jesse Bering (j.bering@qub.ac.uk)
Institute of Cognition and Culture, Queen’s University, Belfast
2-4 Fitzwilliam Street, Belfast, Northern Ireland UK, BT24 7PL

Harvey Whitehouse (harvey.whitehouse@anthro.ox.ac.uk)
School of Anthropology and Museum Ethnography,University of Oxford
51 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6PE, England

Keywords: cognitive science
explanations; religious cognition.

of

religion;

supernatural

The study of religious cognition
The cognitive science of religion has recently emerged as an
important topic of study by both cognitive psychologists
(e.g. Rosengren, Johnson, & Harris, 2000; Legare &
Gelman, 2008) and anthropologists (e.g. Boyer, 2001;
Whitehouse, 2004). How can we explain a phenomenon as
diverse and variable as religion in terms of the universality
of the human mind? Recent research has demonstrated that
the explanation for religious beliefs and behaviors can be
found in basic features of human cognition (e.g. Bering,
2004; 2006; Shtulman, 2008).
Although religion is
increasingly recognized as a legitimate subject for study by
cognitive scientists, this area of human experience remains
somewhat neglected by experimental psychology. In this
symposium we consider the emerging experimental
literature on religious cognition from a psychological and an
anthropological perspective, with the goal of advocating an
interdisciplinary, developmental approach to the field. The
symposium will focus on two themes. Legare and Shtulman
will begin by considering the development of religious
concepts, as well as the ways in which cognitive processes
facilitate both scientific and supernatural thinking. Bering
and Whitehouse will consider the cognitive and
evolutionary underpinnings of religious thinking and the
resilience of religious beliefs.

The development of religious cognition
Religious thinking is shaped by a host of cognitive
processes and concepts (Bering & Bjorklund, 2004; Bering,
2006; Shtulman, 2008), many of which facilitate other kinds
of thinking (Boyer, 2001; Legare & Gelman, 2008). These
talks will consider the ways in which these processes and
concepts undergird the development of religious cognition

and the ways in which religious and scientific explanatory
frameworks are reconciled.

Legare:
The co-existence of scientific and
supernatural explanatory frameworks across
development
Access to scientific and supernatural explanatory
frameworks is a universal psychological experience, and
coordinating these distinct belief systems is a general
cognitive problem. One approach to investigating the
relationship between different explanatory frameworks is to
study contexts where both scientific and supernatural
explanations are used to interpret the same events (Legare &
Gelman, 2008). Constructing explanations for existentially
arousing topics such as biological origins, illness, and death
provide just such an opportunity (Evans, Legare, &
Rosengren, in press). Legare will discuss new findings of
how intuitive and “scientific” explanatory systems co-exist
with religious or supernatural explanatory systems across
development in diverse cultural contexts.
Cristine Legare is an assistant professor of psychology at
UT Austin. Her interests include mechanisms of knowledge
acquisition, culture and cognition, and the development of
scientific and supernatural reasoning. Her work has
appeared in journals such as Cognitive Psychology,
Cognitive Science, and Child Development.

Shtulman: Developmental differences
interpretation of religious claims

in

the

Religious claims, like claims about the nature of the deities
one’s culture endorses, are transmitted not only from adult
to adult but also from adults to children. How children
understand such claims undoubtedly influences the course
of their transmission. In this talk, Shtulman will present
data suggesting that children do not interpret religious
claims in the same manner as adults. Rather, they interpret
them on the basis of untutored, highly anthropomorphic

2081

concepts not clearly differentiated from fictional concepts.
These findings challenge standard models of religious
transmission in that they undermine the assumption that
religious concepts remain stable both within and across
generations.
Andrew Shtulman is an assistant professor of psychology
at Occidental College. His interests include concept
acquisition and belief formation, and his work has appeared
in such journals as Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive
Science.

Cognitive and evolutionary foundations of
religious thinking
A central objective of the cognitive science of religion is to
explain principal causes of both the universal religious
repertoire and the substantial variability in religious belief in
terms of underlying cognitive mechanisms (Whitehouse,
2004; Bering, 2006). These talks will consider the cognitive
and evolutionary bases of religious thinking and the
resilience of supernatural beliefs in the face of disbelief.

Bering: Implicit theism in self-professed atheists
Since many people argue that they are immune to any form
of supernatural reasoning, recent theoretical claims
regarding the ‘universality’ or ‘default’ bases of religious
belief are justifiably met with skepticism by non-religious
individuals. Indeed, atheists pose a special problem for
cognitive accounts of religion because they appear to
contradict the assumption that human beings intuitively
reason in supernatural terms. Although religious belief is
increasingly the subject of empirical attention by cognitive
scientists, the phenomenon of disbelief has been a
comparatively neglected topic of investigation. Either
atheists are qualitatively different types of thinkers from
religious individuals (lacking supernatural intuitions) or
they somehow manage to suppress or executively override
their supernatural intuitions. In this talk, Bering will present
new evidence tentatively supporting the latter hypothesis. In
a series of semi-structured interviews, a large sample of
self-professed atheists who were told they were participating
in a study of autobiographical memory frequently answered
questions about their major life events in teleologicalintentionality terms—that things happened to them “because
they needed to learn a lesson” or were “meant to be at that
time.” Findings from ongoing experiments on atheists’
willingness to “tempt fate” will also be presented.
Jesse Bering is director of the Institute of Cognition and
Culture and a reader in history and anthropology at Queen’s
University, Belfast. His interests include the evolution of
religion and the psychological foundations of afterlife
beliefs. His work has appeared in such journals as
Developmental Psychology and Behavioral and Brain
Sciences.

Whitehouse: Explaining religion
Much research in the cognitive science of religion is
concerned with explaining widely recurrent features of
religious thinking and behaviour in terms of the shaping and
constraining effects of evolved cognitive mechanisms
(Whitehouse, 2004). But there is also growing evidence that
many religious concepts and concept-clusters require
considerable cognitive, social, and technological resources
to create, remember, and pass on. In this talk, Whitehouse
will discuss these more 'costly' features of the religious
repertoire which exhibit considerable variability from one
tradition to the next and as such serve as admirable identity
markers of religious coalitions. The implications of this for
patterns of belief resilience (resistance to argument-based or
evidence-based rebuttal) and more generally for the
maintenance and spread of religious traditions are
increasingly the focus of experimental, naturalistic, and
descriptive studies in this field, affording considerable
opportunities for combining the approaches of social,
cognitive, and biological sciences.
Harvey Whitehouse is professor of social anthropology,
head of the school of anthropology, director of the Centre
for Anthropology and Mind, and a fellow of Magdalen
College, at the University of Oxford. His interests include
recurrence and variation in religious thinking and behavior,
and he has published many books and articles on this topic.

References
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion explained: The evolutionary
origins of religious thought. New York: Basic Books.
Bering, J. M. (2006). The folk psychology of souls.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29, 453-498.
Bering, J. M., & Bjorklund, D.F. (2004). The natural
emergence of reasoning about the afterlife as a
developmental regularity. Developmental Psychology, 40,
217-233.
Evans, E., Legare, C., & Rosengren, K. (in press).
Engaging multiple epistemologies: Implications for
science education. In R. Taylor & M. Ferrari (Eds.),
Evolution, epistemology, and science education. New
York: Routledge.
Legare, C. & Gelman, S. (2008). Bewitchment, biology, or
both: The co-existence of natural and supernatural
explanatory frameworks across development. Cognitive
Science, A Multidisciplinary Journal, 32, 607-642.
Rosengren, K., Johnson, C., & Harris, P. (Eds). (2000).
Imagining the impossible: Magical, scientific, and
religious thinking in children. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Shtulman, A. (2008). Variation in the anthropomorphization
of supernatural beings and its implications for cognitive
theories of religion. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1123-1134.
Whitehouse, H. (2004). Modes of religiosity: A cognitive
theory of religious transmission. Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press.

2082

