UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of different components of working memory in writing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9z87v98t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Galbraith, David
Hallam, Jenny
Le Bigot, Nathalie
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of different components of working memory in writing
David Galbraith (d.galbraith@staffs.ac.uk)
Jenny Hallam (j.l.hallam@staffs.ac.uk)
Centre for Educational Psychology Research, Staffordshire University
College Road, Stoke-on-Trent, ST4 2DE, UK
Thierry Olive (thierry.olive@univ-poitiers.fr)
Nathalie Le Bigot (nathalie.le.bigot@ univ-poitiers.fr)
CeRCA/MSHS,
99 avenue du Recteur Pineau, 86000 F - Poitiers France

Abstract
This paper describes the results of an experiment designed to
assess the effects of self-monitoring and 3 different kinds of
secondary task on the development of ideas during planning,
and on the quality of subsequently produced text. An LSAbased measure was used to assess the development of ideas
during planning and Coh-Metrix was used to assess effects on
text. The results suggest that the spatial component of
working memory plays an important role in the development
of ideas during planning, and that this affects the quality of
the final text. Individual differences in self-monitoring also
affect the extent to which content develops during planning
and are associated with differences in the coherence of the
final text.
Keywords: Writing; working memory; text production; latent
semantic analysis; Coh-Metrix

Introduction
Writing is commonly characterized as a knowledgetransforming process, in which writers actively transform
their thought in order to satisfy rhetorical goals. Typically,
this is attributed to high level problem-solving (Bereiter and
Scardamalia, 1987). However, there has been relatively
little research which directly assesses the effects of writing
on knowledge. Research which has (see Galbraith, in press),
has found some support for this, but has in addition claimed
that these models of writing overemphasize the effects of
high level thinking processes and neglect the more implicit
processes involved in text production. Galbraith has
suggested instead that writing should be characterized in
terms of a dual process model.
According to the dual process model, two distinct
processes are responsible for the generation of novel content
during writing. The first – knowledge retrieval – process
involves retrieving already-formed “ideas” from an explicit
store of knowledge in long term memory, and either
translating these directly into text (what Bereiter and
Scardamalia would characterize as “knowledge telling”) or
the goal-directed evaluation and manipulation of ideas prior
to translating them into text (what Bereiter and Scardamalia
would characterize as “knowledge transforming”). By itself,
however, this can only lead to the reorganization of existing
knowledge or to the selection of different items of existing
knowledge which are more appropriate for the rhetorical
context. In order to create new content, the writer has to

engage in a different – knowledge constituting – process,
which involves the synthesis of content guided by the
connections between subsymbolic units stored in an implicit
semantic memory system. Although this process can be
prompted by higher level problem solving, the content
produced by it is the product of the implicit organization of
content in semantic memory, rather than the explicit
manipulation of content in working memory (WM). The
result is new content that can be added to the store of
existing knowledge in explicit memory.
A key feature of this model is that the two different
processes are optimized under different conditions. The
knowledge retrieval process involves the creation of a
mental model of global structure designed to satisfy the
writer’s rhetorical goals, and operates best when content is
represented economically in WM, and the writer can focus
on evaluating and manipulating it rather than on articulating
it in full text. By contrast, the knowledge constituting
process operates best when thought is articulated in full text,
and text production is guided by the implicit organization of
semantic memory rather than by explicit rhetorical goals.
This leads to a fundamental conflict between explicit
organizing processes guiding the evaluation and selection of
content in WM and implicit organizing processes guiding
the synthesis of content in semantic memory.
Writers vary in the extent to which they prioritize the two
processes. In particular, Galbraith has argued that low selfmonitors, whose self presentation is guided by dispositional
goals, prioritize the knowledge-constituting process,
whereas high self-monitors, whose self presentation is
guided by rhetorical goals (in the context of writing),
prioritize the knowledge retrieval process (see Snyder&
Gangestad, 1986, for a review of research on selfmonitoring, and Galbraith, in press, for a review of research
into the conditions under which writers develop new ideas).
For present purposes, the key finding of this research is that
low self-monitors tend to develop new ideas as a
consequence of spontaneous text production, but not as a
consequence of planning in note-form, whereas high selfmonitors develop new ideas as a consequence of planning in
note-form, but not as a consequence of spontaneous text
production.
In order to resolve the conflict between the two processes
writers resort to different forms of drafting strategy. In an

3028

outline planning strategy, for example, the writer focuses on
knowledge retrieval and generates and organizes their ideas
in note-form prior to translating them into text. Kellogg
(1988) has found good support for the effectiveness of the
outline planning strategy, and that it is effective because it
frees WM resources to focus on generating and organizing
content during outlining and then to focus on translating this
content during text production. However, although this
study demonstrated that outlining has a beneficial effect on
the quality of the final text, it did not examine the processes
involved during outlining. In particular, it did not examine
whether outlining was more effective when it involved the
transforming of knowledge during outlining, and it did not
examine how WM resources were allocated during
outlining.
In order to investigate this, Galbraith, Ford, Walker and
Ford, 2005) asked writers to make outlines while at the
same time carrying out secondary tasks designed to load on
different components of WM. They found that a secondary
task loading on the spatial component of WM reduced the
extent to which writers developed new ideas during
outlining and that this was associated with a reduction in the
quality of the final text. Galbraith (in press) has cited this as
evidence in favour of the claim that the knowledge
transforming process involves the construction of a mental
model of the global structure of the text, and suggested that
a spatial representation of ideas is required in order to be
able to evaluate the global organization of simultaneously
represented ideas. In particular, he claims that writers need
to be able to construct a spatial representation of the text in
order to identify where new content may be required in
order to satisfy rhetorical and organizational goals.
However, various features of the design of the Galbraith et
al (2005) experiment meant that alternative explanations
could not be ruled out. In particular, because the secondary
tasks were imposed throughout the planning process, it
could not be established that the effect was a consequence
of outlining per se, and secondly because it was not clear
that the secondary tasks loaded exclusively on the relevant
components of WM, it could not be conclusively established
that the effect was specifically a consequence of the spatial
component of WM.
In this study, therefore, we had the following goals. First,
we wanted to use better controlled secondary tasks, applied
at more specific points during planning, to confirm whether
a secondary task loading on the spatial component of WM
does reduce idea development during outlining, and whether
this has an effect on the quality of the text that is then
produced. Second, we wanted to examine whether these
effects varied as a function of individual differences in selfmonitoring. We expected, on the basis of previous research,
that high self-monitors would develop their ideas more as a
consequence of outlining than the low self-monitors would.
Third, we wanted to explore the potential of an alternative
measure, based on latent semantic analysis, for capturing the
extent to which knowledge is transformed during writing.
Fourth, we wanted to assess the effects of outlining under

different secondary task conditions on text quality by using
a more detailed and objective set of measures of text
characteristics.

Method
Participants
96 undergraduate students at Staffordshire University, the
majority of whom (80%) were women, volunteered to
participate in the experiment in return for credits in the
Psychology department’s research participation scheme.
Their average age was 22.6 years (SD=6.8). Participants
were pre-selected using Snyder’s revised 18 item selfmonitoring scale (Snyder and Gangestad, 1986) to form two
groups of high and low self-monitors. They were classified
as low self-monitors (n = 48) if they scored between 0 and 8
on the scale, and as high self-monitors (n=48) if they scored
between 10 and 18 on the scale.

Design and procedure
Low and high self-monitors were randomly allocated to one
of four conditions, varying in the nature of the secondary
task imposed during the primary writing task.
Writing task In all four conditions, participants were asked
to write an article for the university newspaper discussing
the pros and cons of legalizing the use of cannabis and
justifying their own opinion of the matter. They were
reminded that they should be careful to consider both sides
of the issue and that they should try to produce a reasoned
argument justifying their position. They were told that they
would have 45 minutes to do this in, and the time would be
divided into 3 phases.
In phase 1, they were given 5 minutes to write down all
the ideas they could think of about the topic, with each idea
being in the form of a brief note or phrase, no longer than a
sentence in length.
In phase 2, they were given 10 minutes to work out an
organized outline of the article. They were instructed to
think about its overall structure, considering what order to
put their ideas in and how they could be grouped together.
They were allowed to use their initial list of ideas for
reference, but were free to change their ideas if they wanted
to. As with the initial list, each idea was to be expressed as a
brief note or phrase no longer than a sentence in length.
In phase 3, they were given 30 minutes to write the article
itself, and were reminded that they should consider both
sides of the issue, with the aim of producing a reasoned
argument justifying their position.
Secondary tasks In the control condition, participants
carried out the three phases of the writing task as normal
without any secondary task. In the remaining conditions,
participants were asked to carry out one of 3 secondary
tasks during phase 2 of the writing task. In each case, they
were given a brief time to practice the secondary task before
starting the writing task. During phase 2, secondary task

3029

probes were presented and participants were asked to make
a judgment about the stimuli, indicating their response by
clicking a button held in their non-writing hand. Probes
were presented randomly at intervals with a mean of 30 s
and a range of 15 s to 45 s. After participants had completed
the writing task, baseline data were collected using the same
procedure and schedule.
In the visual condition, following a warning tone,
participants were presented with three shapes in sequence
but at different locations on a computer monitor in front of
them, and asked to judge whether the shapes were the same
or different to those presented on the previous trial,
regardless of the locations they had appeared in. Same
responses were indicated by a button press; different
responses were indicated by the absence of a button press.
Stimuli were presented randomly at intervals with a mean of
30 seconds and a range of 15 to 45 seconds. In the spatial
condition, the same set of stimuli were randomly presented
on the same schedule, but participants were required to
judge whether the stimuli appeared in the same locations on
the screen as on the previous trial regardless of whether they
were the same shapes as before.
In the interference condition, participants were presented
with a warning tone occurring on the same interval schedule
as in the visual and spatial conditions, and asked to indicate
whether or not the screen “whited out” following the tone.

Measures
Development of ideas “Ideas” were defined as separate
chunks of text within the initial list produced during phase 1
or the outline produced during phase 2. Content ideas were
differentiated from rhetorical headings (e.g. “Introduction”,
“Pros”, “Cons”) and phrases consisting of instructions to the
writer without specific content (e.g. “Deal with potential
objections here”). The following scores were calculated:
number of ideas in initial list; number of rhetorical units in
initial list; number of “old” ideas retained from initial list in
outline; number of “new” ideas introduced into the outline;
number of rhetorical units in outline. Two judges scored all
the lists and outlines. Inter-rater reliabilities for these
measures ranged between R=.81 and R =.95 (p < .001 in all
cases). The means of the two judges’ scores for each
measure were used for analysis.
Semantic similarity of lists and outlines Latent semantic
analysis (LSA) was used to compare the semantic similarity
of the content in the lists produced in phase 1 and the
outlines produced in phase 2. LSA represents the meaning
of a text as a vector in a high-dimensional semantic space
constructed by singular value decomposition from word cooccurrences in a large sample of documents. Text
representations are constructed by summing the vector
representations of a text’s constituent words. Similarities in
the meaning of texts are represented by the cosines of the
angles between the vectors representing the two texts, which
vary between -1 and 1 and are ordered in the same manner
as correlations. (See Landauer, McNamara, Dennis and

Kintsch, 2007, for a collection of papers about the
underlying theory and its applications).
Comparisons of the lists and outlines were made using the
LSA website at Colorado University (http:lsa.colorado.edu).
The college reading space, with 300 factors defining the
dimensions of the semantic space, was used to make
document to document comparisons of each participant’s
initial list and outline. The resulting cosines were used to
represent the extent to which an initial list of ideas had been
transformed during the construction of the outline (with
high scores corresponding to a strong similarity in content
and low scores representing a greater change in content).
Coh-Metrix analysis of texts Coh-Metrix is a tool for the
automated analysis of text developed at the University of
Memphis. It calculates a wide range of indices of the
linguistic and discourse features of a text, including indices
of: general text and word properties; syntactic complexity;
pronoun use; positive and negative connectives of different
types; anaphoric references between sentences; coherence;
and a range of situation model dimensions. (See Graesser,
McNamara, Louwerse and Cai, 2004, for details of the
indices and the architecture of the text analysis tools).
All texts were analyzed using Coh-Metrix 2.0 at
http://cohmetrix.memphis.edu/cohmetrixpr/index.html.
Principal components analysis of the raw set of 53 initial
indices followed by varimax rotation suggested that the
original set could be reduced to 8 orthogonal components,
with the first component explaining 18% of the variance,
and the eighth component explaining 5% of the variance;
cumulative variance accounted for was 78%. Table 1 shows
the factor labels and gives an indication of their
interpretation. (Details are necessarily extremely brief
because of space limitations). Factor scores for each of these
components were used to assess effects on text properties.
Table 1: Text components and their interpretations.
Component
1 Local coherence
2 Anaphoric reference
3 Causal argument
4 Syntactic repetition
5 Elaborated text
6 Two-sided
argument
7 Logical argument
8 Global coherence

Interpretation
High argument overlap and semantic
similarity between sentences
High use of anaphoric reference and
pronouns in complex sentences
High use of causal connectives & verbs;
high ratio of causal particles to verbs
Syntactically similar sentences
Longer texts including negation and
logical operators
High use of negative additive and
logical connectives
High use of logical operators and
positive additive connectives
High semantic similarity between
paragraphs with conditional content

Subjective rating of text quality Two judges rated the
quality of the texts on a 9 point scale. They were asked to
imagine that they were the editor of the student newspaper
and consider the extent to which they would publish the

3030

article. Their judgments should be based on the coherence
of the overall argument, its originality, and the
appropriateness of the tone and the relation to the readership
of an article in the student newspaper. The correlation
between the two judge’s ratings was R=0.74, p< .001).

control condition (p=.04) and the interference condition
(p=.006) but that the difference with the visual condition
was not significant (p=.16)

Results
Secondary task performance
There was a highly significant reduction in accuracy (F(1,
66)=20.9, p<.001, η2=.24) and increase in response time
(F(1,66)= 20.2, p<.001, η2 =.24) when the secondary tasks
were carried out at the same time as outlining, as opposed to
during the baseline task, indicating that outlining interfered
with participants’ ability to perform the secondary task.
However, this did not interact with either self-monitoring or
condition (p>.52, η2<.02 for all tests), indicating that same
amount of attention and effort were paid to outlining in all
the secondary task conditions. Participants performed more
accurately (F(2,66)=14.41, p<.001, η2=.30), and responded
faster (F(2,65)=7.5, p=.001, η2=.19), to the secondary task
in the interference condition – where all they had to do was
indicate whether the screen had “whited out” – than they did
in either the spatial or the visual conditions (p<.005 in both
cases). However, there were no significant differences in
accuracy or response time between the visual and spatial
conditions or between low and high self-monitors. Taken
together, these results imply that the visual and spatial tasks
were of equivalent difficulty, and that any difference in their
effects on writing can be attributed to differences in the
components of WM they require rather than to a difference
in task difficulty.

Development of ideas during planning
There were no significant differences between the
conditions or between low and high self-monitors in the
number of ideas or in the total number of words produced in
the initial list (p>.21, η2<.02, for all effects). There were
also no significant differences in the number of old ideas
retained in the outline, or in the number of rhetorical
headings included in the outline, during phase 2 (p>.22,
η2<.02, for all effects). This suggests that self-monitoring
and the different types of secondary task had no effect on
the ability to generate ideas or on the selection of ideas from
the initial list for incorporation in the outlines.
A two-way between subjects ANCOVA with selfmonitoring and secondary task condition as independent
variables, and the number of ideas in the initial list as a
covariate, showed a significant main effect of secondary
task condition on the number of new ideas introduced
during the construction of the outline (F(3, 85)=3.30,
p=.024, η2=.10). (Note that the distribution of the new ideas
was positively skewed so logs were taken to normalize the
distributions). Figure 1 shows the mean number (logs) of
new ideas produced in each condition. Post–hoc
comparisons using Tukey’s HSD showed that the spatial
condition produced significantly fewer new ideas than the

Figure 1: Mean number of new ideas (log) as a function of
secondary task condition.

Semantic similarity of lists and outlines
The distribution of the cosines representing the semantic
similarity of the lists and the outlines was negatively
skewed so they were reflected and square rooted in order to
normalize the distribution. In order to assess the relationship
between this measure of semantic similarity and the analysis
of changes in ideas during outlining, the transformed
cosines were correlated with the number of old ideas
retained in the outlines and the number of new ideas
introduced in the outlines, controlling for the number of
ideas initially produced. These showed a significant positive
correlation between semantic similarity and the number of
old ideas retained (r=.51, p <.001) and a significant negative
correlation with the number of new ideas introduced (r=-.56,
p<.001). In combination, these two variables showed a
multiple correlation of R=.68 (p< 001) with the LSA scores.
This suggests that the LSA-based measure is a valid
measure of the extent to which content has been transformed
during outlining.
In order to assess the effects of self-monitoring and
secondary tasks on the extent to which semantic content of
was transformed during outlining, a 2-way between subjects
ANOVA was carried out on the LSA scores. This showed a
significant main effect of self-monitoring (F(1,78)=4.00,
p=.049, η2=.05) but no effect of secondary task (p=.63,
η2=.02) and no interaction between self-monitoring and
secondary task condition (p=.57, η2=.02). High selfmonitors’ outlines were less similar to their initial lists
(median=.72, interquartile range = .22) than the low selfmonitors’ (median=.79, interquartile range = .19) were. In
other words, high self-monitors changed the semantic
content of their outlines more than low self-monitors did.
The fact that these results are so different to those for
analysis of the number of new ideas suggests that the LSA
measure captures different aspects of change in content. In
particular, we suspect that it captures changes to implicit
semantic content, whereas the coding of ideas captures how

3031

content is explicitly represented as separate ideas. In order
to test this hypothesis we repeated the two-way between
subjects ANCOVA assessing the effects of self-monitoring
and secondary task condition on the development of new
ideas with the LSA measure added as a covariate. This
showed a similar main effect of secondary task (F(3,
76)=4.04, p=.01, η2=.14) but, in addition, post hoc
comparisons showed that the spatial condition produced
significantly fewer new ideas than each of the other
conditions. For the comparison with the control condition,
p=.007; with the visual condition, p=.04; and with the
interference condition, p=.002. This implies that a more
refined measure of the number of new ideas relative to the
amount of change in semantic content provides a more
sensitive indicator of the effect of the spatial secondary task.

Text quality
Subjective ratings A 2-way between subjects ANOVA was
used to assess the effects of self-monitoring and secondary
task on the subjective ratings of the quality of the text
produced in phase 3. This showed a significant main effect
of secondary task (F(3, 88)=3.58, p=.02, η2=.11) but no
effect of self-monitoring or interaction with self-monitoring.
Texts produced in the control condition (M=5.94, sd=2.16)
were rated of higher quality than in all the secondary task
conditions, with the difference being significant for the
comparisons with the interference condition (M=4.15,
sd=2.04, p=.02), marginally significant for the comparison
with the spatial condition (M=4.46 , sd=2.15 , p=.07), and
non-significant for the comparison with the visual condition
(M=4.62, sd=1.75, p =.12). There were no significant
differences between the secondary task conditions.
Coh-Metrix Multiple regression was used to assess the
relationship between the factors identified using Coh-Metrix
and subjectively rated text quality.
This showed a
significant multiple correlation between text quality and
four of the factors (R=.51, p < .001), which accounted for
23% of the variance in the quality ratings. The four factors
which made significant independent contributions to this
relationship were: anaphoric reference (a negative
correlation) (partial r= -.30, p<.004); elaborated text (partial
r=.36, p<.001); logical argument (partial r=.21, p<.05); and
global coherence (partial r=.23, p<.05). This suggests that
longer more elaborated texts, which included opposed but
logically coherent arguments, integrated by co- rather than
anaphoric reference, were given higher quality ratings.
We then examined what effect self-monitoring and
secondary task condition had on these objective features of
the text. There were 3 significant effects here. First, there
was a significant effect of self-monitoring on the local
coherence of the text ((F(1, 88)=10.88, p=.001, η2=.11),
with low self-monitors (M=.32, sd=1.10) producing more
locally coherent text than high self-monitors (M=-.32, sd
=.80).
Second, there was a marginally significant effect of
secondary task condition on anaphoric reference ((F(3,

88)=2.55, p=.06, η2=.08), with all secondary task conditions
showing higher levels of anaphoric reference than the
control condition (M=-.038, sd=.78) but with only the
difference in the visual condition (M=.37, sd=1.15) showing
a significant effect on post-hoc comparisons (p=.04). The
spatial (M=-.05, SD=1.1, p=.62) and interference conditions
(M=.06, SD=.88, p=.38), though higher, were not
significantly different to the control or visual conditions.
These results are important insofar as this factor showed a
significant relationship with subjective ratings of quality.
They suggest that this may be an important feature of how
planning affects the quality of the final text. However, it is
less clear what aspect of planning is responsible for the
effect. It may be specific to the visual condition, but could
also be a more general effect of disrupting planning.
Third, there was a significant effect of secondary task on
two-sided argument (as indicated by a high incidence of
negative additive and logical connectives) (F(3, 87)=3.55, p
.02, η2=.11). As can be seen in figure 2, the spatial condition
showed less use of these kinds of connectives than the
control (p=.03) and interference (p=.03) conditions, and less
than in the visual condition, but not significantly so (p=.16).

Figure 2: Mean score on two-sided argument factor as a
function of secondary task condition.

Conclusions
Our first conclusion is that a secondary task loading on the
spatial component of WM does reduce the extent to which
writers develop new ideas during outlining.
This
strengthens the findings of Galbraith et al (2005) because
the effect persisted even with these better controlled
secondary tasks. It is worth noting, however, that the initial
analysis failed to show a significant difference between the
spatial and the visual conditions. Although this is probably
simply a matter of statistical power, which could be tested
by a replication with a larger sample, it may also be a
question of how the effect is defined. When the LSA
measure of change in semantic content was added as a
covariate, the effect increased, and the difference with the
visual condition became significant. We think that this is
because adding the LSA measure effectively converts the
score to a ratio measure: it reflects the extent to which a
given amount of change in semantic content has been

3032

differentiated into separate ideas. If this is correct, it implies
that the spatial task reduces the extent to which writers are
capable of differentiating new content into distinct ideas,
and that the function of this component of WM during
outlining is to enable the writer to articulate a global change
in semantic content into discrete ideas.
Our second important finding was that, although the
spatial secondary task was associated with a reduction in
text quality, this was also true of the other secondary task
conditions. In particular, the interference task was also
associated with a reduction in quality. This implies that the
effect could be a consequence of a general disruption of
planning rather than a specific effect of the spatial
component of WM. This possibility is partly ruled out by
the fact that the spatial task did have a specific effect on the
incidence of negative additive and logical connectives.
Since negative connectives of this type are associated with
the presentation of two-sided arguments, this implies that
writers in the spatial condition were less able to generate
counterarguments to their position, perhaps because they
were less able to simultaneously represent different views
on a common topic. However, since this effect was not
significantly different to the visual condition, we cannot be
absolutely sure that this is a distinctive effect of the spatial
component of WM. Further research with a larger sample is
required to establish whether this effect is unique to the
spatial condition.
The addition of self-monitoring as an independent
variable in this experiment revealed several new findings.
First, the high self-monitors changed the semantic content
of their outlines more than the low self-monitors, which is
consistent with the findings of previous research showing
that high self-monitors develop their ideas more during
planning than low self-monitors do (Galbraith, in press;
Galbraith, Torrance and Hallam, 2006). This is assumed to
be a consequence of high self-monitors adapting the content
of their texts more to rhetorical goals. However, the fact that
this greater change in semantic content was not associated
with a concomitant difference in the number of new ideas
produced by low and high self-monitors suggest that there
may also be differences in the extent to which low and high
self-monitors differentiate semantic content into separate
ideas during planning. Second, there was a marked
difference in the local coherence of the texts produced by
low and high self-monitors. The natural explanation for this
is the greater amount of change in semantic content for high
self-monitors during planning. This would also fit with
Galbraith et al.’s (2006) finding that new ideas developed
by high self-monitors after writing planned texts were less
coherently related to one another than new ideas generated
by low self-monitors (note though that this was a different
kind of measure and was not text-based). However, since
there was no direct correlation between the extent to which
semantic content changed during planning and the local
coherence of the resulting text, it may be that this difference
is a consequence of a difference in how the two groups
construct adjacent sentences during text production, rather

than of the difference in the effects of outlining. Whatever
the precise explanation of these differences, they do provide
further strong evidence that self-monitoring has important
effects on both planning and text production, and are
compatible with the assumptions that the dual process
model makes about the way that low and high self-monitors
prioritize planning and text production processes.
Finally, this study demonstrates the utility of both LSA
and Coh-Metrix as tools for investigating writing. In this
experiment, LSA not only correlated well with human
coding of development in ideas but also provided direct
evidence of a difference - the effect of self-monitoring on
changes in content during planning - that was not detected
by other measures. From a theoretical point of view, it also
promises to provide a means of capturing effects of implicit
semantic memory processes on writing. Coh-Metrix also
proved to be a valuable tool for identifying the effect of the
independent variables on specific text features. Global
quality ratings, though useful in providing a general
indication of whether a particular strategy is effective or not,
do not provide information about how specifically the
strategy has its effect on the text. With larger samples than
used in this experiment, we should be able to use path
analysis to identify the relationships between experimental
manipulations, their effects on planning processes, and
specific features of the resulting texts.

References
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The Psychology of
Written Composition. Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Galbraith, D. (in press). Writing as discovery. British
Journal of Educational Psychology Monograph Series II,
Number 6 - Learning and Teaching Writing.
Galbraith, D., Ford, S., Walker, G. & Ford, J. (2005). The
contribution of different components of WM to
knowledge transformation during writing. Educational
Studies in Language and Literature, 15, 113-145.
Galbraith, D., Torrance, M. & Hallam, J. (2006). Effects of
writing on conceptual coherence. Proceedings of Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1340-1345.
Graesser, A., McNamara, D. S., Louwerse, M. M., & Cai, Z.
(2004). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and
language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and
Computers, 36, 193-202.
Kellogg, R. T. (1988). Attentional overload and writing
performance: Effects of rough draft and outline strategies.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 14, 355-365.
Landauer, T. K., McNamara, D. S., Dennis, S., & Kintsch,
W. (2007). Handbook of Latent Semantic Analysis.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Snyder, M., & Gangestad, S. (1986). On the nature of selfmonitoring: Matters of assessment, matters of validity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 125139.

3033

