UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thomas' theorem meets Bayes' rule: a model of the iterated learning of language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/89k9s2br

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Ferdinand, Vanessa
Zuidema, Willem

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thomas’ theorem meets Bayes’ rule: a model of the iterated learning of language
Vanessa Ferdinand (v.a.ferdinand@uva.nl)
Willem Zuidema (zuidema@uva.nl)
Cognitive Science Center Amsterdam & Institute for Logic, Language and Computation,
University of Amsterdam, Plantage Muidergracht 24, 1018 TV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Abstract
We develop a Bayesian Iterated Learning Model (BILM) that
models the cultural evolution of language as it is transmitted
over generations of learners. We study the outcome of iterated learning in relation to the behavior of individual agents
(their biases) and the social structure through which they transmit their behavior. BILM makes individual learning biases
explicit and offers a direct comparison of how individual biases relate to the outcome of iterated learning. Most earlier
BILMs use simple one parent to one child (monadic) chains of
homogeneous learners to study the outcome of iterated learning in terms of bias manipulations. Here, we develop a BILM
to study two novel manipulations in social parameters: population size and population heterogeneity, to determine more
precisely what the transmission process itself can add to the
outcome of iterated learning. Our monadic model replicates
the existing BILM results, however our manipulations show
that the outcome of iterated learning is sensitive to more factors than are explicitly encoded in the prior. This calls into
question the appropriateness of assuming strong Bayesian inference in the iterated learning framework and has important
implications for the study of language evolution in general.

Introduction
The language that you speak is not a product of your mind
alone. Of course, in acquiring language, you did bring to task
a sophisticated learning apparatus able to discover intricate
patterns and track frequency distributions at all levels of linguistic analysis. However, you learned your language from
data that had been shaped by countless generations of language learners and users before you. Without this history,
your personal language would have looked quite different.
In the field of language evolution, the iterated learning
model (ILM) has emerged as a popular formalization of this
cultural transmission of language over successive generations. Through a series of models, it has become clear that
the iteration of learning may have profound influences on
the resulting languages. Many of the defining features of
natural language have been shown to be possible results of
iteration, including compositional semantics and recursiveness (Kirby, 2002) and the bidirectionality of the sign (Smith,
2002). Moreover, these models have shown that the learnability of language in an important sense comes for free: seemingly arbitrary choices of current learners are correct precisely because they are the same choices as those made by the
previous generations (Deacon, 1997; Zuidema 2003). This is
an instance of Thomas’ theorem: "If men define situations as
real, they are real in their consequences" (Thomas & Thomas,
1928).
However, learning in the ILM tradition is operationalized
with a variety of adhoc learning algorithms and many questions remain about the role and appropriateness of the built-in

biases. One way to disentangle the role of the learning biases
and the role of cultural transmission in iterated learning is to
implement ILMs with Bayesian rational agents, whose inductive biases are explicitly coded. The first main BILM result
of this kind was that the outcome of iterated learning (i.e. the
stationary distribution of the transition matrix describing transition probabilities between all possible languages) exactly
mirrors the agents’ distribution over priors. This result implied that the learners’ biases entirely determine the outcome
of iterated learning (Griffiths and Kalish, 2005). However,
when agents with a different hypothesis selection strategy are
used (i.e. they maximize as opposed to sample from the posterior probabilities over hypotheses), the outcome of iterated
learning amplifies the biases and does not mirror the prior
exactly (Kirby et al, 2007). This is taken as evidence that
cultural transmission is adding something to the outcome of
iterated learning.
Given that ILMs are complex, dynamical systems we
should look at the outcome of iterated learning as a product
of the behavior of individual agents (agent properties) and the
ways in which they interact (social properties). In this way,
we can make a clear distinction between which aspects of the
outcome can be attributed to agent biases and which aspects
can be attributed to the transmission process itself. Normally,
only manipulations to the agent itself are made (in terms of
bias values and hypothesis selection strategies) and any outcomes that do not strictly mirror the bias are attributed to unspecified additions of the cultural transmission process.
In the present research, we have chosen to manipulate two
social parameters: population size and bias heterogeneity. In
doing so, we find that the outcome of iterated learning no
longer mirrors the prior and is sensitive to more biases in the
Bayesian agent than are explicitly encoded in the prior. If
the prior can no longer be seen as encoding the whole of an
agent’s bias, this calls into question the appropriateness of the
current BILM framework as a remedy for explicitly linking
specific properties of the agents to the outcome of iterated
learning.

Model description
In this section we outline the components of a Bayesian
ILM and describe how they are implemented in our model.
The components are the standard ones from any Bayesian
inference model (hypothesis space, data, prior, posterior)
combined with those from iterated learning (the learners or
’agents’, data production, population structure). The implementation and analysis were all carried out in Matlab (for details, see Ferdinand & Zuidema, 2008).

1786

Figure 1: Graph of hypotheses [.6 .3
.1; .2 .6 .2; .1 .3 .6] and example
prior vector [.7 .2 .1]. Each hypothesis’ shape is entirely determined by
the likelihoods it assigns to the data.

prior

t

prior

h

d

h

t+1

d

prior

t+2

h

d

h

h

h

prior

prior

prior

Figure 2: Bayesian iterated learning,
in the monadic (black) and polyadic
(+green/grey) condition. When all priors are equal, the chain is called homogeneous, otherwise it is heterogeneous.

Hypotheses: agents are assumed to consider a fixed set of
hypotheses about the state of the world. Each of these hypotheses assigns different likelihoods to each of a fixed set
of possible observations (they are thus probability distributions over data, P(d|h)). These hypotheses could represent, for instance, different languages that generate a set of
utterances, or different functions that describe a set of data
points. The exact nature of the hypotheses is left unspecified, but the basic properties of the model should be generalizable to a variety of systems where information is culturally transmitted (including not only language, but also,
e.g., music and bird song). In this paper, the hypotheses are
set at the beginning of each simulation and are the same for
all agents. In our examples, we will use a set of hypotheses
of size three: h ∈ H = {h1 , h2 , h3 }.
Data: The observations that an agent can make about the
state of the world will be referred to as data points. Data
points are from a fixed set of possible values and in
our model we restrict the size of this set to three: D =
{d1 , d2 , d3 }. In linguistic terms, a data point can be interpreted as any piece of evidence (a “trigger”) that the target
language has a particular property. Different hypotheses
assign different likelihoods to different data points. Multiple data points may be organized into a string, where the
likelihood of the string is the product of the likelihoods of
the points. Data in our model is any such string of length
b ≥ 1: d ∈ Db .
Prior probability: The prior is a probability distribution
over hypotheses, defining the probability P(h) assigned to
each hypothesis before any data is seen. Thus, the prior
models the inductive bias of the learner. An example shorthand we will use to note the prior is [.7 .2 .1], where the
prior probabilities for h1 , h2 and h3 are .7, .2 and .1, respectively1 .
1 Note that in Bayesian modelling the choice of priors is typically constrained by a set of principles that assure the outcome is
not trivially steered by the modeller (e.g., priors must be uninformative) and that calculations remain feasible (e.g., priors must be
conjugate to the likelihood function). In our model, we allow any
choice of prior over any set of hypotheses; this is ‘unorthodox’ yet

Figure 3: Hypothesis structure and priors
affect stationary distribution of monadic
maximizers. b=1; hypotheses [α (1 −
α)/2) (1 − α)/2); (1 − x)/2 x (1 − x)/2;
(1 − α)/2) (1 − α)/2) α], with x on horizontal axis and α = .33 in curve (a), .4 in
(b), .6 in (c) and .8 in (d).

Agents perform inference by combining their prior beliefs
and observations of data using Bayes’ rule:
P(h|d) =

P(d|h)P(h)
P(d)

(1)

where P(h|d) denotes the posterior probability that a hypothesis could have generated the data in question and P(d) =
∑h∈H P(h)P(d|h) is the probability of the data averaged over
all hypotheses.
Hypothesis choice: Once the posterior probabilities are calculated, we still need a strategy to choose one particular hypothesis h, from which to generate the data. We
consider the same two strategies as in much earlier literature: (i) the maximizer simply chooses the hypothesis with
the maximum posterior probability (MAP) or, if there are
multiple maximums, a random one from the set of MAPhypotheses; (ii) the sampler chooses one hypothesis randomly, but weighted by the posterior probabilities.
Data Production: Once a hypothesis is chosen, the next
step is to generate new data using that hypothesis. For
instance, assuming the agent has chosen h1 , each data
point in the output string will be randomly generated, but
weighted according to the likelihood of each data point under h1 . The number of data points in this string defines
the “transmission bottleneck” b. A characteristic string
of size b = 10 under hypothesis h1 of figure 1 would be
< d1 d1 d1 d2 d1 d2 d2 d1 d3 d1 >.
Population structure: Agents are organized into discrete
generations of one or more individuals (figure 2). If
the number of agents per generation is exactly 1, the
model resembles previous ILMs; we will call this condition monadic. We will also consider larger populations, a
condition labeled polyadic. Because each generation only
learns from the previous, the model can – regardless of
very relevant for some of our results, as one reviewer notes, but it is
consistent with our view that it is the reality of human biology that
ultimately determines which priors and hypotheses are appropriate
in linguistic modelling, and not the mathematical convenience for
the modeller.

1787

the population size – be characterized as a Markov chain2 ,
where the population at time t (after learning) is characterized as a vector of hypotheses (~ht ), and for each pair
of hypotheses < ht , ht+1 > the probability of transitioning
from one to the other is given by ∑d P(d|ht ) × P(ht+1 |d).
Cultural transmission (iteration) is modeled by using each
generation’s output data string as the next generation’s input
data string. All agents in one generation produce the same
number of data samples, which are all concatenated into the
output data string for that generation. The likelihood of a
data string is invariant to the order of the data samples it
contains. Each agent has no way of knowing the number of
agents which produced the data string or which data came
from which agent. Additionally, each generation has an identical composition of agents as the generation before it. If a
population is heterogeneous, then the same set of heterogeneous agents occur in each generation.

theory of language universals and variation: it gives the relative frequencies with which we should see particular language
variants, when very many (N → ∞) independent cultural evolution chains have run for a very long time (t → ∞).
In an experimental run, the relative frequency of all chosen
hypotheses are also entirely determined by the transition matrix, but because a run contains a finite number of transitions,
it represents one actual trajectory of transitions, from a larger
set of probable trajectories under that matrix. However, when
a large number of transitions can be recorded in a simulation
(by setting the number of generations sufficiently high), then
a tally of the actual hypotheses chosen by the agents over the
course of the simulation closely approximates the analytical
stationary distribution. This is the normalized hypothesis history (HH); it is a reliable, experimental approximation of the
stationary distribution and is reported in most of our results.

Monadic iterated learning

Results

Griffiths & Kalish (2005) showed, both analytically and numerically, that the stationary distribution of iterated learning
of monadic (i.e., a single agent per generation) samplers mirrors the prior, independently from hypothesis structure or bottleneck size. In our numerical model we easily replicate this
result; for all choices of priors, hypotheses and bottlenecks
we find that the (approximation) of the stationary distribution
(approximately) matches the prior (table 1).

We will study this model numerically while varying the prior,
hypothesis structure, bottleneck size, hypothesis choice strategy, population size, and population heterogeneity in terms of
different priors per agent. In this section we will first briefly
describe how we monitor the behavior of the model. We then
show our model can replicate aspects of previous Bayesian
ILMs. We will then address new findings for multi-agent populations with heterogeneous and homogeneous biases.

Monitoring model behaviour
We are looking for features that are invariant as well as
changes in the dynamics of the model that can be causally
attributed to specific changes in parameter settings. A concrete representation of a “dynamical fingerprint” can be obtained by constructing a transition matrix Q for each model.
This matrix gives the probabilities that any of the hypotheses
will lead to itself or any other hypothesis in the next generation. In linguistic terms, the transition matrix is the idealized
equivalent of a theory of (generational) language change: it
gives the probability that a language in a particular state at
generation t will change into any of a set of possible states at
generation t + 1 (cf. Niyogi, 2002).
If an ILM simulation could be run for an infinite amount
of time, the relative frequency of each chosen hypothesis
would settle into a particular distribution that is determined
entirely by these transition probabilities. This distribution is
known as the stationary distribution and serves as an idealized shorthand for the “outcome of iterated learning”. The
stationary distribution is proportional to the first eigenvector
of the transition matrix (Griffiths & Kalish, 2005). In some
cases, we can therefore easily determine the stationary distribution analytically. In linguistic terms, the stationary distribution is the idealized equivalent of linguistic typology, a
2 (Note that for large populations and large sets of hypotheses the

transition matrix is of course too big to calculate exhaustively, but
identifying a system as a Markov chain can help us decide on the
right approximations to study such systems in simulations.

S1
S2
M1
M2

analytical
h1
h2
h3
.7
.2
.1
.7
.2
.1
.33 .33 .33
.83 .15 .03

h1
.6946
.7095
.3310
.8167

numerical
h2
.2040
.1939
.3327
.1553

h3
.1014
.0966
.3363
.0280

Table 1: Analytically and numerically determined stationary
distributions for 4 conditions of the monadic BILM. S marks
sampler, M maximizer, and the 1 and 2 give bottleneck sizes.
Prior = [.7 .2 .1], hypotheses as in figure 1; 10000 iterations.
One interpretation of this result is that, in the end, the features of the languages of the world are entirely determined
by the biases of the learner – but we will see that this interpretation is incorrect. (Kirby, Dowman, & Griffiths, 2007)
emphasized that in the maximizer condition, iterated learning will not converge to the prior. They describe the maximizer stationary distributions as amplifying the structure of
the prior, although they are careful to note that the exact distribution will depend on the hypothesis structure. We find that
it is in fact easy to choose parameters such that the stationary
distribution is entirely determined by the hypothesis structure
and prior play no role, as shown in the third line of table 1.
In figure 3 we show an example of the complex interaction
between priors and hypothesis structure under the maximizer
condition.

1788

Polyadic iterated learning
In our model, each agent in a polyadic run sees the same data
string, separately calculates its posterior values, chooses its
own hypothesis, and generates its own data. The data from
all agents of the same generation are then concatenated into
one unified data string, which is given to the next generation
as their input. When the population size is set to any number
n and the number of data samples is set to m, the bottleneck
size is b = n × m.
The polyadic and monadic configurations thus differ in
one respect: the data string that is passed between generations is not stochastically generated from one single hypothesis, but from multiple. This has different consequences for
the maximizer and the sampler models.We find that polyadic
maximizers behave almost exactly as monadic maximizers.
Polyadic samplers, however, show markedly different behavior. In particular, samplers in this condition do not converge
to the prior. This seems to be in contradiction with the mathematical result in Kalish et al. (2007), who show that their
single-agent results can be generalized to multi-agent populations, where the stationary distribution will continue to mirror
the prior.
It is worthwhile working out the reasons for this difference.
First consider a homogeneous, polyadic maximizer model.
The behavior of all agents in the population is identical: because all agents receive the same data string and have identical priors and hypotheses, the posterior of all agents will be
the same. Maximizers will all choose the same hypothesis,
because this choice is based on the maximum value of their
identical posteriors. The only exception is when there are
multiple maximum values in their posterior. In this case, they
each choose one of the maximum value hypotheses randomly,
with equal weight. This situation generally only arises when
there is no bias in the prior values (to help diversify the posterior values). Aside from this exception, multiple maximizers
producing m samples, is equivalent to a single maximizer producing n × m samples. Therefore, maximizer dynamics due
to population size are identical to the dynamics due to a larger
bottleneck.
For a homogeneous, polyadic sampler model, the dynamics are very different. Because samplers choose their hypotheses weighted by their posteriors, a homogeneous population will not choose the same hypotheses. Therefore, the
actual data the next generation receives, may come from individuals with different hypotheses. This implies that the data
is a sample from the product of the distributions defined by
the hypotheses of those individuals. The actual probability
distribution over possible data strings is therefore not among
the set of hypotheses entertained by our learners!
This has interesting implications concerning the Bayesian
rationality of the agents. In general, when a string of data is
generated from a set of likelihoods which learners are not explicitly given, then they are not longer perfect Bayesian reasoners. This is exactly the case with a multi-population of
samplers. When a data string is generated from 2 different

hypotheses, these probabilities do not conform to the likelihoods as defined by any of their hypotheses. The result is, for
a multi-agent population of samplers, the stationary distribution no longer mirrors the prior (figure 4).

Figure 4: The maximizer model’s stationary distribution is invariant to population size. For samplers, population size does
affect the dynamics and the stationary distribution no longer
mirrors the prior. Stationary distributions for populations 1
and 2, for maximizer and sampler models with: prior [.7 .2
.1], hypotheses [.8 .1 .1; .1 .8 .1; .1 .1 .8], 10,000 generations.
Hence, the mathematical proof of (Griffiths & Kalish,
2005) requires, in practice, that each sampler is given a new
set of hypotheses, for each corresponding population size,
where each hypothesis represents the combined likelihood set
for each possible combination of hypotheses that the agents of
the population may have when outputting into the data string.
This set is different when learners learn from 1, 2, 3, . . ., 100
individuals, but the proof requires a perfect hypothesis space.
The stationary distribution of polyadic samplers are a function of priors, hypotheses and population size. Figure 5 (left)
shows that the stationary distribution mirrors the prior less
and less as the hypothesis structure becomes strongly peaked
and the prior more biased. However, for a combination of
relatively flat hypotheses and weakly biased priors, the stationary distribution still mirrors the prior. Furthermore, increasing the population size systematically amplifies the effect of the likelihoods on the sampler’s stationary distribution
(figure 5, right). The figure also shows that the stationary
distribution reflects hypotheses structure in the absence of a
prior bias.

Heterogeneous iterated learning
Finally, we implemented a heterogeneous ILM by taking a
polyadic model and assigning different prior vectors to each
of the agents (figure 2). This model, therefore, is the most
complex of all models constructed. The main result is that
heterogeneous agents’ hypotheses choices converge as they
are allowed to share more and more data, despite having fixed
and different priors from each other. In the case of heterogeneous samplers, we find that the stationary distribution is
simply the average of the stationary distributions of the corresponding homogeneous sampler runs. In the case of maximizers, however, the heterogeneous stationary distribution is
not a simple average, and depends on all hypothesis structures
and priors (details in Ferdinand & Zuidema, 2008).

1789

Figure 5: Population size amplifies sampler sensitivity to hypotheses structure. Hypotheses: a [.8 .1 .1; .1 .8 .1; .1 .1 .8],
b [.4 .3 .3; .1 .8 .1; .3 .3 .4], c [.8 .1 .1; .3 .4 .3; .1 .1 .8]; prior
= unbiased. Population sizes n=1 to 5.

Discussion
This Bayesian ILM both replicated the general properties of
previous existing Bayesian ILMs and provided new results regarding multi-agent populations and bias heterogeneity. The
replications are that a monadic sampler’s stationary distribution always mirrors the prior bias of the agent (Griffiths
& Kalish, 2005), and a maximizer’s stationary distribution
is determined both by the prior and the hypothesis structure
(Kalish et al., 2007). Also, for a range of parameters, the prior
has no effect on the maximizer stationary distribution (Smith
& Kirby, 2008), but above this threshold, iterated learning
amplifies this bias (Kirby et al., 2007). Additionally, a strong
bottleneck effect was observed, with the general effect of increasing transmission fidelity of both the sampler and maximizer models (Kalish et al., 2007). All of these replications
attest to this particular implementation as a valid Bayesian
iterated learning model.
Throughout the replication work, new insights into the role
of data likelihoods for both the maximizer and sampler were
obtained. The focus of all previous research with Bayesian
ILMs is the on the prior and how its manipulations affect the
stationary distribution. Kalish et al. (2007) manipulated the
degree of hypotheses overlap, as well as noise level, but it appears their hypothesis structures were all symmetrical. Smith
& Kirby (2008) demonstrate that the maximizer strategy of
hypothesis choice is evolutionarily stable over that of samplers. However, the maximizer parameters for which this result was proven, it seems, were again derived from a symmetrical hypothesis structure and for the range of priors which are
unaffected by bias strength. The result is consistent behavior
of the Smith & Kirby’s maximizer model over the bias values
they selected. Our results show that this is a subset of maximizer behavior and that unstable behavior is easily obtained
for the right relationship between hypotheses and priors. So,
perhaps maximizer would not be the evolutionary stable strategy in all cases, and a certain range of maximizer parameters
is evolutionary stable over other maximizer parameter sets.
Knowledge of this kind would help guide the choice of max-

imizer parameter sets to use for iterated learning simulations.
Our main result, however, was obtained from a manipulation in population size. By just increasing the population
size to 2, the sampler model’s stationary distribution does not
strictly mirror the prior. One response to this finding could
be to claim that we have made a mistake by not giving our
agents the right set of hypotheses. Indeed, in a Bayesian rational analysis it is the task of the modeller to choose hypothesis structure and prior carefully such that it objectively represents the uncertainty the learner faces. The learner doesn’t
have to actually use any of the Bayesian apparatus; it might
rely on completely different heuristics that have somehow
(e.g., by natural selection) been optimized to approximate
the Bayesian rational solution (i.e., it is a normative model).
However, if this line of attack is chosen, it should apply to all
cases where iterated learning does not converge to the prior
(and we listed many). In the stationary distribution, the objective prior probability for learners is the stationary distribution.
A Bayesian rational analysis of iterated learning that predicts
non-convergence to the prior is thus inconsistent.
The alternative response is to acknowledge that the prior
probabilities and the hypothesis structure (i.e., likelihoods)
together instantiate the subjective biases of the individual
agents. The Bayesian inference in that case should be interpreted as a descriptive model, and the components of the
Bayesian apparatus must somehow correspond to cognitively
real processes. We have seen that convergence to the prior
only occurs in the exceptional case that (i) learners have perfect knowledge of the possible sources of the data they are
learning from, (ii) they carry out the Bayesian probability
calculation perfectly and (iii) they then sample from the posterior. In all other cases – which include human language
learning, we suggest – predicting stationary distributions is
in fact a difficult task that depends on many variables. The
results in this paper form a further contribution to developing
the computational tools for that task.
Hence, Bayesian Iterated Learning does not actually give
us what it was intended to: an explicit and complete quantification of an agent’s bias. When we look at the cultural transmission system as a sum of the agents’ behavior and the way
they interact (the social structure) we see the prior does not
quantify the whole agent’s bias. We see that not only does the
hypothesis choice strategy affects agent behavior and therefore the outcome of iterated learning, but hypothesis structure
does the same (since we show an effect of different hypothesis structures on the stationary distribution). If we attribute
these components to a cognitive agent, they should all fall under the agent’s bias (innate or learned) if the bias is everything
that the learner brings to the task - so everything besides the
data itself.
Moreover, the particular dynamics which previously
thought to differentiate the sampler and maximizer models,
may not be as clear cut as they seemed and non-convergence
to the prior cannot be taken as direct evidence against the
sampling strategy or support for the maximizer strategy.

1790

These results are bad news when trying to interpet iterated
learning experiments with human and animal subjects, aimed
at connecting their learning biases to the outcomes of iteration
(Kalish, Griffiths, & Lewandowsky, 2007; Kirby, Cornish, &
Smith, 2008)

manipulation
prior (b is small)
prior (b is large)
hypothesis structure
population size
homo/heterogeneity

monadic
S
M
+
+
+
+

polyadic
S
M
+
+
+
+
+
-

heterogen.
S
M
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

Table 2: Summary of manipulations and effects. S and M
mark samplers and maximizers. A ‘+’ indicates that the (average) stationary distribution will change when the given manipulation is applied.
However, on a more positive note, we find that the stationary distributions in the many different conditions – monadic
or polyadic, samplers or maximizers, homogeneous or heterogeneous – are selectively responsive to particular manipulations of the iterated learning regime. In table 2 we give a
summary of our results; the table indicates, for instance, that
if a population is assumed to be homogeneous, then change
in population size is the relevant manipulation to distinguish
between maximizers and samplers. Similarly, in monadic iterated learning, a change in hypothesis structure should only
result in a different stationary distribution when learners are
maximizers.

models, these caveats are often overlooked. In particular, a
Bayesian rational analysis is not applicable here. In such an
analysis, we (i) take the learning problem as fixed, and (ii)
calculate the ’rational’ strategy that would allow children to
solve it in an optimal way, and (iii) assume that the actual
learning strategy approximates the rational one. The latter
(iii) is a very strong assumption in general, but particularily
problematic in iterated learning where (i) is violated.
A consistent interpretation of Bayesian Iterated Learning
must therefore take the BI as an accurate description of individual learning. The ILM takes (i) the learning strategy as
fixed, and studies (ii) how the learning problem – the language – changes over generations, and, while it becomes better fitted to the learning strategies, (iii) gives rise to language
universals and variation. However, under this interpretation,
Bayesian rationality cannot be assumed and convergence to
the prior is rather the exception than the rule. This leaves the
original linguistic challenge – how are language universals
and learner biases connected? – still unsolved, although we
have progressed yet another step in developing the theoretical
and experimental paradigms for addressing that question and
established that cultural transmission really adds something
to the explanation.

Conclusions
Children learn their native language efficiently and accurately
from very noisy data provided by earlier generations. Understanding how they accomplish this task, and why it is so difficult to mimick their learning in computer models, is a key
challenge for the cognitive sciences. In recent years, two approaches for solving bits of the puzzle – Bayesian inference
and iterated learning – have yielded many new insights. In a
series of papers, Griffiths, Kalish and co-workers have combined the strengths of Bayesian modelling and iterated learning (Kalish et al., 2007; Kirby et al., 2007), and developed a
mathematical framework for understanding the dynamics of
cultural transmission and the roles of learning and innateness
in shaping the languages we see today. The best known result
from this work so far, is that “iterated learning converges to
the prior” (Griffiths & Kalish, 2005).
In this paper, we have extended this work by investigating the outcomes of iterated learning under a number of manipulations, including an increase in population size and heterogeneity of biases. However, by detailing several apparent
counterexamples to the “convergence to the prior” results, our
results also point to some caveats in the interpretation of those
earlier results and of Bayesian models of cognition more generally. Perhaps due to the mathematical sophistication of such

1791

References
Deacon, T. (1997). Symbolic species, the co-evolution of language and the human brain. The Penguin Press.
Ferdinand, V., & Zuidema, W. (2008). Language adapting to the
brain: a study of a Bayesian iterated learning model. (Tech.
Rep. No. PP-2008-54). University of Amsterdam.
Griffiths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2005). A Bayesian view of
language evolution by iterated learning. In Proc. of the 27th
annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Kalish, M., Griffiths, T., & Lewandowsky, S. (2007). Iterated
learning: Intergenerational knowledge transmission reveals inductive biases. Psych. Bulletin and Review, 14(2), 288.
Kirby, S. (2002). Learning, bottlenecks and the evolution of
recursive syntax. In T. Briscoe (Ed.), Linguistic evolution
through language acquisition: formal and computational models. Cambridge University Press.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental approach to
the origins of structure in human language. PNAS, 105(31),
10681-10686.
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. L.(2007). Innateness and
culture in the evolution of language. PNAS, 104(12), 52415245.
Niyogi, P. (2002). Theories of cultural evolution and their applications to language change. In T. Briscoe (Ed.), Linguistic
evolution through language acquisition: formal and computational models. Cambridge University Press.
Smith, K. (2002). The cultural evolution of communication in a
population of neural networks. Connection Sci., 14(1), 65-84.
Thomas, W., & Thomas, D. (1928). The child in america: Behavior problems and programs. New York: Knopf.
Zuidema, W. (2003). How the poverty of the stimulus solves the
poverty of the stimulus. In S. Becker, S. Thrun, & K. Obermayer (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems 15 (proceedings of nips’02) (p. 51-58). MIT Press.

