UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Two routes to cognitive flexibility: Learning and response conflict resolution in the
dimensional change card sort task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0b45q821

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Dye, Meoldy
Klein, Joseph
Ramscar, Michael
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Two routes to cognitive flexibility: Learning and response conflict resolution
in the dimensional change card sort task
Michael Ramscar, Melody Dye, Jessica Witten & Joseph Klein
Department of Psychology, Stanford University,
Jordan Hall, Stanford, CA 94305.
Abstract
There are at least two ways in which response conflict
can be handled in the mind: dynamic response conflict
resolution, which enables conflicting response demands
to be resolved on-line, and discrimination learning,
which reduces the amount of on-line response conflict
that needs to be resolved in context. While under fours
are perfectly capable of discrimination learning, they
appear to lack the ability to resolve response conflict online. They can match their behavior to context in
remarkably subtle and sensitive ways when they have
learned to do so, but if they have not learned to match a
response or a behavior to a context, their inability to
handle on-line response conflict is their undoing (for
example, in the dimensional change card sort task;
DCCS). We present an analysis of how discrimination
learning in context might aid children’s performance in
the dimensional change card sorting (DCCS) over time.
In a training study in which three groups of age matched
under fours attempt to complete the DCCS we find that,
given appropriate discrimination learning, children are
able to flexibly switch between the responses required by
the DCCS. Without appropriate discrimination learning,
children’s performance is far worse, and when the task
contexts are novel, children fail as expected.

Introduction
Thanks to the insight and inventiveness of
developmental psychologists, we know that very young
children are different. A three-year-old might girl seem
simply a slightly smaller version of her four-year-old
brother, however, while he will sail effortlessly,
through the battery of tasks that psychologists have
devised to expose the shortcomings of the very young,
his sister will likely fail every one of them. Her 4-yearold brother will switch responses and probability match
in binary choice tasks, understand false belief and the
conflicting dimensions of appearance and reality, and
switch easily between competing rules in dimensional
change card sorting (DCCS; Zelazo, 2006) task,
whereas our three-year-old will maximize in binary
choice tasks (fixating on the most likely response), fail
false belief tasks, be unable to switch from describing
the appearance of an object to answering questions
about what it really is, and fail to switch from one
sorting rule to another, even though the rule is clearly
stated (see Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007, for a review).

This raises two questions: first, why do children
under four fail to switch to the conflicting but more
contextually appropriate response in these tasks; and
second, given the inflexibility of thought that these tests
reveal, why in the normal course of events do children
appear to be perfectly capable of changing their
responses and behavior according to context?
Many proposals have been made in trying to answer
the first of these questions (see e.g., Zelazo, Müller,
Frye & Marcovitch, 2003). In what follows, we seek to
answer both of them by examining the different ways in
which the conflict between potential responses might be
resolved, so that an appropriate response can be given
in context. We suggest that that there are at least two
ways in which response conflict can be handled in the
mind: dynamic response conflict resolution, which
enables conflicting response demands to be processed
and resolved on-line, and discrimination learning,
which enables the strengths by which responses are
evoked by contexts to be modulated, reducing the
amount of on-line response conflict that needs to be
processed and resolved. We suggest that while under
fours are perfectly capable of discrimination learning,
they lack the ability to resolve response conflict on-line.
Under fours are able to match their behavior to context
in remarkably subtle and sensitive ways when they have
learned to do so. If they have not learned to match a
response or a behavior to a context, under fours’
inability to handle on-line response conflict is their
undoing (for example, in the novel contexts
psychologists devise for their tests).
In what follows, we describe the neurological and
computational bases for these ideas, and present a
computational simulation of how discrimination
learning and context might affect children’s
performance in the dimensional change card sorting
(DCCS) over time. The model explains the observed
failure of under fours at the DCCS as resulting from a
lack of discrimination learning in the context of the
“games” children play in the task. Further, it predicts
that these children are exposed to the game contexts in
ways that promote discrimination learning, they should
later succeed at the task with relative ease. We then
present a training study in which three groups of age
matched under fours attempt to complete the DCCS
after exposure to the games that promote discrimination
learning, exposure to the games that do not promote

3169

discrimination learning, and where the DCCS games
are novel contexts. Consistent with the predictions of
the model, we find that after appropriate discrimination
learning, children are able to flexibly switch between
the various responses required by the DCCS in a
contextually appropriate manner. Without appropriate
discrimination learning, children’s performance is far
worse, and when the task contexts are novel, children
fail as expected.

The Dimensional Change Card Sort Task
In the Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) Task,
three and four year-old children are asked to sort cards
with two prominent linked dimensions—a color and
shape—into bins in which these dimensions have been
reversed. For example, if the child is holding cards
with red stars and blue trucks, the bins will be marked
with blue stars and red trucks. If the child is asked to
sort by color, the red stars will go with the red trucks
and the blue stars will go with the blue trucks; if the
child is asked to sort by shape, the red stars will go with
the blue stars, and the red trucks will go with the blue
trucks. When a child is asked to sort by one
dimension—say, shape, switching the sort dimension to
color will switch the correct sort bins for the card; e.g.,
red stars match to the truck bin when sorted by color,
but the star bin when sorted by shape. For older
children and adults, this is a straightforward task.

Figure 1: The basic DCCS task. Cards can be sorted by shape
(in which case, the red star is sorted into the left bin) or color
(in which case, the red star is sorted to the right bin).

When young children are asked to begin sorting by
shape, they can easily answer questions regarding the
rules for correctly sorting either by shape or by color.
In addition, after switching from sorting by shape to
sorting by color, children can correctly answer
questions about how to correctly sort according to the
new rule. However, once children are actually handed a
card and asked to sort according to the second rule they
have learned, their success in the task varies markedly
with age.
Generally, 3 year-old children are

unsuccessful at this part of the task; they continue to
sort the cards according to the first rule (i.e., whatever
was learned first, whether it be sorting by shape or
color). After age 4, however, children tend to pass the
DCCS task and successfully match the cards to the bins
both before and after the sorting rules are switched
(Zelazo, Frye & Rapus, 1996).
Why do three year olds fail this task? One suggestion
is that their poor performance is a related to the late
development of prefrontal cortex. Like many other
primates, humans are born with an immature brain. In
monkeys the post-natal development of the brain occurs
at the same rate in all cortical areas (Rakic, Bourgeois,
Eckenhoff, Zecevic, & Goldman-Rakic, 1986). In the
human cortex, however, while synaptogenesis reaches
its peak in the visual and auditory cortex within a few
months of birth, the same developments occur later in
the prefrontal cortex (Huttenlocher & Dabholkar, 1997;
for reviews see Thomson-Schill, Ramscar & Chrysikou,
in press; Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007).
One interesting behavioral consequence of this slow
prefrontal development is that children appear unable to
engage in behaviors that conflict with prepotent
responses (see Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007 for a review).
The adult ability to select a less well learned, but goal
appropriate response is seen in the Stroop Task, in
which the subject is asked to identify the ink color of a
conflicting color word (e.g., if the word “green” were
printed in red ink, red would need to be identified).
Performance in this task involves resolving the conflict
between the over-learned response (reading) and the
appropriate response (ink naming). Adults typically
complete the Stroop Task with ease, but young children
repeatedly fail similar tasks. In adults, this is made
possible by pre-frontal control mechanisms that bias
one response over another according to goals or context
(Yeung, Botvinick, & Cohen, 2004). The prefrontal
cortex functions as a dynamic filter, selectively
maintaining task-relevant information and discarding
task-irrelevant information (Shimamura, 2000).
If three year olds lack (or are deficient in) the ability
to dynamically filter responses in accordance with the
demands of a context or goal, this may explain both
why they fail at the Stroop Task and why they fail to
switch rules in the DCCS. If a card depicts a red star,
“red” elicits one response (sorting into the color bin)
whereas “star” elicits a different conflicting response
(sorting into the shape bin). Thus in the standard DCCS
task, successfully switching rules involves changing
from one response associated with a given cue—the
card—to an alternative, conflicting response. Since this
kind of response conflict processing appears to be the
preserve of the frontal areas of the brain (Yeung,
Botvinick, & Cohen, 2004; Ramscar & Gitcho, 2007), it
seems that the failure of three year olds in the DCCS
task—that is, their failure to mediate response

3170

conflict—may
development.

be

related

to

slow

pre-frontal

Discrimination Learning
If young children lack the ability to resolve conflict
on-line, discrimination learning provides another means
by which they might still learn to succeed on the DCCS.
This is because the games associated with each sorting
rule provide cues to the appropriate responses, in
addition to the shape and color in the cards themselves.
The “shape game” is a cue to the response “sort into the
shape bin” and the “color game” is a cue to the response
“sort into the color bin.” Since children fail the task
despite the presence of these cues, it is clear that under
ordinary circumstances, the game cues do not provide
sufficient extra scaffolding to enable three year olds to
pass the DCCS.
To explain why this might matter, we need to
consider the way that responses that lead to response
conflict in the DCCS are learned and discriminated.
Discrimination learning is a process by which
information is acquired about the probabilistic
relationships between important regularities in the
environment (such as objects or events) and the cues
that allow those regularities to be predicted (see e.g.,
Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Gallistel & Gibbon, 2000).
Crucially, the learning process is driven by
discrepancies between what is expected and what is
actually observed in experience (termed “error-driven”
learning). The learned predictive value of cues produces
expectations, and any difference between the value of
what is expected and what is observed produces further
learning. The predictive value associated with cues is
strengthened when relevant events (such as events,
objects or labels) are under-predicted, and weakened
when they are over-predicted (Kamin, 1969; Rescorla
& Wagner, 1972). As a result, cues compete for
relevance, and the outcome of this competition is
shaped both by positive evidence about co-occurrences
between cues and predicted events, and negative
evidence about non-occurrences of predicted events.
This produces patterns of learning that are very
different from those that would be expected if learning
were shaped by positive evidence alone (a common
portrayal of Pavlovian conditioning). Learners discover
the predictive structure of the environment, and not just
simple patterns of correlations within it.
To briefly illustrate how discrimination learning
works, imagine a child learning to play the games
associated with the DCCS. We shall first consider a
case where the experimenter shows the child the card,
and is asked to sort them by color.

Figure 2. If a child has learned that a card with a red star on it
might be sorted by red or star, when the card is presented she
will expect to sort by red and star. In sorting by red (A), the
child’s expectations will weaken the association between the
card and star in this context. The converse is true in (B).

We can assume that children previously have heard
objects referred in terms of both their shape and their
color because they can reliably name the dimensions of
the cards, even though they usually fail to sort by them
(Kirkham, Cruess & Diamond, 2003). The problem,
therefore, seems to be that children experience more
response-conflict with regards the correct dimension to
attend to in order to sort by the rule than they do when
it comes to selecting an appropriate dimension for
naming (this is unsurprising, since children will have
more experience with names than sorting).
Now, when children are asked to sort the cards, both
shape and color appear to be active as relevant
dimensions to sort by. If the cards cause a child to
expect both dimensions to be relevant, but only one is
used in sorting, there will be a violation of expectation
(Figure 2). Given that a response to one of the
dimensions didn’t occur, she will begin to adjust her
expectations accordingly. This causes problems when
the games switch and the child is asked to sort by the
other dimension, since the child will have learned to
ignore the now relevant dimension on the earlier sort
trials.
For example, in the color game the red star card is
sorted by “red.” Because the red star card is intially
associated with both “red” and “star,” it also incorrectly
cues “star.” As a result, the value of the association
between red star card and “star” will decrease over
trials in the color game (“star” will be learned about
even though it is not heard). Importantly, because the
context color game has been introduced, in subsequent
color game trials, a conjunctive cue red star card +
color game (e.g., Gluck & Bower, 1988) can compete
with red star card (and color game) for associativity to
“red.”
The converse will occur when the child switches to
the shape game. Because all of the dimensions of the
red star card will be present in both the color and the
shape games, red star card alone will prove to be a less
useful cue than the conjunctive cues color game + red
star card and shape game + red star card.
To formally test these ideas, we simulated the
competition between conjunctive cues representing

3171

color game + red and shape game + star and the
individual cues red and star across repeated DCCS
trials using the Rescorla & Wagner (1972) model. 1 The
simulation assumes that the output is the appropriate
sorting response, and that red and star have been
previously learned as sorts for the red star card “red”
50% of the time each, and that color game + red will
predict “red” 100% of the time. The individual cue was
initially trained on with color and shape as alternate
labeling events, and then the color game was
introduced.

Figure 3: Rescorla-Wagner simulation of cue competition in
two DCCS trials. The erroneous expectations shape produces
in color game trials cause it to be unlearned, resulting in red
being a far more active cue on the switch trial (trial 61).

In the first DCCS game shown in Figure 3, red and
the conjunctive cues the color game + red gain in
associative value as a result of the diminishing value of
the star cue. Importantly, even though all of the cues
co-occur with exactly the same frequency with “red,”
learning effectively dissociates red star card and color
game from “red” in this situation.
As can be seen in Figure 4, assuming correct
sorting, the erroneous expectations produced by red
and star cause them to lose out in competition with the
conjunctive cues that embody the games as contexts,
such that the dimensional cues alone are effectively
unlearned in this context, even though they co-occur
with the appropriate responses with exactly the same
1

In the Rescorla-Wagner (1972) model the change in
associative strength between a stimulus i and a response j on
trial n is defined to be:
ΔVijn =α i β j (λj – Vtotal)
The model thus specifies how the associative strength (V)
between a conditioned stimulus (CSi) and an unconditioned
stimulus (USj) changes as a result of discrete training trials,
where n indexes the current trial. 0 ≤ αi ≤ 1 denotes the
saliency of CSi, 0 ≤ βj ≤ 1 denotes the learning rate of USj, λj
denotes the maximum amount of associative strength that USj
can support, and Vtotal is the sum of the associative strengths
between all CSs present on the current trial and USj. Learning
is governed by the value of (λj - VTOTAL) where λj is the value of
the predicted event and Vtotal is the predictive value of a set of
cues. In the simulation, all λ = 100%, αi=0.2 and βj=0.3.

frequency as the conjunctive cues. This is because in
error-driven learning, predictive power, not frequency
or simple probability, determines cue value. Thus, as
long as the cards are correctly labeled in each context, a
child will learn to ignore the unreliable cues, thereby
improving response discrimination.

Figure 4: Rescorla-Wagner simulation of cue competition in
six DCCS trials. Each peak represents a rule switch.

Cue competition devalues the cues that result in
prediction error and increases the value of those that do
not, emphasizing the value of reliable cues. To illustrate
the importance of cue competition to discrimination
learning, it is useful to consider the effect of learning in
the absence of cue competition.

Figure 5: When labels precede the cards as discrete events,
there may be no opportunity for cue competition. Each cue
will simply come to predict the card to asymptote.

Let us call learning in the situation just described,
where card Features predicted Labels, FL-learning. We
can then define the opposite situation in which Labels
predict Features as LF-learning (Ramscar, Yarlett, Dye,
Denny & Thorpe, in submission). In this situation,
something very different will happen in learning. To
explain why, we need to consider how the structure of
cues and predicted events conspire to produce cue
competition. In the FL-learning scenario described
above, the labels for the relevant dimensions are
discrete, and only one occurs at any one time. This
results in prediction error if cues present on trials when
“red” is subsequently labeled are present on trials when
“star” is subsequently labeled. Cues not present on one
or the other type of trial come to be favored as a result
of cue competition. However, if the labels (or the labels
in context) are presented prior to the cards (Figure 5),

3172

because the labels are discrete as events and as stimuli
(whereas the dimensions of the cards in context are
not), they cannot compete as cues, so no discrimination
learning will take place.
Because there are no other labels (cues) to compete
for associative value, there can be no loss of potential
associative value to other cues over the course of
learning. Because of this, the effect of prediction-error
on cue value will be very different. In the absence of
cue competition, the cue value of a label will simply
come to represent the proportion of successful
predictions it has made relative to the proportion of
unsuccessful predictions; the cue value of a label will
simply approximate the conditional probability of a
feature given the label (in the DCCS, where cards vary
in color or shape, this variance will be represented
probabilistically after LF-learning). LF-learning thus
provides little help when it comes to learning about
situations in which response conflict is inherent
(Ramscar et al, in submission).

Error-Driven Learning and the DCCS
The analysis above suggests that if children correctly
respond to the appropriate dimensions in the early
stages of the DCCS, contextual learning will reduce
response conflict in later trials. Children trained to
associate sorting by shape with a “shape game” and
sorting by color with a “color game” can eliminate the
response-conflict normally associated with the DCCS
by learning context-dependent rules; for example, “red
star card + shape game sort by red. ”
Given stimulus generalization (Shepher, 1987), one
might expect that these will generalize to a degree to,
“color shape card + color game sort by color”
Similarly, we might expect that if children learn to
attend to one dimension in learning about a response in
context, they might transfer that learning to another
response. Since children can name the appropriate
dimensions of the cards in the DCCS before they can
sort them, we expected that if children were taught to
associate naming the appropriate contexts with the
game rules in an FL-training configuration, they would
learn the high predictive value of these specific cue
configurations and that this contextual learning might
then enable them to successfully sort in the same
contexts in the DCCS task.
Since we would expect that similar training in LF
configuration would result only in the learning of the
transitional probabilities between the dimension labels
and the cards (as described above), the lack of cue
competition in this condition ought to result in less of a
reduction in the amount of response conflict in the task
than FL-Learning. To test these ideas, we examined the
effect this kind of off-line discrimination training had
on children’s on-line performance in the DCCS.

Training Experiment
Participants
47 children between 3- and 4-years-old (M = 3 years,
6.8 months) participated in this study.
Methods and Materials
Two groups of children received either Label-Second
(FL) or Label-First (LF) training on the cards, before
completing standard DCCS tasks (Zelazo, 2006). A
control group was tested on the DCCS without training.
In the FL condition, children were introduced to the
shape and color games prior to the DCCS. They were
told, “In the shape game, we name the different shapes
on these cards.” The experimenter then presented the
first card to the child and asked the child to label it.
After children correctly labeled the first 6 of the 12
cards, the experimenter said, “we’re going to play the
color game. In the color game, we are going to say what
colors are on these cards.” Children then labeled the
remaining 6 cards in the new game.
While children in the FL-condition saw the card and
labeled it, children in the LF-condition were asked to
say the label first and then saw the card. They were
told, “In the shape game, we name the different shapes
on these cards. The first card is going to be a flower–
can you say ‘flower’?” The experimenter showed the
card to the child only after the child had repeated the
label. The structure of the LF-training was the same as
the FL-training: naming 6 cards by one dimension and
then switching to the other dimension.
The two training groups (FL and LF) then completed
two standard DCCS tasks, with the first testing
dimension (either shape or color) counterbalanced
across children. There were 12 test trials completed by
each child (six consecutive trails for the first dimension
and six for the second dimension). Children were
required to correctly sort six cards in the pre-switch,
and before each trial, children were either reminded of
the current game’s rules or asked to answer “knowledge
questions,” such as, “Where do the flowers go? Where
do the boats go?” Children were given no feedback
about their sorting of the cards.
Once a child had sorted six cards along the pre-switch
dimension, the sorting dimension was switched. Exactly
six cards were sorted in the post-switch test. After the
first DCCS task, the children completed a second
standard DCCS task with new cards.
Results
All the children in the two training conditions
correctly labeled the cards. Children were considered to
have “passed” the DCCS task if they sorted at least 5
out of 6 of the post-switch cards correctly. 69% of the
FL-trained children successfully switched rules in the
first DCCS task, and 75% in the second DCCS task. By
contrast, 33% of LF-trained children completed the first

3173

rule switch, and 40% the second. 19% of the control
children switched rules in each test (Figure 4).
Chi-square (χ2) tests revealed that children in the FL
(Label-Second) condition had significantly higher
passing rates (11/16 children passed) in the first DCCS
as compared to children in the LF (Label-First)
condition (5/15); χ2 [1, N = 31] = 9.7, p = 0.005;
second test, label first, 12/16 children passed as
compared to 6/15 in the label second condition, χ2 [1, N
= 31] = 17.0, p = 0.001). Against the control group
(3/16), the comparisons with the FL (Label-Second)
group were, first switch, χ2 [1, N = 33] = 14.9, p =
0.001; second switch, χ2 [1, N = 33] = 23.7, p = 0.001.

Figure 4: Percentage of children successfully switching rules
in the first and second DCCS tasks by condition.

Discussion
We suggested that the observed failure of under fours
in the DCCS might result from a lack of discrimination
learning about the contexts provided by the “games”
children play in the task. We predicted that if children
were exposed to the game contexts in ways that
promote discrimination learning, they would later
succeed at the task with relative ease. Consistent with
these predictions, we found that after appropriate
discrimination learning, children were able to flexibly
switch between the various responses required by the
DCCS in a contextually appropriate manner. With less
appropriate
discrimination
learning,
children’s
performance was far worse, and when the task contexts
were novel, children failed as expected.
This finding is consistent with our suggestion that
that there are at least two ways in which response
conflict can be handled in the mind: dynamic response
conflict resolution, which enables conflicting response
demands to be processed and resolved on-line, and
discrimination learning, which enables the strengths by
which responses are evoked by contexts to be
modulated, reducing the amount of response conflict
that needs to be processed and resolved. It appears that
while under fours are perfectly capable of
discrimination learning, they lack the ability to resolve
response conflict on-line (see also Ramscar & Gitcho,
2007; Thomson-Shill et al, in press). As the children
who received FL-training show, discrimination learning

allows under fours to match their behavior to context in
remarkably subtle and sensitive ways once they have
learned to do so. However, as the performance of
children in the LF-training2 and control groups shows,
if children have not learned context appropriate
behavior, their inability to resolve response conflict
dynamically causes problems when dealing with the
demands of responding flexibly in ambiguous
situations.
References
Gallistel, C.R., & Gibbon, J. (2000). Time, rate and
conditioning. Psychological Review, 107, 344-389
Gluck and Bower (1988). Evaluating an Adaptive
Network Model of Human Learning, Journal of
Memory and Language, 27, 166-195
Huttenlocher, P. R., & Dabholkar, A. S. (1997).
Regional differences in synaptogenesis in human
cerebral cortex. Journal of Comparative Neurology,
387(2), 167-178
Kamin L.J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention,
and conditioning. In: Campbell B, Church R (eds).
Punishment and Aversive Behaviour. AppletonCentury-Crofts: New York.
Kirkham, N.Z. , Cruess, L.M., & Diamond, A. (2003).
Helping Children Apply their Knowledge to their
Behavior on a Dimension-Switching Task.
Developmental Science, 6(5), 449-467.
Ramscar, M. Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., &
Thorpe, K. (in submission) The Feature-Label-Order
Effect In Symbolic Learning
Rescorla R.A. and Wagner A.R. (1972). A Theory of
Pavlovian
Conditioning:
Variations
in
the
Effectiveness
of
Reinforcement
and
Nonreinforcement. In Black & Prokasy (Eds.),
Classical Conditioning II: Current Research and
Theory. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science,
237, 1317-1323
Thompson-Schill, S. L., Ramscar, M., & Evangelia, C.
G., (in press) Cognition without control: When a little
frontal lobe goes a long way. Cognitive Science.
Yeung, N., Botvinick, M. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2004).
The neural basis of error detection: conflict
monitoring and the error-related negativity.
Psychological Review, 111(4), 931-959
Zelazo, P. D., Frye, D., & Rapus, T. (1996). An agerelated dissociation between knowing rules and using
them. Cognitive Development, 11, 37-63.
Zelazo, P. D. (2006). The dimensional change card sort
(DCCS): A method of assessing executive function in
children. Nature Protocols, 1, 297-301.
2

While it has been previously shown that labeling improves
children’s performance on the DCCS (Kirkham, Cruess &
Diamond, 2003), this is consistent with our suggestion that
labels do not necessarily promote discrimination learning.

3174

