UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Eye Movements to Study Working Memory Rehearsal

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/68173221

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Loschky, Lester
Zelinsky, Gregory

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Eye Movements to Study Working Memory Rehearsal
for Objects in Visual Scenes
Gregory J. Zelinsky (Gregory.Zelinsky@Stonybrook.Edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11790-2500 USA

Lester C. Loschky (Loschky@KSU.Edu)
Department of Psychology, Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS 66502 USA

Abstract
Observers freely viewing a multi-object scene in preparation
for a memory test often shift their gaze back to previously
inspected objects. These refixations were analyzed to
determine if they served a working memory rehearsal
function. A gaze-contingent display paradigm was used to
limit the observers' viewing of a study scene, which was
followed by a spatial probe at one of the object locations and
then by a 4AFC test for the probed target. The results
indicated a 16% accuracy benefit linked to target refixation
that disappeared if 6 or more objects were fixated after the
target during study. We interpret these findings as evidence
for a monitor-refixate system and a moving-anchor rehearsal
strategy. According to this view, observers continuously
monitor the availability of items in working memory, then
refixate an item when its availability drops below a taskspecific criterion. Items are shuffled in and out of this
rehearsal set as the rehearsal anchor is systematically moved
during scene inspection.
Keywords: memory maintenance; scene perception; gazecontingent; rehearsal strategies; free viewing

Introduction
People freely viewing a display often return their gaze to
previously fixated objects. This behavior is called an
oculomotor refixation.
Refixations are a ubiquitous
property of oculomotor behavior, and have been noted in
tasks as diverse as reading (Rayner, 1978, 1998), pattern
copying (Ballard, Hayhoe, & Pelz, 1995; Hayhoe,
Bensinger, & Ballard, 1998), portrait painting (Locher,
1996; Nodine, Locher, & Krupinski, 1993), solving
arithmetic and geometry problems (Epelboim & Suppes,
1996; Hegarty, Mayer, & Green, 1992), visual search
(Gilchrist & Harvey, 2000; Peterson, Kramer, Wang, Irwin,
& McCarley, 2001), and undirected picture viewing
(Mannan, Ruddock, & Wooding, 1996, 1997). Refixations
can also comprise a significant portion of the oculomotor
behavior accompanying a task, in one case up to 25% of the
observed fixations (Mannan et al., 1997).
Why do people choose to refixate objects that were
previously inspected? The answer to this question likely
depends on the task. In the case of reading, gaze is often
returned to previously read portions of a text in order to
resolve specific lexical ambiguities (Frazier & Rayner,
1982; Murry & Kennedy, 1988) or to obtain elaborative
details needed for narrative comprehension (Blanchard &

Iran-Nejad, 1987; Just & Carpenter, 1976; Shebilske &
Fisher, 1983). Refixations, however, certainly play very
different roles in non-reading tasks. For example, Hayhoe,
Ballard, and colleagues (Ballard et al., 1995; Hayhoe et al.,
1998) had observers reconstruct a spatially complex multicolored block pattern (the model) from a set of individual
colored blocks scattered in a workspace. These observers
looked first to the model pattern in order to determine the
next block to select from the workspace, then refixated the
model to determine the exact location to put the selected
block in the pattern under construction. Refixation in this
case was therefore used to acquire a specific piece of
information, the spatial information needed to correctly
position a block in the construction of the model replica.
Our study explores refixations in the context of an explicit
working memory task. Unlike the refixations made during
reading or block copying, we propose that refixations in
working memory tasks may serve a straightforward
rehearsal function. Many studies have shown that memory
for specific stimulus properties (e.g., exact color or surface
form) declines soon after gaze shifts away from an object
(Carlson-Radvansky, 1999; Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin,
1995; Henderson, 1997; Henderson & Siefert, 2001; Irwin,
1991, 1996; Irwin & Gordon, 1998). Given this rapid loss
of object properties following gaze movement, observers
freely viewing a multi-object scene may attempt to offset
this information loss by visually reacquiring an object and
encoding its properties anew. Observers may therefore
employ a systematic strategy of cyclically refixating or
rehearsing display objects while viewing a study scene, with
each refixation on an object occurring when its availability
in memory drops below a critical threshold. To assess this
rehearsal process, we use an explicit working memory task
in which the observers’ eye movements are monitored as
they study an array of objects in a simple scene. We
interpret refixations in this task as an attempt to actively
refresh an object's availability in working memory, and refer
to the specific pattern in which these refixations are
deployed as the observer's memory rehearsal strategy.
The current study addresses two questions regarding the
relationship between refixations and rehearsal in an explicit
memory task. First, can the refixation behavior observed
during the viewing of a study scene be serving a rehearsal
function? A rehearsal strategy cannot be inferred from the

1312

a

mere existence of refixations, and in fact answers to the
following questions would need to be obtained before this
relationship can be seriously entertained. First, how
common were refixations in the task? If this behavior was
relatively rare, then even if it was used as a rehearsal tool it
may not meaningfully affect memory performance. Second,
are these refixations patterned or simply the product of
random oculomotor inspection? We will address this
question by comparing the actual refixation rate to a chance
baseline, and by looking for evidence of systematic patterns
in the refixation data. Third, does the refixation of an
object improve recognition accuracy for that object later
during test? If this relationship is not observed, then
refixations obviously cannot be serving a rehearsal function.

b

1

Methods
The events comprising a typical trial are shown in Figure 1.
A trial began with the presentation of a 9-object study scene
(Figure 1a). The stimuli were real-world objects (toy, tool,
or food items) arranged on an appropriate background
surface (a crib, workbench, or dining table). Each scene
was presented in color and subtended 18° × 11.6° of visual
angle. Individual objects were scaled to fit within a 2.4°
bounding box and their locations in the scene were
constrained to 18 positions, creating the appearance of a
random arrangement of items on a surface. Multiple trials
for a given scene type were created by randomly pairing
objects to locations.
Observers studied scenes in preparation for a recognition
test. At test a spatial probe would be presented and they
would have to indicate the object from the study scene that
appeared at a probed location. Observers were therefore
required to encode from the study scene information about
both the identity and location of each object.
Distinguishing our paradigm from many other working
memory paradigms is the fact that testing was contingent
upon the observer's oculomotor behavior while viewing the
study scene. Although the experiment instructions made no
reference to oculomotor behavior, observers invariably
chose to make eye movements during this challenging
memory task. Eye position was sampled at 1000 Hz using a
Generation VI dual Purkinje-image eye tracker and analyzed
in real time to determine the object being fixated. Unknown
to the observer, one of the objects was pre-designated as the
memory target for that particular trial (e.g., the butter dish in
Figure 1). As the observer freely viewed the study scene,
gaze would eventually be directed to this target object
(Figure 1a). This fixation event was detected by the
program controlling the stimulus presentation, which then
started to count the number of different objects fixated after
gaze left the target. We refer to these items fixated after the
target as intervening objects (Waugh and Norman, 1965), in
recognition of their potential for interfering with memory
for the target. Because these objects would be processed
after the target but before the memory test, memory for the
target may vary as a function of the number of fixated
intervening objects (Zelinsky & Loschky, 2005).

2

c

T
I
M
E

d

Figure 1: Procedure and representative stimuli.
A criterion placed on the number of intervening objects
was used to terminate the study display. If this intervening
object criterion was preset to 2, the observer would be
allowed to fixate exactly 2 objects following the target
(Figure 1b). As gaze shifted away from the second posttarget object, the study scene would be replaced by a
colored noise mask appearing at the target's location on an
"emptied" background surface (Figure 1c). This mask,
which was visible for 1 second, served as the spatial probe
for the memory test. There were 7 intervening object
conditions (1-7). In the 1 intervening object condition, the
study display was terminated during the saccade away from
the first post-target object (i.e., the eye was not allowed to
land on a second non-target item after leaving the target); in
the 7 intervening object condition the observer was allowed
to fixate exactly 7 non-target objects following target
fixation. The intervening object conditions were randomly
interleaved throughout the experiment. Post-experiment

1313

Results and Discussion
How frequent are target refixations?
One consequence of a free viewing paradigm is that
observers could shift their gaze back to the target object
before the scene-terminating intervening object criterion
was achieved. To determine if this refixation behavior was
common enough to serve a rehearsal function, we isolated
and analyzed those trials in which observers made at least
one target refixation and found an overall refixation rate of
35%. However, this refixation rate varied with intervening
object condition. Figure 2 shows that the frequency of
target refixation trials increased with the number of fixated
intervening objects required by the gaze contingent
paradigm. When observers were allowed to fixate only one
object following the target, a target refixation could not
occur because the study scene would terminate upon gaze
leaving the non-target object. This contingency is indicated
in the data by a refixation frequency of zero in the 1
intervening object condition.
However, as soon as
refixations were allowed by the paradigm, the refixation rate
jumped to 20% and continued to increase with the number
of intervening objects.
This monotonic increase in
refixation rate is not surprising. Each additional fixation
forced by our intervening object manipulation creates
another opportunity for observers to direct gaze back to the
target.
What is surprising is the fact that refixations
occurred on up to 53% of the trials, making this behavior
frequent enough to be used as a rehearsal strategy for
maintaining object information in working memory.

Is this refixation rate greater than chance?
The analysis from the previous section only demonstrated
the feasibility of using refixations as a rehearsal tool; it
offered no direct evidence that refixations were actually
serving this function. A first step in drawing a link between
refixations and rehearsal is to show that refixation behavior
is patterned and not simply random. The refixation function
illustrated in Figure 2 by itself cannot demonstrate this; with

sufficient time and eye movements, observers would
inevitably refixate the target even if they were shifting their
gaze randomly from one object to the next.
80

actual
chance

60

60

40

40

20

20

20

% Refixations

180

% Refixations

questioning revealed that none of the six participants
realized that their opportunity for study depended on their
own pattern of eye movements, in conjunction with an
intervening object criterion, instead attributing the variable
study scene duration to some random presentation schedule.
Following probe offset, a 4-object array was presented
and observers had to indicate which one of these objects
appeared at the probed location (Figure 1d). One of these
objects was always the target, with the other three randomly
selected from the study scene. The observer registered a
response by looking at the desired object, which caused a
white box to be drawn around the item, then pressing a
button when satisfied with their selection. Observers were
instructed to respond as accurately as possible without
regard for time, and each participated in 378 trials, 54 per
each of the 7 intervening object conditions. See Zelinsky
and Loschky (2005) for additional details.

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Intervening Objects Fixated

Figure 2: Frequency of target refixations as a function of
intervening objects fixated after the target during study.
Bars extending from each marker show the standard error of
the mean. The line indicates the random target refixation
frequency as estimated by Monte Carlo simulation.
To exclude the possibility that these refixations were due
to random oculomotor inspection, we conducted Monte
Carlo simulations of the refixation rate generated by random
eye movements between 9 objects. Separate simulations
were performed for all seven of the intervening object
conditions, and each simulation implemented the identical
display termination criteria used by the gaze-contingent
methodology in the behavioral experiment. The gray line in
Figure 2 shows the results from these 105,000 simulations;
15,000 per each of the intervening object conditions. If the
observers' were refixating the target as a result of random
oculomotor inspection, the behavioral refixation function
should not differ from this random probability baseline.
However, this was clearly not the case. Observers in the 2
intervening object condition refixated the target more
frequently than would be expected by chance. This
refixation rate dropped down to the random probability level
in the 3 and 4 intervening object conditions, then continued
to drop far below chance when there were 5 or more
intervening objects. With regard to the question motivating
this analysis, these deviations in the refixation rate from
chance clearly indicate a patterned behavior. Observers
preferentially revisited the target when the paradigm
allowed fixations on only 2 intervening objects, but avoided
returning to the target when the paradigm forced a larger
number of intervening object fixations.

When are targets refixated during study?
We now know that refixations were common in this explicit
memory task and that they were not just the product of
random eye movements between objects, but we do not yet
have a clear picture of when these refixations actually
occurred during viewing of the study scene. Figure 3

1314

Target Refixation Frequency (%)

100

THREE

80

FOUR

60

40

40

20

20
1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

100

FIVE

80

SIX

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

70

55

55

with refixations

% Correct

70

40

without refixations

25
2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 4: Recognition accuracy as a function of intervening
objects fixated after the target. Filled markers show data
from trials in which the target was not refixated during
study; the unfilled markers show data from trials in which
there was a target refixation. Bars indicate one SEM.

General Discussion

0
1

85

Intervening Objects Fixated

6

100

85

1

0

0

100

25

80

60

100

40

100

0
6

Intervening Objects Fixated

Figure 3: Refixation histograms for the three, four, five, and
six intervening object conditions. Each shows when gaze
shifted back to the target as a function of fixated intervening
objects during scene viewing. A similar pattern
characterized the seven intervening object data (not shown).

Do refixations improve memory?
A final property required by any behavior believed to serve
a memory rehearsal function is, of course, a demonstrated
relationship to an actual memory benefit. Figure 4 compares
recognition accuracy for trials in which there was a target
refixation to trials in which there were no target refixations.1
Refixating the target in the 2-5 intervening object conditions
improved our observers’ ability to later pick this object out
of a 4AFC display, one-tailed t (5) = -2.91, p = .017, effect
size (Eta2) = .628. This improvement amounted to a
roughly constant 16% benefit over the 2-5 intervening
object range, followed by a decline into the no-refixation
level of performance with additional intervening objects.
An essential component of the asserted relationship between
1

refixation and a memory rehearsal function is therefore
supported. To the extent that refixations serve a rehearsal
function, they would be expected to improve memory for
the refixated object. That appears to be the case. Returning
gaze to an object during the study phase of an explicit
memory task increased the probability of that object being
correctly identified in a subsequent recognition test.

% Correct

replots the refixation data from Figure 2, segregated by four
intervening object conditions. Each panel is a relative
frequency histogram of refixations showing when in the
intervening object sequence observers elected to shift gaze
back to the target. This analysis shows that target
refixations within a given condition did not occur equally
often after every allowable intervening object fixation.
Although observers had multiple opportunities to return
gaze to the target in the 3-6 intervening object conditions,
we see that the modal refixation behavior occurred after
gaze left the first post-target object. Observers were in fact
almost twice as likely to refixate the target after 1
intervening object than at any other time during the study
scene presentation. If an observer was going to refixate the
target, that refixation was most likely to occur soon after
initially fixating the target (see also Dickinson & Zelinsky,
2007).

A detailed discussion of the no-refixation data, with emphasis
on the shape of the intervening object function and its theoretical
implications, can be found in Zelinsky and Loschky (2005).

Memory rehearsal strategies have long been implicated in
tasks involving the sequential presentation of list items
(Murdock & Metcalfe, 1978; Rundus & Atkinson, 1970; see
Baddeley, 1986, and Neath, 1998, for reviews). The current
study builds on this work by proposing the use of an
analogous rehearsal strategy for objects presented
simultaneously as part of a visual scene.
The need for such a rehearsal strategy arises from the
observation of serial order effects introduced by the
sequence of fixations made to objects during scene viewing
(Zelinsky & Loschky, 2005). The availability of an object
in memory depends on when it was fixated during study,
with more recently fixated objects enjoying a higher
probability of memory retrieval. This is clear in the case of
the Figure 4 no-refixation data; accuracy was 87% after
fixating only 1 intervening object, 76% after 2, and 65%
after 3 intervening object fixations. Such a pattern suggests
that the target was highly available for retrieval immediately
after fixation, but that interference introduced by the
following object fixations caused this initially high level of
availability to rapidly decline. Eventually, after fixating
three intervening objects, the recency effect disappeared
entirely, asymptoting into an above-chance pre-recency
level of performance.
To attenuate this rapid decline in immediate memory for
objects, we propose that gaze refixations are used in an
attempt to actively maintain or rehearse object information,
which we refer to as a monitor-refixate rehearsal strategy.

1315

According to this strategy, observers viewing a study scene
continuously monitor the availability of each object encoded
into memory, then use refixations to maintain this object at
the level of availability needed to achieve a desired level of
recognition performance. Refixations are triggered by a
threshold that the observer sets on this availability
dimension. When the availability of a previously fixated
object drops below this criterion, the oculomotor system is
signaled that this item is in danger of being forgotten and an
eye movement is programmed back to the item in an attempt
to maintain its place in working memory. The goal of an
object refixation, whether explicit or otherwise, is therefore
to offset the interference introduced by fixations on other
objects (Zelinsky & Loschky, 2005) by reinstating its
previously above-criterion level of memory availability.
This simple monitor-refixate model can account for many
of the patterns observed in the current data. First, it
explains the improved accuracy resulting from refixations
reported in Figure 4, and the disappearance of this
advantage with a large number of intervening objects. Such
benefits derive from the fact that each target refixation
essentially resets the intervening object function. If a target
is refixated during study, the non-target object inspected
immediately following this refixation would represent only
one intervening object, regardless of when the target was
initially fixated during viewing. Accuracy on 2 intervening
object refixation trials (90%) therefore resembles the level
found on 1 intervening object no-refixation trials (86%). A
similar logic can be applied to the larger intervening object
conditions. Because refixations in the 3 intervening object
condition would occur after fixations on either the first or
second post-target objects, accuracy in this condition should
fall between the 87% and 76% levels delineated by the norefixation function, and indeed this was the case (82%).
Note, however, that this relationship would be expected to
break down at very large intervening object separations.
Consider a 6 intervening object trial. Although a target
refixation could have occurred following 2-5 intervening
objects in this condition, as Figure 3 reminds us these
refixations were not uniformly distributed over this range.
On the majority of these trials the target would have been
refixated after the first two intervening objects in the
viewing sequence. These early refixations would mean that
any recency benefit would have disappeared into the prerecency asymptote by the time the 6 intervening object
criterion was satisfied. This relationship between recency
and intervening objects therefore nicely explains the gradual
convergence of the refixation and no-refixation functions
after 6-7 intervening objects were fixated.
A monitor-refixate model also explains why the refixation
rate was above-chance in the 2 intervening object condition
(Figure 2). As speculated by Hooge and Erkelens (1999),
quite often gaze leaves an object before the properties of
that object have been fully coded. This incomplete
encoding, when coupled with the interference created by
shifting gaze to an intervening object, would cause the
target’s availability in memory to drop below criterion.

This event would in turn trigger an eye movement bringing
gaze immediately back to the target, which over trials would
elevate the target refixation rate above chance.
As for why the target refixation rate dipped below chance
over the 5-7 intervening object range (Figure 2), we believe
that this reflects the abandonment of objects fixated early in
the viewing sequence from the rehearsal process. Assuming
a capacity limit on the size of the rehearsal set, strict
adherence to the above-described maintenance rehearsal
strategy would quickly lock the observer in a perpetual loop,
with the same subset of objects continuously refixated and
forgotten. In order to carry out the instructed task of fully
inspecting the study scene, observers would therefore have
to periodically break this monitor-refixate loop long enough
to include new items in the rehearsal set. However, a fixed
capacity rehearsal set means that the addition of each new
object to the set must be accompanied by the abandonment
of a previously maintained member. In the sequence of
object fixations A, then B, then C, an observer might
therefore elect to override the signal from A asking for a
refixation, and make an eye movement instead from C to D.
Following this fixation on D, a refixation would then be
made to B rather than A, despite the fact that the availability
of both objects would now be below threshold. This
refixation amounts to a decision on the part of the observer
to abandon maintenance of object A and to shift their
starting point or "anchor" in the rehearsal loop to object B.
By systematically moving their anchor as they study a
scene, observers would dynamically change the composition
of the rehearsal set throughout a trial. Note however that
refixations are not increasing working memory capacity
under this scheme, the membership of the rehearsal set is
simply being changed as items are shuffled in and out of
memory. Each time an observer wishes to add a new item
to the rehearsal set, an old item must be abandoned. In this
sense, working memory in this task can be characterized as
a sort of moving window of highly available scene objects,
with the size of this window determining the number of
objects that can be maintained above criterion, and the
location of this window in the scene determining the
contents of the rehearsal set.

Conclusion
We propose that the refixations occurring during the study
of a scene reflect the use of a monitor-refixate memory
rehearsal strategy. This strategy assumes the moment-bymoment monitoring of working memory representations for
retrieval availability.
When one of these object
representations drops below an availability threshold, the
eye movement system is signaled to return gaze to that
object so as to refresh its representation. Just as inner speech
is used to maintain a list of digits long enough to dial them
into a telephone, refixations may therefore serve to maintain
the visuo-spatial information from simultaneously presented
objects long enough to perform whatever task is at hand.

1316

Acknowledgments
G.J.Z. was supported by NIMH grant 2-R01-MH63748 and
NSF grant IIS-0527585. L.C.L. was supported by funds
from the Kansas State University Office of Research and
Sponsored Programs, and by the NASA Kansas Space Grant
Consortium.

References
Baddeley, A. (1986). Working memory. (Vol. 11). Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Ballard, D., Hayhoe, M., & Pelz, J. (1995). Memory
representations in natural tasks. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 7, 66-80.
Blanchard, H. E., & Iran-Nejad, A. (1987). Comprehension
processes and eye movement patterns in the reading of
surprise-ending stories. Discourse Processes, 10, 127138.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. (1999). Memory for relational
information across eye movements. Perception &
Psychophysics, 61, 919-934.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Irwin, D. E. (1995). Memory
for structural information across eye movements. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 21, 1441-1458.
Dickinson, C. A., & Zelinsky, G. J. (2007). Memory for the
search path: Evidence for a high-capacity representation
of search history. Vision Research, 47, 1745-1755.
Epelboim, J., & Suppes, P. (1996). Window on the mind?
What eye movements reveal about geometric reasoning.
In G. Cottrell (Ed.). Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 59-60).
Mahwah, New Jersey: Erlbaum Associates.
Frazier, L., & Rayner, K. (1982). Making and correcting
errors during sentence comprehension: Eye movements
in the analysis of structurally ambiguous sentences.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 178-210.
Gilchrist, I. D., & Harvey, M. (2000). Refixation frequency
and memory mechanisms in visual search. Current
Biology, 10, 1209-1212.
Hayhoe, M., Bensinger, D., & Ballard, D. (1998). Task
constraints in visual working memory. Vision Research,
38, 125-137.
Hegarty, M., Mayer, R. E., & Green, C. E. (1992).
Comprehension of arithmetic word problems: Evidence
from students' eye fixations. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 84, 76-84.
Henderson, J. M. (1997). Transsaccadic memory and
integration during real-world object perception.
Psychological Science, 8, 51-55.
Henderson, J. M., & Siefert, A. B. (2001). Types and tokens
in transsaccadic object identification: Effects of spatial
position and left-right orientation. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 8, 753-760.
Hooge, I., & Erkelens, C. (1999). Peripheral vision and
oculomotor control during visual search. Vision
Research, 39, 1567-1575.

Irwin, D. E. (1991). Information integration across saccadic
eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 23, 420-456.
Irwin, D. E. (1996). Integrating information across saccadic
eye movements. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 5, 94-99.
Irwin, D. E., & Gordon, R. D. (1998). Eye movements,
attention and trans-saccadic memory. Visual Cognition, 5,
127-155.
Just, M., Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and cognitive
processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 441-480.
Locher, P. J. (1996). The contribution of eye-movement
research to an understanding of the nature of pictorial
balance perception: A review of the literature. Journal of
the International Association of Empirical Studies, 14,
143-163.
Mannan, S., Ruddock, K., & Wooding, D. (1996). The
relationship between the location of spatial features and
those of fixations made during visual examination of
briefly presented images. Spatial Vision, 10, 165-188.
Mannan, S., Ruddock, K., & Wooding, D. (1997). Fixation
sequences made during visual examination of briefly
presented 2D images. Spatial Vision, 11, 157-178.
Murdock, B. B., & Metcalfe, J. (1978). Controlled rehearsal
in single-trial free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 17, 309-324.
Murry, W. S., & Kennedy, A. (1988). Spatial coding in the
processing of anaphor by good and poor readers:
Evidence from eye movement analyses. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 40A, 693-718.
Neath, I. (1998). Human memory: An introduction to
research, data, and theory. New York: Brooks/Cole.
Nodine, C. F., Locher, P. J., & Krupinski, E. A. (1993). The
role of formal art training on perception and aesthetic
judgment of art compositions. Leonardo, 26, 219-227.
Peterson, M. S., Kramer, A. F., Wang, R. F., Irwin, D. E., &
McCarley, J. S. (2001). Visual search has memory.
Psychological Science, 12, 287–292.
Rayner, K. (1978). Eye movements in reading and
information processing. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 618660.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing:
20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372-422.
Rundus, D., & Atkinson, R. C. (1970). Rehearsal processes
in free recall: A procedure for direct observation.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9, 99105.
Shebilske, W. L., & Fisher, D. F. (1983). Eye movements
and context effects during reading of extended discourse.
In K. Rayner (Ed.), Eye movements in reading:
Perceptual and language processes (pp. 153-179). New
York: Academic Press.
Waugh, N. C., & Norman, D. A. (1965). Primary memory.
Psychological Review, 72, 89-104.
Zelinsky, G. J., & Loschky, L. C. (2005). Eye movements
serialize memory for objects in scenes. Perception &
Psychophysics, 67, 676–690.

1317

