UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Reasoning in Modeling and Design

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0mw0m8d9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Cheng, Peter C-H.
Clement, John
Dogan, Fehmi
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Reasoning in Modeling and Design
Ashok K. Goel (goel@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth Street, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

Peter C-H. Cheng (P.C.H.Cheng@sussex.ac.uk)
Department of Informatics, University of Sussex
Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QH, UK

John J. Clement (clement@educ.umass.edu)
School of Education and Scientific Reasoning Research Institute, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003, USA

Fehmi Dogan (fehmidogan@iyte.edu.tr)
Graduate School of Engineering & Sciences, Izmir Institute of Technology
Urla, TR-35430, Izmir, Turkey

Mary Hegarty (hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California at Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA

Nancy J. Nersessian (nancyn@cc.gatech.edu)
School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth Street, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA

Keywords: Visual reasoning, visual representations, diagrams,
mental models, modeling, design.

Introduction
Visual reasoning plays an important role in modeling in
science and engineering, including science and engineering
education. It also plays a critical role in engineering and
architectural design. Ferguson (1992), for example, views
good engineering largely as an outcome of visual reasoning
(and not verbal or mathematical reasoning). Yet, there is
much that we do not yet understand about visual reasoning.
In fact, at present there is not even a universal agreement in
cognitive science on a definition of visual representation or
reasoning.
The purpose of this symposium is to bring together recent
cognitive science research on visual reasoning in modeling
and design. Our proposal focuses on visual representations
such as sketches, drawings and diagrams. The speakers in
the proposed symposium represent multiple disciplines
within cognitive science, including artificial intelligence
(Cheng, Goel), science education (Clement), cognitive
psychology (Hegarty), architecture (Dogan), and philosophy
and history of science (Nersessian). Goel will be the
moderator for the symposium.

Presentations
Ashok K. Goel
Understanding Drawings by Model Construction by
Compositional Analogy
Understanding sketches, drawings and diagrams is a
fundamental problem in visual reasoning. I describe a
computational technique for understanding engineering
drawings by constructing a teleological model of the target
drawing by analogy to the model of a known drawing.
Knowledge of the source case is organized in a multimodal
schema that contains the source drawing and its teleological
model represented at multiple levels of abstraction: the lines
and intersections in the drawing, the shapes, the structural
components and connections, the causal interactions and
processes, and the function of the system depicted in the
drawing. Given a target drawing and a relevant source case,
the technique of compositional analogy first constructs a
representation of the lines and the intersections in the target
drawing, then uses the mappings at the level of line
intersections to transfer the shape representations from the
source case to the target, next uses the mappings at the level
of shapes to transfer the full teleological model of the
depicted system from the source to the target. The Archytas
computer system implements this multimodal knowledge
representation and the technique for understanding drawings

2087

by construction of teleological models by compositional
analogy.
John J. Clement
Imagistic Simulation in Scientific Theory Construction;
Transfer of Runnability From Specific Cases to Explanatory
Models
I have been studying scientifically trained experts asked
to think aloud while solving unfamiliar explanation
problems. Transcripts from video tapes capture a complex
set of behaviors that is difficult to parse, such as generating
multiple creative analogies, explanatory models, and
thought experiments. Progress has come from assigning
them to three nested levels of processing: (1) mental
simulations using fairly primitive physical intuitions for
actions on specific cases; (2) reasoning processes such as
analogy, chaining simulations, applying a model, and
evaluative Gedanken experiments; and (3) abductive
evolution cycles of explanatory model generation,
evaluation, and modification. At level (1), subjects’ use of
depictive gestures, drawings, and other indicators provide
evidence that they are imagining moving components in
specific cases; this is modeled as an imagistic simulation
process. Are these simulations simply used to ‘brainstorm’
a starting point for the problem, or are they involved in
sophisticated modeling at level (3)? Evidence is provided
for ‘transfer of imagery and runnability’ from cases to
explanatory models, resulting in a model with enough
imagistic precision, alignment, and dynamics to aid
evaluation and be ready for mathematization.
Fehmi Dogan and Nancy J. Nersessian
Conceptual Diagrams in Creative Problem Solving
Studies of diagrammatic reasoning have investigated the
role of diagrams in different domains in supporting
reasoning, problem solving, and communication. These
studies often are confined to domains that pose relatively
well-defined problems, such as geometry and physics, with
fewer studies in domains where the problems are ill-defined,
such as scientific discovery and architectural design. Our
study investigates the roles played by diagrams in concept
generation and elaboration in complex, ill-defined, and
creative problem solving situations as exemplified in
architectural design and scientific discovery. We argue that
a specific class of diagrams can be identified which
structure creative problem solving in these domains – what
we call “conceptual diagrams.” These diagrams facilitate
creativity and innovation by way of representing incipient
conceptualizations of complex domains in simpler graphical
representations that foster mental modeling processes. We
illustrate and explicate the notion of conceptual diagrams
with brief exemplars from physics, and then focus on their
use in two cases of problem solving in architectural design,
Daniel Liebskind’s Jewish Museum in Berlin and Louis
Kahn’s First Unitarian Church in Rochester, NY.

Mary Hegarty
Thinking in Diagrammatic Reasoning.
Mary Hegarty will report on recent studies of diagrammatic
reasoning in the domains of mechanics and chemistry, as well
as studies of solution strategies in classical tests of spatial
ability. These studies indicate that mental simulation can be an
important strategy in reasoning from diagrammatic
representations. However, reasoning with diagrams can also
involve more analytic processes, such as task decomposition
and rule-based reasoning, indicating that reasoning with
diagrams is not necessarily a process of running and inspecting
visual images in the ‘mind’s eye’. This paper will examine
whether solution processes in “visual reasoning” are related
depend on consistent cognitive styles of reasoning and/or
whether they reflect adaptive strategy choice in response to task
constraints.
Peter C-H. Cheng
Representational Epistemology: Beyond Visual Reasoning.
The Representational Epistemic approach to the study of
diagrammatic cognition in complex technical domains will
be summarized. The REEP approach adopts a broad
perspective: (a) The rich conceptual structure of knowledge
domains that encompass many levels of abstraction, scales
of granularity and alternative ontologies is examined, rather
than task level information. (b) Representational systems
that govern the creation of classes of representations are
analyzed, rather than the formats of particular visualizations.
(c) The complex relations that codify knowledge domains as
representational systems are explored, rather than mappings
between informational and visual elements. The principles
that appear to determine the effective diagrammatic
codification of complex knowledge domains will be
discussed.
Inventing new representational systems for conceptually
challenging domains and contrasting them with extant
approaches provides the theoretical and empirical leverage
needed for the study of diagrammatic cognition under the
REEP approach. Case studies of how the diagrammatic recodification of conceptually challenging domains in science
and engineering can substantially enhance reasoning,
problem solving and learning will be summarized, including
our recent work on diagrams for complex planning and
scheduling tasks.

References
Ferguson, E. (1992) Engineering and the Mind’s Eye.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Pres

2088

