UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Analytics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/80b1g8kd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fisher, Brian
Kielman, Joseph
Paley, W. Bradley
et al.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Analytics
Brian Fisher (bfisher@sfu.ca)
Interactive Arts & Technology, Simon Fraser University
250-13450 102 Ave., Surrey BC V3T 0A3
Joseph Kielman (joseph.kielman@dhs.gov)
Science and Technology Directorate, Department of Homeland Security
Washington, D.C. 20528
W. Bradford Paley (brad@didi.com)
Computer Science, Columbia University and Information Esthetics
170 Claremont Avenue, Suite 6, New York, NY 10027
Markus Rester (markus@igw.tuwien.ac.at)
Institute for Design & Assessment of Technology, Vienna University of Technology
Karlsplatz 13 1040 Vienna, Austria
Keywords: visual analytics; problem solving; perceptual
cognition; enactive cognition

Introduction to Visual Analytics
Visual Analytics (VA) is defined as “the science of
analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive visual
interfaces” (Thomas and Cook, 2004). Its focus is
on the design and utilization of visual information
systems to support human cognitive performance
—e.g. reasoning and decision-making— in a
variety of situations and task domains. Our
symposium
will
introduce
this
new
interdisciplinary field and discuss opportunities for
cognitive science contributions to it.
VA researchers seek to support human decisionmaking through the use of interactive visualization
combined with mathematical, statistical and AI
methods for handling data. The use of graphical
visualization allows human intelligence to be
brought to bear on situations characterized by large
datasets that contain information that is unclear,
uncertain or contradictory. Visual analytics tools
have been used in scientific research, safety and
security, disaster relief, law enforcement, public
health, and economics.
Funding for visual analytics research has come
from a European Coordination Action Project
VisMaster “Visual Analytics - Mastering the
Information Age”, the US Department of
Homeland Security’s International Program and

Center for Excellence in Command, Control, and
Interoperability, the US NSF’s “Foundations of
Data And Visual Analytics Program”, the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft’s Priority Programme
“Scalable Visual Analytics: Interactive Visual
Analysis Systems of Complex Information Spaces"
and Canada’s Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council’s Strategic Partnership Program
“Visual Analytics for Safety and Security”.
VA technology design frequently draws upon
research in cognitive science, and generates
research questions that can best be addressed by
methods from cognitive science subdisciplines.
Examples include:
•

Understanding complex, dynamic visual
displays (perceptual cognition)

•

Design of real-time human-information
discourse (enactive cognition)

•

Design of AI systems for mixed-initiative
analytics (user modeling)

•

Collaborative analytics, analytics in the
organization (distributed cognition)

•

VA as a human/computer cognitive system
(distributed cognition)

This symposium builds on previous symposia and
workshops at Cogsci 07, and IEEE Visualization
Week to advance the dialog between cognitive
science and visual analytics. The symposium will

2194

explore the ways in which an application-aware
basic research program and a powerful applied
research field can advance both pragmatically and
intellectually.
Symposium Topics
We intend to make this symposium dialogic and
interactive. The format will include 12-minute
talks from three participants followed by a
symposium discussion with substantial input from
workshop attendees.
Presentations
“Where Visual Analytics Has Been and
Where It Might/Could/Should Be Going”
Joseph Kielman
Joseph Kielman serves as Science Advisor in
the Science and Technology Directorate at the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), where
he is the Lead for Basic/Futures Research in the
Command, Control and Interoperability Division
and also manages two University Programs’
Centers of Excellence. He established and
manages the National Visualization and Analytics
Center program, including the university-based
Regional Visualization and Analytics Centers and
the Institute for Discrete Sciences University
Affiliates and oversees joint programs with the
National Science Foundation (FODAVA),
Defence Research and Development Canada, and
the German BMBF. Immediately prior to joining
DHS, Dr. Kielman worked for 20 years at the
FBI, where he was successively Chief of the
Advanced Technology Group in the Engineering
Section, Chief of Research and Development for
the Technical Services Division, and Chief
Scientist and also Chief Architect at the
Information Resources Division. In 2006 he was
awarded the Presidential Rank of Meritorious
Senior Professional.
VisMaster, the European Coordination
Action Project in Visual Analytics. Markus
Rester
Markus Rester studied Computer Science in
Vienna. He is senior lecturer at the Vienna
University of Technology and received his PhD in

Computer Science in 2007. His main research
area is Information Visualization, especially
cognitive and usability aspects of Information
Visualization.
“Externalizing Implicit Spatializations of
Abstract
Data:
cognitive
science
&
Psycholinguistics Applied at the New York
Stock Exchange” W. Bradford Paley
Brad Paley did his first computer graphics in
1973, graduated Phi Beta Kappa from UC
Berkeley in 1981, founded Digital Image Design
Incorporated (didi.com/brad) in 1982, and started
doing financial & statistical data visualization in
1986. He has exhibited at the Museum of Modern
Art; he created TextArc.org; he is in the
ARTPORT collection of the Whitney Museum of
American Art; has received multiple grants and
awards for both art and design, and his designs are
at work every day in the hands of brokers on the
floor of the New York Stock Exchange. He is an
adjunct associate professor at Columbia University,
and is director of Information Esthetics: a fledgling
interdisciplinary group exploring the creation and
interpretation of data representations that are both
readable and esthetically satisfying.
“Visual Analytics as a Cognitive Science”
Brian Fisher (Moderator)
Brian Fisher is an Associate Professor in the
School of Interactive Arts and Technology at
Simon Fraser University and Adjunct Professor
and Associate Director of the Media and Graphics
Interdisciplinary Centre at the University of British
Columbia. He is also a member of the SFU Centre
for Interdisciplinary Research in the Mathematical
and Computational Sciences, and the UBC Brain
Research Centre and Institute for Computing,
Intelligent and Cognitive Systems. His research
focuses on the cognitive science of human
interaction with visual information systems.
References
Thomas, J. & Cook, K. A. (Eds.), (2005)
Illuminating the Path-- Research and
Development Agenda for Visual Analytics:
IEEE Press.

2195

