UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Vividness and Behavioral Specificity in Visual Imagery: Not what you’d expect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9s19x4v3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Author
D'Angiulli, Amedeo

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Vividness and Behavioral Specificity in Visual Imagery: Not what you’d expect
Amedeo D’Angiulli (amedeo@connect.carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada
and “dorsal” imagery, and the involvement of the complex
underlying working and long-term memory dynamics.
A major threat to the vivid-is-fast relationship is that it
may really reflect various types of participants‟ expectations
during lab experiments, not at all generation and use of
mental images. Following up to previous research
(D‟Angiulli & Reeves, 2005), I show that the current
evidence on the vivid-is-fast relationship, and its selective
variations in some conditions, is incompatible with the main
accounts based on expectations and tied to the alleged
epiphenomenalism of imagery experience. In addition,
presenting evidence from multiple measures, I show that
vividness fits well within the causal theory approach to
validity (Borsboom, Mellenbergh & van Heerden, 2004). To
explain the data reviewed here (as well as other recent
literature evidence), I develop a minimalist approach,
dubbed vividness-core principle. This consists in a
parsimonious set of propositions that: 1) builds on the vividis-fast relationship and Levesque‟s (1986) formalization of
vividness in AI; 2) accounts for most everyday imagery,
explaining how imagery could be useful for everyday
incidental memory and undetermined object-based
reasoning.

When remembering specific everyday objects or events
linked to past experiences, for example personal events
(e.g., the face of a relative or a pet), people generally report
“seeing with the mind's eye”. A pervasive aspect of people‟s
report is the vividness of their mental images. Images may
come from the imagination (e.g., a pink dog) or from
retrieved episodic and specific representations which refer
to everyday objects (e.g., your breakfast this morning).
Setting aside “imagination imagery”, whose vividness is
entirely subjective, we can define the vividness of “realistic”
imagery as: (i) The extent to which mental images reflect
the composite quality (including specificity, detail, and
richness) of visual representations that would have been
generated if the object had actually been perceived.
Proposition (i) requires no presumptions about the
underlying format of mental images (e.g., propositional)
other than that they are a type of analogue. All that one
needs to assume is some elementary properties of databases
(Brachman & Levesque, 2004). That is, a memory database
containing information about a given domain (of objects and
relationships between these objects in the world) will
contain individual images that consistently designate
individual objects in the world and relationships between
individual objects that designate the respective relationships
in the world. Second, according to (i), vividness can be
interpreted as a crude proxy for what is available in the
memory database, a report about a represented object X or
relationship involving X will be more or less vivid
depending on the extent to which information about X is
perceived to be complete (see Levesque, 1986), in turn this
should be reflected in behaviour, for example, the time
needed to respond to a query about X.
Some recent research (D‟Angiulli, in press; 2002;
D‟Angiulli & Reeves, 2007; 2002; Reeves & D‟Angiulli,
2003) has shown conditions in which the relationship
between vividness ratings and image latency response
reflects some properties of the visual systems: the system
that is dedicated to process object-properties (ventral
pathway) and the system that is dedicated to process
locative properties of mental images (dorsal pathway). In
particular, the results of these studies showed that for small
images expected to recruit mainly the ventral pathway (i.e.,
requiring size-scaling of less than 10o) the higher the rated
vividness, the faster their generation. This vivid-is-fast
relation, it was also found, changed for large images
expected to recruit mainly the dorsal pathway (i.e., requiring
size-scaling of 10o or more). While the size-dependent
effects gradually disappeared over the course of repeated
image generation, the vivid-is-fast relation remained,
although it corresponded to a much weaker effect. Based on
these findings, it was concluded that differential patterns of
vividness-image latency relationship can reflect “ventral”

References
Brachman, R.J. & Levesque, H., J. (2004). Knowledge,
representation and reasoning. NY: Morgan & Kaufmann.
Borsboom, D. Mellenbergh, G. J., & van Heerden, J. (2004).
The concept of validity. Psychological Review, 111,
1061–1071.
D‟Angiulli, A. (in press). Is the spotlight an obsolete
metaphor of „seeing with the mind‟s eye”? A constructive
naturalistic approach to the inspection of visual mental
images. Imagination, Cognition & Personality.
D'Angiulli, A., & Reeves, A. (2007). The relationship
between self-reported vividness and latency during mental
size scaling of everyday items: Phenomenological
evidence of different types of imagery. American Journal
of Psychology, 120(4), 521-551.
D‟Angiulli A., & Reeves A. (2005). Picture theory, tacit
knowledge or vividness-core? Three hypotheses on the
mind‟s eye and its elusive size. Proceedings of the 27th
Cognitive Science Society Annual Meeting, 536-541
D'Angiulli, A. (2002). Mental image generation and the
contrast sensitivity function. Cognition, 85, B11-B19.
D‟Angiulli, A., & Reeves, A. (2002). Generating mental
images: Latency and vividness are inversely related.
Memory & Cognition, 30, 1179-1188.
Levesque, H. (1986). Making believers out of computers.
Artificial Intelligence, 30, 81-108.
Reeves, A., & D‟Angiulli, A. (2003). What does the visual
buffer tell the mind‟s eye? Abstracts of The Psychonomic
Society, 8, 82.

49

