UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is Conversation? Distinguishing Dialogue Contexts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70w9n6fq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Eshghi, Arash
Healey, Patrick G.T.

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is Conversation? Distinguishing Dialogue Contexts
Arash Eshghi (arash@dcs.qmul.ac.uk)
Queen Mary University of London
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS

Patrick G.T. Healey (ph@dcs.qmul.ac.uk)
Queen Mary University of London
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS
Abstract
Conversations are a basic unit of analysis in studies of human
interaction. These units are conventionally distinguished by
reference to the set of ratified participants who take part, often by appeal to their physical proximity/orientation. We show
that within such conversational units there are distinct dialogue
contexts which are more fine-grained than this. We present
experimental evidence that demonstrates how these dialogue
contexts are distinguished not in terms of topic but in terms of
the participants who are actively contributing. More specifically, we show that changes in the set of primary participants
alters how easily participants can access a prior turn in the conversation using a context dependent elliptical expression. So
even within small groups of fully ratified participants, distinct
dialogue contexts, indexed to specific sets of participants, can
emerge. This leads to the idea that in multi-party dialogue,
context/adjacency has a tree like structure, so that under certain conditions, presented here, utterances on either side of a
sub-dialogue (a stretch of talk during which the set of primary
participants remains unchanged) can be regarded as ‘pragmatically next’ to each other. This has implications for our understanding of how conversations are structured and for how
models of dialogue track what is salient for whom at any given
point in conversation.
Keywords: Conversation, Dialogue, Multi-party Interaction,
Ellipsis, Adjacency Structure

Motivation
Theories of human interaction use the notion of ‘conversation’ as a basic building block. It groups together the sets of
people, utterances, gestures or other communicative signals
which are considered together in an analysis. In the case of
two-person, dyadic, interactions this choice is relatively unproblematic. However, in gatherings of three or more people
the boundaries between conversations become both more important for understanding the structure of the unfolding interaction and more difficult to track.
Conversation as a unit has typically been defined in terms
of physical criteria that are intended to capture who the ratified participants are (i.e. those who are officially part of the
conversation). For example, Goffman (1981), one of the first
researchers to recognise the problems created by multi-party
interactions, highlighted the way physical orientation, movement and the use of ‘ritual brackets’ such as greetings and
farewells can mark the boundaries of interaction. Kendon
(1990) described more subtle ways in which people use body

position and orientation to maintain interactional units or ‘Fformations’. An F-formation is also a ratificational device.
Think for example of how a group standing together in a circle may or may not move aside to ‘let another person in’.
Such gatherings are instances of what Goffman (1963) and
Goodwin (1981) called focused encounters, in which participants work to maintain a joint focus of attention.
Even within a single focused encounter different participants may stand in different relations to each contribution
(Goffman, 1981). For example one person may be the direct
addressee of a joke that is designed to mock another person
standing next to them (the non-addressed recipient or ‘sideparticipant’). It is known that these differences in participant
status can lead to systematically different patterns of common ground being established between the different parties
to a conversation (Schober & Clark, 1989; Wilkes-Gibbs &
Clark, 1992).
These observations have important ramifications for formal
and computational theories of discourse and dialogue that aim
to characterise syntactic and semantic dependencies across
multiple turns, i.e. how a contribution relates to the prior context of the dialogue (e.g. (Ginzburg, 1996; Kamp & Reyle,
1993)). For these theories it is critical to be able to specify
what constitutes the shared context for a conversation.
To clarify what is at issue, consider the representation of
context in Ginzburg’s KoS framework (Ginzburg, 1996). This
has 3 components: FACTS (the set of propositions mutually
accepted/believed so far by the participants), QUD (Questions Under Discussion) and LatestMove. QUD is a partially
ordered set of questions that are salient or currently under
discussion. This is meant to capture the highly constrained
set of ‘next moves’ that a participant can felicitously choose
from. In particular, utterances need to be ‘specific’ to a salient
question in QUD. So we may say that context is shared if the
same set of constraints/obligations are imposed on what each
participant can say/do next, i.e. the participants in question
have the same discursive potential at that point. In multiparty dialogues, it is clear that differences in participant status, result in different sets of obligations for the participants
(see (Ginzburg & Fernandez, 2005) for more detail), and accordingly, also affects the acceptability - in terms of relative

1240

positioning - of elliptical turns and the possibilities of their
resolution from context.
Nevertheless, the characterisations of conversation as a unit
in terms of the set of ratified participants, alluded to above,
are contradicted in discontinuous strands of interaction when
conversational contexts are ‘left open’ - questions left unresolved - and taken up later on; in the sense that what you say
later on, counts as ‘pragmatically next’ or a second pair part,
to what was said before the conversation was ‘broken’ e.g. in
multi-focus gatherings where one person may be a participant
in more than one parallel conversation.
In this paper we present experimental evidence that even
within a single conversation more than one dialogue context can emerge as a result of fluctuations in different participants’ levels of participation. These contexts, we propose, are
more fine-grained than an ‘interactional unit’ defined solely
in terms of who the ratified participants are and are also independent of topic.

Ellipsis as window on shared-context
Ellipsis provides a useful window on the accessibility of different contributions at different points in a dialogue (Eshghi
& Healey, 2007). An elliptical expression involves the omission of one or more words or phrases from an utterance
which are, by implication, presumed to be recoverable from
the local context. In dialogue this context is often another
turn/utterance referred to as the Antecedent of the ellipsis. Interpretability of elliptical utterances - as manifest in the relevant response to them - demonstrates that the context required to recover the missing bits (the antecedent) is sufficiently salient or pragmatically ‘close’ or ‘in focus’, for the
responder.
In dyadic dialogue1 , the antecedent of an ellipsis is almost always found in the immediately preceding turn (Purver,
2004), e.g. “A: Where did you go yesterday evening? B: Cinema”. In multi-party dialogues however, the situation is more
complex. Consider dialogue 1 from the AMI corpus below:
C:

What does cutest spelling mean? (1)
oh, she spelled cutest um with an I , (2)
C:
oh, okay. (3)
B:
so that that’s just something I pointed out. (4)
D:
oh yeah. (5)
A : Cutest? [Clarification Ellipsis, Antecedent Distance of
5](6)
D : E S T (7)
A : Thank you.[laugh] (8)
B:

Dialogue 1: From the AMI corpus (Carletta, 2006)
In the above example, A’s elliptical request for clarification
(turn 6) is, in effect, just as local to C’s utterance as B’s (at
1 It may be worth noting that “dialogue” is derived from ‘dia-’
meaning ‘through’ and not ‘di-’ meaning ‘two’ and so covers interactions between multiple participants

turn 2) despite differences in the amount of time and number of turns that have elapsed. The adjacency structure of
multi-party dialogues is thus generally more complex than
dyadic dialogues. In multi-party dialogues, after the initiation of any move, multiple non-speakers could then react to it
elliptically without necessarily causing any trouble in understanding; hence adjacency structure in multi-party dialogues
is not linear, but looks more like a tree: Given any utterance,
there can be more than one subsequent turn, constructed as
‘pragmatically next’ to it.
We can also find examples in which multiple conversational strands, with overlapping groups of participants, are
interleaved. Consider Dialogue 2 below which comes from a
corpus of on-line chat community interactions in an environment called Walford (described by (Healey, White, Eshghi,
Reeves, & Light, 2007)). The residents of Walford interact
using a single text chat screen on which all the messages they
send and receive are displayed. In Walford people can conduct multiple concurrent conversations with different, potentially overlapping, groups of individuals and they routinely
take advantage of this fact. These conversations all take place
in the same chat window with no visual cues to help distinguish the different conversational strands or groups of participants. Dialogue 2 shows a sequence of turns seen by ‘
Naomi’. Note that we have used indentation to indicate the
separate conversational tracks but in the actual chat window
there is no indentation:
SONIA :

Hopws you? (1)
tired (2)
NAOMI : you? (3)
SONIA : Just got in from work (4)
NAOMI : ahh I see, kinda sick and a bit pissed (5)[Antecedent of CE]
NAOMI :
heya hun (6)
NAOMI :
Logged in from home? (7)
FRANK :
ok, I?m off (8)
GARRY:
yep, just about to start my studying (9)
FRANK :
Yeah Yeah Yeah (10)
SONIA : Drunk pissed? (11)[Clarification Ellipsis(CE), distance of 6]
NAOMI : Angry pissed. (12)
NAOMI :

Dialogue 2: From the Walford Corpus
Naomi is conducting a dyadic exchange with Sonia, a second dyadic exchange with Garry - which Sonia does not
see - in parallel with a third, broadcast ‘group’ interaction
with Frank that is seen by everyone. Despite this mixture
of turns and participants it is clear that the clarification ellipsis at turn 11 has its antecedent in turn 5. It is as if
the conversation/shared-context between Naomi and Sonia is
‘suspended’ for the duration of turns 6-10, the intervening
sub-dialogue/shared-context. Sonia’s subsequent CE is then
successfully understood by Naomi as referring back to turn
11.

1241

Accessibility of the Antecedent
What these examples make clear is that the accessibility of
an antecedent is not a simple function of time elapsed, turns
elapsed, nor recency in memory. They suggest rather, that
people track different conversational contexts that may be
maintained in parallel over surprisingly long periods especially in discontinuous strands of interaction where there is
an ‘open state of talk’ (Goffman, 1981). An initial generalisation suggested by these examples is that distinct dialogue
contexts may be distinguished in terms of the set of primary
participants, i.e. those actively making contributions (jointly
or individually). This leads to the prediction that an elliptical turn that is separated from its antecedent by a different
dialogue context, i.e. when there’s been a change in primary
participants, should be more easily resolved than one which
is separated by the same number of turns from the same dialogue context.
In this paper we report an experimental test of this prediction by looking at the relative ease with which participants
are able to resolve elliptical clarification questions within or
across dialogue contexts.

Figure 1: Director 1’s view

Method
Task and Materials

Figure 2: Matcher’s view

The experiment uses a variation on the ‘Tangram’ (Chinese
abstract figures) tasks used in various experimental studies
of common ground (e.g. (Wilkes-Gibbs & Clark, 1992)). In
these studies, a Director has a sequence of pictures of these
figures in a fixed order in front of him. The director describes
these one by one to a Matcher. The matcher has the same
figures, but unordered, which he needs to put into the same
order as the director. They cannot see one another’s cards,
but they can talk as much as they like about them.
3-Way Tangram Task We use an on-line, 3-person variant
of the same task. The task involves 2 Directors and 1 Matcher
(D1, D2 and M). The D’s share a set of 12 Tangram images
in a single target order but half are assigned to one D and half
to the other. At the start of the task all the figures are hidden
from the D’s but they can see which items in the sequence
they will deal with and which ones the other will deal with
(see Figure 1). The M, by contrast, can see all the figures but,
as with the original task, does not know the target order they
will have to put them in (see Figure 2).
The directors proceed through the sequence of figures one
at a time by clicking, as appropriate, in the window. For each
figure the ‘active’ director provides a description so that the
matcher can identify it and drag and drop it into the appropriate slot (see Figure 2). The ‘passive’ director does not see
the image and therefore has no direct involvement in describing it. They are, however, fully ratified side-participants in
the exchange. In this manner, for each round of Tangrams,
we gather a sequence of interactions between D1 and M, and
some between D2 and M with the sequence of participants
controlled experimentally.

In order to enable the insertion of the experimental probe
clarification questions all interaction between the D’s and M
is via the DiET Chat Tool, described below.
The DiET Chat Tool This is a custom built
Java application which allows 2 or more participants to communicate via a shared chat window
similar to proprietary instant messaging systems
(http://www.dcs.qmul.ac.uk/research/imc/diet/index.php).
The display is split into an upper window, a status bar and a
lower window (see Figure 3). The upper window displays
the ongoing conversation, and the lower window is used for
typing. All keys pressed are recorded and relayed to the
server where they are time-stamped and stored. The status
bar, a prominent single line of text that is controlled by
the server indicates whether other participants are currently
typing. Everything that the participants say to each other,
passes through the DiET server. The server stores all the
relevant details about the utterances sent, including timing
and structural information. This allows us to parse each turn
for target expressions and provides control over what each
participant sees on their local chat window.
In this experiment we parse utterances on the fly, in order to
identify possible fragments from the D’s turns that can serve
as target sources/antecedents for long-distance RF’s (Reprise
Fragment, a special class of Clarification Ellipsis. E.g. A:
Did Mary show up last night? B: Mary? [RF]). The criteria
for selecting a potential target in this experiment were that it
should be a noun phrase, verb phrase or prepositional phrase,

1242

probe RF’s occurred, on average, at equivalent distances from
their targets in terms of time, topics and turns elapsed but at
different distances in terms of dialogue context boundaries
(within context in the former condition and across contexts
in the latter). Exactly 4 RF’s (2 in each condition) were sent
to the D’s per round of 12 Tangrams resulting in a withinsubjects manipulation.

Participants
60 participants were recruited from among undergraduate
and postgraduate students from various disciplines at Queen
Mary, University of London. 33 were male, 27 were female.
The experiments took approximately 60 minutes to complete
and each was paid 7 pounds for taking part.

Figure 3: Chat Display
that is not subsequently repeated prior to its use in a spoof RF
(in order to factor out the element of ambiguity with respect
to the current figure). Given a suitable target, the server can
then generate a spoof clarification question that appears to
originate from the Matcher, but is not relayed to the Matcher’s
screen. Both D’s see the RF and either may respond. The
response is trapped by the server (the matcher does not see
the response but the D’s do) and the dialogue resumes (see
Dialogue 3 for an example).

Procedure
Participants were randomly assigned to the D and M roles.
They were given written and oral instructions about the task
together and had an opportunity to ask questions about the
procedure. They were then seated in separate rooms, each at
a desk with a PC displaying the appropriate task window (Figure 1 for the D’s and Figure 2 for the M) and the chat client
window (Figure 3). They did as many rounds of tangrams
that they could in 1 hour and were then debriefed about the
experimental manipulations together.

D 1:

the big fat lady. [Antecedent of RF]
ok got it.
D 2: ok my one now.
D 2: camel with the triangular back.
M : ye got it
M : sorry err fat lady? [Fake server probe (RF). ]
D 1: yeh that was number 2 [Trapped Response]
M:

Results

Dialogue 3: Example from the Experimental Corpus
This whole process can be carried out without disrupting
the dialogue and without being detected by any of the participants. For a more detailed description of this technique see
(Healey, Purver, King, Ginzburg, & Mills, 2003).
The probe RF interventions are triggered when the Matcher
places a figure in the appropriate slot, and just before everybody moves on to discuss the next figure. The target antecedent of the RF is always from the previous item (relative
to the one just placed by the M), i.e. the fragment queries
something said previously by one of the D’s about the penultimate figure described so far.

Experimental Design
As noted, in the experiment reported here the probe spoof RF
is always generated on an antecedent (target) expression that
has been used to describe the previous Tangram figure in the
sequence. The experimental contrast is between a ‘same’ dialogue context condition where the current D also described
the last-but-one item (i.e. there has been no change in the
primary participants over the two items) and a ‘different’ dialogue context condition where the other D described the lastbut-one item (i.e. there has been a switch in primary participants over the two items). This created a situation in which

The principal question for our analysis is whether the dialogue context manipulation affects the responses Directors
give to the spoof RF probe questions from the matcher. In
particular, our prediction is that the distant antecedents should
be more accessible/salient - and hence the RF, easier to interpret - when they are from a different dialogue context because they are pragmatically ‘nearer’ for the Director who
produced them - than when they are from the same dialogue
context, i.e. were produced by the director who is describing
the current item. In contrast to this, if accessibility is solely a
matter of recency, number of topics (items) or total amount of
intervening turns then there should be no difference between
these conditions.
Because both Directors saw each RF probe question both
had the opportunity to respond regardless of who actually
produced the target antecedent. Responses were therefore
classified according to who responded: Owner (of the target expression), Not Owner (i.e. the other director) and None
where nobody responded. As Figure 4 shows, the distribution
of responses was different in the two conditions. The probe
question was equally likely to receive no response in the two
conditions but where the target crosses the context boundaries (‘different dialogue context’ condition) the owner was
less likely to respond than the current speaker (this is construed as Momentum of Dyads in the discussion below). A
multinomial regression analysis confirmed the reliability of
this pattern (Chi22 = 46.41, p =0.00)
Where a response was given, it was also classified as to
whether it displayed a Local (i.e. incorrect) or Distant (cor-

1243

Figure 4: Distribution of responses across conditions
rect) interpretation, or no interpretation at all - if the response
itself was a request for clarification. This was possible, because the figures being described and the order in which they
were described by the directors, were known at the time of
analysis. In addition, the whole dialogue between Directors
and Matcher prior to the sending of the RFs, was recorded.
So the response often revealed clearly, whether the Director
had taken the RF as clarifying something about the current
figure (Local/incorrect), or the previous one (Distant/correct).
In particular, the responses were coded as Distant, if:

Figure 5: Distribution of the Directors’ interpretation of
probe Reprise Fragments across conditions
equal, there is a strong presumption that elliptical expressions
have local antecedents.

Momentum of dyads

• part of the original distant antecedent from which the RF
was taken, was repeated by the Director.
• there was reference in the response to the previous item e.g.
“D1: yea that was number 2”.
Otherwise, the responses were coded as displaying a Local
interpretation.
As Figure 5 shows, where the responses indicated a distant or a local interpretation, the pattern of interpretations was
systematically different in the two conditions. If the owner responds then a distant interpretation is only favoured where the
antecedent was in a different dialogue context. If the owner
responds and the antecedent comes from the same dialogue
context, i.e. was produced by the person who also produced
the most recent description they strongly favour a local (incorrect) interpretation. This pattern is confirmed by a multinomial regression analysis which shows a main effect of both
Dialgoue Context condition (Chi21 = 18.26, p =0.00) and of
who responds (Chi21 = 21.25, p =0.00) on the likelihood of a
distant (correct) interpretation.

Discussion
Tendency to interpret a fragment against local
context
The most obvious pattern in the results of this experiment
is that there is a strong preference for local antecedents for
ellipses. Even where the owner of the distant antecedent responds to the probe RF they frequently interpret it as being
about the current item and not the (distant) target. This is despite the fact that the fragment used in the probe question has
not been repeated since. This suggests that, all things being

In the ‘same dialogue context’ condition the current speaker
is also the owner of the distant antecedent (i.e. the 2 consecutive figures were described by the same director). In the
‘different dialogue context’ condition, the current speaker is
not the owner of the distant antecedent. As figure 4 indicates, there is a strong preference for the non-owner (coincident with the current speaker) to respond in the ‘different
dialogue context’ condition. In both conditions then, the current speaker is more likely to respond. Therefore, a possible
generalisation here is that by default, in the absence of any
address cues, utterances are taken to be addressed at the last
speaker; dyads therefore have momentum. This is consistent with the results found in (Parker, 1988). The significant
finding in that study is that a random utterance in a small focused group discussion is most likely (by a large margin) to
be within a dyadic turn-taking pattern (A-B-A). Even when
this pattern is broken, a new one is quickly established and
sustained for an extended period. This means that even interactions with a small set of fully ratified participants, tend to
lapse into stretches of dyadic talk during which the rest of the
participants take on secondary roles. We argue below, that it
is exactly such imbalance in the participants’ level of participation, which results in the emergence of more than one distinct dialogue context; hence the need to index shared-context
to specific sets of participants.

Emergence of distinct dialogue contexts
Importantly for our purposes, the results show that the structure of context, understood here in terms of changes in primary participants, has a significant effect on the accessibility
of the antecedent of an ellipsis, prior to the change of primary participants. As predicted from the corpus examples,
the long distance antecedents are more easily accessed where
they are from a different dialgoue context. It’s crucial here to
see that it is not just any change in the primary participants

1244

across contexts that makes the distant antecedent more accessible. For the change in the primary participants to have such
an effect, it is essential that:
1. the participant producing the elliptical turn, say A, and
the owner/producer of the antecedent, say B, are primary
participants in the antecedent containing, distant dialogue
context i.e. they have grounded the antecedent and

If correct, attempts to scale-up computational/formal models of dyadic dialogue, to multi-party, need to take these findings into account. They change our assumptions about how to
track and update content as the conversation moves forward
and what is salient for whom at any given point. This should
also lead to a systematic loosening of constraints on when and
from whom ellipsis is possible.

Acknowledgments
2. either A or B is NOT a primary participant in the intervening dialogue context.
Support for 1 above, comes from the observation that the
preference for the incorrect local interpretation is strongest
when the non-owner responds. This seems to be because
the non-owner is not a primary participant in the distant dialogue context containing the antecedent, and therefore has
not grounded the antecedent to a level that would allow him
to interpret the ellipsis as distant. So we may say that the
context that A shares with B (in virtue of the fact that they are
both primary participants in it) prior to the intervening dialogue context, is ‘suspended’ as a result of either A’s or B’s
lack of active participation in the intervening context, so that
subsequent to it, the distant context/antecedent is still sufficiently salient. And this is despite the fact that A or B may be
a ratified side-participant to the intervening exchange.
All this supports the idea that multi-party dialogues can
lead to conversational contexts that have a tree like structure.
Utterances that are placed on either side of a sub-dialogue,
corresponding to a single dialogue context in our sense, can
be understood as pragmatically ‘next’ to each other. The experimental approach allows us to factor out from this effect
the possible influence of number of turns, number of topics (in terms of Tangrams described) and the amount of time
elapsed between the ellipsis and its antecedent. This provides
a very useful notion of context locality/saliency as indexed to
specific participants - contingent upon their level of participation - which accounts for the adjacency structure of turns,
not only in multi-focus, discontinuous situations (such as Dialogue 2 above) but also focused gatherings with sets of fully
ratified participants.

Conclusion
The experimental results presented here show that even
within small groups of fully ratified conversational participants distinct conversational contexts can emerge as a result
of changes in the primary participants, and hence they are, as
indexed by ellipses, anaphora and other context sensitive expressions, more fine-grained than interactional units such as
an F-formation (Kendon, 1990). Moreover, we have argued
for the need to index these contexts to specific sets of participants and provided conditions, in terms of the participants’
statuses during a stretch of talk/sub-dialogue (corresponding
to a single dialogue context), under which utterances on either
side of that sub-dialogue may be regarded as ‘pragmatically
next’ to each other.

We would like to acknowledge the efforts of Gregory J. Mills,
in both the development and further extension of the DiET
Chat Tool, and for invaluable input to the various conversations we have had about the issues addressed in this paper.

References
Carletta, J. (2006). Announcing the ami meeting corpus. The
ELRA Newsletter.
Eshghi, A., & Healey, P. (2007). Collective states of understanding. In Proceedings of the 8th sigdial workshop on
discourse and dialogue (pp. 2–9). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ginzburg, J. (1996). Dynamics and the semantics of dialogue.
Logic and Computation.
Ginzburg, J., & Fernandez, R. (2005). Scaling up from dialogue to multilogue: some principles and benchmarks. In
Proceedings of the 43rd annual meeting of the association
for compuational linguistics.
Goffman, E. (1963). Behaviour in public places: Notes on
the social organisation of gatherings. The Free Press.
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, C. (1981). Conversational organization: Interaction between speakers and hearers. New York, Academic
Press.
Healey, P., Purver, M., King, J., Ginzburg, J., & Mills, G.
(2003). Experimenting with clarification in dialogue. In
Proceedings of the 25th annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 539–544.). Mahwah, N.J.: LEA.
Healey, P., White, G., Eshghi, A., Reeves, A., & Light, A.
(2007). Communication spaces. Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
Kamp, H., & Reyle, U. (1993). From discourse to logic.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kendon, A. (1990). Conducting interaction: Patterns of
behaviour in focused encounters. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Parker, K. C. H. (1988). Speaking turns in small group interaction: A context-sensitive event sequence model. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology.
Purver, M. (2004). The theory and use of clarification requests in dialogue. PhD Thesis At King’s College University of London.
Schober, M. F., & Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding by
addressees and overhearers. Cognitive Psychology.
Wilkes-Gibbs, D., & Clark, H. (1992). Coordinating beliefs
in conversation. Memory and Language.

1245

