UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What it means to be “better”: The role of comparison language in social comparison

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8qm1n70v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Bloomfield, Amber
Choplin, Jessica

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What it means to be “better”: The role of comparison language in social comparison
Amber N. Bloomfield (abloomfi@depaul.edu) and Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu)
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504

Abstract
Judgments of personal attributes are often informed by the
social information available (Festinger, 1954). The results of
social comparison can manifest as assimilation of judgments
towards the comparison standard or the contrast of judgments
away from the standard, and many theories attempt to
describe the conditions under which the two patterns will
occur (e.g. Mussweiler, 2003; Schwartz & Bless, 1992).
Recent work on comparison-induced distortion (Choplin,
2007; Choplin & Hummel, 2002) highlights how the
magnitude of difference implied by comparisons like “better”
may influence estimates of the compared values and produce
assimilation and contrast-like effects. We explored the
influence of this comparison-suggested difference (CSD) on
participants’ performance estimates. In Experiment 1, we
examined the effects of social comparison when the
difference between participants’ unbiased estimates and the
standard did not agree with the CSD. Experiment 2 explored
how comparison language (and the corresponding CSD)
mediates the role of standard similarity in social comparison
effects. Combined, these studies demonstrate that the outcome
of social comparison can be influenced by the CSD of the
comparison language applied.

Introduction
When a person compares herself to others, how does
information about their attributes influence the way she
understands or estimates her own? When objective
information is unavailable, comparison with others may be
sought to understand personal attributes (Festinger, 1954).
For instance, understanding how liberal one is may involve
comparing one’s political opinions to the political opinions
of one’s social group. The effect of social comparison on
evaluations of personal attributes is a well-established and
active research area (Buunk & Gibbons, 2007).
Much of the research on social comparison can be
characterized as an attempt to delineate conditions where
social comparisons leads to bias away from the comparison
standard in recall, estimation or judgment of personal
attributes from conditions where social comparisons leads to
bias towards the standard: these are respectively termed
contrast and assimilation effects (e.g. Mussweiler, 2003;
Stapel & Winkielman, 1998; Suls, Martin, & Wheeler,
2002). There are several cognitive accounts of these effects.
For example, Mussweiler and his colleagues (Mussweiller,
2003; Mussweiler, Ruter & Epstude, 2004; Mussweiler &
Strack, 2000) describe how a focus on similarities between
one’s self and a comparison standard leads to assimilation
(the more similar one believes they are to the standard, the
more similar judgments of one’s personal attributes are to

those of the standard), while focusing on dissimilarities
leads to contrast. Schwartz and Bless (1992) appeal to the
way in which comparison information is used to explain the
different patterns: if the standard is used as a reference point
against which to evaluate one’s attribute, contrast results; if
the standard is used to interpret one’s ability or attribute, by
including the standard information in the representation of
the self, assimilation results.
Another factor that has not yet been considered in social
comparison research is the role of comparison language and
the magnitude of difference between compared values the
language implies. Rusiecki (1985) found that participants
interpreted comparison words like “taller” to imply a
particular range of difference between values (e.g. 2-5
inches’ difference for the women’s heights), with substantial
consistency across participants in the size of the inferred
differences. The difference in magnitude implied by a
comparison is the comparison-suggested difference (CSD)
and can be estimated by asking pre-test participants to
provide values that are, for instance, “much more” or
“taller” than a comparison value: the difference between the
median response and the comparison value is the estimated
CSD for the comparison word or phrase (Choplin, 2007).
Recent research (Choplin, 2007; Choplin & Hummel,
2002) demonstrates that verbal comparisons and their
comparison-suggested differences systematically bias
evaluations, estimates and recall for compared values. The
CSD for a comparison word (i.e. “smaller”) determines how
making a comparison will affect representation of the
compared values. If two compared values differ by an
amount less than the CSD, they will tend to be represented
as further apart in magnitude than they actually are
(Choplin, 2007). As a result, evaluations of the two values
will be more different than they would have been if they
were not compared, the values will be recalled as further
apart than they actually were, and estimates of the values
may be adjusted to be further apart. Similarly, two
compared values that differ by more than the CSD will be
represented as closer together in magnitude than they
actually are (Choplin, 2007), and recalled, estimated or
judged as closer together than if they had not been
compared. This effect has been demonstrated with the recall
of geometric shapes (Choplin & Hummel, 2002), estimates
of building heights (Choplin & Tawney, 2005) and amount
of food consumed (Choplin & Motyka, 2007).
Comparison-induced bias may produce apparent
assimilation or contrast effects in social comparisons. For
example, consider a comparison involving “taller.” The
median CSD for “taller” for a woman’s height is 2 inches

2783

(Choplin, 2007). If Jane is 5’7” and is compared to Beth
who is 5’4” with “taller,” the actual difference in their
heights exceeds the CSD: the value that is a CSD greater
than Beth’s height is 5’6”, shorter than Jane’s height. In this
case, comparison may result in Jane’s height being
estimated as closer to Beth’s, an apparent assimilation
effect. Conversely, if Jane were only 5’5”, the difference
between their heights would fall below the CSD. In this
case, Jane’s height might be estimated as taller than it is,
contrasted away from Beth’s height. Note that in both cases
the compared value (i.e. Jane’s height) is being assimilated
towards the value that is a CSD from the standard, which is
5’6” in this case. Thinking about the outcome of social
comparisons in terms of assimilation and contrast with
regards to the standard may sometimes be misleading:
adjustment may not be relative to the standard, but relative
to the value a CSD away from the standard.
Comparison-suggested differences differ with the
extremity of comparison language (e.g. “a few less” vs. “a
lot less”), so this factor must also be taken into account
when predicting the outcome of a social comparison. For
example, we conducted a preliminary study examining how
extremity of comparison language affected the outcome of
social comparison. Sixty participants first estimated how
many ads they had seen in the last 24 hours (their average
first estimate was ~ 172 ads). The experimenter then told
them that the average American sees roughly 3000 ads ever
24 hours. A language manipulation was introduced in the
social comparison: half of the participants were told “you
may see a few less ads than the average American;” the
other half were told “you may see a lot less ads…” Pretesting with a separate group of participants indicated that
the comparison-suggested difference for “a few less”
(median = 300) was smaller than that for “a lot less”
(median = 1750). After hearing the comparison, participants
gave a second estimate for observed ads: participants who
heard “a few less” gave a second estimate closer to 3000 (M
= 1513.17) than participants who heard “a lot less” (M =
655.17; t(58)=3.361, p<.01). In both conditions, the
difference between the first estimate and the standard fell
below the CSD, so both conditions produced apparent
assimilation effects. However, the magnitude of these
effects was determined by the CSD for the comparison.
As opposed to manipulating comparison language, the
first experiment described below manipulated whether the
difference between a participant’s first estimate and the
presented standard information fell below or exceeded the
CSD. This manipulation should affect whether participants
show assimilation or contrast towards the standard in
making their second estimates. The second experiment
manipulated the standard (more vs. less similar to
participants) to examine the effects of standard similarity on
the comparison language participants chose to make a social
comparison (and the relevant CSD), and so the outcome of
the comparison on their second estimates.
The task used in both experiments involved performance
on a test of driving rules, a knowledge domain in which

Windschitl et al. (2003) found the majority of their
participants expected their performance to be superior to
that of a competitor (the “better-than-average” effect; Alicke
et al., 1995; Chambers & Windschitl, 2004). Using this
domain allowed us to anticipate our participants’
expectations for the ordinal relationship between their
performance and that of the standard, and so provide
appropriate comparison language.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we explored the effects of social
comparison on estimates of personal performance when the
difference between unbiased estimates and the comparison
standard was manipulated to be either less than the CSD or
greater than the CSD for “better.” We predicted that most
participants would choose “better” to compare themselves to
the average person on the driving test, activating the CSD
for “better.” We predicted that participants would adjust
their first estimate down towards the average person’s
performance when the difference between the first estimate
and the average person’s performance was larger than the
CSD for “better” and adjust up from the first estimate when
the difference was smaller than this CSD. In this way, the
same comparison standard and task description would
produce both assimilation and contrast patterns of response.

Methods
Pre-testing
A group of 15 pre-test participants imagined that there was a
multiple choice test about driving rules in the state of
Illinois and stated how many questions they would answer
correctly out of 50. They were then asked to imagine the
performance level of the average person given that their
performance was “better.” The median percent difference
between pre-test participants’ estimates of their own
performance and their estimate of the average person’s
performance was 17%. Thus, for Experiments 1 and 2, the
estimated CSD for “better” was 17% more questions correct
on the driving test.

Materials
The experimental materials described a multiple-choice test
of driving rules in the state of Illinois with 50 questions.
Participants estimated their own performance on this task
and then heard comparison information. Participants in the
large difference condition heard that the average person’s
performance was 25% less than their first response (recall
that the CSD for “better” was 17%). Those in the small
difference condition heard that the average person’s
performance was 2 questions less than their own first
estimate. The reason for using a percentage rather than an
absolute difference in the large difference condition was to
prevent our large difference from being less than
participants’ actual first estimate; this practice was difficult
to apply in the small difference condition, however, as for

2784

3.5

some participants a very small percentage difference would
be less than a 1-question difference. For this reason, we
used an absolute difference of 2. Thus, in both conditions,
participants were “better than average” in light of the
comparison information. Participants were asked to choose
a phrase to compare their anticipated performance on the
test with that of the average person:

2.5
1.5
OVERALL
0.5

"better"
"approx.
the same"

-0.5

Compared to the average person, how do you think you
would perform, approximately the same or better?

-1.5
-2.5

Large difference

Participants then provided a second personal performance
estimate.

Small difference

Figure 1. Average difference between estimates (first–
second) in Experiment 1 by condition and comparison.

Procedure
All materials were presented verbally by the experimenter.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of the difference
conditions. They were to estimate how many questions they
would answer correctly on the test of driving rules. After
giving this estimate, participants were told the average
person’s score and asked to state “better” or “approximately
the same” as their comparison with the average person’s
performance. After providing a second estimate, participants
were thanked and dismissed.

Participants
The experimenter approached potential participants in
public locations in the Chicago area. One-hundred eighteen
people agreed to participate after being approached in this
manner. The data of two participants were excluded due to
experimenter error, leaving 57 in the large difference
condition and 59 in the small difference condition.

Results
Choice of comparison phrase did not differ significantly
between the large and small difference conditions (Χ2(2,
N=116)=1.31, p=.25). Participants showed a slight tendency
across conditions to choose “better” as the comparison
(54%). This was not significantly different from 50% (by
binomial test, p > .20). Six participants opted to choose
“worse” as their comparison, though this was not offered as
an option. Only one of these participants provided a second
estimate that was lower than the average person’s
performance. Excluding this participant from analyses did
not change the pattern of results.
The average first estimate did not differ across conditions
(40.3 in the small difference, 40.6 in the large difference).
Figure 1 shows the average difference between first and
second estimates for each condition (negative numbers
indicate a second estimate higher than the first) overall and
by comparison choice. Difference condition significantly
affected the adjustment from first to second estimates (F(1,
114) = 19.19, p<.001): participants in the large difference
condition decreased their second performance estimate from
their first (t(56) = 3.65, p < .01), while those in the small
difference condition increased their second estimate (t(58) =
-2.40, p < .05).

Although comparison language was not manipulated, it is
worth noting that participants’ second estimates reflected
their comparison choice. Participants in the small difference
condition who chose “better” adjusted their second estimate
up from their first by an average of 1.3 questions; those
choosing “approximately the same” tended to not adjust the
second estimate (indicating that a 2-question difference was
within the range of “approximately the same”). Participants
in the large difference condition who chose “approximately
the same” adjusted their second estimate down from the first
by an average of 1.97 questions, whereas those choosing
“better” adjusted their second estimate down by an average
of 1.76 questions. The difference in adjustment for
participants who chose “better” and those who chose
“approximately the same” was significant in the small
difference condition (F(2, 56) = 3.57, p < .05) but not in the
large difference condition (F(2, 54) = .24, n.s.). The lack of
a significant difference in the large difference condition is
likely due to the CSDs for “better” and “approximately the
same” both being less than the difference between
participants’ first estimate and the standard (the CSD for
“approximately the same” would be ~ 0 questions). Thus we
would predict that either comparison would be associated
with adjustment down towards the standard, differing only
in the degree of the adjustment. In the small difference
condition, however, the direction of adjustment would be
expected to differ with comparison, resulting in a more
obvious difference between participants who chose “better”
and those who selected “approximately the same.”

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show that the outcome of social
comparison depends in part on how the magnitude of the
difference between the unbiased estimate of performance
and the comparison standard matches up to the comparisonsuggested difference for the comparison language. When the
unbiased estimate is far away from the comparison standard
(more than the CSD), participants adjust their estimate
towards the standard, as in assimilation effects; when the
difference between the unbiased estimate and the standard is
less than the CSD, participants adjust their estimate away
from the standard, as in contrast effects. Adjustment

2785

towards or away from the standard did not occur because of
changes in standard identity (e.g. a standard more likely to
be used as a reference point vs. one more likely to be
included in the self representation) or a change in focus on
similarities vs. differences between the self and the
standard, and so is not easily explained by current theories
of social comparison (e.g. Mussweiler, 2003; Schwartz &
Bless, 1992). Experiment 1 showed that responses
consistent with assimilation and contrast can be found with
social comparisons differing only in the magnitude of
difference between a participant’s unbiased estimate and the
standard.

resident” presented a dissimilar standard. As in Experiment
1, participants provided a first estimate, selected “better” or
“approximately the same” to compare themselves with the
standard, and made a second estimate. Also, as a
manipulation check, participants provided a rating of how
similar the standard’s performance would be to theirs (1-10
scale, with 1 = not at all similar, 10 = completely similar).

Procedure

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 showed that when the magnitude of difference
between participants’ unbiased estimates and the
comparison standard did not agree with the CSD for the
comparison language, participants adjusted their estimates
accordingly. This study focused on manipulating the degree
of difference between unbiased estimates and the standard
to be more than or less than the CSD for “better.” In
contrast, Experiment 2 manipulated the description of the
comparison standard and so the language that participants
were likely to choose for comparison with the standard. If
participants use different comparison language for different
comparison standards, this will affect CSDs and result in
different patterns of adjustment for different standards.
In social comparison, standards who are more similar to
the participants generally lead to assimilation patterns (e.g.
Hoffman, Festinger & Lawrence, 1954). Conversely,
standards more dissimilar to the participants often produce
contrast patterns (e.g. Brown et al., 1992). The question we
ask here is whether standard similarity also affects the
language a person uses to compare herself to the standard.
More dissimilar standards may prompt comparisons with
larger CSDs (e.g. “much more,” “better”), leading to
estimates further from the standard; more similar standards
may lead to comparison with smaller CSDs (e.g. “slightly
more,” “approximately the same”), encouraging estimates to
be closer to the standard. The result of this comparison
effect would be contrast patterns in the former case and
assimilation patterns in the latter. Experiment 2 examined
the potential mediating role of comparison language in the
effect of standard similarity on social comparison effects.

Methods
Materials
The materials in Experiment 2 were identical to those in
Experiment 1 except for the description of the comparison
standard. After providing their unbiased estimate of
performance, participants heard a performance level for
either “the average Chicago, IL area resident” or “the
average London, England area resident.” Because
participants were approached in the Chicago area, “the
average Chicago, IL area resident” presented a more similar
standard, while “the average London, England area

All materials were presented verbally by the experimenter.
Participants were randomly assigned to the London or
Chicago conditions. After providing their unbiased estimate,
participants provided a similarity rating for the standard.
They were then told that this standard answered 4 fewer
questions correct that their first estimate. The difference size
of 4 was selected because the results of Experiment 1
indicated that a difference of 2 questions fell within the
range of the CSD for “approximately the same.” With a
difference of 4, participants choosing either “better” or
“approximately the same” would be likely to adjust their
second estimate from their first (though in different
directions), as this difference magnitude was unlikely to
meet the CSD for either comparison. After hearing this
information, participants selected a comparison phrase to
compare their anticipated performance to that of the
standard and made a second estimate of their performance.

Participants
Participants were approached in a manner similar to those in
Experiment 1. Ninety participants agreed to participate, with
the data of one participant excluded due to experimenter
error (45 in Chicago; 44 in London).

Results
Rated similarity differed significantly between standard
conditions (t(87) = 5.447, p < .001). The similar standard
(“average Chicago, IL area resident”) received higher
similarity ratings on average (M = 5.16, SD = 2.48) than did
the dissimilar standard (“average London, England area
resident;” M = 2.52, SD = 2.06). If the results here follow
past findings, (e.g. Hoffman et al., 1954; Brown et al., 1992)
participants in the Chicago condition should show more
adjustment of their estimates towards the comparison
standard (i.e. assimilation) than participants in the London
condition, and those in the London condition should show
more adjustment of their estimates away from the
comparison standard (i.e. contrast) than participants in the
Chicago condition.
The average first estimate was 38 questions correct in the
Chicago condition and 36 questions correct in the London
condition (t(87)=1.32, n.s). Figure 2 shows the average
difference between first and second estimates by standard
condition and comparison choice. The overall difference for
each condition can be seen by examining the gray bars.
Regressing the second estimate on the first estimate
provided and standard condition revealed a significant effect
of standard condition (β = .145, t(86) = 2.93, p < .01) and

2786

Difference between estimates

5.00
4.00
3.00
2.00

OVERALL

1.00
0.00

"better"

-1.00
"approx.
the same"

-2.00
-3.00
-4.00
Chicago

London

Figure 2. Average difference between first and second estimates
(first–second) by condition and comparison in Experiment 2.

indicated that the two factors accounted for a significant
portion of the variance (R2 = .794, F(2, 88) = 166.04, p <
.01). Participants in the London condition adjusted their
second estimate up from their first an average of 1.80
questions, while those in the Chicago condition adjusted
their second estimate down from their first an average of
0.70 questions. Thus, Experiment 2’s results are consistent
with past evidence showing assimilation-like patterns for
similar standards and contrast-like patterns for dissimilar
standards (Hoffman et al., 1954; Brown et al., 1992).
Though comparison language was not directly
manipulated, the average difference between first and
second estimates in both conditions was consistent with the
comparison chosen (“better” or “approximately the same”).
Participants who chose “better” made a higher second
estimate (1.4 questions in the Chicago condition, 2.7
questions in the London condition). Participants choosing
“approximately the same” made a lower second estimate
(3.0 questions in the Chicago condition and 3.3 in the
London condition). Adjustment following comparison was
significantly different across chosen comparison in the
Chicago (F(1, 43) = 23.17, p < .001) and London conditions
(F(1, 42) = 28.79, p < .001).
Figure 3 shows the proportion of comparison choices for
the London and Chicago conditions. Choice of “better”
predominated in the London condition, while a more even
split between the two comparisons emerged in the Chicago
condition. This difference in proportion of comparison
choices was significant by logistic regression (b=1.53,
0.90

Proportion of participants

0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50

better
same

0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Chicago

London

Figure 3. Proportion of each comparison chosen for the
London and Chicago conditions in Experiment 2.

SE=.509, p<.01). This establishes a significant effect of
standard on comparison language. To examine the extent to
which choice of comparison mediates the effect of standard
condition on the second estimate given the first estimate, we
regressed the second estimate on the first estimate given,
comparison choice and standard condition and found that
the three factors accounted for a significant proportion of
the variance in difference size (R2 = .880, F(3, 88) = 207.70,
p < .001); however, the effect of standard condition was no
longer significant (t(85) = .93, n.s.), while the effect for
comparison language was significant (β = .311, t(85) = 7.79,
p < .001). A Sobel test found that comparison choice
significantly mediated the effect of standard condition on
second estimates (Sobel = 2.84, p < .01). After accounting
for the influence of comparison choice, standard condition
no longer significantly affected how participants adjusted
their estimate after receiving comparison information.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 show that, in some cases,
similarity of the standard to the decision maker affects
social comparison because it affects comparison language.
Participants who estimated their own performance to be
“approximately the same” as the standard moved their final
estimate to be closer to the standard for both the similar and
dissimilar standards (an assimilation pattern); those
participants who chose “better” to compare themselves to
the standard adjusted their estimate to be further from the
standard, again for both a similar and dissimilar standard (a
contrast pattern). The difference in proportion of
participants choosing “approximately the same” to compare
themselves to the standard gave rise to the effect of standard
on difference between estimates: the more similar the
standard was, the more likely participants were to choose
“approximately the same” as the comparison phrase, and the
more likely they were to move their estimate towards the
standard. Once the influence of comparison choice was
accounted for, standard identity had no significant effect on
adjustment of the second estimate from the first estimate.

General Discussion
Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate that the agreement
between the difference magnitude implied by a comparison
(CSD) and the difference between the unbiased estimate and
the standard affect the outcome of a social comparison.
These results highlight a new factor to be considered in this
area of research: the language used by people to compare
themselves to a standard and their resulting expectations of
how different they will be. Further, the results of
Experiment 2 indicate that it is important to consider how
identity of the standard might affect the language people use
to compare themselves to that standard.
In cognitive theories of social comparison, the effect of a
comparison standard on estimates of one’s own attributes is
dependent on how people use the comparison information
(Schwartz & Bless, 1992) or which aspects of the

2787

comparison standard they focus on (Mussweiler, 2003).
Experiment 1 manipulated the size of the difference
between compared values and found that the difference size
between the participant’s initial estimate of their ability
(their unbiased estimate) and the standard’s value affected
how participants adjusted their personal estimate after
comparison. This study demonstrated that both assimilationlike and contrast-like effects are possible in a particular
comparison situation depending on the language people use
to compare themselves to others, the CSD for this
comparison language, and the extent to which the standard
is a CSD from the participants’ unbiased estimate. These
findings also show that the extent to which people forecast
their performance to be better than average is affected by
the difference they interpret as “better:” the corresponding
ordinal difference in performance is not sufficient.
Experiment 2 further demonstrated that the language
participants choose to compare themselves to the standard
influences social comparison effects. While more similar
standards often lead to assimilation-like patterns in social
comparison effects (e.g. Hoffman et al., 1954), the similarity
of the standard also influences comparison language:
participants were more likely to choose “approximately the
same” to compare their estimated performance to a similar
standard than a dissimilar standard and participants who
selected “approximately the same” tended to adjust their
final estimate to be closer to the standard’s performance
level (because the CSD for this phrase is 0). After
accounting for the choice of comparison language, standard
similarity no longer significantly affected how participants
adjusted their second estimate.
The results of Experiments 1 and 2 are not only relevant
for examining the role of standard characteristics in social
comparison, but also for work looking at which attributes of
a standard are emphasized in a comparison. Mussweiler and
his colleagues describe how a focus on similar attributes
rather than dissimilar attributes between the self and the
standard leads to assimilation (Mussweiler, 2003;
Mussweiler et al., 2004; Mussweiler & Strack, 2000), but
this focus is also likely to result in comparison language that
implies a smaller or no difference (e.g. “approximately the
same”). We predict that participants who focus on
similarities between themselves and the standard will be
more likely to show assimilation patterns in their responses
in part because they will use small-CSD comparison
language to compare themselves to the standard. Equally,
participants who focus on dissimilarities will be more likely
to use large-CSD comparison language (e.g. “better”), and
this will contribute to contrast patterns in their responses.
Our findings demonstrate that comparison language is a
factor that should be considered when examining how a
similarity vs. dissimilarity focus affects social comparison.

Conclusion
Comparison language conveys information about the
magnitude of difference between the compared values
(Choplin, 2007). Someone who describes herself as “better”
than average also has an idea of what “better” entails. If the

difference between average and her initial estimate
disagrees with this difference, she may reassess her
estimate. Because comparison language imparts information
about more than just ordinal differences, the language used
in making a comparison is an important factor to consider in
predicting how social comparison will influence judgments.

References
Alicke, M.D., Klotz, M.L., Breitenbecher, D.L., Yurak, T.J., &
Vredenburg, D.S. (1995). Personal contact, individuation, and
the better-than-average effect. Interpersonal Relations and
Group Processes, 604(5), 804-825.
Brown, J. D., Novick, N. J., Lord, K. A., & Richards, J. M. (1992).
When Gulliver travels: Social context, psychological
closeness, and self-appraisals. JPSP, 62, 717-727.
Chambers, J. & Windschitl, P. (2004). Biases in social comparative
judgments: The role of nonmotivated factors in above-average
and comparative-optimism effects. Psych. Bull., 130(5), 813838.
Choplin, J. M. (2007). Toward a comparison-induced distortion
theory of judgment and decision making. In J. A. Elsworth
(ed.), Psychology of Decision Making in Education (pp. 5586). Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude comparisons
distort mental representations of magnitude. JEP: General,
131(2), 270-286.
Choplin, J. M. & Motyka, L. (2007). The Interaction of FoodQuantity Differences and Temporal Presentation on the
Amount of Food People Consume. Proceedings of the 29th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Choplin, J. M. & Tawney, M.W. (2005). Comparison-Induced
Anchoring Effects, Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes.
Human Relations, 7, 117-140.
Hoffman, P., Festinger, L., & Lawrence, D. (1954). Tendencies
toward group comparability in competitive bargaining.
Human Relations, 7(2), 141-159.
Mussweiler, T. (2003). Comparison processes in social judgment:
Mechanisms and consequences. Psych. Rev., 110, 472-489.
Mussweiler, T., Ruter, K., & Epstude, K. (2004). The ups and
downs of social comparison: Mechanisms of assimilation and
contrast. JPSP, 87(6), 832-844.
Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. (2000). The 'relative self:'
Informational and judgmental consequences of comparative
self-evaluation. JPSP, 79(1), 23-38.
Rusiecki, J. (1985). Adjectives and Comparison in English. New
York: Longman.
Schwarz, N. & Bless, H. (1992). Scandals and the public's trust in
politicians: Assimilation and contrast effects. PSPB, 18, 574579.
Stapel, D. & Winkielman, P. (1998). Assimilation and contrast as a
function of context-target similarity, distinctness, and
dimensional relevance. PSPB, 24(6), 634-646.
Suls, J., Martin, R., Wheeler, L. (2002). Social comparison: Why,
with whom, and with what effect? Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11(5), 159-163.
Windschitl, P., Kruger, J., & Simms, E.N. (2003). The influence of
egocentrism and focalism on people’s optimism in
competitions: When what affects us equally affects me more.
JPSP, 85(3), 389–408.

2788

