UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Sample Size Matters: The Influence of Sample Size and Category Variability on
Children’s and Adults Inductive Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3144919p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Fisher, Anna
Lawson, Chris

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Sample Size Matters: The Influence of Sample Size and Category Variability
on Children’s and Adults Inductive Reasoning
Chris A. Lawson (clawson@andrew.cmu.edu)
Anna F. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 US

Abstract
A considerable amount of work has focused on the processes
that underlie children’s inductive reasoning. For instance,
numerous studies explored the role of linguistic labels,
perceptual similarity, and children’s beliefs in generalization
of properties to novel cases. The present studies investigated
an aspect of induction that has received considerably less
attention in prior developmental research, namely – the effect
of the statistical properties of evidence on inductive
reasoning. Studies presented below were motivated by the
hypothesis that induction involves an evaluation of the
statistical properties available in the evidence. From this
perspective, sample size, or the amount of available evidence,
should influence inductive reasoning. Sample size effects
were investigated in three experiments with 90 5-year-olds
and 90 adults. Results indicated that children made higher rate
of projections for larger than smaller samples, particularly
when samples were represented by a set of diverse exemplars.
Keywords: induction, development, sample size, reasoning

Introduction
Inductive reasoning is crucial for learning new
information and making sense of novel experiences. From
an early age children are able to generate inductive
inferences in order to make predictions about novel
exemplars. For example, given a sample of evidence about
an animal with a specific property (e.g., “birds have
omentum inside”), children as young as 2-years of age will
predict that a new animal from the same category will also
have the property (Gelman & Coley, 1990). Much of the
developmental work has focused on how children’s
knowledge of object properties and categories promote
induction (see Gelman, 2003 for a review). Children’s
attention to the statistical distribution of the properties in a
sample has received considerably less attention in the
literature. Studies that investigated this issue concluded that
children are likely to generalize object properties that are the
best statistical predictors of category membership regardless
of the type of property (i.e., internal versus external
properties and observable versus unobservable properties)
(Lawson & Fisher, 2008; Rakison & Hahn, 2004). The
present studies explored the influence of a particular
statistical feature of evidence: specifically, we examined the
influence of sample size on children’s inductive inferences.
A natural hypothesis is that larger samples are a better
source from which to make predictions than smaller
samples. However, adults often do not consider this basic

distinction between small and large samples (Kahneman &
Tversky, 1972; Nisbett, Krantz, Jepson, & Kunda, 1983). At
the same time, some studies reveal that adults are insensitive
to differences in sample size only when evidence is
presented in the form of proportions. In particular,
Sedlemeier & Gigerenzer (2000) have shown that adults
prefer large to small samples for making predictions when
evidence is presented in the form of frequencies rather than
proportions (see also Gigerenzer, 1994).
Few studies have explored the effect of sample size on
children’s inductive generalization, and all of these studies
concluded that children are insensitive to sample size
information. In one study children were equally willing to
generalize properties attributed to samples of 1, 3, or 30
individuals, but children’s responses were influenced
heavily by property type (Jacobs & Narloch, 2001). For
instance, 6-year-old children were less likely to generalize
highly variable properties (e.g., size), than low variability
properties (e.g., number of eyes), regardless of whether a
sample was small (i.e., one object) or large (i.e., 30 objects).
Studies using a category-based induction format also
suggested that children’s predictions are insensitive to
sample size (Gutheil & Gelman, 1997; Lopez, Gelman,
Gutheil, & Smith, 1992). In these studies 5-year-old
children generalized properties associated with a single
category member (e.g., a single butterfly with blue eyes)
and those attributed to a group of several category members
(e.g., five butterflies with gray eyes) to a novel instance
from the same category (a new butterfly) at equal rates.
These findings are consistent with the argument that
children might ignore statistical properties in evidence and
instead rely on their conceptual knowledge or beliefs when
performing inductive generalizations (Gutheil & Gelman,
1997; Rhodes, Brickman & Gelman, 2008). Specifically it
has been argued that children ignore information about
sample size and base their inferences on expectations about
the variability of properties across category members
(Jacobs & Narloch, 2001; Kahnman & Tversky, 1983 and
Nisbett et al. 1983 offer a similar interpretation of adult
projections).
However, there is mounting evidence that children are
sensitive to statistical properties of evidence when
generalizing object properties (Lawson & Fisher, 2008;
Rakison & Hahn, 2004; Smith, 1989). Statistical learning
supports the detection of structure via attention to
redundancies in property-category and property-property

1324

correlations (Rogers & McClelland, 2004; Smith, 1989). An
implication of this view is that sample size should have a
strong influence on induction – larger samples should
provide a broader set of evidence from which to detect the
meaningful correlations in the data. Despite unsuccessful
attempts to detect effects of sample on children’s inductions
(Gutheil & Gelman, 1997; Jacobs & Narloch, 2001; Lopez,
Gelman, Gutheil, & Smith, 1992) it is possible that children
are sensitive to sample size differences in the course of
induction. We investigated three factors that may influence
children’s sensitivity to sample size information: (1)
variability of the evidence exemplars, (2) variability of the
conclusion exemplars, and (3) probability of occurrence of
to-be-generalized properties.
Variability of Evidence Exemplars
One of the hypotheses motivating this research was that
effects of sample size might become more pronounced as
exemplars in the sample become more variable. There is
evidence that variability in the sample influences induction
in young children. For example, children appear unable to
determine the breadth of conclusions supported by diverse
samples of evidence (Rhodes, Brickman & Gelman, 2008)
but able to do so for homogenous samples (Gutheil &
Gelman, 1997). This difference in children’s responses is
often attributed to knowledge about the categories
represented in an inductive problem; children are able to
construct the appropriate conclusion category implied by
homogenous but not diverse samples of evidence. However,
it is possible these effects stem from sample size effects:
tests of homogenous and diverse samples in previous
research often involved small sets of evidence. Providing
larger samples of evidence for diverse sets of exemplars
might lead children to recognize the broad scope of the
properties associated with such exemplars. The experiments
reported here tested the prediction that as sample variability
increases more evidence should be required to determine the
scope of property projection.
Variability of Conclusions Exemplars
Unlike previous research, the present studies explored
projections to a range of targets from the non—sampled
category: how does evidence about a mammal influence
projections to non-mammals? One possibility is that large
samples of evidence about diverse exemplars might lead to
high rates of projections about a wider range of exemplars,
compared to large samples of homogenous exemplars.
People might conclude that properties that are true of a wide
range of exemplars generalize broadly to other kinds.
Alternatively, given large samples of evidence people might
expect that the evidence apply only to the range of sampled
items, and not other instances. From this perspective
increases in sample size should lead to decreases in nonsampled items.

Property Probability
The few studies that have explored the effects of sample
size on children’s induction measured projections about
properties attributed to 100% of the evidence exemplars.
However, few object properties are invariant in children’s
experience (for instance, most birds fly but some don’t,
most cookies are tasty but some aren’t, etc.). Arguably,
sample size information is most useful for generating
predictions about properties that are variable rather than
invariant. Therefore, in the present studies novel properties
were attributed to most (75%) but not all of the exemplars in
the evidence.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined the influence of sample size for a
highly variable range of evidence exemplars. Participants
learned about a novel property (“omat inside”) that occurred
within a set of various mammals (e.g., rabbit, mole,
elephant, mouse, etc.) and then asked to make predictions
about novel instances from the same category (e.g., cows),
close targets comprised of a collection of vertebrate animals
from a different superordinate-level (e.g., birds), and far
targets including a set of invertebrates (e.g., insects). Half
of the participants learned about a small sample of animals
(N = 4) while the other half learned about a large sample (N
= 16). We predicted low rates of projections from small
samples of evidence and high rates of projections from
large samples of evidence. We also hypothesized that any
developmental differences would reflect a greater effect of
sample size for younger participants. While children may
not generalize properties associated with small sets of
diverse exemplars, we expected that increasing the amount
of information associated with the sample would increase
rates of projections.

Method
Participants. 30 Adults (undergraduates; 14 females, 16
males), and 30 children (M = 5;0; age range 4;5 – 5;6 years;
14 females, 16 males) participated. Adults received course
credit for their participation, children were recruited from
local preschools and received a small prize their
participation. All participants were recruited from a
moderately large, predominately white, eastern US city. No
participants were involved in other studies reported here.
Design and materials. Sample size condition was
manipulated between subjects. In the Small sample
condition participants were presented evidence about four
mammals, while participants in the Large sample condition
were presented evidence about sixteen mammals. A set of
sixteen mammals was created such that all of the items were
presented in the Large sample condition and a randomly
chosen subset of these items was presented in the Small
sample condition. Each participant in the Small sample
condition learned about 4 exemplars randomly selected from
the set of 16.
Both conditions involved property attribution at a rate of
3:1, such that 75% of in the instances involved the presence

1325

both conditions is presented in Figures 1 and 2. Scores that
were different from chance are indicated with an asterisk
The first analyses involved a mixed analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with Age (Adults, Children) and Sample size
(Small, Large) as between subjects variables, and Target
(Same, Close, Far) a within subjects variable. The analysis
revealed a main effect of Sample size, F(1, 56) = 18.01, p
<.0001, with post hoc analyses (Tukey’s) confirming higher
rates of projections in the Large rather than the Small
sample condition. The analysis also revealed effects of Age,
F(1, 56) = 10.50, p < .01 and Target, F(2, 112) = 21.94, p <
.0001. Both effects were mediated by an interaction, F(2,
112) = 14.23, p <.0001. The interaction revealed that
children made a higher rate of projections than adults for
Close, F(1, 58) = 9.07, and Far targets, F(1, 58) = 20.26,
both p’s <.01.
The hypothesis of higher rates of projection in the Large
than the Small condition was explored further with separate
target comparisons for each age group. These tests revealed
that children made a higher rate of projections in the Large
than Small sample condition for all three targets: Same, F(1,
28) = 14.33, p <.001, Close, F(1, 28) = 5.61, p < .05, and
Far, F(1, 28) = 5.69, p <.05. Adults showed a higher rate of
projections to the close targets in the Large than Small
condition, F(1, 28) = 4.79, p <.05.
Adults
Proportion of projections

of the property and 25% of the instances involved the
absence of the property. The presence/absence of properties
was pseudo-randomized, with the one constraint that in the
Large sample condition the absence of a property was not
attributed to consecutive instances. The presence or absence
of the property was indicated in two ways. First, targets
were verbally described as either having or lacking the
property. Participants were shown a picture of the target and
told, “This animal has/does not have omat inside of it”.
Second, targets appeared with an arrow pointing toward the
animal referring to a circle containing a small red blotch
when the property was present and an empty circle when
the property was absent. As is typical in induction studies,
properties were novel internal features that could be
interpreted as biological (e.g., “omat inside”).
After the introduction of evidence participants were asked
to make predictions about a range of conclusion exemplars.
There were four instances in each of the three conclusion
exemplar types: Same superordinate-level category
conclusion exemplars (e.g., other mammals), Close
conclusion exemplars (e.g., birds, lizards), and Far
conclusion exemplars (e.g., insects, crustaceans).
Participants responded to twelve items in total. For each
conclusion exemplar, participants were shown a picture of
the animal and asked, “Do you think this animal has omat
inside of it?” After responding “yes” or “no” the next item
was then introduced. All conclusion exemplars were
presented in random order.
Procedure. Children were interviewed in a quiet location at
their preschool. The task was administered on a laptop and
designed using Psyscope. Adult participants completed the
task on individual computers in a computer room. Adults
were told the task was part of a larger project aimed at
understanding how children use evidence to make
predictions and that their responses would serve as a
measure of adult reasoning. They were then given the same
instructions as children. Children were told that the “game”
involved two parts – one in which they would learn
something about an animal and a second in which they
would be asked some questions. The game involved a scene
with a tree which participants were told needed to be
clicked in order to see the animals. When participants
clicked on the tree a single exemplar emerged and they
were told about the animal (or, in the projection phase,
asked to predict the property of the animal). The method of
selecting and discovering the animals was designed to
sustain children’s interest in the task and to assure the items
were presented individually. The task lasted approximately
10 minutes.

1

*

*

0.5
*

*

Same
Close
Far

*

0
Small Sample

Large Sample

Figure 1: Adults projections across target types in both sample
conditions in Experiment 1. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

Proportion of projections

Children
1

* * *

Same
Close
Far

0.5

0
Small Sample

Large Sample

Results and discussion
The first set of analyses was conducted on rates of
projections to the three sets of conclusion exemplars.
Responses to the four items in each set were averaged to get
a composite score for Same, Close, and Far targets. The
proportion of projections for each of the three targets in

Figure 2: Children’s projections across target types in both sample
conditions in Experiment 1. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

The results were consistent with the primary hypotheses.
Large samples yielded higher rates of projections than small

1326

samples. This pattern was particularly true for young
children who responded at higher rates for each of the
targets in the Large than the Small sample condition from
which projections were no different from chance.

Experiment 2

Proportion of projections

The goal of Experiment 2 was to examine the effects of
sample size for a less diverse sample of evidence.
Experiment 2 used the same design as Experiment 1, but
rather than learning about the properties of mammals,
participants learned about a collection of animals from
the same basic-level category (i.e., rabbits). The
conclusion categories included a novel set of animals
from the same basic-level category (e.g., other rabbits),
close matches comprised of a set of mammals (e.g.,
cows), and far matches including non-mammal
vertebrates (e.g., birds). Thus, the far and close exemplars
were the close and same categories, respectively, from
Experiment 1. We expected the results would replicate
the findings from Experiment 1: large samples of
evidence would lead to higher rates of projection and
broader generalization. As in Experiment 1, we expected
sample size to have the strongest effect on young children
with large samples leading to a higher rate of projections
to sampled and non-sampled exemplars. Though, we
speculated that we may fail to observe sample size effects
for conclusion exemplars most similar to the evidence
exemplars (e.g., Same matches) because small samples of
evidence may be sufficient to warrant the prediction that
the property generalizes to instances from the same basiclevel category.

Figures 3 and 4. Scores that were different from chance are
indicated with an asterisk.
The primary analysis involved a mixed ANOVA with
Age and Sample size between subjects variable and Target a
within subjects variable. The analysis revealed the same
effects as in Experiment 1: Age, F(1, 56) = 30.32, p <.001,
with children making higher rates of projections than adults.
There were also effects of Target and Age, which were
mediated by an interaction, F(1, 112) = 13.34, p <.0001;
simple effects showed that children made a higher rate of
projections than adults to Close, F(1, 58) = 22.59, p <.0001,
and Far targets, F(1, 58) = 35.27, p <.0001.
The effect of condition was mediated by age, F(1, 56) =
7.91, p <.01; higher rates of projection in the Large than the
Small sample condition was evident in children’s, F(1, 28)
= 13.39, p < .01, but not adult responses, F(1, 28) > 1, ns.
Children’s higher rates of projection in the Large sample
condition were evident for Close, F(1, 28) = 12.52, p <.001,
and Far targets F(1, 28) = 8.57, p <.01, but not Same targets,
F(1, 28) > 2, ns.

Adults

1

*

*

0.5
*

*

*

*

Same
Close
Far

0
Small Sample Large Sample

Participants. 30 Adults (undergraduates; 14 females, 16
males) and 30 Children (M = 5;2, age range, 4;7 years – 5;8
years; 13 females, 17 males) participated. Participants were
recruited from the same population using the same methods
as in Experiment 1. No participants were involved in other
studies reported here.
Design, materials, and procedure. All facets of the design
were the same as in Experiment 1 with the exception of the
exemplars used. The evidence exemplars were comprised
of a set of rabbits. Also, the conclusion exemplars were the
same as in Experiment 1, except that the insect items were
eliminated, and a set of basic-level matches (i.e., other
rabbits) was included. We chose this strategy in order to
keep the amount of conclusion items constant across the
experiments. Thus the conclusion exemplars included
rabbits (Same basic-level category matches), other
mammals (Close matches), and other living kinds (Far
matches). In all other respects the design, materials and
procedures were identical to Experiment 1.

Results and discussion
Mean projection scores for the three types of conclusion
exemplars in both sample size conditions are presented in

Figure 3: Adults projections across target types in both sample
conditions in Experiment 2. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

Proportion of projections

Method

Children

1
*

*

*
Same
Close
Far

0.5

0
Small Sample Large Sample

Figure 4: Children’s projections across target types in both sample
conditions in Experiment 2. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

The results were consistent with the main finding from
Experiment 1: children, but not adults, made higher rates
of projections for large than small samples of evidence.
The one exception was responses to the same targets, for
which children made an equal rate of projections across
both samples. Thus, the effect of sample size was
pronounced for non-sampled items. It could be argued

1327

that these results show that children simply
overgeneralize large samples of evidence. Experiment 3
was designed to examine whether the effect of sample
size depends on variability in the evidence, or if larger
samples always yield higher rates of projections.

groups used small and large samples of evidence to make
inferences about the same individual in the future. Overall
children made higher rates of projections, but the effect was
not mediated by sample size. Overall, the results indicate
that sample size had common effects on children and adults’
projections when the evidence sample was maximally
homogenous (Experiment 3) but not when the evidence
sample was variable (Experiments 1 and 2).

Experiment 3
In Experiment 3 participants were presented evidence
about the same individual (i.e., the same white rabbit). The
conclusion exemplars included the same individual,
instances from a close match (e.g., other rabbits), and far
matches (e.g., mammals). We predicted that sample size
would have a limited influence on projections in
Experiment 3 because the evidence presented to participants
came from a homogeneous sample: evidence about four
instances of an individual might be as informative as
evidence about sixteen instances. Similarly, the narrow
sample might not promote projections to close and far
matches, and more evidence might not lead to a greater
willingness to generalize to non-sampled items. Experiment
3 tests the degree to which sample size, alone, supports
broad projections. If large samples always lead to higher
rates of projections, then children should show a higher rate
of projections to non-sampled items in the Large sample
condition.

Adults
1

*

Proportion of
projections

*

Same
Close
Far

0.5

*

*

0
Small Sample

Large Sample

Figure 5: Adults projections across target types in both sample
conditions in Experiment 3. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

Children
Proportion of
projections

1

Method
Participants. 30 Adults (undergraduates; 14 females, 16
males), and 30 children (M = 5;0; age range, 4;3 – 5;10
years; 16 females, 14 males) participated. Participants were
recruited from the same population using the same methods
as in Experiment 1. No participants were involved in other
studies reported here.
Design, materials, and procedure. All facets of the design
were the same as in Experiment 1 with the exception of the
exemplars used. The evidence exemplar was a single white
rabbit presented four times (in the Small sample condition)
or sixteen times (in the Large sample condition). Also, the
conclusion exemplars were the same as in Experiment 2,
except that the “individual” items were included as the
Same matches, a collection of rabbits (used in Experiment
2) served as the Close matches, and a set of mammals (used
in Experiments 1 and 2) were the Far matches. In all other
respects the design was identical to Experiment 1.

Results and discussion
Mean projections to each of the items for both conditions
and age groups are presented in Figures 5 and 6. Scores that
were different from chance are indicated with an asterisk A
mixed ANOVA with Age and Sample size between subjects
and Target within subjects revealed an effect of Target, F
(2, 112) = 43.3, p < .0001, which interacted with age, F (2,
112) = 4.40, p < .05; simple effects showing the effect was
caused by a higher rate of projections to the far targets for
children than adults, F(1, 58) = 19.25, p < .001. There was
no effect of condition or age.
Unlike Experiments 1 and 2, results from Experiment 3
revealed no effect of sample size. Participants in all age

*
*
Same
Close
Far

0.5

0
Small Sample

Large Sample

Figure 6: Children’s projections across target types in both sample
conditions in Experiment 3. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

General Discussion
The studies reported here explored a fundamental yet
understudied component of induction, the influence of
sample size. Overall, there were several novel findings.
First, unlike previous studies, we observed strong effects of
sample size on induction in young children, particularly
when evidence exemplars had high category variability: 5year-old children were more likely to generalize novel
properties to all types of conclusion items (i.e., same, close,
and far matches) from larger than from smaller samples
(Experiment 1). Second, children made narrower projections
(i.e., projecting properties to same and close matches but not
to far matches) when category variability in the evidence
exemplars was reduced (Experiment 2). Third, children used
sample size information to make property projections to the
non-sampled items: children were more likely to generalize
properties to non-sampled items from larger than from
smaller samples (Experiments 1 and 2). Fourth, sample size
did not influence projections when the sample was
comprised of a homogenous set of exemplars (Experiment
3). Evidence from Experiment 3 suggests that conclusions

1328

about sample size effects should be reserved to cases in
which samples include variability among the instances.
Perhaps the most surprising result from the present studies
was that sample size effected children’s but not adult’s
responses.
Results reported above are inconsistent with the idea that
children ignore sample size information (Jacobs & Narloch,
2001). However, the results support the account of early
induction that treats the evaluation of available evidence as
a version of statistical learning. Because homogenous
evidence is invariant, less evidence is needed to determine
which inferences are warranted from the sample. Increases
in the diversity of samples yields samples that are more
variable; as a result, more evidence may be necessary to
determine which inferences are warranted.
In fact, the present results indicate that children rely more
on sample size than adults. It is possible these age
differences were caused by differences in the ability to
generate a representative set of conclusions from a sample
of evidence. In each of the experiments adults appeared to
recognize that evidence identified a specific category, while
children never constrained their inferences to the most
specific category that included all of the exemplars.
However, children were the only group whose conclusions
fluctuated as a function of sample size. Certainly more work
is needed to examine the nature of the developmental
differences in the use of sample size to support induction.
This is the first set of studies to conclude that children as
young as 5-years of age are influenced by sample size
information in the course of induction. Studies that have
reported no sample size effects are different from the
present design in several ways. First, previous studies have
used familiar properties (e.g., eye color, size), while the
present studies used novel properties. Familiarity with
content may cause children to rely on prior knowledge about
property variability. Second, past studies attributed
properties to evidence exemplars at a rate of 100%. It is
possible that sample size information is more useful for
making projections about properties that are variable rather
than invariant.
Third, previous work explored children’s ability to choose
between two different samples of different size, the present
studies manipulated sample size between participants. It is
possible that children did not choose larger samples over
smaller samples in previous studies because they had
difficulty making the appropriate comparisons (for instance,
due to working memory demands). Finally, previous studies
have presented evidence as collections of exemplars, while
the present studies introduced each instance of the sample as
an individual. It is possible that the method of presentation
used here may have highlighted the frequency of instances
in the sample thus making it easier for children to attend to
sample size.
Indeed, there are a number of important differences
between the present studies and existing studies on sample
size effects in children. Future studies should clarify the
conditions under which sample size influences children’s

induction. Ultimately, any comprehensive theory of
induction will have to consider the effect of statistical
properties, such as the amount of evidence and variability in
the evidence.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an NIH postdoctoral training
grant (T32 MH019102). Special thanks to the teachers,
parents, and children of Carnegie Mellon University’s
Children’s School, Beginnings, and Overbrook Head start
for their generous support of this research.

References
Gelman, S.A.
(2003). The essential
child. Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S.A., & Coley, J.D. (1991). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2year-old children. Developmental Psychology, 26, 796-804.
Gigerenzer, G. (1994). Why the distinction between
single-event probabilities and frequencies is important for
psychology (and vice versa). In G. Wright & P. Ayton
(Eds.), Subjective probability (pp. 129-161). Chichester:
Wiley.
Gutheil, G., & Gelman, S.A. (1997). Children’s use of
sample size and diversity information within basic-level
categories. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64,
159-174.
Jacobs, J.E, & Narloch, R.H. (2001).Children’s use of
sample size and variability to make social inferences.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 311-331.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 430-454.
Lawson, C.A., & Fisher, A.V. (2008). Children’s attention
to property likelihood as a guide to property projection. In
B.C. Love, K. McRae, & V.M. Sloutsky (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Lopez, A., Gelman, S.A., Gutheil G., Smith, E.E. (1992).
The development of category-based induction. Child
Development, 63, 1070-1090.
Nisbett, R.E., Krantz, D.H., Jepson, D., & Kunda, Z.
(1983). The use of statistical heuristics in everyday
reasoning. Psychological Review, 90, 339-363.
Rakison, D.H., & Hahn, E. (2004). The mechanisms of
early categorization and induction: Smart or Dumb Infants?
In R. Kail (Ed.), Advances in Child Development and
Behavior, Vol 32. New York: Academic Press.
Rogers, T.T., & McClleland, J. (2004).
Semantic
Cognition: The MIT Press.
Rhodes, M., Brickman, D., & Gelman, S.A. (2008).
Developmental changes in the consideration of sample
diversity in inductive reasoning. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 9, 112-143.
Sedlmeier, P., & Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Was Bernoulli
wrong? On intuitions about sample size. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 13, 133-139.

1329

