UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Within-subject Preference Reversals in Description- and Experience-based Choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4h4328gv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 31(31)

Authors
Camilleri, Adrian R.
Newell, Ben

Publication Date
2009-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Within-subject Preference Reversals in Description- and Experience-based Choice
Adrian R. Camilleri (acamilleri@psy.unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

description (DfD) paradigm decision makers are presented
with convenient descriptions of all outcomes and their
respective likelihoods, and are asked to select their preferred
option. For example, the decision maker might be asked to
choose between: (A) a 100% chance of 3, or (B) an 80%
chance of 4, else 0 (henceforth, Problem 1). Contrary to
early belief (e.g., Expected Utility Theory, Savage, 1954)
people often make decisions that depart from the
prescriptions of rational choice axioms. For example,
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) noted that in Problem 1,
80% of decision makers tended to prefer the certain option
(choice A) despite it being associated with a lower expected
value. In addition, people appear to make decisions as if
options with very low probabilities are overweighted but
options with moderate and high probabilities are
underweighted. Based on the large body of data gathered
from the DfD paradigm, choice behaviour appears to adhere
to the ‘fourfold-pattern’: risk averse for gains and risk
seeking for losses of high probability, but risk seeking for
gains and risk averse for losses of low probability. The most
successful model accounting for these patterns of choice is
Prospect Theory (PT; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992).
In spite of PT’s huge success and beliefs about its wide
scope of generalization, recent evidence has questioned the
applicability of PT, and the very occurrence of the four-fold
pattern, to more ecological decisions from experience
(Barron & Erev, 2003). In a decision from experience (DfE)
paradigm decision makers are initially unaware of their
options and must learn about potential outcomes and make
estimates of their respective likelihoods through exploration
and feedback. In the sampling version of the paradigm,
decision makers might be presented with two options that
they are asked to sample from. Each sample returns a value
randomly selected from a static payoff distribution
corresponding to an objective probability that is unknown to
the decision-maker. For example, one option might be
associated with the distribution “100% chance of 3” and the
other option “80% chance of 4, else 0” (i.e., Problem 1). In
this exploration stage decision makers are free to sample
from each option in any order and as often as they like
without consequence. Once the decision-maker has gathered
enough information about their options and have formed a
preference they move on to the exploitation stage where
they select one option to play from for real.
Using the DfE paradigm, Hertwig et al. (2004) observed
choices that were actually opposite to the predictions of PT.
Indeed, strikingly different patterns of choice were observed
when compared to decisions made by participants in another

Abstract
Numerous studies using between-subject designs have found
that different decisions can be made about identical binary
choice problems depending on whether the options are
described or experienced. Using a within-subjects design we
examined this Description-Experience ‘gap’ at the level of the
individual. We found that: (1) the gap could be observed both
at the group and the individual levels, (2) the gap was
eliminated, at least at the group level, when controlling for
sampling variability, and (3) riskier decisions were made by
those with more positive risk attitudes, regardless of format.
We conclude that the gap is likely a statistical phenomenon
due to biased samples.
Keywords: decisions from experience, decisions from
description, description-experience, risk taking, risky choice.

Introduction
Murray and Kluckhohn’s (1953) clever adage that “every
man is in certain respects (a) like all other men, (b) like
some other men, (c) like no other man” highlights three
levels of investigation. The first level refers to universal
cognitive or biological mechanisms, the second level to
social grouping factors, and the third level to individual
differences. Most studies restrict their investigation to a
single level and this can become problematic if the research
in an area becomes concentrated on just this one level
(Lopes, 1987). A current example of where this
phenomenon may be occurring is in the context of the
“Description-Experience (D-E) gap” debate. The
controversy lies with the observation that different decisions
are made about structurally identical lotteries as a function
of how information about the options is acquired. To date,
all of the published studies have used between-subjects
designs. This makes sense at the first level of investigation
where the intent is to abstract and model universal choice
mechanisms. However, several of the most interesting
conclusions implied by the “gap” are at the third, and as yet
largely unaddressed, level of investigation. In the present
study we re-examine some of the conclusions that have been
made, and add additional insights, by examining the D-E
gap within-subjects while assessing individual differences in
risk attitude.

Universal Choice Mechanisms
Over the last few decades the prevailing methodology
used to investigate universal choice mechanisms is the
decision from description paradigm (Weber, Shafir, & Blais,
2004, but see Myers & Suydam, 1964). In a decision from

449

group presented with the same problems via the DfD
paradigm. Averaged across all problems, the absolute
difference in percentage points was 36. This D-E ‘gap’ has
now been replicated on many occasions with a range of
problem sets (Camilleri & Newell, submitted; Hau et al., in
press; Hau et al., 2008; Hertwig et al., 2004; Rakow et al.,
2008; Ungemach et al., 2009; Weber et al., 2004).

and with a binning procedure that compared descriptionbased decisions only with experience-based decisions where
the experienced distribution was roughly equal to the
objective distribution (Camilleri & Newell, submitted). The
methodology preferred in the current study is the binning
procedure that allows participants to freely sample. Thus,
our second aim was to test the statistical account by
observing whether the D-E gap is eliminated when
controlling for sampling bias by using the binning
procedure, in the context of a within-subjects study.

Within-subject Designs
Notably, all of these studies have used a between-subjects
design and, appropriate to this level of investigation, a
number of models have been devised to explain the
universal choice mechanisms involved (for an overview, see
Hau et al., 2008). However, some of the conclusions implied
by the “D-E gap” may be on less solid ground. The issue
boils down to what exactly we mean by, and want to infer
from, the word “gap” in the context of risky choice. One
inference is that, “given the same structural decision
problem, the average group of people will show a different
choice preference compared to another average group of
people as a function of how the two groups learn about their
options”. A second inference is that, “given the same
structural decision problem, the average person will reverse
their choice preference as a function of how that person
learns about their options”. We feel that the second
conclusion is at least as, if not more, interesting than the
first conclusion; however, based on the current literature the
second conclusion cannot be made. Thus, our first aim in
the current study was to observe a D-E gap within-subjects.

Individual Differences in Risk Attitude
In the context of decisions between safe and risky options,
perhaps the most fascinating individual difference is that of
risk attitude. Risk attitude is broadly understood as the
degree to which an individual engages in risky behaviors
(Weber, Blais, & Betz, 2002). In the context of PT, risk
attitude refers to the degree of concavity (or convexity) of a
decision maker’s utility function. Two problems with this
definition are: (1) different measures of risk attitude can
classify an individual disparately, and (2) even the same
measure can classify an individual disparately in different
domains. Indeed, a growing body of evidence suggests that
“risk attitude” is domain specific (Weber et al., 2002).
In light of these issues, some researchers have suggested
that risk attitude could be better understood within a riskreturn framework (Weber et al., 2002). Under this
conceptualization, observed behavior is a function of two
factors: (a) an evaluation of the benefits and risks, and (b)
an attitude towards perceived risk (i.e., the trade-off
between perceived benefits and perceived risks). Thus, an
individual may be classified disparately in different domains
due to inequality in either factor, but not necessarily both. A
useful measure for examining each of these factors is the
Domain-Specific Risk-Taking (DOSPERT) scale (Blais &
Weber, 2006). The DOSPERT is a self-report questionnaire
that assesses the tendency to engage in risky activities
across five domains, as well as the perceived risks and
benefits involved in those activities. Behavioral scores on
the DOSPERT have been shown to have a significant
positive relationship with risky decisions made in a DfD
paradigm (Weber et al., 2002). Additional support for a link
between a stable dispositional risk trait and behavior comes
from the observation that choices made within a decisionunder-risk paradigm (where the outcome distribution is
known) predict choices made within a decision-underambiguity paradigm (where the outcome distribution is
unknown), even after a 2 month time gap (Lauriola, Levin
& Hart, 2007). Together, these findings suggest that risk
attitude may be useful in predicting experience-based
choice, or could interact in some way with an individual’s
tendency to make choices in line with a D-E gap. Thus, our
third aim was to replicate the correlation between
description-based choices and individual differences in risk
attitude, to determine whether this association holds with
experience-based choices, and investigate the possibility
that the size of the D-E gap is modulated by risk attitude.

The Importance of Sampling Variability
With a number of studies ruling out factors such as
recency (Hau et al., in press; Ungemach et al., 2009) and
judgement error (Fox & Hadar, 2006; Hau et al., 2008), the
debate as to the cause of the gap is now largely focused on
whether it can be explained as a statistical occurrence due to
biased sampling. The freedom inherent in the sampling DfE
paradigm means that decision makers often make their
choices based on relatively small, and therefore biased,
samples that do not accurately reflect the objective
probabilities (Hertwig et al., 2004). As a consequence, there
are fewer encounters with the rare event than expected. Fox
and Hadar calculated that in the Hertwig et al. data, 69% of
choices in the Experience group (and 63% of choices in the
Description group) were predicted by cumulative PT when
based on participant’s actual (biased) samples, as opposed to
27% when based on objective probabilities.
At present, the relative importance of sampling bias as a
cause of the gap remains unsettled. On the one hand, the gap
has been observed in studies that have increased the number
of samples by manipulating incentives (Hau et al., 2008), or
when forcing decision maker to sample extensively (Hau et
al., 2008) or in exact accordance with the objective
probabilities (Ungemach et al., 2009). On the other hand,
the gap has been eliminated in studies that have yoked
description-based problems to the subjective distributions
observed in experience-based choices (Rakow et al., 2008),

450

At the beginning of each of the two choice tasks (i.e.,
tasks A and C) the instructions indicated that a number of
different money machines would have to be selected
between, each of which could add or subtract points from
their running tally. Participants’ overall task was to
maximize the amount of points won. At the end of the
experiment points were converted into real money according
to the conversion rate of 1 point = AUD$0.10.
In the Description condition participants were instructed to
compare two labeled money machines and to choose one to
play from. In the Experience condition participants were
instructed to sample from two unlabeled money machines in
order to find out what the machine's payoff was like.
Samples from each machine reflected random draws from a
distribution of possible outcomes in accordance with the
objective probabilities. Participants were allowed to sample
each of the machines as often and in any order that they
liked until they decided to choose one machine to play from.
Participants were not given feedback during the experiment
in order to reduce any wealth effects. In all cases allocation
of safe and risky options to the left and right machines was
counterbalanced and the order of the problems was random.
After both choice conditions and the filler task had been
completed, the DOSPERT measure of risk attitudes was
administered. Each of the three questions assessed by the
DOSPERT was presented on a separate screen and in
random order. The order of the scenarios on each question
screen was also randomized for each participant.
At the completion of the experiment a final screen
appeared informing the participant that the experiment was
finished, and revealed their total points earned, as well as
their corresponding real money conversion. Participants that
ended up with negative point scores were treated as though
they had scored zero points. Finally, participants were
thanked, debriefed, and then paid.

Method
Participants
The participants were 40 undergraduate first year
University of New South Wales psychology students (23
females), with an average age of 19.3 years. Participation
was in exchange for course credit, plus payment contingent
upon choices (range = AUD$0.00 to AUD$3.10).

Materials
Choice Problems: The ten choice problems used are shown
in Table 1. Each choice problem consisted of two options
with similar expected values, with at most two outcomes per
option. The option predicted by PT to be preferred was
labelled the “favoured” choice and the alternative option
was labelled the “non-favoured” choice. Specifically, the
favoured choice was the option containing the rare event
when the rare event was desirable (e.g., 0 is a desirable rare
event in the problem -4[.8] 0[.2]), or the alternative option
when the rare event was undesirable (e.g., 0 is an
undesirable rare event in the problem 4[.8] 0[.2]).
Risk Attitude Measure: The Domain Specific Risk-Taking
Scale (DOSPERT; Weber et al., 2002) was used to measure
individual attitudes towards risk. DOSPERT assesses an
individual’s risk taking in a number of scenarios within the
domains of financial, health/safety, recreational, ethical, and
social decisions. For each scenario respondents rate along a
7-point scale: (1) the likelihood that they would engage in
the activity, (2) the perceived magnitude of the risks
associated with engaging in the activity, and (3) the
expected benefits from engaging in the activity. DOSPERT
has been found to have adequate internal-consistency and
test-retest reliability estimates, as well as good convergent/
discriminant and construct validity (Blais & Weber, 2006).
In order to minimize participant fatigue across the
experiment, only the 10 scenarios from the domains of
finance and recreation were used. Weber et al. (2002, p.282)
state that “if risk attitudes are measured merely for
predictive purposes [then] one or more of the subscales ...
will suffice”. An example of a scenario from the domain of
finance is “Betting a day’s income at the horse races”. An
example of a scenario from the domain of recreation is
“Bungee jumping off a tall bridge”.

Results
Sampling Behaviour
We computed each participant’s average number of
observations per problem (total sample size), average
number of periods of uninterrupted observation from a
single machine per problem (number of sub-samples), and
the average number of observations in each of these
subsamples (sub-sample size). The mean (median) values
were 12.1 (9.0) for total sample size, 4.9 (3.0) for the
number of sub-samples, and 3.3 (1.6) for sub-sample size.
Task order was a factor in sampling strategy adopted.
Sampling was more extensive when the experience-based
choice task was played first; the mean (median) values were
13.6 (10.0) for total sample size, 5.1 (3.0) for the number of
sub-samples, and 3.5 (1.6) for sub-sample size. When the
experience-based choice task was played second the values
were 10.6 (8.0) for total sample size, 4.7 (2.0) for the
number of sub-samples, and 3.0 (1.5) for sub-sample size.

Filler Task: A 2-minute, computerized filler task asked
participants to list as many countries as they could from
three different geographical regions.

Procedure and Design
The within-subjects experiment comprised four tasks that
were described to the participants as independent: (A) a
description-based choice task, (B) a filler task, (C) an
experience-based choice task, and (D) the DOSPERT. Half
of the participants completed the tasks in the order A,B,C,D
and the other half in the order C,B,A,D.

451

Patterns of Choice
Table 1 displays the percentage of participants selecting
the favoured choice in each condition. It was expected that
more participants would select the favoured choice in the
Description condition than in the Experience condition.
When averaging across task order, the difference between
Description and Experience conditions falls in the expected
direction for all ten problems. Seven of these differences
were significant by individual chi-square tests (p’s < .05).
Indeed, averaging across problems, the favoured choice was
selected on 53.3% of trials in the Description condition and
on 31.3% of trials in the Experience condition: a difference
of 22 percentage points. The odds of selecting the favoured
option in the Description condition were therefore more
than 2.5 times the odds of selecting the favoured option in
the Experience condition. Task order again played a role:
the mean difference in the predicted direction was 16
percentage points when tasks were played first and 28
percentage points when tasks were played second.
Table 1: Percent choosing the favoured option by condition
% choosing
favoured option

Option
Problem

NonDescrip.
Exper.
favoured
1
3 (1)
4 (.8)
70
30*
2
-4 (.8)
-3 (1)
53
40
3
32 (.1)
3 (1)
53
30*
4
-3 (1)
-32 (.1)
48
23*
5
9 (1)
10 (.9)
53
30*
6
-10 (.9)
-9 (1)
65
35*
7
16 (.2)
3 (1)
40
33
8
11 (.1)
1 (1)
63
38*
9
14 (.15)
2 (1)
60
28*
10
28 (.15)
4 (1)
30
28
*
Significantly different from Description condition.
Favoured

Choice Preference Reversals

Subjective Experiences of the Rare Event
To investigate the important role of sampling variation,
we divided participants’ experience-based choice problems
into seven ‘bins’ based on their subjective experience of the
rare event. In order to maintain standardization between
problems with rare events of differing rarity, data was
binned as a function of the objective probability.
Specifically, each bin constituted a certain percentage of
objective probability away from objective probability. For
example, the data collected in the central bin, Bin 4,
represent those from participants whose subjective
experience was ±10% of the objective probability away
from the objective probability. Thus, when the objective
probability was 10%, subjective experiences of the rare
event between 9 and 11% were placed into Bin 4 (i.e., 10%
of 10% = 1%; 10%±1% = 9 to 11%); when the objective
probability was 15%, subjective experiences of the rare
event between 13.5 and 16.5% were placed into Bin 4; and
when the objective probability was 20%, subjective
experiences of the rare event between 18 and 22% were
placed into Bin 4. This binning procedure placed just over
16% of all trials into the central three bins.
The proportion of trials where participants selected the
favoured option in each of the seven bins is displayed in

10
8
6
4
2

Participant
Figure 1. Degree of correspondence between description- and experience-based choice for each participant.
Black bars indicate preference reversal in the predicted direction, white bars indicate preference reversal in
the non-predicted direction, and dotted bars indicate that no preference reversal occurred.
452

40

38
39

36
37

34
35

32
33

30
31

28
29

26
27

24
25

22
23

20
21

18
19

16
17

14
15

12
13

9
10
11

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

0

1

Description- and
Experience-based
Choice Correspondence

The average percentage of problems in which participants
switched their choice between Description and Experience
conditions was 48.2%. Where a change in preference did
occur, 72.5% of these switches were in the predicted

direction, that is, from the favourable choice in the
Description condition to the non-favourable choice in the
Experience condition.
Taking advantage of our within-subjects design we
looked at, for each individual and problem, the degree of
correspondence between description- and experience-based
choices to determine if there had been: (1) a preference
reversal in the predicted direction, (2) a preference reversal
in the non-prediction direction, or (3) no preference change.
As can be seen in Figure 1, the vast majority of reversals, if
they occurred, were in the predicted direction. Indeed, when
we calculated a Description-Experience gap score
(proportion of choice preference reversals in the predicted
direction minus the proportion of choice preference
reversals in the non-predicted direction) we found that
thirty-two participants showed a D-E gap in the predicted
direction, five participants showed no gap, and just three
participants showed a gap in the non-predicted direction.

Figure 2. The curve is positive and linear, indicating that
participants were more likely to select the favoured option
the more often they experienced the rare event. The most
critical trials to consider are those located in Bin 4, since it
is only on these trials that the experienced distribution was
approximately (i.e., ±10%) in accordance with the objective
probability. The proportion of trials in which participants
selected the favoured option is remarkably similar across the
Description and Experience Bin 4 data: .53 and .52
respectively (p > 1, one-tailed). Our power to detect a
difference of the size generally reported in the literature
(i.e., odds-ratio of greater than 2.5) was at least 62%.

Proportion selecting
the favoured option

1.0

decisions contrary to the predictions of PT and selected the
non-favoured option. This apparent ‘gap’ between choice
preferences as a function of mode of information acquisition
replicates findings from numerous previous studies 1
(Camilleri & Newell, submitted; Hau et al., in press; Hau et
al., 2008; Hertwig et al., 2004; Rakow et al., 2008;
Ungemach et al., 2009; Weber et al., 2004). What makes our
results particularly fascinating is that we observed these
preference reversals at the level of the participant, that is,
individual D-E gaps. Thus, we can make the conclusion that
given the same structural decision problem, the average
person will reverse their choice preference as a function of
how that person learns about their options (i.e., described or
experienced). More broadly, these results support the
general hypothesis that individuals appear to make choices
as if outcomes with very low probabilities have more of an
impact on decisions when they are described than when they
are experienced, a finding that has a wide range of realworld implications (e.g., Barron, Leider, & Stack, 2008).
The results also highlight the importance of sampling
variability. When conditionalising only on those trials where
participants’ experienced distribution was approximately
equal to the objective probability the gap disappeared: the
proportion selecting the favoured choice was equivalent
regardless of whether the choice was description- or
experience-based. This results replicates, and extends to a
within-subjects design, previous studies that have attempted
to account for sampling variability using the free sampling
DFE paradigm (Camilleri & Newell, submitted; Rakow et
al., 2008). Equivalent choices given equivalent information
supports the statistical account of the D-E gap, which
suggests that the phenomenon is almost entirely due to
sampling bias that occurs at the point of information
acquisition. Such a proposition leads to the strong prediction
that there will be no individual D-E gaps – in fact, no
preference reversals at all – when comparing DfD only with
central binned DfE. Unfortunately, the paucity of trials per
individual that actually fell into Bin 4 severely limited our
ability to conduct any meaningful inferential test of this
prediction. Therefore, based on the present dataset, we
cannot extend the “equivalent information equals equivalent
choice” qualification to the level of the individual.
Using the DOSPERT as a measure of risk attitude, we
replicated the correlation between risk attitude and
description-based choices (Weber et al., 2004).
Unsurprisingly, we found no evidence that scores on the
DOSPERT could be used to predict experience-based
choices when averaging across problem (and therefore, a
myriad of experienced distributions). Such a null-finding
was unsurprising given that, for the majority of problems,
there was in fact no risky choice to be made: biased samples
had reduced the lotteries to trivial decisions such as “100%
chance of 3” versus “100% chance of 4”. Only sampled

Experience
Description

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Bin

Figure 2: Percentage of participants selecting the favoured
option as a function of bin.

Individual Differences in Risk Attitude
In order to examine the relationship between risk attitude
and risky choices we designated the option with the greater
variance the “risky” option and the alternative the “safe”
option. Each participant’s average score from the three
DOSPERT questions were correlated with the participant’s
own average number of risky choices made in the
Description and Experience conditions. As expected,
participants’ average number of risky choices made in the
Description condition was significantly positively correlated
with their average behavioural score (r = .40, p < .05) and
negatively correlated with their averaged perceived risk
score (r = -.37, p < .05). There were no significant
correlations between participants’ average number of risky
choices made in the Experience condition and scores on the
DOSPERT. Additionally, we could find no relationship
between DOSPERT scores and choice preference reversals,
sampling strategy adopted, or propensity to make decisions
in accordance with EV.

Discussion
When making description-based choices, the majority of
our participants made decisions in line with the predictions
of PT and selected the favoured option (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1992). In contrast, when making experiencebased choices, the majority of our participants made

1
The larger gap observed when the experienced-base choice
task was played second is most likely due to fatigue and
participants correspondingly smaller (and therefore more biased)
samples.

453

distributions close to the objective probabilities permitted a
risky choice to be made. Again, due to the small number of
trials that actually fell into the central bin, we were unable
to rigorously test the prediction that DOSPERT scores
would predict choices made when information sampled was
nearly equal to the objective probability. However, when we
used a more liberal criterion and looked at the 27
participants that had at least one experienced distribution
trial that fell into the central three bins, we found that the
participants’ average number of risky choices was nonsignificantly positively correlated with their averaged
behavioural score (r = .30, p = .12) and negatively
correlated with their averaged perceived risk score (r = -.36,
p = .06). From these correlations we can tentatively
conclude that a greater proportion of risky choices were
made by those who self-reported to be more likely to
perform risky behaviours, and perceived such behaviours as
less risky, regardless of the mode of information acquisition.
The major limitation of the current study was the small
number of trials in the experience-based condition that
actually fell into the central bin. As a result, we were
restricted in our ability to examine the relationship between
risk attitude and choice preference reversals when
information acquired was approximately equal. A
methodology for overcoming this problem is to manipulate
the sequence of samples that participants are exposed to in
order to drive the experienced distribution towards the
objective probabilities while maintaining a pseudo-random
sample selection (for one such attempt see Camilleri and
Newell, submitted).
In summary, we found that the Description-Experience
gap phenomenon can be observed both at the individual and
group levels. The gap can be eliminated, at least in the latter
case, when only considering choices in which sampled
observations result in experienced distributions close to the
objective probabilities. Such a pattern of results strongly
conforms to the predictions of a statistical account due to
biased sampling. We also found that one measure of risk
attitude, the DOSPERT, may be useful in predicting
choices, but only when the options are presented in a
description-type format or in an experienced-based format
where sampling variability does not radically skew the
perceived outcome distributions.

roll. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 106, 125-142.
Blais, A. R., & Weber, E. U. (2006). A Domain-Specific
Risk-Taking (DOSPERT) scale for adult populations.
Judgment and Decision Making, 1, 33-47.
Fox, C. R., & Hadar, L. (2006). "Decisions from
experience" = sampling error + prospect theory:
Reconsidering Hertwig, Barron, Weber & Erev (2004).
Judgment and Decision Making, 1, 159-161.
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., & Hertwig, R. (in press). Decisions
from experience and statistical probabilities: Do they
trigger different choices than a priori probabilities?
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making.
Hau, R., Pleskac, T. J., Kiefer, J., & Hertwig, R. (2008). The
description-experience gap in risky choice: The role of
sample size and experienced probabilities. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making, 21, 1-26.
Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., & Erev, I. (2004).
Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in
risky choice. Psychological Science, 15, 534-539.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263292.
Lauriola, M., Levin, I. P., & Hart, S. S. (2007). Common
and distinct factors in decision making under ambiguity
and risk: A psychometric study of individual differences.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
104, 130-149.
Lopes, L. L. (1987). Between hope and fear: The
psychology of risk. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 20, pp. 255-295).
San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press.
Myers, J. L., & Suydam, M. M. (1964). Gain, cost, and
event probability as determiners of choice behavior.
Psychonomic Science, 1, 39-40.
Rakow, T., Demes, K. A., & Newell, B. R. (2008). Biased
samples not mode of presentation: Re-examining the
apparent underweighting of rare events in experiencebased choice. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 106, 168-179.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297-323.
Ungemach, C., Chater, N., & Stewart, N. (2009). Are
probabilities overweighted or underweighted, when rare
outcomes are experienced (rarely)? Psychological
Science, 20, 473-479.
Savage, L. J. (1954). Foundations of Statistics: Wiley:
Oxford.
Weber, E. U., Blais, A. R., & Betz, N. E. (2002). A domainspecific risk-attitude scale: Measuring risk perceptions
and risk behaviors. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 15, 263-290.
Weber, E. U., Shafir, S., & Blais, A. R. (2004). Predicting
risk sensitivity in humans and lower animals: Risk as
variance or coefficient of variation. Psychological
Review, 111, 430-445.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an Australian Postgraduate
Scholarship and a UNSW Research Excellence Award to
the first author, and an Australian Research Council
Discovery Project Grant (DP 0770292) to the second author.

References
Barron, G., & Erev, I. (2003). Small feedback-based
decisions and their limited correspondence to descriptionbased decisions. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
16, 215-233.
Barron, G., Leider, S., & Stack, J. (2008). The effect of safe
experience on a warnings' impact: Sex, drugs, and rock-n-

454

