UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Cross-Linguistic Study of Phonological Units: Syllables Emerge from the Statistics of
Mandarin Chinese, but not from the Statistics of English

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/94r0c4s4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Chen, Train-Min
Dell, Gary S.
Chen, Jenn-Yeu

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Cross-Linguistic Study of Phonological Units: Syllables Emerge from the Statistics
of Mandarin Chinese, but not from the Statistics of English
Train-Min, Chen (trainmin@alumni.ccu.edu.tw)

Department of Psychology, National Chung Cheng University
160 San-Hsing, Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi 621 Taiwan, R.O.C.

Gary S. Dell (gdell@s.psych.uiuc.edu)

Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
405 N. Mathews Ave, Urbana, Illinois 61801 U.S.A.

Jenn-Yeu, Chen (psyjyc@ccu.edu.tw)

Department of Psychology, National Chung Cheng University
160 San-Hsing, Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi 621 Taiwan, R.O.C.
more unitary than has been found in English and Dutch.
Then, we present two computational studies involving the
learning of Mandarin and English sound sequences. These
studies suggest that cross-linguistic differences in the
salience of the syllable in production emerge from the
statistics of the sequences.

Abstract
This study explored the statistical patterns of English and
Mandarin Chinese sound sequences, by comparing their
learning in a simple recurrent network. Experiment 1 showed
that vivid syllable structure emerged from the sound sequence
of Mandarin Chinese. Experiment 2 further demonstrated that
the emerged syllable structure of Mandarin Chinese is
considerably more salient than that of English. We claim that
the more salient syllable structure in Mandarin Chinese inputs
is one reason why syllable units are particularly emphasized
in its processing in comparison to English.

Introduction
According to linguistic theory, the sound patterns of all
languages are hierarchical. Segmental speech sounds (or
phonemes) are concatenated into syllabic constituents (onset,
rhyme), which join to form syllables, which, in turn, are the
constituents of larger units such as feet and words. In
psycholinguistic theories of production, each kind of unit
plays a part, but some units are more salient than others. For
example, standard theory (e.g. Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer,
1999) holds that lexical items are stored as sequences of
segments. The organization of these sounds into syllables,
however, is not stored, but rather is computed during
production. Evidence against stored syllables comes from
two principal sources:
(1) The absence of syllabic speech errors. For example,
exchanges of non-morphemic syllables are very rare. You
woul
dne
v
e
rhe
a
r“
na
pk
i
n”s
pok
e
na
s“
k
i
nna
p.
”
(2) The absence of syllabic priming effects that cannot be
attributed to segmental units. For example, naming a word
is speeded when a masked orthographic prime syllable that
matches the initial sounds of the word precedes it. In many
such studies, this priming is unaffected by whether or not
the prime syllable corresponds to a whole syllable in the
target word (e.g. Schiller, 2000).
The conclusion that syllables are not units of storage has
been based on studies of Germanic languages such as
English and Dutch. Our own production research has
demonstrated that this conclusion is not warranted for all
languages. Here, we briefly review our studies of production
in Mandarin Chinese, which show that the syllable is far

216

Speech Error Data Psycholinguists believe that the
commonness of slips of units such as segments or words
provides evidence that these units are psychologically real.
Research has shown that whole syllables, in contrast, rarely
move, at least in English and in related languages, and the
few apparent cases can be otherwise explained as
morphemic or segmental slips (Chen, 2000). However, this
is not the case for Mandarin Chinese. Chen (2000)
demonstrated that syllable movement errors indeed happen
in the natural speech of Mandarin Chinese at a rate of
10,000 times greater than would be expected if these errors
were the result of independent segmental slips. Importantly,
t
he
s
es
y
l
l
a
b
l
ee
r
r
or
s“
s
t
r
a
nd”t
one
;o
n
l
yt
hes
e
g
me
n
t
a
lpa
r
t
of the syllable moves. One such example is that the word
[ching1zhuo2du4] ( 清 濁 度
’
clarity’
) slipped to
[ching1du2du4], an anticipation of the third syllable [du].
This stranding of tone rules out the explanation that these
are slips of morphemes or characters.
Masked Priming Data Studies of masked priming of word
naming in Mandarin Chinese also point to the syllable as a
unit. Chen, Lin, and Ferrand (2003) found that when the
segmental overlap between the target word to be produced
and a preceding character prime constituted a complete
syllable, the response time was faster than when it did not.
This result was obtained for both CVC and CV-glide
syllables (Lin & Chen, 2003).
Implicit Priming Data The implicit priming paradigm is a
production task that is useful for discovering relevant
phonological units. Participants learn several cue-target
word pairs, and later must say the target member of the pair
as quickly and correctly as possible upon seeing its paired
cue word. Using this task in Dutch, Meyer (1991) showed
that when target words in a set shared their initial portions,

responses were faster than when they did not. Moreover,
when the shared initial portions did not constitute a syllable,
priming was still observed and correlated positively with the
number of shared segments. Hence, the observed priming
effects seem to derive from shared segments. Implicit
priming in Mandarin Chinese was quite different from that
in Dutch (Chen, Chen, & Dell, 2002). Crucially, priming
was only found when target words shared the segments of
entire first syllable, or the segments and the tone together.
Accordingly, the priming effects in Mandarin Chinese
derive from syllable rather than segment sized units.

layers are linked by forward trainable connections in a
distributed fashion, i.e. fully connected. Crucially, the
network includes another input layer, the context layer,
which serves as the dynamic memory of the network. The
connections from context layer to hidden layer are trainable
and distributed, but the recurrent connections from hidden
layer to context have fixed weights of 1.0 and are one-toone. Functionally, the recurrent connections behave much
like a copier, which duplicate the activation pattern of
hidden layer at a particular time step on the context layer.
Hence, output at any given time step is shaped by the
network’
sprevious internal state together with its current
input. These properties make simple recurrent networks
useful models of how people implicitly learn the structure of
sequences.

Why are Mandarin Chinese speakers more
sensitive to syllable units than other speakers?
We believe that the production system reflects the language.
Relative to English, Mandarin Chinese has few syllable
types. English has more than 10,000 syllables, and
Mandarin only around 400 (without counting the tone) or
1,200 (when tones are considered). In addition, resyllabification commonly occurs in English speech, e.g.
‘
demand it’becomes ‘
de-man-dit’
, but not in Mandarin
(Kuo, 1994). Moreover, English, but not Mandarin, involves
ambisyllabicity, the apparent membership of a consonant in
more than one syllable e.g. ‘
hap-py’
. These properties make
the syllable a more efficient planning unit for Mandarin
Chinese. In this paper, we explore the hypothesis that these
properties lead to sound sequences whose statistical
structure favors syllabic, as opposed to word and segmental,
units. More generally, we claim that the relative importance
of various unit types is a product of experience and test this
claim by adopting the computational approach of Elman
(1990) to phonological sequences.

Word Structure in a Letter Sequence
Elman (1990) examined the statistical structure of English
letter sequences by having the simple recurrent network
predict the letter that follows the current input letter.
Trainable weights were changed to the extent that the
prediction was incorrect. The degree of prediction error was
highly correlated with word boundaries. Error tended to
spike up for word-initial letters, and declined as a function
of the serial position for letters within words (see Figure 2).
Hence, the relatively higher error for word-initial letters
successfully demonstrated that the simple recurrent network
discerns the word structure in the letter sequence without
providing it with any word boundary cue during training. It
appears that the word is the dominant unit, at least in
English letter sequences. Next, we perform the same
analysis on spoken Mandarin Chinese input.

Analysis of Sequences by Simple Recurrent
Network
The Simple Recurrent Network (Elman, 1990)
A simple recurrent network (see Figure 1) is a three-layer
feedforward network, in which input, hidden and output
Output Units

Figure 2. Graph of root mean squared error plotted over
time in the letter prediction task (Elman, 1990, Figure 6).
The letter to be predicted each time is shown in parenthesis.

Hidden Units

Input Units

Experiment 1: Exploring the Syllable Structure
in Mandarin Chinese Inputs

Context Units

In this experiment, Mandarin Chinese input was assessed by
inspecting the relative performance of the network on
predicting (1) word-initial sounds, (2) syllable-initial sounds
that are not also word initial, and (3) the sounds within the
syllable (hereafter, within-syllable sounds). If predicting
syllable-initial sounds is harder than predicting withinsyllable sounds, syllable boundaries will be protruded, that

Figure 1. Elman’
s(1990) simple recurrent network, in
which activations are copied from hidden layer to context
layer on a one-for-one basis, with fixed weight of 1.0.
Dotted lines represent trainable connections.

217

is, syllable units will show up. Besides, if predicting the
syllable-initial sound is as difficult as predicting the wordinitial sound, it suggests that the syllable is the sole
emergent unit. This is because word-initial sounds
themselves are also syllable-initial, and the syllable unit
alone could explain the pattern without postulating a word
level.

very high within the syllable, and the word boundary does
little to increase uncertainty beyond that associated with the
syllable boundary. Whether any word structure exists will
be statistically examined in Experiment 2 when we directly
compare Mandarin Chinese with English.
Mandarin Chinese
Euclidian Distance

Method
Simulation Materials and Sound Representation The
simulation material came from a 30-minute stretch of a
children’
s radio broadcast program (for ages 6 and upward)
downloaded from the “
National Education Radio”website
at http://www.ner.gov.tw. It contained 5,394 sounds
(sounds differing only in nasal features were regarded as
different sounds), comprising 2,072 syllables and 1,300
words. For the simulation, each sound was represented as a
52-bit binary vector, 47-bit for the segment (because 47
different segments were involved) and 5-bit for the tone
(because there are five lexical tones in Mandarin Chinese).

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Word initial Syllable initial

Within
syllable

Position of target sound

Figure 3. Average Euclidian Distance for predicting sounds
in different positions. (Simulation condition: 100 hidden
units, 20 epochs, tone was distributed to each sound of the
syllable)

Simulation Design and Network Training The
performance of the network on predicting the word-initial,
syllable-initial, and within-syllable sounds was examined
under 18 conditions created by crossing three factors: (1)
tonal information (Syllable condition: tone distributed to
each sound of the syllable; Rhyme condition: tone only
distributed to sounds of the rhyme; Without condition: no
tonal information), (2) the number of training epochs (20,
40), (3) the number of hidden units (25, 100, 200).
Performance of the network was evaluated by two kinds of
scores: (1) the Error Rate, calculated by regarding the output
vector incorrect if the proposed target vector was not its
closest vector, and (2) the Euclidian Distance between the
actual output vector and its target vector. For both ways of
scoring, the larger scores index greater unpredictability and,
hence, a more salient boundary.
Before training, the connection weights were initialized
randomly in the range of 0.5. Training began with
presenting the network a sequence of input vectors one at a
time, and having the network learn to predict the next by
adjusting the connection weights with the backpropagation
algorithm. Leaning rate and momentum were set to 0.3 and
0.9 respectively.

An important side result of this experiment is that the
pattern shown in Figure 3 was, for the most part,
independent of how we represented tone, or even whether
we represented it at all. For example, if tone was not
represented, the condition corresponding to the one
illustrated in Figure 3 led to distances of 1.00, 0.94, and
0.56 for word-initial, syllable-initial, and within-syllable
sounds, respectively. Thus, the segmental pattern alone is
more than enough to motivate dominant syllable-sized units.
In fact, the speech error study of Chen (2000), the implicit
priming study of Chen, Chen, and Dell (2002), and the
masked priming study of Chen, Lin and Ferrand (2003) all
suggested that tone-less or segmental syllables as well as
syllables with tone function as important production units in
Mandarin. The findings of Experiment 1 are quite consistent
with these data.

Experiment 2: Comparing Sound Patterns in
English and Mandarin Chinese
The second experiment compared the sound distributions in
English and Mandarin Chinese inputs directly. This was
achieved by replicating the prior experiment using English
and Mandarin Chinese versions of comparable simulation
materials. The experiment also manipulated the nature of the
representation of diphthongs, that is, whether they are
considered to be one or two sounds. Because the prior
experiment had shown that the supra-segmental (tone)
information, the number of the hidden units, and the number
of training epochs did not matter, the present experiment
was conducted without supra-segmental information (tone
or stress), and with a constant 100 hidden-unit network
trained for 20 epochs.

Results and Discussion
Throughout the study, the Error Rate and Euclidian Distance
displayed the same pattern. We present only the latter
measure in Figure 3, which illustrates the results of single,
but typical, condition. Sounds at word and syllable
boundaries were much more difficult to predict than withinsyllable sounds. The difficulty of predicting the syllableinitial sounds, however, was quite similar to that of the
word-initial sounds. This pattern held no matter how many
hidden units the network was equipped with, how many
epochs of training had passed, and how (or even whether)
the tone was represented. These findings strongly suggest
that the syllable is functioning as a unit. Predictability is

218

diphthong-as-two-sounds condition, but it was in the
diphthong -as-one-sound condition, F (1,9) = 4.4, p < .03.

Simulation Materials The simulation materials consisted of
10 short English-Mandarin Chinese bilingual children’
s
stories, down
l
o
a
de
df
r
om t
he “
Mandarin Daily News”
website at http://www.mdnkids.org.tw/. The English
versions contained a total of 6,511 sounds when diphthongs
were counted as two sounds and 6,243 sounds when
diphthongs were counted as one sound, 2,482 syllables and
1,949 words. The Mandarin Chinese versions contained
7,116 sounds when diphthongs were counted as two sounds
and 6,472 sounds when diphthongs were counted as one
sound, 2,743 syllables and 1,860 words. The principle of
representing the sounds for simulation was identical to the
prior experiment.
Simulation Design Four conditions were created by
crossing two factors: (1) the number of sounds that
diphthongs denote (one, two), and (2) languages (English,
Mandarin Chinese). Aside from the Error Rate and
Euclidian Distance, another score, Syllabic Saliency, was
created for representing the degree of saliency of syllable
structure. It was defined as where, in percentage terms, the
performance of predicting the syllable-initial sound locates
on a scale that is maximal at the performance of predicting
the word-initial sound and minimal at the performance of
predicting the within-syllable sound.

Mandarin Chinese vs. English
Euclidian Distance

Method

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Mandarin Chinese
Word initial

Syllable initial

English
Within syllable

Figure 4. Average Euclidian Distance for predicting sounds
in different positions in Mandarin Chinese and English
(Simulation condition: diphthong as 2 sounds, 100 hidden
units, 20 training epochs, without tonal information)

Discussion

Results
The results with Euclidian Distance and Error Rate were
statistically indistinguishable and so we continue to report
only the distance measure. The main finding from the
experiment was that, as expected, Mandarin Chinese
differed considerable from English. Treating the 10 stories
a
s“
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
s
”i
na
na
na
l
y
s
i
so
fv
a
r
i
a
n
c
ewi
t
hl
a
ng
ua
g
e
,t
y
pe
of boundary, and diphthong representation as independent
variables yielded a strong interaction between language and
boundary type, F (1,18) = 197.2, p < .0001. Figure 4 shows
the findings from the diphthong-as-two-sounds condition. In
Mandarin the predictability at syllable and word boundaries
was nearly identical. The Syllable Saliency here was 96%,
that is, predicting sounds at syllable boundaries was almost
as inaccurate as predicting them at word boundaries. For
English, the Syllable Salience in this condition was 35%,
much lower than in Mandarin, F (1,9) = 25.9, p < .001. In
fact, for English, syllable-initial prediction accuracy was
actually closer to within-syllable than word-initial accuracy.
The results were similar, but less dramatic, when the
diphthong was treated as a single sound. The Syllable
Saliencies for Mandarin and English were 88% and 43%,
respectively, F (1,9) = 19.4, p< .002. Pooling across the
diphthong treatment yielded a strong effect of language on
this measure, F (1,9) = 24.6, p < .001.
Clearly, in Mandarin, the predictability was close for
word-initial and syllable-initial sounds. Were word-initial
sounds any less predictable than syllable-initial ones? For
English, they definitely were, F (1,9) = 28.7, p < .001. For
Mandarin, the very small effect was not significant in the

219

To summarize, three major findings were obtained. First,
vivid syllable structure emerged from the sound sequence of
Mandarin Chinese. Second, the emerged syllable structure is
more salient in Mandarin Chinese than in English. Third,
equivalent syllable structure was found even when suprasegmental information was removed from the sound
sequence. Implications of these results are discussed below.
As described in the introduction, psycholinguistic studies
demonstrated that the role of the syllable is not equally
emphasized in the production of English and Mandarin
Chinese, a finding that hints that the sound patterns the
language presents should reflect such difference. This is
exactly what we demonstrated in this experiment. In
Mandarin, the predictability of a sound was almost entirely
determined by whether or not it is at a syllable boundary. In
English, word structure was more salient, and the
predictability within a syllable was not that much greater
than that at syllable boundaries that are not word boundaries.
A stronger, but more speculative, interpretation of our
findings makes reference to the particular kind of model that
we used to assess predictability, the simple recurrent
network. This network architecture has been offered as an
account of phonological retrieval in production (e.g. Dell,
Juliano, & Govindjee, 1993). One of the advantages of such
an account is that one does not need to explicitly include or
exclude particular kinds of units. Rather, the weights
acquired through learning lead to activation states with
greater or lesser correspondence to discrete units at several
levels. Hence, the learner is not faced with the all-or-none
decision as to whether to have a syllable level in the system.
To the extent that different languages possess gradations in
the salience of units such as the syllable, this connectionist
approach may help explain the cross-linguistic variation

Another finding of note was that a strong syllable
structure emerged in Mandarin Chinese even when suprasegmental (tone) information was not considered. This
suggests that the segmental syllable, i.e. the syllable without
the tone, has statistical support in the input, and may
function as a processing unit. Psycholinguistic studies of
Mandarin support this hypothesis. For instance, analysis of
natural speech errors indicated that sometimes a syllable
moves to a new location, leaving its tone behind (Chen,
2000). That is, the slipping unit was a segmental syllable.
Pan, Chen, and Chen (1999) demonstrated this effect with
experimentally generated slips. Furthermore, implicit
priming and masked priming findings are robust both for
syllables with tones and for segmental syllables (Chen,
Chen & Dell, 2002; Chen, Lin & Ferrand, 2003).

References
Chen, J.-Y. (2000). Syllable errors from naturalistic slips of
the tongue in Mandarin Chinese. Psychologia, 43(1), 1526.
Chen, J.-Y., Chen, T.-M., & Dell, G. S. (2002). Word-form
encoding in Mandarin Chinese as assessed by implicit
priming task. Journal of Memory and Languages, 46,
751-781.
Chen, J.-Y., Lin, W.-C., & Ferrand, L. (2003). Masked
priming of the syllable in Mandarin Chinese speech
production. Chinese Journal of Psychology, 45(1), 107120.
Dell, G. S., Juliano, C., & Govindjee, A. (1993). Structure
and Content in Language Production: A theory of frame
constraints in phonological speech errors. Cognitive
Science, 17, 149-195.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179-212.
Kuo, F.-L. (1994). Aspects of segmental phonology and
Chinese syllable structure. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Illinois.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A
theory of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-75.
Lin, W.-C., & Chen, J.-Y. (2003). Masked priming of the
segmental syllable in Mandarin Chinese speech
production: More evidence. Presented orally at the 42nd
Annual Meeting of the Chinese Psychological Association,
October 4-5, Taipei, Taiwan.
Meyer, A. S. (1991). The time course of phonological
encoding in language production: Phonological encoding
inside a syllable. Journal of Memory and Language, 30,
69-89.
Pan, H.-C., Chen, T.-M., & Chen, J.-Y. (2000). GuoYu
YinJie de DengLu LiCheng (The role of syllable in
phonological encoding in Mandarin Chinese). Presented
orally at the First Taiwan Cognitive Science Conference:
A Review and a Prospect of Cognitive Psychology in
Taiwan, June 23-25, Chiayi, Taiwan.
Schiller, N. O. (2000). Single-word production in English:
The role of subsyllabic units during phonological
encoding. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26, 512-528.

220

