UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A New Theory of the Representational Base of Consciousness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mj932dm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Brook, Andrew
Raymont, Paul

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A New Theory of the Representational Base of Consciousness
Andrew Brook {abrook@ccs.carleton.ca}
Paul Raymont {praymont@ccs.carleton.ca}
Cognitive Science
Carleton University
Ottawa, ON Canada

Abstract
Though we take mainly a philosophical approach, we hope
that the results of our work will be useful to researchers on
consciousness who take other approaches. Everyone agrees,
no matter what their point of view on consciousness, that
consciousness has a representational base. However, there
have been relatively few well-worked-out attempts to say
what this base might be like. The two best developed are
perhaps the higher-order thought (HOT) and the transparency approaches. Both are lacking. Starting from the notion
of a self-presenting representation, we develop an alternative
view. In our view, a representation, a completely normal
representation, is the representational base for not just for
consciousness of its object (if it has one), but also itself and
oneself as its subject. The unified picture of consciousness
that results should assist research on consciousness.

Introduction
Though we take mainly a philosophical approach, we hope
that the results of our work will be useful to researchers on
consciousness using other approaches. Current views on
consciousness can be divided by whether the theorist accepts or rejects cognitivism about consciousness. Cognitivism is the view that consciousness is just a form of representation or a property of information-processing systems
that have representations (e.g., focussed attention). Anticognitivists deny this, claiming that inverted spectrum and
zombie thought experiments show that consciousness could
change while everything cognitive or representational stays
the same. Whatever, researchers on both sides of this fence
agrees that consciousness has a representational base.
Whether or not consciousness simply is representational or
cognitive, it at least requires representation and cognition.
However, there have been few well-worked out attempts to say what this representational base might be like.
The two best developed are perhaps the higher-order
thought (HOT) approach, in which the representational
base of consciousness is a thought directed at one’s own
psychological state(s), and the transparency theory, in
which one’s conscious states are said to be, not objects of
representation, but things that one knows about by inference from consciousness of the world around one, one’s
body, and so on.
As we will see, both approaches are lacking. We then
introduce a notion of a self-presenting representation and
attempt to build a better alternative around this notion. On
our view, representations are self-presenting but more than

that. A single representation is the basis not just of consciousness of the world and itself but also of oneself as its subject. This notion leads to a unified picture of consciousness.

The standard picture of representation
Many consciousness researchers accept the following as a
principle of representation:
RP: Representations represent something other than
themselves and only something other than themselves.
If RP is right, our view is wrong and something like a HOT
model or transparency model has to be right.
There are a host of problems facing HOT models (see
Raymont, forthcoming). Perhaps the most serious arises
from its separation of the representing state that confers
consciousness from the state on which consciousness is
conferred. The problem is that a representation can exist in
the absence of its object. If so, a HOT that represents pain
should be able to make things seem subjectively just as they
would if one really were in pain – with no real pain. Rosenthal (1997, p. 744) at least bites this bullet but it is a pretty
tough chew. Moreover, since in this case what is represented
is not real, it is the representing state that has to be the conscious state. If so, there is nothing higher-order about consciousness. Indeed, the resulting conscious state would look
remarkably like our self-presenting state.
So what about the transparency alternative? The basic
idea behind transparency theory is that one is directly conscious only of what a representation represents and not the
representation itself. We are conscious via representations,
not of representations. Representations are transparent to us.
If so, consciousness of representing is an inference from
the fact that we are conscious of what is represented. As
Dretske puts it,
You cannot represent something as F without, necessarily, occupying a state that carries the information that it
is F (not G or H) that you are representing something
as. [1995, p. 56]
All we know about our representing is what we can infer
from how represented items appear. Dretske (p. 40 ) calls
the resulting consciousness of our representing states displaced perception. The perception of an object is displaced
by an inference onto the perception itself.
The transparency thesis faces some problems. First
problem: when one is conscious of something by means of a
given representation, one is thereby conscious of that repre-

156

sentation’s content, i.e., of how that thing is represented by
one’s representation (visually, aurally, and so on). It is a
very small step from this to consciousness of the representation. To take this step, various things may be needed but
an inference from what one is representing does not seem to
be one of them. One is conscious of not only what is represented but also how it’s represented. The latter is an aspect
of the representation itself.
Second problem: when one is conscious of how one is
representing given contents (seeing them, imagining them,
doubting them, remembering them), even Dretske allows
that this knowledge does not come by way of an inference
from representing something (1995, p. 57-8), though he
does not say where it does come from. If transparency is not
the case here, why anywhere?
Third problem: itches, pains and other bodily sensations. On the transparency view, feeling a pain, hurting,
has to be nothing more than an inference from what the
pain represents – some bodily damage or whatever. This is
extremely implausible. (Dretske recognizes that he has a
problem about pains, etc.: “this is a topic that I have neither
the time nor (I admit) the resources to effectively pursue”
[1995, p. 103].) All who accept RP face this problem.
Indeed, about the only phenomenon for which a transparency claim seems at all plausible is perception, especially vision, though even here transparency might have
trouble with the difference between, say, seeing a corner
and feeling it, in general with situations in which there is
one content, two or more modes of representation. Put
bluntly, the transparency thesis seems simply to be false, at
least for most of consciousness.
As we said, if RP is right, something like a HOT model
or transparency model are the only alternatives. If accepting RP leads to such problems, what happens if we deny it?
It is not obviously true. Think again of pains and itches and
other bodily sensations, not to mention feelings of tension
and tiredness, mood states such as aimless anxiety or euphoria, and so on. What (other than themselves) are states
like these about? Then there are altered states of consciousness. When consciousness is altered, what it is like to have
those states certainly changes but there is no obvious candidate, other than the conscious states themselves, for what
they are about.
There are two ways to reject RP. One would be to say
that pains, etc., are not representations at all. This move is
hopeless. In having pains (and mood states, altered states of
consciousness, and so on), one is clearly aware of something, something about which a pain, for example, carries
information. These are marks of representing. But what one
becomes aware of in having a pain, what this state carries
information about, is itself. Pains are representational by
being self-representational; the qualities of which one becomes conscious by having these states are mainly qualities
of the states themselves. So the other way of rejecting RP is
to say that some representations at least are self-presenting.
Not only do we think that RP is false but our version of
the opposing idea that representations can be self-present-

ing is fairly radical. Here is how our story goes.

Self-presenting Representations: The Representational Base of Consciousness
On our view, having a representation is all the representation that one needs to become conscious not only of what
the representation is about and the representation itself, the
standard view of self-presenting representations, but something more.1 Consider the following sentence as uttered by
MM:
1. I am reading the words on the screen in front of me.
Having the representation expressed by (1) can make MM
conscious of the words on the screen, obviously. It can also
make her conscious of the representation itself, that the
words are being seen (not heard, imagined, touched, and so
on). In addition, having this representation can make MM
conscious of who is seeing the words, namely, herself. An
ordinary single representation is all the representation that
one needs to become conscious of that representation and
also oneself as the subject of it. Let us call such a representation the representational base of becoming conscious of
these items.
Representational base – an act of representing that is
all the representation that one needs to be conscious of it
and of oneself as its subject
Almost any representation will do.
Imagining something unreal such as Pegasus will do
just as well as perceiving an external object such as a computer screen. Indeed, even a representational state that had
no object, and therefore could not make us conscious of
anything other than itself, could still be the basis of becoming conscious of that state and of oneself. Moreover, a representation need not itself actually be recognized in order to
provide a representational base for self-consciousness. Just
recognizing what is represented in it would be an adequate
representational base for one to be conscious of oneself (as
conscious of that object).
Note carefully the term representational base. We are
not saying that to have a representation is to be conscious of
it. That would be a crazy view to hold. What we are saying
is that having a representation provides everything representational needed to become conscious of having it and of
oneself. Other things may be needed, too, shift of attention
for example, or the conceptual resources to go from consciousness of something to consciousness of representing it.
Lest it be thought that the idea of a self-presenting representations is exotic, note that something as lowly as a bar
code can be run quite a long way as an analogy. A bar code
contains information about what it is ‘about’, usually the
item’s nature and price. But it also contains information
about itself – a few of the bars are an integrity check on the

1.

Among others, James held the standard view, as more recently
have Kriegel (2003) and Tye (2003).

157

bar code itself. And it contains information about the thing
that has it – it is physically mounted on the thing that has
it. How far the analogy can be run does not matter here.
What matters is that even a representation as simple as a
bar code can be self-presenting.

representational base of consciousness are usually much
‘bigger’ than individual representations traditionally conceived. Indeed, in complex beings like us, we do not believe
that there are any individual representations as traditionally
conceived; but we will not go into that here.

Another homely example, a gauge, shows how our story
goes.2 A gauge presents information about something other
than itself, namely, whatever it has the function of indicating information about. For example, an altimeter presents
information about the distance to the earth’s surface. However, an altimeter also presents information about itself,
how far it is from earth, for example. And it is the gauge
that presents this information about the gauge, not some
higher-order gauge pointed at it! This is how we see conscious states. To be conscious of having a representation,
all the representation that one needs is the state itself.

The representations serving as the representational base
of consciousness usually have multiple objects and encompass multiple representations (as traditionally conceived).
Let us call such a representation a global representation. In
a global representation, one is conscious of many objects
and/or many representations as traditionally conceived, and
one is conscious of them as a single complex object and/or a
single complex representation.

For the analogy of the gauge to be complete, the gauge
would have to have one more function, It would have to
represent the system that has it. Not a problem. Suppose
that to provide information about altitude and itself, an
altimeter has to port itself to a system. And suppose that to
do so correctly, it has to recognize what sort of system it
has been installed in. (‘Ah, this is a Cessna Skylane.’) Now
we have at least a rough analogue of a representation presenting not just its object and itself but also its subject, the
person who has it.
We don’t have room to mount the full case for our
notion of the representational base of consciousness but
notice, if it is right, it would do some real work for us.
•

It would entail that RP is false.

•

It would entail that the idea behind transparency and
displaced perception, the idea that we are not conscious
of our own conscious states, is false and that the displaced perception move is unnecessary – the consciousness one has of one’s own representations by having
them is as direct and non-inferential as any consciousness of anything.

And,
•

It would show that the HOT move is unnecessary. If a
representation itself is all the representation we need to
become conscious of that representation, there is no
need for a higher-order representation of any kind.

Global Representation
Our notion of the representational base gives a single, unified account of the basis of three forms of consciousness –
consciousness of the world, consciousness of one’s own
states, and consciousness of oneself. This nicely unified
account is progress. Progress – but not the whole story.
So far we have talked exclusively about individual
representations as understood by the tradition. As Kant
already knew, however, the representations that serve as the

Global representation – representing many objects
and/or many representations as traditionally conceived
as a single complex object and/or a single representation.
Our points about the representational base can now be made
using this notion. A global representation is all the representation that one needs to be conscious not just of its complex
object, if it has one3, but also of the representation itself, and
of oneself as the ‘the single common subject’ of the elements
of this representation (Kant, 1781/7, A350).
The structure of a global representation is complicated.
Suppose that at the same time as one has the representation
expressed by (1),
1. I am reading the words on the screen in front of me,
one also has representations expressed by,
2. I am puzzled by your comments
3. I am enjoying the music I hear outside
4. I believe our agreement was to meet at 6:00
5. Yesterday I thought I understood Kant's notion of the
object
6. I wish the world were a fairer place
There are three elements of (1)-(6) that could be united in a
single global representation.
• One could be conscious of the various represented objects here as a single complex object.
• One could be conscious of the various ways in which
these objects are being represented as a single complex
representation.
And,
• One could be conscious of oneself, the subject, as the
single common subject of the whole business.
The next question is, How does a global representation serve
as the representational base of consciousness of its complex
object, itself, and its subject, the person who has it?

Joint Consciousness
Central to a global representation of objects is what we will

3.
2.

A gauge is one of Dretske’s favourite examples.

Must global representations have objects (other than themselves)? Nice question; but not one for us here.

158

call joint consciousness:
Joint consciousness – to be conscious of any of the
objects of a global representation is to be conscious of
other such objects.
It seems obvious that joint consciousness is a distinctive
feature of a global representation. The notion of joint consciousness just stated clearly applies to consciousness of the
world (plus such things as one’s own bodily states), more
exactly, to consciousness of intentional objects. What about
consciousness of one’s global representation and of oneself
as its subject?
When one is conscious of representing in a global
representation, here too there will be joint consciousness –
to be conscious of some representings is to be conscious of
others. And conscious of self? Here the idea that is plausible is a bit different. When one is conscious of oneself as
subject of one bit of representing, one will usually be conscious of oneself as the subject of other representings, as
their ‘single, common subject’, to use Kant’s words again.
The next question. How could a global representation
serve as the representational base of joint consciousness of
representings and of oneself as their common subject? It
seems plausible to hold that only certain elements of a
global representation are needed for one to have an adequate representational base for consciousness of a single
representing and of oneself as its subject. One will be conscious of doing an act of seeing by doing that act of seeing,
whatever the rest of one’s current global representation is
like. And one will conscious of oneself seeing, which
makes it likely that the act of seeing is the basis of this
consciousness of oneself. If so, what is the representational
base of joint consciousness of objects, of being jointly conscious of various representings, of being conscious of oneself as the common subject of a number of acts of representing?
Here we can only sketch what would have to happen
for these forms of joint consciousness to occur. In the same
way as an act of representing is the representational base
for consciousness of that act and of oneself, it will have to
be the representational base for consciousness of doing
other acts of representing and of oneself as their common
subject.
Moreover, the relationship will be symmetrical. One is
not ‘located’ at any given representing. When consciousness of a representing carries one to consciousness of other
representings, one has all the representings concerned
equally. So it would be better to say that representings in
general are the base for consciousness of representings in
general. It is not any given representing that is the base of
consciousness of oneself as common subject but representings in general.
Thinking of representations in the traditional way, it is
hard to make sense of what we just said. But that may be
the fault of the traditional conception. There is another way
to think about representation within which what we just
said makes fine sense.

Structure of a Global Representation
Instead of trying to make sense of the base of joint consciousness of representing and of oneself as subject in terms of
relations among representations, let us try out the idea that
these forms of consciousness are something that obtains
within a single complex representation.
Our test case will be a person seeing something, hearing
something, and tasting something, all parts of a global representation and global object, where the person is jointly
conscious of the objects, the representings, and herself as
subject. To be the base for such consciousness, how are the
three acts of representing brought together in a global representation? Here are three possibilities:
1. The three acts and their objects become the object of a
fourth, higher-order representation.
2. The three acts and their objects become parts of a
single subsuming representation.
3. While their contents are taken up in a global representation, the three acts of representing do not survive
even as parts of this state, though their objects remain
distinct. They become three (for the moment let us call
them) modalities of a single representation.
How might (3) work?
Consider what happens if one goes from a situation, at
time t, that has objects o1 and o2 to a situation that has o1
but not o2. We could try to capture the change in two ways.
We could say that where once there were two representations, r(o1) and r(o2), which were bundled in a mental structure of some kind, [r(o1) & r(o2)], we now have only the one
representation, r(o1); one representation has been dropped
from the bundle that existed at t. Or we could say that there
was just one representation, r(o1 & o2), at t and it has been
replaced by another single representation, r(o1).
The second view is simpler, since it does not involve
postulating representations as parts of an encompassing
representation. According to it, at t there was one representation that had a complex content. The content was complex
because it had multiple contents, o1 and o2, as its parts. If it
were a conscious representation, what would make it one
representation is that to be conscious of any of its objects by
means of it is to be conscious of other of its objects, too.
Here, the part-whole relation obtains among objects, but
there is no parallel multiplicity of representational states. On
this approach, unlike the first, the representing state does
not have ‘smaller’ or less complex representing states as
parts.4
On this picture, globality obtains within a representation
but not among representations. It does obtain among objects.
Returning to the joint consciousness condition, where to be
conscious of one thing is to be conscious of others, on our
picture joint consciousness of objects can be present or absent but it is trivially present in a global representation,

4.

If the representing state is a brain state, then it will have parts,
but these parts will not be representing states.

159

simply because a global representation is a single representing state, r(o1 & o2). For conscious representing states of
of this form, to be conscious of o1 by means of this state is
also, by that very same act, to be conscious of o2. One representational state-token provides consciousness of both o1
and o2.
Consider an act of reference as an analogy. Suppose I
refer to Toronto. Scarborough is part of that city; it is a part
of the thing to which I referred. It does not follow that my
act of referring to Toronto contains a numerically distinct
reference to Scarborough. It was of course possible for me
to refer simply to Scarborough, and thus to refer to part of
the thing to which I actually referred, but it does not follow
that I actually did so. The mere fact that Scarborough is
part of the thing to which I referred does not entail that a
reference to that borough figures as part of my act of referring. Similarly, the mere fact that o1 is part of (o1 & o2)
does not entail that a distinct representation of o1 must
figure as part of my act of representing (o1 & o2).
It may be objected that in advancing these observations
and contrary to our intentions, we actually provide the
resources for showing that a subject’s global representation
will contain parts that are themselves representations. Didn’t we ourselves just say that representations are individuated by their objects? This suggests that for each object that
we can individuate, including objects that are parts of a
global object, there will be a corresponding representation
individuated by that object.
This objection does not work. If we have relied on a
claim that each representation is individuated by an object,
we have not said how objects individuate a representation.
What if only some objects individuate a representation? Let
us introduce the idea of a global object.
Global object – a group of represented objects that is
the single complex object of a global representation
If we now say that only a global object individuates at least
a conscious representation, we are clear of the objection.
To capture these claims about singularity of representation, let us generalize (3),
3. While their contents are taken up in a global representation, the three acts of representing [viz., seeing
something, hearing something, and tasting something]
do not survive even as parts of this state, though their
objects remain distinct. They become three modalities
of a single representation.
into (3'),
3'. A global representation at a given moment is a
single representation not made up of multiple distinct
representations and it has a complex object.5
Now that we have said what we mean by (3) and (3'),
what about (1) and (2)? Though most philosophers hold to
(1) or (2), they do so uncritically and seldom offer any

5.

James (1890, vol. 1, pp. 145-61) held something like this view.

support for the views. We do not know of any good argument for either one of them. To see where those adopting (1)
or (2) might go wrong, recall the representation, r(o1 & o2).
Suppose that this representation occurs at t. Supporters
of (1) and/or (2) may confuse the untokened (at t) representational type that would take part of r(o1 & o2)’s object (viz.
o1) as its object, with a representational token, r(o1), held to
be part of r(o1 & o2) and to have one of the latter state’s
objects as its sole object. There is no reason to suppose that
there actually is such a distinct representational state nestled
within r(o1 & o2). There could have been such a token at t,
but the mere fact that we can entertain such a possibility –
that is, the mere fact that we can think of an instantiation at
t of that type – is no reason to conclude that there actually
exists a token of that type at t.
Conclusion: (3'), the idea that at a given moment a
global representation is not a group of representations but a
single representation with a complex object, is a perfectly
coherent point of view, one well supported by examples and
analogies. Before we leave it, however, there are some objections that we need to answer. One of them is so obvious that
it has probably occurred to most readers already.

Single Representation View: Objections
The obvious objection is this. In a global representation, we
are conscious, within a single unified representation, of
several sensory modalities. The phenomenal field is polymodal: it involves tactual data, visual data, auditory data,
and so on.
(1) or (2) would try to account for the contributions of
the different modalities to consciousness by saying that there
are several distinct representations here – visual representations, auditory representations, and so on – that come together as parts of an encompassing global representation. On
this view, the cognitive system constructs a variety of representations in different modalities. These representations are
not simply superseded by a global state that combines their
informational contributions in one representation. Instead,
they are preserved as distinct representations within it. The
polymodal complexity of the resulting global state is due to
the presence in it of this range of representations.
Against this, we offer the following picture: we do not
have several visual, aural, etc. representations, not conscious
ones anyway. Rather, the information we represent is formatted visually, aurally, etc. The cognitive system receives
some information in a visual format (reflecting, perhaps, the
wave length of incoming energy) or tagged as visual, some
formatted or tagged as aural, and so on. When this information appears in a global representation, its modality appears
with it. But there is just one representation, the global representation. In this one state, diverse bits of information are
formatted in a variety of modalities.
This view has the twin virtues of adequacy and parsimony. The onus rests with proponents of the more complicated view, in which a global representation is held to be an
assemblage of other representations, to show that our account has failed to account for something. It is difficult to

160

see what that could be.
Suppose that one is consciously representing things
both visually and aurally. What accounts for something
there being aural? This question must be answered either in
terms of how the representation represents or in terms of
what it represents. There are no other ways to specify the
modality of a representation. But a global representation
can incorporate either of these ways. There can be a diversity in what it represents; it can represent many things
having many properties. And it can represent these contents in a variety of ways, visually, aurally, and so on.
In support of this contention, note that we are compelled to postulate a plurality of representations only when
there is a particularly strong sort of incompatibility in how
or what a cognitive system represents, that is, only when
the system represents in ways that exclude one another. For
example, theorists tend to attribute distinct representations
(not all of which are held to be conscious) to a system in
such cases as binocular rivalry, or to explain the fact that
consciously seeing the Necker Cube in one way precludes
consciously seeing it in the alternative way.
These cases and all others that we’ve been able to think
of are not problems for us. To be a counter-example to our
single representation/complex object picture, the elements
would have to be: all conscious, and all available simultaneously to one conscious subject. The cases we’ve just considered do not meet these conditions.
In the Necker cube case, the conflicting representations
are successive. In binocular rivalry, the representations may
be simultaneous but one is not simultaneously conscious of
them (Baars 1988, pp. 82-3; see p. 126). So even when we
are driven to multiply representations in a subject at a time,
the results are not a problem for our view.
Notice that cases such as binocular rivalry and the
Necker cube arise within a modality. It is not clear that
there are any strong incompatibilities across modalities.
Certainly there aren’t many. In the absence of strong incompatibilities, nothing compels us to posit more than one
representation to make a place for different perceptual
modalities.
Second objection. Think of a picture of a car in front of
a house. It is plausible to say that this picture includes a
picture of the car and a picture of the house, that the bigger
picture of the car and house together contains little pictures
of the car and of the house.
Is it so clear, though, that the picture of house and car
together literally contains several distinct pictures, one for
each item depicted? The belief that it does threatens to
introduce an implausible multiplication of pictures. If one
can discern ten thousand blades of grass in front of the
house, then there would have to be ten thousand pictures in
the larger picture. Clearly, at some level of decomposition,
we stop positing a distinct picture for each part of the content that we are able to distinguish. Why not stop at the
whole picture and say that it is the only picture, with no
smaller pictures in it?

Third objection: If conscious representation consists of
one big, non-compositional representation, how are acts of
judging particular bits of content, forming beliefs about
things based on particular bits of content, possible? Response: In the same way as information in the complex
global object of a global representation can come ‘marked’
with various modalities (aural, visual, etc.), particular bits of
the information in a complex global object can enter into
particular information-processing activities: judging, remembering, and so on. These activities do not need to merge
into a single representation and they can pick and choose
information to work on ad libitum.
Even after responding to these objections, the support
we have offered for (3') is not decisive. It is strong, however,
certainly strong enough to justify acceptance of the view.
Our theory that a single global representation is the
representational base of consciousness has real potential. As
we have seen, it provides a unified account of three major
kinds of consciousness, consciousness of world, one’s own
representations, and oneself as subject. Though we can’t
show this here, it also opens the way to a nice account of: the
unity of consciousness; the special features of consciousness
of self; and the subject of consciousness (Brook and Raymont, forthcoming).

References
Baars, B. 1988, A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brook, A. and P. Raymont. forthcoming. A Unified Theory
of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D. 1978e. Mind writing and brain reading. In
Brainstorms. Montgomery, VT: Bradford Books, pp. 3950.
Dretske, F. 1995. Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press/A Bradford Book.
Kant, I. (1781/1787) Critique of Pure Reason (trans. P.
Guyer and A. Woods). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1997. (References are in the pagination of the 1st
(A) or 2nd (B) editions.)
Kriegel, U. 2003. Consciousness as intransitive self-consciousness. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 33:103-132.
James, W. 1890. Principles of Psychology. London: Macmillan.
Raymont, P. submitted. From HOTs to self-representing
states
Rosenthal, D. 1997. A theory of consciousness. In N. Block,
O. Flanagan, and G. Gázeldere, eds. The Nature of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tye, M. 2003. Consciousness and Persons: Unity and Identity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/A Bradford Book.

161

