UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Stochastic Comparison-Grouping Model of Multialternative Choice: Explaining Decoy
Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5gm8959s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Tsuzuki, Takashi
Guo, Frank Y.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Stochastic Comparison-Grouping Model of Multialternative Choice: Explaining
Decoy Effects
Takashi Tsuzuki (tsuzuki@rikkyo.ac.jp)
College of Social Relations, Rikkyo University, NishiIkebukuro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 171-8501, Japan

Frank Y. Guo (fyguo@ucla.edu)
UCLA, Department of Psychology, 405 Hilgard Ave.
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563, USA
Abstract
Based on Guo and Holyoak’s (2002a, 2002b) work, we
propose a stochastic comparison-grouping theory of
multialternative decision making to explain three contextinduced violations of rational choice. The attraction effect and
the similarity effect are explained by stochastic comparison
grouping, according to which similar alternatives are
compared more frequently than dissimilar alternatives are.
The compromise effect is explained by the assumption that
attribute values are perceived according to a basic
psychophysical function, in addition to the comparison
grouping mechanism. Furthermore, this model explains
individual differences in choice by assuming interpersonal
differences in pre-existing attitude toward products.

Introduction
Rational theories of decision making suggest that choice is
intrinsically determined by the utilities of individual
alternatives, thereby unaffected by relationship among
alternatives, which is a part of choice context. However,
violations of this tenet have been found in many studies (e.
g., Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1982; Simonson, 1989). Three
much-studied findings of the so-called context-dependent
choice warrants specific attention, as they constitute
violations of axioms that are believed to be fundamental to
rational choice. They are addressed together in this paper as
they share important commonalities and can be explained by
a unified framework. These findings include the attraction
effect, the similarity effect, and the compromise effect
(Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1982; Tversky, 1972; Simonson,
1989; Simonson & Tversky, 1992).
These effects all occur with the addition of a third
alternative, called the decoy, to a two-alternative choice set
and are all called decoy effects. Like in most research of the
same line (e. g., Guo & Holyoak, 2002b; Roe, Busemeyer,
& Townsend, 2001), they are examined in the present paper
in a two-attribute form, which is schematized in Figure 1.
The alternatives that constitute the core set are commonly
referred to as the target and the competitor (also called the
core alternatives in this paper), and the addition the decoy.
The target and the competitor form a trade-off, that is, one is
better than the other on one attribute but worse than the
other on the other attribute. Depending on the position of
the decoy relative to that of the target, three phenomena

could occur. Two of them happen when the decoy is more
similar to the target than to the competitor. If it is inferior to
the target on all attributes, the choice probability of the
target would increase relative to that of the competitor. This
is called the attraction effect (Huber, Payne, & Puto, 1982).
On the other hand, if a trade-off exists between the decoy
and the target, the choice probability of the target would
decrease relative to that of the competitor. This is called the
similarity effect (Tversky, 1972). The third phenomenon
occurs when the decoy sits between the target and the
competitor, in which case the decoy, now constituting a
compromise of the core alternatives, would be chosen most
often. This is called the compromise effect. All three
phenomena would potentially lead to violations of axioms
of rational choice (will explain in detail later).
A number of explanations have been advanced for each of
the three findings (e. g., Simonson & Tversky, 1992;
Tversky, 1972; Tversky & Simonson, 1993), however, Roe
et al. (2001) were the first to explain all three (in addition to
other findings) with a single framework, implemented in a
connectionist model derived from a previous stochastic
mathematical theory (Busemeyer & Townsend, 1993). Their
model accounts for these findings by variable lateral
inhibition determined by similarity relations among
alternatives and momentary shifting of attention from
attribute to attribute. Subsequently, Guo and Holyoak
(2002b) proposed a connectionist model accounting for the
attraction effect and the similarity effect that is also based
on inter-alternative similarity. They conceived the decision
process as divided into two stages: the two more similar
alternatives (i. e., the target and the decoy) are compared
first, and joined by the competitor later. The first stage has
an impact on the second stage and finally leads to these
phenomena (will explain in detail later). The two-stage
model derives its idea from perceptual grouping, according
to which similar shapes are visually perceived as forming a
unit. Analogously, similar alternatives are processed
together at the early stage of decision process. In analogy to
perceptual grouping, this mechanism is called comparison
grouping in the present paper. Compared to Roe et al.’s
model, the two-stage assumption is more consistent with
some empirical studies that investigate decision processes of
multialternative choice (Russo & Rosen, 1975; Satomura,
Nakamura, & Sato, 1997). To explain the compromise

1351

effect, Guo and Holyoak (2002a) used another feature of the
same model in addition to the two-stage assumption.

The Model
Decision Scenario and Model Architecture
The decision scenario used for simulation is adapted from
that used by Roe et al. (2001). The decision maker has to
choose one car from a set of two or three alternatives by
evaluating two attributes; gas mileage and performance,
which are measured on a 1 – 10 scale (see Figure 1).
Accordingly, a connectionist model is constructed (see
Figure 2). Each attribute or alternative is represented by one
node (circle) in the network, with their relations represented
by connections (lines with arrowheads). Each node has a
certain degree of activation. For an alternative node, the
activation stands for the valuation of the corresponding
alternative; for an attribute node, it stands for the evaluative
importance of that attribute. Node activations are within the
range of 0.0 - 1.0.

Figure 1: A summary of the phenomena simulated.
The letters S, A, and C stand for the decoys for the
similarity effect, the attraction effect, and the
compromise effect respectively. The numbers in
parentheses are attribute ratings.
Despite its explanatory simplicity and consistency with
certain experimental data, the two-stage model seems
oversimplified for describing human behavior – it is
unlikely that people completely limit evaluation to just one
pair of alternatives for a long period of time. Studies have
shown that in multialternative choice tasks that resemble
those giving rise to the three effects, people 1) momentarily
shift attention across pairwise comparisons, and 2) similar
pairs were compared more frequently than dissimilar pairs
were (Russo & Rosen, 1975; Satomura et al., 1997). In
addition, the second stage in that model was proposed to
consist of triple-wise comparisons, whereas these studies
suggested that choice predominantly consists of pairwise
comparisons. Based on data from these studies, we propose
a stochastic comparison-grouping model, in which all
possible types of comparisons are performed momentarily
with differential frequencies (Russo & Rosen, 1975;
Satomura, Nakamura, & Sato, 1997). In addition, whereas
Guo and Holyoak’s model estimates choice probabilities
from results of just one simulation by a mathematical
conversion (Luce, 1959), the present model runs a large
number of simulations to reflect decisions across
individuals, thereby directly estimating choice probabilities.
The psychophysical assumption (Guo & Holyoak, 2002a),
proposed in conjunction with comparison grouping to
explain the compromise effect, remains unchanged in the
current model.

Figure 2: The architecture of the model. External
Input represents the motivational and attentional
sources that drive the decision process.
The connection between an attribute node and an
alternative node, called the attribute-alternative connection,
has an excitatory weight (i. e., when one node is more
active, the other would be more active as well). The
connection between each pair of alternative nodes has an
inhibitory weight (i. e., when one node is more active, the
other would be less active), also known as lateral inhibition
in the literature. The lateral inhibition reflects the
competitive relationship among alternatives. Via this
mechanism, which would commonly result in one node
achieving higher activation than the rest, the model
“chooses” the winning alternative. All connections are bidirectional, reflecting the idea that influences can go either
way between factors involved in decisions. The external
inputs to the attribute nodes represent the motivational and
attentional sources that drive the decision making.
This network representation was similar to Guo &
Holyoak’s (2002a, 2002b) model, and is consistent with
common connectionist architecture used in decision
modeling (e. g., Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Tsuzuki,
Kawahara, & Kusumi, 2002).

1352

Connection Weights and Initial Activations
The attribute-alternative weights reflect the perceived
goodness of alternatives according to their attribute ratings,
and were initially set to the corresponding attributealternative ratings. For example, the performance-target and
gas mileage-target weights were first set to 8.0 and 2.0
respectively.
Recall that in Guo and Holyoak’s model (2002a, 2002b)
the perception of goodness follows a basic psychophysical
function. In particular, this function reflects the idea that
perceived goodness increases with negative acceleration
with actual attribute value. Consistent with this idea, each
attribute-alternative weight was further transformed by a
logarithmic function:
wij = (loge (wij + α) + β) / γ.

(1)

Here, wij is the weight of the connection from node j to node
i. α, β, and γ are set to 31.00, –3.35, and 0.905
respectively. Equation 1 reflects a weakly convex function.
In addition, it serves as a normalization function that
compresses these weights to values within a small range,
which is comparable in magnitude to node activations
(whereas the attribute values range from 0.0 to 10.0, the wijs
range from 0.090 to 0.400.)
The lateral inhibitions are all set to -0.60. The initial
activations of all nodes are conveniently set to 0.5, the
middle point of the activation range, with the following
qualification.
In reality, people usually have different pre-existing
preferences regarding products. Accordingly, randomness
was introduced to the initial activations of the alternative
nodes, which were in the range of 0.5±0.25. The values
follow a uniform distribution. As will be seen later, this
randomness provides an explanation for individual
differences in choice.

Running the Model
Connectionist models commonly run in an iterative fashion.
In each iteration the activation of each node is updated
according to the total influence it receives from the rest of
the model – the activation increases if the influence is
positive and decreases if otherwise. This influence can be
understood as the overall reason for liking or disliking an
alternative or attribute. A common activation function is
used to specify this process (c. f., McClelland & Rumelhart,
1988).
ai(t + 1) = ai (t)+ Δai(t), where
if netinputi＞0，
Δai = netinputi（MAX－ai）－ decay . ai
otherwise
Δai = netinputi（ai－MIN）－ decay . ai

(2)

ai(t+1) is the activation of node i at iteration (or time) t + 1;
it is a function of ai(t), the activation of the same node at the
previous iteration (or moment). Δai(t) is the amount of activation
change. The decay parameter reflects how much a neural

signal decays over time (connectionist models draw
analogies to neural processing), and is set to 0.04. The
decay, however, does not play an important role in
explaining the effects. MAX and MIN are the upper (1.0) and
lower (0.0) limits of node activations. This equation
specifies that node activation asymptotically approaches the
upper or lower activation limit as a consequence of the total
influence it receives from other components of the network.
The total influence, netinputi, is determined by the following
equation.
netinputi = istr. intinputi＋estr . extinputi, where
intinputi = Σjwij aj (t)
extinputi = 1

(3)

Intinput is the internal input that comes from all the attribute
and alternative nodes, and depends on both the activation of
the node feeding input to i and the connection strength that
links the two nodes. Extinput, standing for the external
input, should be a stable source of attention and motivation
and is set to a constant. Istr and estr, set to 0.12 and 0.05
respectively, are constants that scale down activation
changes so that the changes are not abrupt. Since the
internal input is the source of these effects, istr is set to be
larger than estr.
The model runs iteratively – in each iteration, the
activation of each node in the model is updated according to
Equation 2 and 3. The process reflects the evolution of
valuation over time. This iterative process continues until an
externally determined period of deliberation time, arbitrarily
set to 100 iterations, is met.1 The final winning choice is the
alternative with the highest activation.

Stochastic Comparison Grouping
In a series of eye fixation studies, Russo & Rosen (1975)
found that pairwise comparisons between similar options
happen earlier and more frequently than other types of
comparisons in multialternative choice. Consistent with that,
Satomura et al. (1997) found that in decision tasks leading
to the attraction effect, for the participants who chose the
target (i. e., exhibited the attraction effect), 74%
retrospectively reported that they compared the target to the
decoy, while only 19% of them reported that they compared
the target to the competitor. These studies give rise to the
following modeling assumptions – All four kinds of
possible comparisons (target-decoy, competitor-decoy,
target-competitor, and target-decoy-competitor) are
performed momentarily with different frequencies. To
instantiate this in the model, for each iteration, a specific
type of comparison is randomly chosen according to
specified probabilities, and only the involved alternative
nodes are updated.
1

Other stopping criteria might be used. For example, the model
can stop when the amount of activation difference across nodes is
very large, or the amount of activation change becomes very small.
However, according to our analysis, the type of criterion does not
affect the qualitative pattern of the simulation results.

1353

In simulating the attraction effect, the frequencies of these
types of comparisons, in the order mentioned above, were
set to the percentages of 74.0%, 10.4%, 10.4%, and 5.2%
respectively. For example, for a random 74.0% of the
iterations, only the activations of the target and the decoy
were updated. These percentages were arbitrarily
determined to roughly reflect previous experimental data
(Russo & Rosen, 1975; Satomura et al, 1997), which
suggested pairwise comparisons constitute the majority of
the deliberation process, and the two similar alternatives
were compared most often. To be consistent, the same
decision process was employed for the similarity effect.

Simulations and Results
A total of 10,000 independent simulations, each standing for
the deliberation of one individual, have been performed. For
each simulation, the alternative with the highest final
activation is the one chosen. Choice probability was
obtained across all the simulations. The simulation results
are presented both as choice probability (Table 1) and
average node activation (Table 2). Note that choice
probability is the criterion by which the modeling is judged.

Modeling Individual Differences
Note that node activation evolves as a continuous function
of time. This means a node with high initial value tends to
stay strong. For instance, if the initial value of the target is
higher than that of the competitor, the target would tend to
maintain relative advantage over the competitor in
deliberation. Recall that initial activation values randomly
vary across simulations. This randomness therefore leads to
choice differences across simulations, and explains why
sometimes the unlikely alternative was chosen. For
example, the decoy was chosen with a slim chance in the
attraction effect scenario – when the initial value of the
decoy was very high relative to the target and the
competitor, such initial advantage was too strong to be
offset by the comparison-grouping mechanism. The
modeling is consistent with the intuition that people have
different pre-existing beliefs that randomly favor one
alternative over another and tend to bias later decisions.

Binary Choice
The target and the competitor are set to equal additive
attribute ratings: the target is rated 2.0 on gas mileage and
8.0 on performance, whereas the competitor is rated 8.0 on
gas mileage and 2.0 on performance. The two attributes are
assumed to be equally important. Consistent with the trivial
prediction that their choice probabilities should be the same,
the simulations yielded probabilities of 0.504 and 0.496 for
them respectively. The slight inequality was due to the
randomness in initial activations of the alternative nodes.

Attraction Effect
When the attraction effect occurs, the target benefits from
the addition of the decoy more than does the competitor.

Under some circumstances, this tendency leads to a higher
choice probability for the target in the trinary set than in the
core set. This constitutes a violation of the regularity
principle of rational choice, according to which adding
alternatives to a given choice set should not increase the
probability of any alternative (Huber et al., 1982). In the
simulation, the decoy was chosen to have attribute values of
1.5 and 7.5 for gas mileage and performance, respectively.
Comparison grouping, in conjunction with the competitive
relationship among the alternatives, is able to explain this
effect. Any time when the target is compared with the
obviously inferior decoy (in modeling terms, this means the
target node receives more input via the attribute-alternative
connections than does the competitor), the activation of the
target node increases whereas the activation the decoy node
decreases. This differentiation is an intrinsic property of this
type of connectionist model (c. f., McClelland & Rumelhart,
1988). Given that the deliberation process primarily consists
of target-decoy comparisons, the target node would finally
acquire higher activation than does the competitor.
The above analysis suggests that if the initial node
activations were identical across the alternatives, the target
would have been chosen for all simulations. However, with
some randomness, it is possible that the competitor has a
higher initial activation than does the target. If this initial
difference, which has an impact on later comparisons, is
large enough, the competitor would be chosen. This also
suggests that with extreme initial values even the rather
inferior decoy might be chosen. This seems consistent with
the intuition that pre-existing beliefs regarding products
carry a weight on later decisions.
The simulated choice probabilities of the target, the
competitor, and the decoy were 58.7%, 36.6%,
4.8%.
The probability of the target exceeds that in the binary
choice scenario, thereby leading to a violation of the
regularity principle.

Similarity Effect
In the decision situation that leads to the similarity effect,
the target looks less attractive relative to the competitor
once the decoy is introduced. Under certain situations, this
would lead to a change of rank order of the target and the
competitor. For example, in the simulated scenario, the core
alternatives rank the same in the binary set, but the
competitor would rank higher than the target if the
similarity effect occurs. This constitutes a violation of the
independence of irrelevant alternatives principle of rational
choice, which states that adding a decoy to an original
choice set should not alter the rank order of the alternatives
(c. f., Tversky, 1972). Decoy was set to have attribute
ratings of 2.5 and 7.5 for gas mileage and performance
respectively. Note that its additive attribute rating is
identical to that of the target.
Like in the case of the attraction effect, comparison
grouping and inter-alternative competition are able to
explain the similarity effect. Any time when the target is
compared with the similarly attractive decoy, the activation

1354

of both the target and the decoy nodes decrease due to their
mutual inhibition of equal strength. This again is an intrinsic
property of this type of connectionist model (c. f.,
McClelland & Rumelhart, 1988). Because the target-decoy
comparison is the predominant type of comparison,
compared to the competitor node, the target node hurts more
from the comparison with the decoy, and would finally
acquire lower activation than does the competitor.
The simulated choice probabilities of the target, the
competitor, and the decoy were 27.8%, 39.7%, and 32.6%.
Note that the tie between the target and the competitor was
broken, indicating a violation of the independence of
irrelevant alternatives principle.
In summary, the similarity effect and the attraction effect
can be explained by frequency difference between the
target-decoy and competitor-decoy comparisons. This also
suggests that simulations of these effects should not depend
on a particular specification of frequency ratio for the four
types of comparisons – so long as this frequency difference
is substantial, the two effects should be observed. In fact,
other frequency ratios were used in our simulations and the
same pattern was obtained (not reported here due to space
limit).
Table 1: Simulation results as choice probability
(estimated from 10,000 simulations).
Choice scenarios
Binary choice
Attraction effect
Similarity effect
Compromise effect

Target
0.504
0.587
0.278
0.213

Choice probability
Competitor Decoy
0.496
----0.366
0.048
0.397
0.326
0.219
0.568

Table 2: Simulation results as average node activation
and SD.

Choice scenarios

Binary choice
Attraction effect
Similarity effect
Compromise effect

Average Node Activation
(SD)
Target Competitor Decoy
0.293
0.294
----(0.060)
(0.060)
0.320
0.305
0.233
(0.034)
(0.046)
(0.038)
0.286
0.300
0.291
(0.033)
(0.046)
(0.033)
0.275
0.276
0.291
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.022)

Note. The results are computed from the simulations
summarized in Table 1.

Compromise Effect
When the decoy for the similarity effect moves toward the
competitor and finally reaches the middle point between the
target and the competitor, the similarity effect turns into the
compromise effect – The decoy changes from the least
popular to the most popular alternative. In a decision
scenario slightly different from the present one, this effect
can also lead to a violation of the regularity principle (see
Simonson, 1989 for more detail).
The comparison grouping assumption suggests that
frequency of pairwise comparison increases with interalternative similarity. Accordingly, the percentages of the
target-decoy,
competitor-decoy, and target-competitor
comparisons have the ratio of 2 : 2 : 1, inversely
proportional to psychological distance1. The triple-wise
comparison, being the least frequent, was arbitrarily set to
one half as frequent as the least frequent pairwise
comparison. Hence, the percentages of the four types of
comparisons were set to 36.36%, 36.36%, 18.18%, and
9.10%.
The psychophysical assumption implemented in Equation
1 gives rise to this phenomenon. (This mechanism was still
at work in the simulations of other two phenomena, but it
did not play a causal role in producing them.) Take the
target-decoy comparison for an example. The advantage of
the decoy over the target (ratings of 5 versus 2 on gas
mileage) looms larger than the advantage of the target over
the decoy (ratings 8 versus 5 on performance) after the
attribute ratings have been transformed into connection
weights. (Calculated by Equation 1, the sum of the two
attribute-alternative weights is 0.512 for the decoy, higher
than the 0.505 for the core alternatives.) Hence the total
input the decoy node receives via the attribute-alternative
connections is the largest among the alternative nodes,
making the decoy the winner.
The simulated choice probabilities of the target, the
competitor, and the decoy were 21.3%, 21.9%, and
56.8%. Note that the specification of comparison
percentages is not unique – so long as there is no frequency
difference between the target-decoy and the competitordecoy comparisons, neither the target nor the competitor
would be bolstered relative to the other. The psychophysical
mechanism would then guarantee choosing the decoy.
Comparison grouping provides a unified framework
toward understanding the three phenomena. In particular, it
explains why difference between the core alternatives exists
in the similarity effect but disappears in the compromise
effect, as comparison grouping can be modified by changing
the similarity between the decoy and the core alternatives.

1

This is just one way of specifying the inverse relationship
between frequency ratio and similarity, which should be viewed as
qualitative rather than quantitative. Note that in simulations of the
other two effects, frequency ratios are not determined by the same
function and just roughly reflect the inverse relationship.

1355

Conclusion
We propose a stochastic comparison-grouping theory cast in
a connectionist model to explain three important violations
of rational choice. In addition, this model lends us
understanding of the decision processes involved in these
tasks.
A comparison is made between this model and previous
accounts of the same findings. It extends Guo & Holyoak’s
(2002a, 2002b) model by incorporating insights from
experimental data (Russo & Rosen, 1975; Satomura et al.,
1997). In addition, it better accounts for individual
differences in choice by introducing randomness in intial
beliefs to the model. In comparison with Roe et al.’s (2001)
model, both models use similarity relationship, but in
different manners. Their model uses variable lateral
inhibition that increases with inter-alternative similarity,
whereas the current model proposes a similarity-based
grouping mechanism. In addition, both models suggest
momentarily shifted attention, again in different manners. In
their model attention shifts from attribute to attribute,
whereas in the present model attention shifts across different
types of pairwise comparisons. The assumptions of this
model seem more consistent with the aforementioned
experimental data. Future studies are in order to further test
the relative merits of the two models.
One apparent problem of the present model is that the
modeling seems to depend on manually specified parameter
values rather than psychological principles. Our justification
is that these parameters specify linear transformations that
do not alter the essence of the modeling assumptions. In
addition, the same set of parameter values applies to all
three phenomena.
Finally, this model is consistent with theoretical
frameworks that relate cognition to perceptual processes (c.
f., Medin, Goldstone, & Markman, 1995, Goldstone &
Barsalou, 1998), and its proposed perceptual mechanisms
might help us understand decision behavior at large.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for comments from Keith J. Holyoak and
John Hummel.

W. D. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 393-398). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 3-31.
Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of
Consumer Research, 9, 90-98.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Markman, A. B. (1995).
Comparison and choice: Relations between similarity
processes and decision processes. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 2, 1-19.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1988). Explorations
in parallel distributed processing: A handbook of models,
programs, and exercises. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roe, R. M., Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (2001).
Multialternative decision field theory: A dynamic
connectionist model of decision making. Psychological
Review, 108, 370-392.
Russo, J. E., & Rosen, L. D. (1975). An eye fixation
analysis of multialternative choice. Memory & Cognition,
3, 267-276.
Satomura, T., Nakamura, H., & Sato, E. (1997). Consumers’
attitude toward price (4): Experiments of reference price.
Distribution Information, 5, 18-24. (In Japanese)
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of
attraction and compromise effects, Journal of Consumer
Research, 16, 158-174.
Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1992). Choice in context:
Tradeoff contrast and extremeness aversion. Journal of
Marketing Research,29, 281-295.
Tsuzuki, T., Kawahara, T., & Kusumi, T. (2002).
Connectionist modeling of higher-level cognitive
processes. Japanese Journal of Psychology, 72, 541-555.
(In Japanese with English summary)
Tversky, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of
choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281-299.
Tversky, A., & Simonson, I. (1993). Context-dependent
preferences. Management Science, 39, 1179-1189.

References
Busemeyer, J. R., & Townsend, J. T. (1993). Decision field
theory: A dynamic-cognitive approach to decision making
in an uncertain environment. Psychological Review, 100,
432-459.
Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting
perception and conception. Cognition, 65, 231-262.
Guo, F. Y., & Holyoak, K. J. (2002a, April). Coincidence
effect versus compromise effect: A neural network
explanation. Paper presented at meeting of the Western
Psychological Association, Irvine, CA.
Guo, F. Y., & Holyoak, K. J. (2002b). Understanding
similarity in choice behavior: A connectionist model. In
1356

