UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Activation of Non-Target Language Phonology During Bilingual Visual Word Recognition:
Evidence from Eye-Tracking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6bj2h3pf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Kaushanskaya, Margarita
Marian, Victoria

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Activation of Non-Target Language Phonology During Bilingual Visual Word
Recognition: Evidence from Eye-Tracking
Margarita Kaushanskaya (m-kaushanskaya@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, Il 60208

Viorica Marian (v-marian@northwestern.edu)
Northwestern University
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, 2240 Campus Drive
Evanston, Il 60208

reading task requiring use of only the target language) has
accumulated over the past three decades (e.g., De Groot,
Delmaar, & Lupker, 2000; Nas, 1983; Van Heuven, 2000;
Van Heuven, Dijkstra, & Grainger, 1998). Activation of
non-target language phonological information has been
reported for bilingual readers of languages with shared
alphabets, such as English and French (Jared & Szucs,
2002), Dutch and English (Dijkstra, Grainger, & van
Heuven, 1999), Spanish and Catalan (Costa, Miozzo, &
Caramazza, 1999), and Dutch and French (Brysbaert, Van
Dyck, & Van de Poel, 1999). Activation of phonological
information for the non-target language has also been
reported in the case of bilinguals who speak languages with
entirely different alphabets, like Hebrew and English
(Tzelgov et al., 1996). However, it is still largely unknown
whether phonological information for the non-target
language is activated when the letter string in the target
language carries little resemblance to the non-target
language orthography (but see Feldman & Turvey, 1983;
Lukatela et al, 1978).
In this experiment, we used a modified Picture-Word
Interference (PWI) task to test whether phonological
information for Russian is automatically activated during
processing of non-words in English. The stimuli were
constructed to contain English-specific letters, but constitute
viable phonological Russian words. Using head-mounted
eye-tracking methodology, we examined Russian-English
bilinguals’ ability to control their eye-movements to
distractor words in the PWI task when these words
contained phonological, but not orthographic information
for Russian. The proportion of eye-movements to the
distractor word signified the degree to which Russian
phonological information drew the participants’ eyemovements, while the reaction times to naming the target
picture stimulus signified the degree to which the Russian
phonological word interfered with picture naming in
English.
Eye-tracking technology has been used to explore parallel
activation of the two languages known to a bilingual during
auditory perception tasks (e.g., Marian & Spivey, 2003 a, b).
Eye-tracking has also been widely used in research of
reading (e.g., Reichle, Rayner, & Pollatsek, 1999; Starr &
Rayner, 2001). Unlike automatic eye-movements observed

Abstract
Russian-English bilingual and English monolingual
participants were tested on the Picture-Word Interference task
modified for use with an eye-tracker. Distractor words were
1) non-words in English, but viable phonological words in
Russian, 2) control bigram matched non-word stimuli, and 3)
English translations of the Russian words. Russian-English
bilinguals looked at the phonological Russian words more
than monolingual participants, and took longer to name
pictures accompanied by these stimuli than did monolingual
participants. Proportion of eye-movements and reaction times
to the other two types of distractor stimuli did not differ for
the two groups. These results suggest that phonology of the
non-target language is activated automatically during visual
word recognition in the target language, even for written
stimuli that do not carry orthographic information for the nontarget language.

Introduction
The task of reading is hard enough when the reader reads in
one language alone. In the case of a bilingual reader, the
picture is even more complex: Not only does a bilingual
reader need to process the written information in one
language, but he or she may have to contend with
information from his or her other language that also
becomes activated. The activation of the non-target
language during reading in the target language is
implemented in the Bilingual Interactive Activation (BIA+)
model of visual word recognition (Dijkstra & Van Heuven,
1998; 2002). The BIA+ model is a localist connectionist
model with elements from both the dual-route models of
reading (e.g., Coltheart et al., 1993; Coltheart et al., 2001;
Ziegler et al., 2000) and the connectionist models of
reading. (e.g., Plaut et al., 1996; Seidenberg and
McClelland, 1989; Van Orden and Goldinger, 1994). The
BIA+ model proposes that lexical access of a visually
presented word in a bilingual is non-selective, i.e., when a
word is presented, information for that word, both
orthographic and phonological, is activated for both of the
bilingual’s languages.
Support for such non-selective processing of written
information in bilinguals (i.e., activation of the non-target
language orthography and/or phonology when involved in a

654

in response to spoken instructions, eye-movements in
reading are thought to be under partial cognitive control.
The E-Z Reader model of eye-movement control in reading
(Reichle, 1998; Reichle et al., 1999) posits that prior to
programming an eye-movement to a particular word, a
familiarity check takes place, which indicates whether a
word is likely to be recognized by a reader. During this
familiarity check, a reader gains information on low-level
properties of the word (Engbert, Longtin, & Kliegl, 2002),
which causes partial activation of the lexicon (e.g., Deutsch
et al., 2002; Starr & Rayner, 2001). Experimental evidence
shows that readers obtain both orthographic information
(Liu et al., 2002), and phonological information (Wong &
Chen, 1999) from the word before it is fixated. Models of
eye movement control during reading account only for
monolingual reading and it is still largely unknown whether
control of eye-movements during bilingual reading is
accomplished in the same way.
Recent research with bilinguals suggests that
phonological information for the non-target language is
automatically activated when reading in the target language.
However, phonological activation for the non-target
language when reading in the target language has not yet
been explored for bilingual speakers whose two languages
have partially overlapping alphabets. For these speakers,
letter strings with alphabet-specific symbols often contain
phonologically meaningful information for the non-target
language. Russian-English bilinguals are faced with exactly
this type of alphabetic overlap (Figure 1). Given the
properties of the Russian Cyrillic alphabet and the English
Roman alphabet, it is possible to test whether phonology of
the non-target language is activated when its orthography is
only partially present in the target language letter string.
Consider the word COBA, which is the Russian word for
“owl.” COBA can be transcribed using the Roman alphabet,
SAVA, which includes letters specific to the English
alphabet. Letter strings like SAVA constitute phonological,
but not orthographic, representations of Russian words.
When they are presented to the Russian-English bilinguals,
only phonology, but not orthography, associated with
corresponding Russian words, should be activated.
The activation of the non-target Russian language during
picture naming in English was measured using a modified
PWI task. The objective of the PWI task is to name
pictures, while ignoring the words also present on the
screen. The interference from the distractor word is thought
to arise due to the automatic reading of the word, which
then interferes with selection of the appropriate name for the
picture at the level of the lexico-semantic system. Thus,
reading during this task is largely automatic; in fact, it is
counter-productive to the successful and fast completion of
the task. Unlike a classic PWI task, where a written stimulus
is presented inside a picture, we separated the written
stimulus and picture presentation, such that a picture was in
one quadrant of the computer screen, while a written
stimulus was in another quadrant of the computer screen.
The instructions to the participants were the same as in the
regular PWI task: To ignore the word, and name the picture.
In the regular PWI task, these instructions do not prevent
reading of the words because the words are presented inside

Russian

Orthographic Overlap

, , , , ,
, , , , ,
, ,
, ,
Ъ, , Ь,Э, Ю,
Я

A, B, C, E, K,
M, H , O, P,
T, Y, X

English
D, F, G, I, J,
L, N, Q, R,
S, U, V, W,
Z

/a/, /b/, /k/, /e/, /k/,
/m/, /h/, /o/, /p/, /t/,
/j/, /ks/

/a/, /v/, /s/, /e/, /k/,
/m/, /n/, /o/, /r/, /t/,
/u/, /h/

Figure 1: Overlapping symbols in orthographies of Russian
and English, and the associated phonemes in each language.
the picture, and therefore, the participants necessarily look
at them. In the modified PWI task, the word and the picture
are in different locations on the screen so that the
participant sees that there is a word, but does not need to
look at it in order to recognize the picture. We tracked the
participants’ eye-movements while they were completing
the task in order to determine whether particular words drew
more eye-movements than others.
Based on the models of cognitive control of eye
movements in reading (Reichle, 1998; Reichle et al., 1999),
the proportion of eye-movements to distractor stimuli
during the modified PWI task should be indicative of the
degree to which participants were able to control their eyemovements to the written stimuli. The stimuli presented as
distractors on the PWI task words were 1) phonological
Russian words, 2) English translations of the Russian
stimuli, and 3) control stimuli (non-words in both Russian
and English that were controlled for English bigram
frequencies to equal phonological Russian stimuli). We
hypothesized that if phonology of Russian is automatically
accessed even when the orthographic shape of the word is
not Russian (i.e., contains English-specific letter symbols),
Russian-English bilingual readers will make more eyemovements to the phonological Russian words than the
monolingual English speakers. Consequently, we
hypothesized that if the phonological information for
Russian activates the lexico-semantic information for
Russian, Russian-English bilinguals will have longer
reaction times to the pictures accompanied by the
phonological Russian words than monolingual English
speakers.

Methods
Participants
Fifteen Russian-English bilingual speakers (Mean
Age=24.27 years, SD=4.80) and 15 English monolingual
speakers (Mean Age=21.00 years, SD=4.68) participated in
the experiment. All Russian-English bilingual participants
were born in the former Soviet Union, and immigrated to
the United States at a mean age 14.56 years (SD=5.35). All
bilingual participants filled out a Language Experience and

655

Bilingual Status Questionnaire (LEABS-Q) at the end of the
experiment. LEABS-Q is a comprehensive questionnaire
containing questions about language proficiency, modes and
ages of language acquisition, current language usage, etc.
(Marian, Blumenfeld, and Kaushanskaya, 2003). Selfreported proficiency measures were later determined based
on the participants’ answers.
Reading fluency and reading comprehension were
assessed by administering a passage reading task in English
to the monolingual participants, and in English and Russian
to the bilingual participants. When tested in English,
bilingual participants were found to read orally with similar
speed, t(28)=0.94, p=0.36, have as many errors while
reading, t(28)=0.75, p=0.46, and comprehend as much of
the content, t(28)=0.96, p=0.35, as the monolingual
participants. For bilingual speakers, fluency of reading,
t(14)=1.89, p=0.08, and comprehension of content,
t(14)=0.38, p=0.71 were comparable for Russian and
English. However, bilingual participants were significantly
faster when reading in English (M=2.71 words/sec,
SE=0.12) than in Russian (M=2.12 words/sec, SE=0.11),
t(14)=4.44, p<0.01.

non-word control stimulus. The picture-no word condition
was used as a baseline, to establish that eye-movements to
words, if occurred, were due to the presence of the word in a
particular location, and not to the location itself. For each
condition, a panel divided into four quadrants was
constructed – a picture was placed into the middle of one
quadrant, and the word was placed into the middle of
another quadrant. For each condition, a picture and all the
words in the three conditions were placed in the same
quadrants; the positions of pictures and words were
counterbalanced across the four possible quadrants. To
increase the time between target picture presentations, 16
filler picture stimuli were added to the experiment.

Apparatus
All stimuli were presented on a G5 Macintosh Monitor
using SuperLab experimental software. Naming times were
measured from the presentation of the picture to the onset of
triggering the microphone response by the participant’s
voice. A headband-mounted ISCAN eyetracker was used to
record participants’ eye-movements during the PWI task. A
scene camera, joined to the view of the tracked eye,
provided an image of the participant’s field of view. A
second camera, which provided an image of the
participant’s left eye, allowed the ISCAN software to track
the center of the pupil and the corneal reflection; gaze
position was indicated by white crosshairs superimposed
over the image generated by the scene camera. The output
was recorded onto a digital mini-tape via a Cannon Digital
Camera; it was later loaded into the FinalCut Editing
software for frame-by-frame playback analysis.

Design
Two dependent variables were considered: reaction time,
and proportion of eye-movements to the word. The
experiment followed a 4x2 Mixed Design with two
independent variables – condition (no word, phonological
Russian word, non-word control stimulus, and English
word) as a within-subjects variable, and group (bilingual vs.
monolingual) as a between subjects variable. For the
proportion of eye-movements data, condition variable
included only three levels (phonological Russian word, nonword control stimulus, and English word).

Procedure
All participants were tested individually. Training for the
Picture-Word Interference task was presented first. Each
picture used in the PWI task was presented in the middle of
the screen; the participant was instructed to name it into the
microphone.
The Picture-Word Interference task was presented next.
Prior to initializing the task, the calibration of the eyetracking equipment was completed. To increase the
sensitivity of equipment, calibration was done on 9 fixation
points. The fixation values were then mapped onto the
corresponding monitor locations; the fixation location was
indicated by a white cross-hair that moved synchronically
with the eyes. After successful calibration, the PWI task
was initiated. Each participant was instructed to fixate on
the cross that appeared prior to each picture stimulus; he/she
was also instructed to name pictures into the microphone as
fast and as accurately as possible, and ignore the text on the
screen.
At the end of the experimental session, two proficiency
measures were administered to each participant. The first
was the reading ability measure: Each participant read a
short passage in English into the microphone, and answered
8 multiple-choice questions about it afterwards. Each
bilingual subject also read a short passage in Russian, and
answered 8 multiple-choice questions about it. Lastly, the
LEABS-Q was administered to each participant.

Materials
Twenty-three target pictures of common concrete objects
were selected from the IMSI MasterClips picture database;
all pictures were transformed into black-and-white drawings
of equal size using PhotoShop.
Twenty-three words that were semantically related to
picture names, i.e. belonged to the same superordinate
category, were selected. The 23 words were then translated
into Russian to create stimuli that were phonological
representations of Russian words, spelled using the English
alphabet. For instance, for the picture of a duck, the
distractor word selected was chicken, which translates to
YTKA in Russian, and yields UTKA when spelled using the
English alphabet.
Control stimuli for the phonological Russian stimuli were
constructed by creating non-words comparable to Russian
phonological words in length and bigram frequencies.
Paired-samples t-tests confirmed that Russian phonological
stimuli (M=4355.02, SE=2244.50) and phonological
controls (M=4263.35, SE=2362.53) were similar in their
bigram frequencies (t(22)=0.36, p>0.05).
For each picture, there were 4 conditions: (1) picture – no
word, (2) picture – English semantic distractor, (3) picture –
phonological Russian semantic distractor, and (4) picture –

656

condition revealed that bilingual participants had longer
reaction times to Phonological Russian words (M=912.80,
SE=23.66) than monolingual participants (M=810.74,
SE=23.66), F(1, 28)=9.30, p<0.01. There was no significant
difference between bilinguals’ and monolinguals’ reaction
times to Phonological controls F(1, 28)=3.28, p>0.05,
to
pictures alone, F(1, 28)=1.48, p>0.05, or to English
translations, F(1, 28)=0.17, p>0.05.

Coding
Reaction times were recorded using SuperLab software by
measuring the time between the presentation of the picture
and the initiation of the vocal response into the microphone.
Accuracy was assessed by reviewing the participant’s
recorded performance. The eye-tracking data, consisting of
super-imposed cross-hairs onto the field of view, were
coded for proportion of eye-movements to the distractor
words. Eye-movements to the distractor word were
considered to have occurred when the crosshairs have
crossed into the quadrant containing the word. Ten percent
of the data were coded by a second, independent coder, who
did not speak Russian. Point-to-point reliability for coding
of proportions of eye-movements was 96%.

Proportion of Eye Movements to the Word
A 3x2 Mixed Ancova, with condition (Phonological Russian
words, Phonological controls, and English translations) as a
within-subjects variable, and group (monolingual and
bilingual) as a between-subjects variable, with speed of
reading as a covariate, was used to analyze the proportion of
eye movements to the three types of distractor words.
Results revealed a main effect of group, F(1, 27)=4.44,
p<0.05, with bilinguals looking more at the written stimuli
(M=0.46, SE=0.04) than monolinguals (M=0.34, SE=0.04)
and a marginally significant interaction between condition
and group, F(1, 27)=3.74, p<0.06 (Figure 3).
Post-hoc Univariate Analyses of Covariance revealed that
bilinguals looked more at the Phonological Russian words
(M=0.50, SE=0.05) than monolinguals (M=0.31, SE=0.05),
F(1,27)=7.66, p<0.05, but the two groups did not differ in
their proportion of looks to the Phonological controls, F(1,
27)=2.11, p>0.05, or the English translations, F(1,27)=2.09,
p>0.05.

Results
Trials on which participants made errors accounted for
4.40% of the data. Picture naming errors were analyzed
separately, while errors like false starts were omitted from
the analyses.

Reaction times
A 4x2 Anova with condition (no word, Russian words,
Phonological controls, and English translations) as a withinsubjects variable, and group (monolingual and bilingual) as
a between-subjects variable yielded a main effect of
condition, F(1, 28)=8.39, p<0.01, and a significant two-way
interaction between condition and group, F(1, 28)=5.35,
p<0.05 (Figure 2).
Post-hoc pair-wise comparisons for condition adjusted for
multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method revealed
that both groups had shorter reaction times to pictures
without distractor words (M=809.70, SE=14.93) than to
pictures accompanied by Phonological Russian words
(M=861.77, SE=16.73), p<0.05, Phonological controls
(M=852.80, SE=16.75), p<0.05, or English translations
(M=855.36, SE=16.47).
Post-hoc pair-wise comparisons between groups for each

*

Error Analysis
On the PWI task, monolingual participants committed 11
mis-naming errors, where a picture was named using the
distractor word (for example, naming a picture of the
chicken “duck”). Bilingual participants committed 8 misnaming errors. Of these, 5 were committed with the English
distractors being the word stimuli. The Mann Whitney test
for independent samples revealed that monolingual speakers
of English misnamed more pictures using the English
0.8

Bilinguals

1000

0.7

Monolinguals

*

Bilinguals
Monolinguals

0.6

800

0.5

600
0.4

*

400

0.3
0.2

200

0.1

0
Pictures

Phonological

Control

Alone

Russian

Stimuli

0

English words

Russian Phonological

Control Stimuli

English Words

Words

Words

Figure 3: Mean proportion of looks to distractor stimuli
made by bilingual and monolingual participants when
distractors were phonological Russian words, bigrammatched non-word control stimuli, and English words.

Figure 2: Reaction times of bilingual and monolingual
participants when naming pictures alone, pictures,
accompanied by phonological Russian words, by bigrammatched non-word control stimuli, and by English words.

657

with connectionist models of visual word recognition (e.g.,
Plaut et al., 1996; Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989; Van
Orden & Goldinger, 1994), which propose that phonological
information for a word is automatically activated. The only
way to obtain interference effects from phonological
Russian words is by activation of the Russian language via
its phonology because the orthographic information for
Russian is not present in these stimuli. The dual-route
models of visual word recognition, while allowing for an
indirect phonological route to the lexicon, postulate that this
route is specialized for reading non-words (e.g., Coltheart et
al, 2001; Ziegler et al., 2000).
Russian-English bilinguals had longer reaction times
when naming pictures accompanied by phonological
Russian stimuli that constituted words semantically related
to the picture names than monolingual speakers; reaction
times to non-word control stimuli and English translations
were comparable for the two groups. Because slower
naming times on the PWI task result from the interference
of the written stimulus with the picture name at the lexicalsemantic level, this finding suggests that not only was
phonology for the Russian language activated, as indicated
by greater proportion of eye movements made to these by
the bilingual than the monolingual speakers, but that this
information was meaningful enough to get processed to the
lexico-semantic level. This observation is further supported
by the analysis of the error data: Although bilingual
participants committed only 3 misnaming errors when the
distractor word was a phonological Russian word, the mere
fact that these errors exist support the idea that the
phonological information for Russian was meaningful
enough to activate the relevant lexico-semantic information.
In conclusion, we have successfully shown that
phonology of the non-target language is activated for the
target-language stimuli that bear little resemblance to the
non-target language orthography. Furthermore, we have
shown that activation of non-target language phonology is
enough to produce interference effects during picturenaming in the target language. These findings extend the
idea of parallel activation of languages in bilinguals to those
languages in which shared orthographic symbols map onto
distinct phonological representations, and inform models of
bilingual reading on the role of phonology in the lexical
access of written words. Finally, the idea that eyemovements during reading are under at least partial
cognitive control offers an intriguing possibility that the
bilinguals in this experiment exhibited a measure of
cognitive control over interference from the non-target
language during the modified PWI task. Future experiments
might be able to explore the idea of cognitive control over
language interference in bilinguals further by manipulating
the amount of meaningful information present for the nontarget language, and by testing different groups of bilingual
speakers.

distractor words than bilingual participants, Mann Whitney
U(15)=73.50, p<0.06.
Three mis-naming errors were committed by bilingual
participants with distractors being phonological Russian
stimuli, such as naming a picture of a collar “sleeve,” when
the distractor word on the screen was RUKAV, a
phonological word for “sleeve” in Russian. This number
was not significantly different from the number of errors
committed by monolingual participants, Mann Whitney
U(15)=90.00, p>0.05.
It is interesting to note that while interference of Russian
written stimuli did occur during naming of pictures in
English, none of the bilingual participants had switched into
Russian when naming pictures. Instead, a spontaneous
translation of the Russian distractor into English had
occurred, and this, in turn, interfered with naming of the
picture. This pattern of errors is consistent with the
observation made by Costa, Miosso, and Carammazza
(1999), who suggested that items from two languages, while
activated in parallel, do not compete for selection during
production.

Discussion
Russian-English bilinguals looked at English non-words that
composed meaningful phonological Russian words more
than monolingual English speakers, while the proportions of
eye-movements made to control non-word stimuli and to
English translation equivalents were comparable for the two
groups. This finding suggests that phonological information
in the non-target language drew bilinguals’ eye-movements.
Therefore, phonological information for the non-target
language was automatically activated for these stimuli.
According to models of eye movement control in reading,
the stimuli that carried phonological information for
Russian drew the bilinguals’ eye movements because these
stimuli carried meaningful information for them, but not for
monolingual speakers of English.
Literature on eye movements during reading suggests that
before fixating a word, a reader obtains useful information
from its parafoveal preview; this information is used by the
reader to decide whether to fixate on the word or not
(Reichle et al., 1999; Starr & Rayner, 2001). While the E-Z
Reader model of eye-movement control in reading posits
cognitive control of eye-movements during reading of
sentences (Reichle, 1998), it also seems to explain the
behavior of the participants in this experiment, where they
recognized single words. The decision to look at the word
during the modified Picture Word Interference task appears
to be dictated by the amount and quality of information a
reader gleans from its parafoveal preview. Russian-English
bilinguals were better able to control eye-movements to
English non-word stimuli that did not carry any
phonological information for Russian, than to English nonword stimuli that did carry phonological information for the
non-target language.
Testing bilinguals who speak languages with partially
overlapping alphabets allows for separating the
contributions of orthographic codes and phonological
information they carry to the parallel activation of the two
languages when processing print. Our findings are in line

Acknowledgments
We thank Karla McGregor, Doris Johnson, Henrike
Blumenfeld, Caitlin Fausey, and members of the
Bilingualism and Psycholinguistics Research Lab for their
helpful suggestions during the course of this research.

658

References

Language proficiency and bilingual status questionnaire
(LEABS-Q). Poster presented at the annual meeting of the
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, IL.
Manuscript in preparation.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003 a). Bilingual and
monolingual processing of competing lexical items.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 173-193.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003 b). Competing activation in
bilingual language processing: Within- and betweenlanguage competition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 6, 97 - 115.
Nas, G. (1983). Visual word recognition in bilinguals:
evidence for a cooperation between visual and sound
based codes during access to a common lexical store.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22,
526-534.
Plaut, D.C., McClelland, J., Seidenberg, M.S., & Patterson,
K. (1996). Understanding normal and impaired word
reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular
domains. Psychological Review, 103, 56-115.
Reichle, E. D. (1998). Towards a model of eye-movement
control in reading. Psychological Review, 105, 125-157.
Reichle, E.D., Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (1999). Eye
movement control in reading: Accounting for initial
fixation locations and refixations within the E-Z Reader
model. Vision Research, 39, 4403-4411.
Seidenberg, M.S., & McClelland, J. (1989). A distributed,
developmental model of word recognition and naming.
Psychological Review, 96, 523-568.
Starr, M.S., & Rainer, K. (2001). Eye movements during
reading: Some current controversies. TRENDS in
Cognitive Sciences, 5, 156-163.
Tzeglov, J., Henik, A., Sneg, R., & Baruch, O. (1996).
Unintentional word reading via the phonological route:
The Stroop effect with cross-script homophones. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 336-349.
Van Heuven, W.J.B. (2000). Visual word recognition in
monolingual and bilingual readers: Experiments and
computational modeling. Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Nijmegen.
Van Heuven, W.J.B., Dijkstra, T., & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word
recognition. Journal of Memory and Langauge, 39, 458483.
Van Orden, G.C., & Goldinger, S.D. (1994). The
interdependence of form and function in cognitive
systems explains perception of printed words. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 20, 1269-1291.
Wong, K.F.E., & Chen, H-C. (1999). Orthographic and
phonological processing in reading Chinese text:
Evidence from eye fixations. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14, 461-480.
Ziegler, J. C., Ferrand, L., Jacobs, A. M., Rey, A., &
Grainger, J. (2000). Visual and phonological codes in
letter and word recognition: Evidence from incremental
priming. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
53A, 671-692.

Brysbaert, M., Van Dyck, G., & Van de Poel, M. (1999).
Visual word recognition in bilinguals: Evidence from
masked phonological priming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25,
137-148.
Coltheart, M., Curtis, B., Atkins, P., & Haller, M. (1993).
Models of reading aloud: Dual-route and paralleldistributed-processing approaches. Psychological Review,
100, 589-608.
Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R., & Ziegel,
J. (2001). DRC: A dual route cascaded model of visual
word recognition and reading aloud. Psychological
Review, 108, 204-256.
Costa, A., Miozzo, M., & Caramazza, A. (1999). Lexical
selection in bilinguals: Do words in the bilingual's two
lexicons compete for selection. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 365-397.
De Groot, A.M.B., Delmaar, P., & Lupker, S.J. (2000). The
processing of interlexical homographs in translation
recognition and lexical decision: support for non-selective
access to bilingual memory. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 53A(2), 397-428.
Deutsch, A., Frost, R., Pollatsek, A., & Rayner, K. (2002).
Early morphological effects in word recognition in
Hebrew: Evidence from parafoveal preview benefit.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 487-506.
Dijkstra, T., Grainger, J., & van Heuven, W.J.B. (1999).
Recognition of cognates and interlingual homographs:
The neglected role of phonology. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 496-518.
Dijkstra, T., & Van Heuven, W.J.B. (2002). The
architecture of the bilingual visual word recognition
system: From identification to decision. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 5(3), 175-197.
Dijkstra, T., & Van Heuven, W.J.B. (1998). The BIA model
and bilingual visual word recognition. In J. Grainger and
A.M. Jacobs (eds.), Localist Connectionist Approaches to
Human Cognition, pp.189-225. Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum
Associates.
Engbert, R., Longtin, A., & Kliegl, R. (2002). A dynamic
model of saccade generation in reading based on spatially
distributed lexical processing. Vision Research, 42(5),
621-636.
Feldman, L.B. and Turvey, M.T. (1983). Word recognition
in Serbo-Croatian is phonologically analytic. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 9(2), 288-298.
Jared, D and Szucs, C. (2002). Phonological activation in
bilinguals: evidence from interlingual homograph naming.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 5, 3225-239.
Liu, W., Inhoff, A.W., Ye, Y., & Wu, C. (2002). Use of
parafoveally visible characters during the reading of
Chinese sentences. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 28, 1213-1227.
Lukatela, G., Savic, M., Gligorijevic, B., Ognjenovic, P., &
Turvey, M.T. (1978). Bi-alphabetical lexical decision.
Language and Speech, 21, 142-165.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H., & Kaushanskaya, M. (2003).

659

