UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automatic processing of elements interferes with processing of relations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6cd377s5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Sloutsky, Valdimir M.
von Spiegel, Jackie

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automatic processing of elements interferes with processing of relations
Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
Ohio State University, 208 Ohio Stadium East
1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Jackie von Spiegel (von-spiegel.2@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science & Department of Psychology
Ohio State University, 208 Ohio Stadium East
1961 Tuttle Park Place, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
This research examines mechanisms underlying the primacy
in processing of elements over relations. It is hypothesized
that elements are detected atomatically even when the task is
to ignore them, and this automatic detection may interfere
with the processing of relations. In Experiment 1, 4 year-olds
and adults were asked to ignore elemental features and to
match a test item to a target by detecting the numerical
equivalence beween the test and the target. Results indicate
that only children, but not adults, cannot ignore elements,
thus suggesting that elements could be processed
automatically. In Experiment 2, the same task was presented
again, except that elements were perceptually-rich. This time,
both children and adults exhibited difficulty ignoring
elements. These findings point to two important regularities.
First, attention is automatically attracted to elements,
interfering with processing of relations, and this interference
may make relational processing more difficult. And second,
perceptual richness of elements amplifies this effect.

Introduction
Humans live in a structured environment: we encounter
entities that are interconnected spatially, temporally, or
conceptually into larger arrangements. Those components
of structure that are entities or separable properties of these
entities can be considered elements, whereas the manner in
which elements are arranged can be considered relations.
However, it is not self-evident as to what constitutes an
element or a relation. For example, a letter may constitute a
relational entity in a letter recognition task, but it constitutes
an element in a lexical decision task. Similarly, a word may
constitute a relational entity in lexical decision, but (as
demonstrated by Ratcliff and McKoon, 1989) it constitutes
an element in a sentence comprehension task.). Because
there is evidence that stimulus familiarity is established
early in the course of processing and familiar stimuli are
processed by dedicated circuits (Hölscher, Rolls, & Xiang,
2003; Xiang & Brown, 1998), it seems that familiar objects
are good candidates for being considered elements.
Processing of structure requires processing of both
elements and relations because both elements and relations
carry important information: changing a relation (e.g., the
ball is under the table instead of the ball is on the table) as

well as changing an element (e.g., the book is under the
table instead of the ball is under the table) can radically
change the nature of the information. Processing of
structure and the ability to recognize the processed structure
at a later time is critically important for both cognition and
learning.
There is multiple evidence that pointing to a primacy of
processing of elements over relations in terms of processing
time, as well as phylogenetic, ontogenetic, and microgenetic
time. First, researchers have found that, across a broad
array of tasks, elements are processed prior to (or faster
than) relations (Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Ratcliff &
McKoon, 1989). Second, there is evidence that processing
of some relations (e.g., numeric equivalence) is available to
great primates, but even for great primates this processing
requires much more substantial training than processing of
elements (Thompson, Oden, & Boysen, 1997). Third, there
are developmental differences in processing of elements and
relations, with younger children being less likely to process
relations than older children and with greater age
differences in the processing of relations than elements
(Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996).
Finally, there is also a large body of evidence indicating that
in knowledge rich domains, novices are more likely to
process elements (i.e., individual pieces of a chess position,
or entities in a problem description) more ably then relations
(i.e., the arrangements of pieces in the position, or equations
that underlie the solution to the problem), although experts
often process relations as well as elements (Chase & Simon,
1973; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Larkin, 1983; Reed,
Ackinclose, & Voss, 1990; Reingold, Charness, Schultetus,
& Stampe, 2001).
Taken together, these findings suggest that elements and
relations are psychologically distinct. We further contend
that there might be an attentional mechanism underlying the
differential processing of elements and relations: elements
may be detected automatically, and this automatic detection
may interfere with processing of relations.
The idea of such a mechanism has been supported by
several sets of findings. First, it has been found that the
likelihood of processing of relations often varies with the
salience of elements. For example, when Structures 1 and 2
(e.g., two sequence of triangles monotonically increasing in

1
1261

size) differ in elemental and relational correspondences (i.e.,
the leftmost triangle in Structure 1 has the same size as the
rightmost triangle in Structure 2 in terms of an elemental
match, whereas it corresponds to the leftmost triangle in
Structure 2 in terms of its position), participants focused on
relational matches when objects were perceptually
impoverished. At the same time, they were more likely to
focus on the elemental matches when objects were
perceptually elaborated (see Gentner & Medina, 1998 for a
review). Second, introduction of a simple warm-up task,
which attracts attention to either to relations or to elements,
markedly increases processing of relations, but not elements
in a target task (Sloutsky & Yarlas, under review), thus
indicating that processing of elements is at ceiling. Both
sets of findings suggest that elements may be processed in
an automatic and obligatory manner.
If this is the case, then elements should be detected even
when the task is to ignore them, and these automatically
detected elements may interfere with processing of
relations. Furthermore, because young children may have
difficulty deliberately directing their attention to some
properties of stimuli, while ignoring others, it seems likely
that children would exhibit these effects under a wider range
of conditions than adults.
To test these hypotheses, we created a task, in which
participants were asked to focus on a simple relation of
numeric equivalence. We selected this relation because
previous research demonstrated that even primates could
match items having equivalent number of elements,
regardless of what these elements were (Thompson, et al.,
1997). We deemed it reasonable, therefore, that the relation
of numeric equivalence should be available to 4-to-5 yearolds. The task (a variant of Garner’s interference task) was
presented as a “matching game,” in which participants were
presented with a Target having a particular number of
identical elements (e.g., two identical shapes), and a Test
item. If the Test item had the same number of elements,
participants should identify it as a match, otherwise they
should identify an item as a mismatch. The items were
presented under three conditions. First, there was a “fixed”
condition, in which the Target and Test items had identical
elements, and matching or mismatching relation was the
only source of variance. Second, there was a “correlated”
condition, in which elements and relations varied together: a
relational match accompanied an elemental match, and a
relational mismatch accompanied an elemental mismatch.
Finally, there was an “orthogonal” condition, in which
relations and elements varied independently. Examples of
items across the three conditions are presented in Figure 1.
If elements are not attended to in the course of relational
processing, there would be no difference in speed and
accuracy of matching across the three conditions. If,
however, elements are processed automatically, there should
be a difference in speed or accuracy between the orthogonal
condition and the correlated conditions. Such a decrease
would be a strong evidence for automatic processing of
elements and fro interference of automatically detected

elements in processing of relations. As mentioned above,
we expect that even young children process elements
automatically, and, therefore, we expect that even young
participants would exhibit these effects.

Experiment 1
Method
The goal of this Experiment was to test the hypothesis that
even early in development, elements are processed
automatically, and this automatic processing of elements
may interfere with processing of relations.

Fixed condition
Target

Mismatching Choice

Matching Choice

Correlated condition

Target

Matching Choice

Mismatching Choice

Orthogonal condition

Target

Mismatching Choice

Matching Choice

Figure 1: Example of stimuli across the three conditions.

2
1262

Participants
Participants were 44 young children (Mean Age = 4.41
years, SD = 0.346 years; 24 girls and 20 boys) recruited
from childcare centers located in middle class suburbs of the
Columbus, Ohio area, with approximately equal numbers of
participants in the fixed, correlated and orthogonal
conditions. There was another group of 37 college
undergraduates (13 women and 24 men) participating in the
experiment for course credit. There was also approximately
equal numbers of participants in the fixed, correlated and
orthogonal conditions.

Materials
Materials were stimuli sets, each consisting of three panels.
Two of these panels were Target and Choice items and these
depicted simple geometric shapes (e.g., circle, triangle,
cross). The third panel depicted a Trash can. Stimuli set
were presented on screen with the Target and Trash can
above each Choice item, with the latter one placed
equidistantly to the former two. Participants were told there
that if the Choice item has exactly the same number of
shapes as the Target, there is a match, and they should point
to the Target, whereas if the number is different, there is a
mismatch, and they should point to the Trash can. There
were a total of 24 trials with 12 matching and 12
mismatching trials. As mentioned above, there were three
between-subjects conditions: fixed, correlated, and
orthogonal.
There were exactly the same elements employed across
trials in these conditions. However, within the trials, there
were identical elements in all three panels in the fixed
condition, elements covaried with the relation of
equivalence in the correlated condition, and elements and
the relation of equivalence varied independently in the
orthogonal condition.

Design and Procedure
The design included two between subject factors, Condition
(fixed, correlated, and orthogonal) and Age (young children
and adults). Participants were randomly assigned either
fixed, correlated, or orthogonal condition. The dependent
variables were accuracy and latency of responses. Young
children were given brief training, in which real threedimensional objects were used to explain the rules of the
“matching game.” The training was identical across the
three conditions.
The child participants were tested individually by a
female researcher in a quiet room in their schools, whereas
adult participants were tested in a lab room on campus.
First, the child participants were trained on a real-object
version of the computer task (this training was not used with
adult participants). The researcher showed the participants
two clear plastic shoeboxes. The instructions said: This is a
toy box (pointed to box with two stars on the front) and this
is a trash can (pointed to plain box). There are two stars on
this toy box, so this is the “two-toy” toy box. If I give you

two toys, you put them in here. If I don’t give you two toys,
you put them in the trash can. Then the researcher set one,
two, or three toys in front of the participants and asked,
“Should these go in the toy box or the trash can?” The toys
were small, colorful, plastic toys (i.e. sunglasses, cars, tops).
The participant was given feedback for these training trials.
The participant had four trials with the two-toy toy box,
after which the researcher replaced it with a one- or threetoy toy box (designated by stars on the front) and restated
the instructions. Each participant had four trials with each
toy box, totaling 12 training trials. If the participants were
successful on the last three trials, they proceeded to the
computer task. If a participant was not successful, the
experiment was terminated because the participant did not
demonstrate understanding of the task.
The computer task was the same as the training, except
that the child participants responded by pointing to the
Target or Trash can or naming them. Children’s responses
were entered by the experimenter. Adult participants
entered their choices by pressing appropriate buttons on the
keyboard. The experiment was administered on computer
and was controlled by SuperLab Pro 2.0 software.
The screen was divided by a horizontal line, with the
Target and Trash can above the line and the “toys” to be
moved below. The toys were actually two-dimensional
shapes (square, triangle, cross, circle, heart, and diamond).
The researcher said to the child participants: Now we are
going to do the same thing, but on the computer. Here is
the toy box (i.e., the Target) and here is the Trash can and
here are the toys (pointed to each as they were mentioned).
If the number of toys on the toy box is the same as the
number of toys down here, then you tell me to put them in
the box. If the number of toys on the toy box is different
than the number of toys down here, then you tell me to put
them in the trash. The researcher then pressed “1” for box
and “0” for trash, according to the participants’ responses.
The adults had similar instructions on the computer screen
and two examples (one match and one mismatch). There
were four warm-up trials on the computer and 24 test trials.
Warm-up trials were exactly as the test trials, except that the
former were accompanied by feedback.

Results and Discussion
Because procedures for children and adults differed
slightly, we present their data separately. Recall that
children’s responses were entered by the researcher, which
added time to their latencies. To adjust for this added time,
we conducted a separate experiment, in which we used
measured the speed of pressing buttons by the researcher.
We then averaged this time across trials, and subtracted it
from each child participant response.
Children.
Overall child participants exhibited high
accuracy of responding with 91% correct in the fixed
condition, 97% correct responses in the correlated condition,
and 88% correct in the orthogonal condition. There was an
approaching significance difference in accuracy between the
orthogonal and the correlated condition, with greater

3
1263

accuracy in the correlated condition, t (27) = 1.81, p = .08.
Latencies across the three conditions are presented in Figure
2.

Materials

1500
1400

Latency (in ms)

participating in the experiment for course credit. There was
also approximately equal numbers of participants in the
fixed, correlated and orthogonal conditions.

1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
Cor

Fixed

Orth

Condition

Figure 2. Children’s latencies by condition. Error bars
represent Standard Errors of the Mean.

The task was set up identically to the task in Experiment 1
expect for the nature of the stimuli. Instead of the simple
geometric shapes, the stimuli were perceptually rich images
of common animals (e.g., bird, dog, turtle). An example of
stimuli is presented in Figure 3. Again, participants were
told there that if the Choice item has exactly the same
number of shapes as the Target, there is a match, and they
should point to the Target, whereas if the number is
different, there is a mismatch, and they should point to the
Trash can. There were a total of 24 trials with 12 matching
and 12 mismatching trials. Again, there were three
between-subjects conditions: fixed, correlated, and
orthogonal.

These latencies were subjected to a one-way ANOVA. The
analysis pointed to significant differences across the three
conditions, F (2, 41) = 5, 21, p = .01. Post-hoc Tukey tests
indicated that responses in the fixed and the orthogonal
condition were slower than responses in the correlated
condition, ps < .05. These results indicate that there was a
significant speed up in the correlated condition, pointing to
an automatic processing of elements.
Adults. Adults’ data differed from those of young children
in that there was little evidence of elements interfering with
processing of relations. Adults exhibited comparable
accuracy across the conditions, with 97% correct in the
fixed condition, 97% correct in the correlated condition, and
95% correct in the orthogonal condition, ns, p > .3.
Similarly, they exhibited comparable latencies across the
conditions, 1017 ms in the fixed condition, 987 ms in the
correlated condition, and 988 ms in the orthogonal
condition, ns, p > .8.
Results of this experiment indicate that children, but not
adults exhibit automatically processing of elements even
when instructed to focus on relations.

Fixed condition

Target

Matching Choice

Mismatching Choice

Correlated condition

Target

Matching Choice

Mismatching Choice

Experiment 2
The goal of this experiment was to test the second
hypothesis that perceptual richness of elements may amplfy
the effects of automatic detection of elements found in
Experiment 1.

Orthogonal condition
Target

Participants
Participants were 40 young children (Mean Age = 4.49
years, SD = 0.33 years; 24 girls and 16 boys). They were
recruited in the same manner as in Experiment 1 and there
were approximately equal numbers of participants in the
fixed, correlated and orthogonal conditions. There were
also 70 college undergraduates (17 women and 53 men)
4
1264

Mismatching Choice

Matching Choice

Figure 3: Example of perceptually rich stimuli across the
three conditions.

Design and Procedure
The design of this experiment is identical to the design of
Experiment 1. The design included two between subject
factors, Condition (fixed, correlated, and orthogonal) and
Age (young children and adults).
Participants were
randomly assigned to each level of the Condition. The
dependent variables were accuracy and latency of responses.
Again, young children were given brief training, identical to
the training in Experiment 1 and using the same threedimensional objects.

Results and Discussion
Data was entered and analyzed in the same manner as in
Experiment 1.
Children. Similar to Experiment 1, the child participants
exhibited high accuracy of responding with 94% correct in
the fixed condition, 97% correct responses in the correlated
condition, and 94% correct in the orthogonal condition.
There were no significant differences between the
accuracies of the three conditions. Latencies across the
three conditions are presented in Figure 4.

3800

Latency (in ms)

3300
2800
2300
1800
1300
800
Cor

Fixed

Ort h

C on di t i o n

Figure 4. Perceptually rich stimuli. Children’s latencies
by condition. Error bars represent Standard Errors of
the Mean.
These latencies were subjected to a one-way ANOVA. The
analysis pointed to significant differences across the three
conditions, F (2, 36) = 3.60, p = .038. Post-hoc Tukey tests
indicated that responses in the orthogonal condition were
slower than responses in the correlational condition, p = .03.
These results indicate that there was a significant slow down
in the orthogonal condition, pointing to an interference on
the part of perceptually rich elements.

Adults. Adults exhibited interference effects showing
somewhat lower accuracy in the orthogonal condition with
97% correct in the fixed condition, 97% correct in the
correlated condition, and 92% correct in the orthogonal
condition. The one-way ANOVA pointed to significant
differences across the three conditions, F (2, 67) = 3.41, p =
.04. Post-hoc Tukey tests indicated a significant difference
in accuracy between the orthogonal and the correlated
condition, with greater accuracy in the correlated condition,
p = .05, and an approaching significance difference in
accuracy between the orthogonal and the fixed condition,
with greater accuracy in the fixed condition, p = .08. They
exhibited comparable latencies to the children across the
conditions, 911 ms in the fixed condition, 943 ms in the
correlated condition, and 1017 ms in the orthogonal
condition, ns, p > .8.
Results of this experiment indicate that increasing the
perceptual richness of the elements produces more
interference of automatically detected elements with
processing of relations not only in children, but also in
adults.

General Discussion
Two important findings stem from the reported
experiments.
First, when elements are perceptually
impoverished, and the task is to focus on relations, young
children automatically attend to elements. And second,
perceptual richness of elements amplifies this effect in
children, and it reveals the effect in adults.
Findings that elements are attended to automatically, even
when the task is to ignore them, may explain the earlier
found primacy in processing of elements. As mentioned
above, elements are processed prior to (or faster than)
relations (Goldstone & Medin, 1994; Ratcliff & McKoon,
1989), younger children are less likely to process relations
than older children (Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Kotovsky &
Gentner, 1996), and experts in a domain are more likely to
process domain-important relations than novices (Chase &
Simon, 1973; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). These
findings suggest that the difficulty of processing relations
may often stem from participants inability to ignore
irrelevant elements.
This attentional mechanism is capable of explaining
several existing findings. In particular, there is evidence
(see Gentner & Medina, 1998; Markman & Gentner, 1993)
that when elements are perceptually-rich, participants are
more likely to focus on matching elements than when
elements are perceptually-impoverished.
Because
perceptually-rich stimuli are more likely to engage attention
than perceptually-impoverished stimuli, it seems that
differences reported by Gentner & Medina (1998) may stem
from greater attention automatically attracted to
perceptually-rich elements.
Finally, there is evidence that although young children
have difficulty processing relations under regular
conditions, they are significantly more likely to process
relations when relations are labeled (Gentner &

5
1265

Loewenstein, 2002; Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). Again, it
seem that labels attract attention to relations thus making it
easier to ignore elements.
It seems that these examples demonstrate that, unless
attention is attracted to relations and away from elements,
participants are more likely to automatically attend to
elements, and attention to elements may interfere with their
processing of relations. Recall that current research used a
highly familiar relation of numerical equivalence, and
interference effects manifested themselves in a decresed
latency or accuracy. However, it is possible that when
relations are less familiar, interference may result in a
failure to detect a relation.
In short, reported results indicate that elements are
detected automatically. The results also indicate that
perceptual richness of elements amplifies the effect of
automatic detections of elements. It is possible that
automatic detection of elements may interfere with
processing of relations, especially when the task is to ignore
elements.

Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1989). Similarity information
versus relational information: Differences in the time
course of retrieval. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 139-155.
Reed, S. K., Ackinclose, C. C., & Voss, A. A. (1990).
Selecting analogous problems: Similarity versus
inclusiveness. Memory & Cognition, 18, 83-98.
Reingold, E.M., Charness, N., Schultetus, R. S., & Stampe,
D. M. (2001). Perceptual automaticity in expert chess
players: Parallel encoding of chess relations.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 504-510.
Thompson, R. K. R., Oden, D. L., & Boysen, S. T. (1997).
Language-naive chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) judge
relations between relations in a conceptual matching-tosample task. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Animal Behavior Processes, 23, 31-43.
Xiang, J.-Z., & Brown, M. W. (1998). Differential neuronal
encoding of novelty, familiarity, and recency in regions of
the anterior temporal lobe. Neuropharmacology, 37, 657676.

Acknowledgments
This research has been supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir
M. Sloutsky.

References
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. G., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2002). Relational language
and relational thought. In E. Amsel & J. Byrnes (Eds.),
Language, literacy, and cognitive development: The
development
and
consequences
of
symbolic
communication (p. 87-120).
Gentner, D., & Medina, J. (1998). Similarity and the
development of rules. Cognition, 65, 263-297.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Goldstone, R. L., & Medin, D. L. (1994). Time course of
comparison.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 20, 29-50.
Hölscher, C., Rolls, E. T., & Xiang, J.-Z. (2003). Perirhinal
cortex neuronal activity related to long-term familiarity
memory in the macaque.
European Journal of
Neuroscience, 18, 2037-2046.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Larkin, J. (1983). The role of problem representation in
physics. In D. Gentner & A. Stevens (Eds.), Mental
models, (pp. 75-98). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural
alignment during similarity comparisons. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
6
1266

