UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorization and Memory: Representation of Category Information Increases Memory
Intrusions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/18v7k98p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Fisher, Anna V.
Sloutsky, Valdimir M.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorization and Memory: Representation of Category Information Increases
Memory Intrusions
Anna V. Fisher (fisher.449@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
Ohio State University
208B Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA
replicated Deese’s results, demonstrating that memory
intrusions of non-presented words persist in recall as well as
in recognition, thus giving the name of DRM (for DeeseRoediger-McDermott) to this phenomenon. However, the
nature of the phenomenon is still unclear.
According to one explanation, during recognition,
participants perceive both studied items, and semantically
related critical lures, to be more familiar than unrelated
distracters. Because familiarity strongly affects the decision
criterion for accepting items as studied or “old”, those items
that have elevated familiarity are more likely to be accepted
both correctly and erroneously. This increased familiarity
may stem from a summary or “gist” representation that
reflects the general meaning of the list (in addition to
representing individual items in the list), with critical lures
being consistent with the gist (Brainerd, Reyna, &
Mojardin, 1999). Therefore, on a recognition test, itemspecific representations drive hits or correct acceptance of
studied items, whereas “gist” representations drive both hits
and false alarms on critical lures (i.e., erroneous acceptance
of items semantically related to studied items).
According to another explanation, processing of items
(either at study or at test) activates a critical lure, an item
strongly associated with studied items. However, during
recognition participants fail to monitor the source of this
activated information, and as a result of confusing internally
generated and externally presented information, participants
falsely recognize critical lures (Gallo & Roediger, 2002;
Koutstaal & Schacter, 1997; Roediger, et al., 2001).
If participants can represent both the “gist” and individual
items (Brainerd, et al., 1999), and distortions (or false
alarms) are driven by the gist representations, then it should
be possible to facilitate the formation of either
representation by focusing participants on the overall theme
or on individual items. If our contention is correct, then a
manipulation focusing on a gist representation should lead
to elevated memory distortions (due to an elevated level of
false alarms on critical lures).
This manipulation can generate evidence capable of
distinguishing between the two theoretical positions because

Abstract
False recognition of verbal information has long been
established with word lists. Current research examines the
phenomenon of false recognition with pictorial stimuli.
Experiment 1 demonstrated that similar to word-lists,
pictorially presented information elicits memory intrusions,
and that rates of intrusions differ across stimuli sets.
Experiment 2 investigated the effects of focusing on
category-level versus item-specific information on the rates
of false recognition. Results of Experiment 2 suggest that
memory accuracy decreases dramatically when participants
perform category-based processing compared to item-based
processing. Experiment 3 confirmed that processing
manipulations rather than other extraneous factors influence
levels of false recognition in Experiment 2.

Introduction
People strive for accurate and reliable memories; however
their memories often get distorted. Although forgetting is
one of the most obvious types of memory distortions, it is
not the only one. There is much research demonstrating that
people often distort memories in systematic and predictable
ways. For example, prior knowledge has previously been
implicated in memory distortions: people often falsely
recognize new information when it is consistent with their
knowledge (e.g., Alba & Hasher, 1983). For instance, after
reading a story describing a famous person, participants
tended to falsely recognize statements that were not part of
the story they had read, but were thematically related to this
person. (Sulin & Dooling, 1974).
Systematic memory distortions are not limited to sentence
information, and are often found with word lists. These
types of memory distortions were first demonstrated by
Deese (1959), who presented participants with word-lists
(e.g., “bed”, “rest”, and “awake”) consisting of associates of
a single non-presented word (e.g., “sleep”). When asked to
recall the words from the list, participants often erroneously
recalled words consistent with the overall theme of the list,
which was never actually presented. Deese’s fundings were
followed up by Roediger and McDermott (1995), who
1
387

the source confusion explanation does not predict these
effects.
Note, however that much of DRM-based research has
been based on word-lists rather than pictures (see Koutstaal
& Schacter, 1997; Seamon Luo, Schlegel, Greene, &
Goldenberg, 2000, for notable exceptions). At the same
time, pictures are well suited for this manipulation:
participants could be focused on an entire category (e.g.,
Cats) or on individual items, such as a picture of a particular
cat.
Another advantage of pictorially presented information is
that pictures can drastically decrease the tendency to make
source monitoring errors: it is highly unlikely that one
would spontaneously generate a particular unique picture
serving as a critical lure (see Koutstaal & Schacter, 1997,
for related arguments). Therefore, persistence of memory
intrusions with pictures would further suggest that these
intrusions do not stem solely from source monitoring errors.
It has been previously demonstrated that pictures do
generate memory intrusions (Koutstaal & Schacter, 1997;
Seamon, et al., 2000). However some of these findings are
based on a procedure that used large 120-study-item stimuli
sets, and a 3-day delay between the study and the
recognition phases. In this research, we will use the
procedure that follows more closely the DRM procedure
with word lists: we present participants with a reasonably
small stimulus set, and impose no delays between the study
and recognition phases. We have demonstrated elsewhere
(Sloutsky & Fisher, in press) that false recognition of
information presented pictorially can be obtained in a
procedure that closely follows the original DRM task.
However, these results were obtained with a single picture
set, and it is unclear how well they can be generalized to a
greater number of categories.
Overall, the reported research has two goals: (1) to
examine whether or not pictorially-presented information
can generate DRM-type phenomena and, if yes, then (2)
whether false recognition in DRM stems from sourcemonitoring errors or from gist representation of information.
The goal of Experiment 1 was to replicate these findings
using multiple categories. Experiment 2 had a more
theoretically important goal: to generate evidence capable of
distinguishing among the proposed theoretical accounts of
the DRM-effect. Recall that finding increased memory
intrusions as a result of processing manipulations would
support the position that DRM-type memory intrusions stem
from gist-type representations, while weakening the position
that these intrusions stem from source-monitoring errors.

Design, Materials and Procedure Materials were 90 color
photographs of animals presented against a white
background. The photographs represented five different
animal categories (Cats, Bears, Squirrels, Fish, and Birds)
with 18 photographs per category.
The task consisted of a study and a recognition phase.
During the study phase participants were presented with 30
pictures from three different animal categories: 10 items
from the Target category, and 20 items from the two Filler
categories. Participants were instructed to remember the
presented pictures as accurately as possible for a f uture
recognition test. During the recognition phase, which
immediately followed the study phase, participants were
presented with 28 pictures: 14 previously studied pictures (7
from the Target category and 7 from one of the Filler
categories), and 14 new pictures (7 new pictures from the
Target category, and 7 pictures from a novel category,
which served as control items). Participants were asked to
determine whether each picture presented during the
recognition phase was “old” (i.e., exactly the same as
previously seen in the study phase) or “new”.
The categories that were designated to be Targets were
rotated such that Cats, Bears, Squirrels, Fish, and Birds
served as Targets in one of five between-subject conditions.
All participants were tested individually, and had all
instructions and stimuli presented to them on a computer
screen in a self-paced manner.

Results and Discussion
Some participants did not reliably reject control items (i.e.,
at least 5 out of 7 correct), and their data were excluded
from further analyses; 11 participants were excluded
overall. The rest of the participants were very accurate in
recognizing previously studied items (on average over 88%
of correct recognitions across the target categories) and in
rejecting items from novel categories (over 97% of correct
rejections across categories).
Most importantly, participants often mistakenly
recognized new items from the Target category, or critical
lures. Proportions of “old” responses to previously studied
items from the Target category (Hits), to new items from the
Target category (False Alarms), and to novel items from a
novel category (Control Items) are presented in Figure 1.
Data in the figure indicate that (a) although for all
categories, the proportion of Hits was significantly higher
than the proportion of False Alarms (FA), all paired-sample
ts > 6, ps < .0001, some pictorially presented categories
(e.g., Bears) elicited sizable memory intrusions (Hits = .86,
FA = .54, Hits –FA = .32), and (b) proportions of memory
intrusions varied across the categories, ranging from
relatively high for Bears to almost non-existent for Birds.
To examine the significance of differences across
categories, accuracy measures (i.e., Hits – FA) were
subjected to a one-way between-subjects ANOVA with
Target category as a factor. The results point to significant
differences in accuracy across the Target categories, F (4,
91) = 27.3, MSE = 0.04, p < .0001, with the following

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were introductory psychology
students at a large Midwestern university (N = 103, M age=
19.7 years, SD = 1.8 years; 51 women and 52 men) who
received a partial course credit for participation.
2
388

patterns of memory intrusions are similar for verbally and
pictorially presented stimuli suggests that DRM-type
memory intrusions do not stem solely from source
monitoring errors. The goal of Experiment 2 was to
examine directly whether a task that facilitates categorylevel processing will lead to an increase in memory
intrusions compared to the baseline of Experiment 1.

pattern of accuracy Birds > Fish = Squirrels = Cats >
Bears, post-hoc Tukey test, for all differences ps < .05.
Therefore, major DRM phenomena that were previously
found with word-lists are replicable with pictures. First,
pictures generated substantial levels of memory intrusions.
And second, similar to word-lists, pictures elicited different
levels of memory intrusions across different target
conditions: while little false recognition occurred for the
Target category Birds, other Target categories (Bears, Cats,
Fish, and Squirrels) elicited sizeable levels of false
recognition.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Participants were introductory psychology
students at a large Midwestern university (N = 134, M age=
20.26 years, SD = 2.5 years; 64 women and 70 men) who
received a partial credit for participation.

Old items/Old Category (Hits)
New Items/Old Category (False Alarms)
New Items/New Category (Distracters)

Design, Materials and Procedure Materials in Experiment
2 were identical to Experiment 1, however the study phase
of the experiment was different. Participants were first
presented with a picture of an animal from a Target
category, and informed that the animal had “beta-cells
inside its body”. Participants were then presented with 30
pictures (10 from the Target category and 20 from two Filler
categories), and asked to determine whether each presented
animal also had beta-cells inside. Participants were provided
with feedback, which indicated that only animals from the
Target category had the property in question, whereas
animals from the Filler categories did not. Participants were
not warned about an upcoming recognition test.
Similar to Experiment 1, during the recognition phase
participants were presented with 28 pictures: 14 previously
studied pictures (7 from the Target category and 7 from one
of the Filler categories), and 14 new pictures (7 new pictures
from the Target category, and 7 pictures from a novel
category). Participants were asked to determine whether
each picture presented during the recognition phase was
“old” (i.e., exactly the same as previously seen in the study
phase) or “new”.
The categories that were designated to be Targets were
rotated such that Cats, Bears, Squirrels, Fish, and Birds
served as Targets in one of five between-subject conditions.
All participants were tested individually, and had all
instructions and stimuli presented to them on a computer
screen in a self-paced manner.

Proportion of "Old" Responses

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Bears

Cats

Squirrels

Fish

Birds

Target Category

Figure 1: Mean proportions of “Old” responses across target
types in the recognition memory test of Experiment 1
It could be argued, however, that Birds were an odd
category that stood out in the context of mammals, which
resulted in a more accurate processing of this odd category.
To test this alternative, we conducted an additional
experiment, using Cats as the Target category presented in
the context of reptiles, with Frogs and Alligators used as
Filler Categories. When Cats were an odd category, the
level of false recognition of critical lures was statistically
equivalent to that in Experiment 1 (42% versus 39%,
respectively).
It is also possible that during the study phase, participants
spontaneously labeled species of birds (but not cats,
squirrels, fish, or bears), which dramatically reduced
memory intrusions for the Target category Birds. To rule
out this possibility we asked 23 undergraduates to label
pictures of birds used in Experiment 1: no more than 4 out
of 18 birds received unique labels, which was comparable to
the labeling of cats.
Overall, these results suggest that DRM-type memory
distortions are a robust phenomenon independent of the
mode of presentation. More importantly, the fact that

Results and Discussion
Some participants did not reliably reject control items (i.e.,
at least 5 out of 7 correct), and their data were excluded
from further analyses; 35 participants were excluded
overall. The rest of the participants were very accurate in
recognizing previously studied items (on average over 83%
of correct recognitions across the target categories) and in
rejecting items from novel categories (over 97% of correct
rejections across categories).
However, the rates of false recognition in each target
condition increased substantially, compared to the baseline
3
389

in Experiment 1. Proportions of hits (i.e., correct
recognitions), false alarms on Target distracters (FA), and
accuracy scores (Hits – FA) for each target category are
presented in Table 1.

Baseline (Experiment 1)
1

Accuracy (Hits - FA)

Table 1: Proportions of false alarms (FA), and
Accuracy scores (Hits – FA) across target categories in
Experiment 2.
Target
Category

Hits

FA

Accuracy
(Hits – FA)

Birds

.84

.50

.34

Fish

.80

.47

.33

Squirrels

.80

.61

.19

Cats

.80

.62

.18

Bears

.88

.79

.09

Induction (Experiment 2)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Birds

Fish

Squirrels

Cats

Bears

Figure 2: Mean accuracy (Hits – FA) across target
categories in Experiment 1 and 2.

Method

Overall results of Experiments 1 and 2 are presented in
Figure 2. Data in the figure indicate that recognition
accuracy markedly decreased in Experiment 2 compared to
Experiment 1. This differential accuracy was the result of a
processing manipulation introduced in Experiment 2 (i.e., an
induction task) that focused participants on the categorylevel properties of stimuli, as opposed to item-specific
properties in Experiment 1. Data in the figure also suggest
that the decrease in accuracy in Experiment 2 was not
proportional to the level of performance in Experiment 1.
This task by condition interaction, F (4, 181) = 3.7, MSE =
.21, p < .05, suggests that when participants are focused on
category-level properties, they form mainly category-level
representations, as opposed to mainly item-level
representation in the Baseline. However, it is possible that
decrease in memory accuracy obtained in Experiment 2 can
be explained by increased task demands of Experiment 2
compared to Experiment 1 (performing an induction task
versus no task during the study phase). It is also possible
that overall accuracy in Experiment 2 decreased because
participants were not warned about a subsequent memory
test. Experiment 3 was designed to test these alternative
explanations.

Participants Participants were introductory psychology
students at a large Midwestern university (N = 24, M age=
20.2 years, SD = 1.6 years; 9 women and 15 men) who
received a partial credit for participation.
Design, Materials and Procedure Overall structure of the
task was similar to Experiment 2, however only one target
category (Cats) was tested, and participants were presented
with a different question during the study phase.
Participants were first presented with a picture of a cat, and
told the animal was young. Then they were presented with
30 pictures of animals from 3 different categories (10 cats,
10 bears, and 10 birds), and asked to determine whether
each animal was young or mature. Participants received
random feedback, thus blocking any possible categorization.
Similar to Experiment 2, participants were not warned about
a subsequent memory test.
During the recognition phase participants were presented
with 28 pictures: 14 previously studied pictures (7 cats and
7 bears), and 14 new pictures (7 novel cats and 7 squirrels,
which served as control items). Participants were asked to
determine whether each picture presented during the
recognition phase was “old” (i.e., exactly the same as
previously seen in the study phase) or “new”.
All participants were tested individually, and had all
instructions and stimuli presented to them on a computer
screen in a self-paced manner.

Experiment 3
The goal of Experiment 3 was to eliminate potential
confounds of Experiment 2 by introducing a task that would
force participants to engage in item-based processing.
Similar to Experiment 2 participants were not warned about
a subsequent memory test. Therefore, if accurate memory
performance is obtained in Experiment 3, both of alternative
explanations for the results of Experiment 2 will be
eliminated.

Results and Discussion
Three participants did not reliably reject control items (i.e.,
at least 5 out of 7 correct), and their data were excluded
from further analyses. The rest of the participants were very
accurate in recognizing previously studied items (over 87%
of correct recognitions versus 86% in Experiment 1), and in
4
390

of induction on memory accuracy may bring critical
evidence to this debate.
In short, the reported research brings new evidence to
research on memory and induction: category-based
induction results in the formation of category-level or “gist”
representations, which in turn increase false recognition of
new items from studied categories.

rejecting items from novel categories (95% and 99% of
correct rejections respectively). Levels of false recognitions
were also comparable to the baseline in Experiment 1 (38%
and 33% respectively). Results of Experiment 3 suggest that
differential accuracy on a recognition memory test in
Experiment 1 and 2 cannot by attributed to the difference in
task demands or difference in instruction, since memory
performance in Experiments 3 was very close to
performance in Experiment 1, despite a task added to the
study phase, and a lack of warning about a subsequent
memory test. These findings indicate that the level of
processing required by a task (item-specific versus categoryspecific) influences the level of false recognition on a
recognition memory test.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

References
Alba, J. & Hasher, L. (1983). Is memory schematic?
Psychological Bulletin, 93, 203-231.
Arndt, J. & Hirshman, E. (1988). True and false recognition
in MINERVA2: Explanations from a global matching
perspective. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 371 –
391.
Brainerd, C., Reyna, V., & Mojardin, A. (1999). Conjoint
recognition. Psychological Review, 106, 160-179.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58, 17 – 22.
Gallo, D. & Roediger, H. (2002). Variability among word
lists in eliciting memory illusions: Evidence for
associative activation and monitoring. Journal of Memory
and Language, 47, 469 – 497.
Hintzman, D. (1986). “Schema abstraction” in a multipletrace memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411 –
428.
Koutstaal, W., & Schacter, D. (1997). Gist-based false
recognition of pictures in older and younger adults
Journal of Memory & Language, 37, 555-583.
Roediger, H., & McDermott, K. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 21, 803 – 814.
Roediger, H., Watson, J., McDermott, K., & Gallo, D.
(2001). Factors that determine false recall: A multiple
regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8,
385-407.
Seamon, J. G. Luo, C. R., Schlegel, S. E., Greene, S. E., &
Goldenberg, A. B. (2000). False memory for categorized
pictures and words: The category associates procedure for
studying memory errors in children and adults. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42, 120 – 146.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (In press). When
development and learning decrease memory: Evidence
against
category-based
induction
in
children.
Psychological Science.
Sulin, R., & Dooling D. (1974). Intrusion of a thematic idea
in retention of prose. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 103, 255- 262.

General Discussion
The present study replicated earlier findings that DRM-type
intrusions are possible with pictorially presented stimuli,
and generalized these earlier findings to multiple categories.
The study also demonstrated that processing manipulations
(rather than differential task demands) influence the levels
of false recognition. Specifically, tasks that focus
participants on category-level properties result in categorylevel representations, and lead to decreased memory
accuracy compared to the tasks that focus participants on the
item-specific properties of stimuli. This decrease, however,
is not proportional to the level of memory performance in
the Baseline condition: as a result of performing induction,
memory accuracy decreases drastically, and becomes more
comparable for all types of Targets.
The reported findings, indicating that DRM-type memory
intrusions persist even with pictures, seem to weaken the
source monitoring explanation of memory intrusions. Even
if source-monitoring errors play a role in memory intrusions
with word-lists, these errors are highly unlikely to generate
recognition errors when stimuli are presented pictorially.
Therefore, assuming that the same mechanism underlies
DRM-type intrusion with verbally and pictorially presented
materials, it seems reasonable to conclude that monitoring
errors are unlikely to be the only source of DRM-type
intrusions with verbally presented materials. Given that
memory intrusions with pictures are isomorphic to those
with word-lists (i.e., both modes of presentation elicit high
levels of false recognition and different intrusion rates
across different lists), the assumption does not seem
unreasonable. Therefore, the reported results seem to
support the idea that that DRM-type intrusions stem from
category-level or “gist” representations rather than from
source monitoring errors.
The finding that performance on an induction task results
in an increased level of memory intrusions is theoretically
important for the study of inductive reasoning as well as
memory. In particular, researchers debate whether or not
induction is category-based at different points of
development (see Sloutsky, 2003), and the study of effects
5
391

