UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognition in Jazz Improvisation: An Exploratory Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46v6s1qk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Mendonça, David
Wallace, William A.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognition in Jazz Improvisation: An Exploratory Study
David Mendonça (mendonca@njit.edu)
Information Systems Department, 323 Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard
Newark, NJ 07102 USA

William A. Wallace (wallaw@rpi.edu)

Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems, 110 8th Street
Troy, NY 12180 USA

Abstract

creation and iteration (usually through notation) of musical
ideas” (Sarath, 1996). Improvisation, by contrast, is a
continuous and serial process. Composing involves
distributing musical elements (such as notes) over a score
that is to be played serially: the composer may add to, delete
or edit any part of the composition at any time before its
performance. Performance of a composition involves
interpreting and articulating a written or memorized score.
Performance of an improvisation involves conceiving,
articulating and remembering an unwritten, evolving score
(Berliner, 1994). While a misplaced note in a composition
can be erased and rewritten; a misplayed note in
improvisation cannot. Errors in improvisation therefore
“must be accepted as part of the irrevocable chain of
acoustical events, and contextually justified after the fact by
reinforcement or development” (Pressing, 1984). As stated
by Pressing (1984), “If erasing, painting over, or non-realtime editing exist, improvisation does not.”

This research investigates thinking processes of duos of jazz
improvisers in performance. Of particular interest are
cognitive processes related to creativity and to reasoning
about time, since both activities are fundamental to
improvisation. Data sources are the group members’
retrospective verbal protocols, collected after the performance
of each tune. One result of this work is that cognition related
to reasoning about time and creativity varied little either
within or across groups, regardless of the type of tune being
played. This result is further investigated by examining some
of the statements from the protocols themselves.

Introduction
This research examines the thinking processes of duos of
jazz improvisers in performance. Of particular interest are
cognitive processes related to creativity and to reasoning
about time, since both activities are fundamental to
improvisation. To produce the data used in this study, each
member of the duo watched and listened to a tape of the
duo’s performance and recalled out loud what he had been
thinking during it. The study addresses a gap in prior
research by presenting an analysis of cognition during
improvisation as reflected in verbal protocol data. Since this
study is thought to be the first of its kind, an exploratory
approach is taken.
A brief review of related work is followed by a
presentation of exploratory questions concerning how
performers reason about time and how they produce ideas
for performance. The results of the study are then presented,
followed by an analysis of the contents of selected
statements in the protocols. The paper concludes with a
discussion of implications for current theory and directions
for future work.

Temporal Cognitive Processes
Following Berliner’s (1994) comments, improvisers must
reason about time in order to conceptualize what is to be
articulated in light of what they remember has been played
(see Sarath, 1996 for further discussion). In comparison
with a tune that is being composed as it is being played (i.e.,
a free tune), the performance of a well-learned tune (such as
a jazz standard) may place fewer demands on remembering,
since much of what needs to be recalled (e.g., chord
changes) is easily accessible from long-term memory
(Johnson-Laird, 2002). Similarly, conceptualization may
also be easier for a jazz standard, since the path in front of
the improviser is better known. A tentative hypothesis, then,
is that players will spend more cognitive effort on
remembering and planning ahead for a free tune than on a
standard.

Related Prior Research

Creative Cognitive Processes

Improvisation in jazz is said to involve “reworking
precomposed material and design in relation to
unanticipated ideas conceived, shaped, and transformed
under the special conditions of performance, thereby adding
unique features to every creation” (Berliner, 1994). While
improvising has been compared to “real-time composing”
(Kernfeld, 1988), the two differ in salient ways (Nettl,
1974). Composition refers to “the discontinuous process of

Creativity—the production of new ideas—is fundamental to
improvisation, since it is not enough for improvisers to
produce music that has already been composed: they must
produce something that, to them at least, is new. There have
been numerous proposed models of the cognitive processes
involved in creative thinking (Sternberg, 1999) and on the
factors that influence creative thinking (Welsh, 1973). These

956

Research Questions The research questions concern the
frequencies of occurrence of temporal and creative
cognition within and among groups during the performances
of various jazz tunes. Although some tentative hypotheses
have been discussed, a broad range of questions are
addressed. This decision is due to the exploratory nature of
the study, one goal of which is to provide suggestions for
further lines of research. The research questions explore (i)
the defensibility of the assumption of between-group
homogeneity; they also examine possible differences in
creative and temporal cognition (ii) within a group for a
particular tune and (iii) across tunes by the same group.
Data from performances of a jazz standard and a free
improvisation are used. An example of question (i) is, do the
proportions of occurrence of the various types of temporal
processes differ across the groups for the performance of a
jazz standard? An example of question (ii) is, do the
proportions of occurrence of the various types of temporal
processes differ between the trumpet and bass player in the
performance of a jazz standard? An example of question
(iii) is, do the proportions of occurrence of the various types
of temporal processes differ between the performance of a
jazz standard and of a free improvisation for a particular
group?

theories typically include convergent and divergent
processes, along with some mechanism that governs
switching between them (Newell, 1962). The Geneplore
model (Finke, Ward, & Smith, 1992) describes creative
thinking as entailing divergent processes of generation and
subsequent exploration of ideas (see Ward, Smith, & Finke,
1999 for a discussion). Evaluation (a convergent process) is
discussed in Geneplore in terms of constraint satisfaction.
A jazz standard may afford more opportunities for
divergent thinking than a free improvisation. Jazz standards
are tunes with familiar structures and a long history of
performance which players routinely draw upon. Their
performance may enable the improviser to spend less time
trying to recall the tune or, in the case of free improvisation,
trying to determine the structure and content of the tune.
Similarly, evaluation may be easier to accomplish for a jazz
standard, since the player can easily recall what has been
played and speculate reliably what is to be played.

Analytic Framework
The analytic framework for this study is used to define a set
of temporal and creative processes. A scheme for classifying
the contents of the protocols based on these definitions was
developed so that independent coders could identify these
processes in the protocols. This section provides the
definitions of the processes; the method of their application
is discussed in the subsequent section on “Study Design.”
An improviser in performance must reason about past,
present and likely or possible future events, resulting in
three different processes related to temporal cognition.
Orientation is the process of considering a current
performance event. An example of orientation is the
statement "The time is in 4," since the speaker is referring to
the present moment. Retrospection is the process of
recalling a previous performance event. The statement "He
had just played in three so I did too" is an example of
retrospection. Prospection (a term coined for this research)
is the process of looking ahead; that is, of predicting or
speculating about a future event in the performance. An
example of prospection is the statement "I knew I was
coming to the end of my solo so I looked up."
Three different types of creative cognition are considered
here. Idea generation is said to occur when a musical idea
(i.e., one that pertains to the performance) is recalled or
created. An example is the statement "I was thinking about
playing an open figure there." Idea development is said to
occur when a player further develops a musical idea which
has already been generated, either by the speaker or the
other member of the group. An example is the statement "I
was thinking of inverting the figure I played previously."
Both idea generation and development are regarded as
divergent processes. Finally, idea evaluation is said to occur
when the speaker makes a statement about the value or
worth of a musical idea. An example is the statement, “I
remember liking what I played there.” Idea evaluation is a
process that leads to decisions about whether or not to
pursue ideas, and is therefore convergent.

Study Design
The study employs the preceding three research questions to
investigate the impact of different types of tunes on how
members of professional jazz duos reason about time and
think creatively.
Tune Choice The tunes which the duos were asked to
perform were intended to vary in difficulty and familiarity.
The first tune played, “I Got Rhythm,” has been extensively
recorded and is the origin of the so-called “Rhythm
Changes,” a set of widely-used chord changes in jazz
(Berliner, 1994; Kernfeld, 1988). All participants were
expected to be very familiar with this tune and comfortable
in improvising on it. The second tune, “Willow Weep for
Me,” was chosen since it is not as familiar as “I Got
Rhythm” and because it is typically played as a blues ballad.
In case a duo did not know this tune well enough to play it
without sheet music, a backup tune— “Blue Train”—was
used. The third tune, “Giant Steps,” is known for being a
difficult tune, since the chord progressions are highly
idiosyncratic and the tempo is fast. The backup tune for
“Giant Steps” was “Cherokee,” which is in part challenging
because it is also typically played at a quick tempo. The
fourth tune was a free improvisation. A free improvisation
has no pre-determined structure other than the one which
performers create.
Solicitation of Participants Groups of two players each
were solicited through word-of-mouth contact with
professional musicians working in the Albany, New York
area. (Though the duo is a common configuration in jazz,
the use of duos was also due to practical concerns of cost

957

Procedure

Once the protocol had been delivered, the participants
returned to the performance area and prepared for the next
performance. The above procedure was repeated for the
tunes “Willow Weep for Me” and “Giant Steps.” If the
participants decided not to play a tune, the backup tune was
played. For the fourth and final tune, participants were
asked “to work out the composition of the tune as you play
it.” Again they were asked to keep the total length of the
performance to less than 10 minutes. They were not asked to
take solos, since doing so would have helped determine the
structure of the performance.
Once the think-aloud protocol for the final tune had been
given, participants were asked a series of questions about
their background and their participation in the study. They
were then paid and invited to discuss the study further in a
relaxed atmosphere without being recorded. The total
duration of each session was approximately two hours.

The study was conducted at a local professional recording
studio. Once a duo arrived, study personnel reviewed the
study protocol with them. The duo’s members next signed
consent and contract forms, tuned their instruments and
performed a sound check.
Each member of the duo then entered a vocal (i.e.,
isolation) booth to practice giving concurrent and
retrospective verbal protocols, using two tasks from the
literature (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). In the third task they
whistled or sang a short tune then recalled their thinking
during the performance of the tune. Once these practice
tasks had been completed to the player’s and the
experimenter’s satisfaction, the players practiced operating
the VCR that would assist them in giving the retrospective
verbal protocol. The main part of the study then began.
The group first played “I Got Rhythm.” They were asked
to keep the performance to less than ten minutes and to take
one solo each. A maximum length of ten minutes was
chosen since that is the maximum length recommended in
guidelines for conducting a retrospective verbal protocol
(Ericsson & Simon, 1993). Once any questions had been
answered, all personnel except two video camera operators
left the main studio and the duo performed the tune. The
videotape recorded the images and sound of the two
performers, along with a display of the duration of the
performance.
After the performance, each participant went to a vocal
booth in order to watch and listen to a videotape of the
performance and to deliver the protocol. (About two to three
minutes usually elapsed between the end of the performance
and the beginning of the protocol.) As is commonly done in
verbal protocol-based studies, one experimenter remained
with the participant in order to reiterate the instructions and
to ask the participant to “keep talking” whenever there was
silence for more than about ten seconds (Ericsson & Simon,
1993). While giving a protocol, each participant could
control the videotape as necessary. All protocols were
audio- and video-taped, so that it would be possible to hear
and see what was on the videotape while the participant was
speaking.

Data are taken from the verbal protocols associated with the
performances of "I Got Rhythm" (IGR) and a free
improvisation (Free). Performances of these two tunes were
chosen for initial analysis since they represent opposite ends
of the spectrum of jazz performance. All the groups played
IGR first and Free fourth.
Participants' protocols were first transcribed and
segmented (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). All references to
study participants in the protocols were masked so that it
would not be possible for a reader to determine which
protocol corresponded to which session or player. Segments
pertaining to cognition during the actual performance of the
tune were coded using the definitions for the types of
temporal and creative cognition that are given above in the
“Analytic Framework” section. Coders were provided with
(i) the segmented and masked protocols and (ii) instructions
on how to use the above definitions to code the protocols.
Coding was done by two independent coders unfamiliar
with the objectives of the research. The coders were trained
first to identify creative processes, then applied the
instructions to the protocols. The same procedure was then
followed for temporal processes. A second coder coded
approximately 10% of the data, and reliability as measured
by Cohen’s kappa (Cohen, 1960) was approximately 87%.
Counts of the various types of temporal and creative
processes were then entered into contingency tables. For
creative cognition, it was immediately obvious that there
were too few instances of idea development to justify the
use of the appropriate statistical test, the Chi-squared test for
differences in proportions (Conover, 1999). All instances of
idea development were therefore recoded as instances of
idea generation, since, as discussed previously, both are
processes of divergent thinking. All statistical tests were
then performed on the tables at a 0.05 significance level.
The observed significance level of a test is denoted p. Some
of the contingency tables are shown below, with the
following symbols used: for temporal cognition,
O=orientation, P=prospection and R=retrospection; for

and the availability of appropriate recording space.) The
player of the lead instrument—a trumpet player in all
cases—was first secured. The lead player then suggested the
second member of the duo, someone with whom he played
often. The groups were intended to be reasonably
homogeneous in terms of musical experience and
experience improvising. Accordingly, all participants were
asked to describe their backgrounds. Because they would be
asked to verbalize their thoughts, only players who had
experience in teaching—and therefore talking
about—improvisation were asked to take part in the study.
Finally, they were then told that, during the study, they
would be given three or four tunes to play, videotaped
during the performance of each tune and then asked to recall
their thinking while watching the videotape.

Results

958

Table 2: Temporal Cognition for IGR, by Player in Group
One.

creative cognition, G =idea generation and E=idea
evaluation.

Between-group Differences

Player
Trumpet
Bass

A reasonable degree of homogeneity was desired among the
groups in order to minimize the possibility of betweengroup confounding effects. Information on participants’
backgrounds was collected, as discussed previously. Also,
differences in groups’ temporal and creative thinking
processes for each tune were investigated using question (i),
with the following results. For temporal thinking, no
significant between-group differences were found among
the groups for either IGR or Free.
For creative cognition, no significant differences
were found among the groups for IGR, but a significant
difference (p=0.0045) was found for Free. This result may
be stated by saying that at least two of the proportions in
some column were not equal to each other. Table 1 shows
the data associated with Free.

G
33
13
68

P
13
10

R
11
4

Similarly, for question (iii), no significant differences were
evident across the two tunes as performed by each group.
Table 3 shows the question (iii) data associated with Group
One.
Table 3: Temporal Cognition for Group One, by Tune.
Tune
IGR
Free

O
42
30

P
23
21

R
15
21

Creative Processes

Table 1: Creative Cognition, by Group for Free.
Group
One
Two
Three

O
25
17

No significant differences were evident in creative cognition
between the participants in each group for IGR or Free. So,
in Group One, the proportion of segments from the trumpet
player reflecting idea generation is not significantly
different from the corresponding figure for the bass player.
Table 4 shows the question (ii) data associated with Group
One for IGR.

E
37
9
26

The assumption of homogeneity may therefore be seen as
reasonable for IGR but not for Free. Accordingly, the
analysis will consider individual groups rather than pooling
data across groups.

Table 4: Creative Cognition for IGR, by Player in Group
One.
Player
Trumpet
Bass

Description of Performances
I Got Rhythm All groups structured their performances of
IGR in approximately the same way, with the head (i.e., the
introduction and first AABA chorus) and ending (i.e., the
last AABA chorus) played more or less as discussed by
Kernfeld (1995). In Groups One and Two, solos were two
choruses long; in Group Three they were four choruses
long. All performances were less than ten minutes long.

G
18
8

E
16
6

No significant differences were evident across the two tunes
as performed by each group. Table 5 shows the question (iii)
data associated with Group One.
Table 5: Creative Cognition for Group One, by Tune.

Free Improvisation For the free improvisation, participants
were asked to "work out the composition of the tune as you
play it." Groups in sessions one and two asked for some
additional guidance but were given nothing more than a key
and/or time signature. All performances were less than ten
minutes long and had a stable time signature. It should be
noted that, although all free tunes were spontaneously
composed, all were clearly in the idiom of bebop jazz.

Tune
IGR
Free

G
26
37

E
22
33

For both temporal and creative processes, the
results suggest that—contrary to expectation—the same
proportion of segments reflected each type of temporal or
creative process. The same was true for differences within
the same group across the two tunes. This result is
particularly surprising, since groups were expected to
approach IGR and Free quite differently; indeed, the
recorded performances of the tunes by any given group,
while sharing certain elements (e.g., stable key signature

Temporal Processes
For question (ii), no significant differences in temporal
cognition were evident between the participants in each
group for IGR or Free. Table 2 shows the question (ii) data
associated with Group One for IGR.

959

47. I'm, I'm thinking about how we're going to resolve the
tune, how we're going to end it here.
48. I know we're going to put the tag on, which is what
we're doing right now.
Similarly, at about the same point PT recalled thinking
41. Ah, we're coming up on the last eight, eight bars.
42. And we had talked about putting the the tag at the
end, so I'm actually thinking, yeah we're going to put
that tag on the end.
Successful completion of the tune was therefore in part
dependent on both players recalling the need to play the tag
at the end of the tune. Additionally, JH was thinking about
how to resolve the tune, given the need to include the tag.
At numerous points in the performance, JH and PT each
speculated about what might be played by the other person.
For example, after the first chorus of JH’s solo, PT thought
22. Now I'm, right now I tell you I'm thinking, is he
taking another chorus?
23. There, so, he's taking two choruses.
These segments suggest that the de facto structure of the
tune was in part determined during performance, thus
requiring the performers to think explicitly about past,
present and future events. For example, because JH had
taken two choruses in his solo, PT did the same.

and meter within each performance) nonetheless sound quite
different, particularly in Group Three and to a lesser extent
in Group One.

Content Analysis
The contents of the protocols from the performance of IGR
by Group One are now analyzed in order to provide further
insight into individual- and group-level creative and
temporal cognition. These protocols were chosen because
they are richer in content than those of the other groups and
because it is appropriate to begin with an analysis of a
simpler tune before moving to more complex ones. The
statements examined here were those thought to provide the
most insight into processes of collaboration, temporal
reasoning and creativity. To aid the discussion, statements
are labeled with their segment number from the protocols.
Collaboration Statements by one player about himself, the
other player in the group and the group itself suggest how
the duo collaborated. In IGR, the trumpet player (JH)
explicitly mentioned trying to fit the melody and rhythm of
his playing with that of the bass player (PT), as follows:
19. I'm just ah, I'm hearing melodies, I'm trying to play
them, that I know will fit with what PT is playing.
24. I'm trying to keep, trying to keep a steady rhythm with
PT, trying to make my eighth notes very steady.
JH also engaged in active listening following the completion
of his own solo and the onset of PT’s solo:
32. I'm kind of ah thinking after the thought and reacting
to what he's playing.
Segments 19, 24 and 32 reflect JH trying to solve two types
of problems related to collaboration. The first type, as in
S24, is reasonably well-posed and technical. In this case, it
involves keeping the rhythm of the tune. In contrast, the
second requires the generation of new melodies: here, ones
that “fit with” PT’s playing. Segment 19 (S19) suggests that
generation of the melodies occurred closely in time to their
evaluation and performance. The use of the phrase “hearing
melodies” would seem to indicate that the process is more
one of retrieval rather than on-the-spot composition.
Computational approaches to this type of thinking in jazz
improvisation have sometimes involved retrieval and use of
fragments or motifs (e.g., Ramalho, Rolland, & Ganascia,
1999) S32 is similar in spirit to S19, the distinction being
that JH was not actually playing anything at that moment.
The statements show that JH was actively listening to PT,
analyzing PT’s playing and attempting to use the results of
this analysis to guide his own playing.

Creative Processes An interesting exchange occurred at the
very end of the group’s performance of IGR. As shown in
S47-48 and S41-S42 (above), JH and PT recalled the
agreement to play the tag and planned for it. JH made the
following statements immediately after S48:
49. Now, I didn't, I also extended the tag.
50. I could have made that, I could have made that tag a
few bars, uh one or two bars shorter. By not
extending it, I I kind of doubled the time.
52. Ok, as I said I I I doubled the length here, just to see
what PT would do, how he'd react.
53. And I held that note out because that gave PT an
opportunity to decide for both of us how exactly that
was going to end.
54. Um and then I just threw that little tag of those couple
notes on the end uh expecting he might react off of
that,...
JH therefore elaborated upon the tag by doubling the time,
holding out a note and adding a couple of notes to the tag.
Each generated idea was intended to result in PT generating
an idea in reaction to it, which would of course require
evaluation. PT’s reaction was as follows:
43. And right there I'm thinking, should I put a tag after
his little ending there, but I decided to just let him
have the final word.
S54 (above) concludes with JH saying “and he chose not to.
And that was his choice.” This example therefore shows
cycle of idea generation (by JH), evaluation of those ideas
by (PT), and finally JH’s evaluation of PT’s evaluation.

Temporal Processes A number of statements by both
players reflect reasoning about time, particularly about the
group’s movement through the structure of the tune. Once
they were asked to play IGR, one of the things they
discussed was whether or not to play the tag (an optional
ending to the melody). JH decided that they would play the
tag at the very end of the tune. As they neared the end of the
tune (i.e., the last A section), JH recalled thinking

960

Discussion and Conclusions

References

The statistical analysis suggests a great degree of stability
in creative and temporal cognition across the various
conditions. Groups may therefore have applied similar
cognitive strategies, regardless of the conditions of
performance. The analysis of the “I Got Rhythm” protocols
for Group One provides additional insight into how
improvisers collaborate while simultaneously abiding by
constraints of an evolving musical structure and generating,
evaluating and executing new ideas.
Temporal cognition is necessary when a tune’s structure
evolves in real time. A theory of improvisation, even for the
performance of standard tunes, should therefore include
explicit modeling of temporal reasoning (see Johnson-Laird,
2002 and Ramalho et al., 1999 for discussions on both sides
of this issue). A key consideration is range of planning
(Palmer, 1997), since the current study and others (Sarath,
1996) have suggested that improvisers engage in
contingency-based reasoning during performance. This
study used prompted retrospective verbal protocols as
primary data sources. Data on physical movements (Palmer,
1997) and cues and communications (Brinner, 1995) of
performers may be useful in triangulating the results.
Further work is needed in understanding the role of
knowledge and experience in the production of new musical
ideas. A large body of work (see Pressing, 1984) shows that
skilled improvisers draw upon and adapt highly resilient
motifs during performance. Some evidence (Berliner, 1994)
suggests that the use of these motifs can be conscious,
though this claim has not been rigorously tested.
The results show that some creative and temporal
processes may themselves be highly collaborative. Indeed,
as suggested by Pressing (1984), the nature of improvised
performance demands that the all “acoustical events” must
be folded into the performance. The protocols contained
evidence of both routine and non-routine problems arising
out of collaboration between duos.
Finally, as discussed by Johnson-Laird (1991, 2002),
additional work is needed in expressing theories of
improvisation as computer programs. The current study has
provided some evidence that such programs should include
mechanisms for reasoning about (i) evolving conceptions of
musical structure (and therefore time), (ii) processes of
creativity and (iii) how dependencies among group members
are negotiated (e.g., Bongers, 1999; Walker, 1997) in order
to deal with temporal constraints while thinking creatively
(Ramalho et al., 1999). Such an approach ought to result in
a theory of improvisation that seeks to explain how it occurs
in a wide variety of domains.

Berliner, P. F. (1994). Thinking in jazz. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Bongers, B. (1999). Exploring novel ways of interaction in
music performance. Paper presented at the ACM
Creativity and Cognition Conference, Loughborough,
UK.
Brinner, B. (1995) Knowing music, making music, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,
37-46.
Conover, W. J. (1999). Practical nonparametric statistics.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis
(Revised ed.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
cognition: Theory, research and applications. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1991). Jazz improvisation: A theory
at the computational level. In P. Howell & R. West & I.
Cross (Eds.), Representing musical structure. New York:
Academic Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). How jazz musicians improvise.
Music Perception, 19(3), 415-442.
Kernfeld, B. (1995). What to listen for in jazz. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Kernfeld, B. (Ed.). (1988). The new Grove dictionary of jazz
(Vol. 1). New York: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Nettl, B. (1974). Thoughts on improvisation: A comparative
approach. The Musical Quarterly, 60(1), 1-17.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. C. & Simon, H. A. (1962). The
processes of creative thinking. In Gruber (Ed.),
Contemporary approaches to creative thinking. New
York: Atherton Press.
Palmer, C. (1997). Music performance. Annual Review of
Psychology, 48, 115-138.
Pressing, J. (1984). Cognitive processes in improvisation. In
R. Crozier & A. Chapman (Eds.), Cognitive processes in
the perception of art. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Ramalho, G. L., Rolland, P., & Ganascia, J. (1999). An
artificially intelligent jazz performer. Journal of New
Music Research, 28(2), 105-129.
Sarath, E. (1996). A new look at improvisation. Journal of
Music Theory, 40(1), 1-38.
Sternberg, R. J. (1999). Handbook of creativity. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Walker, W. F. (1997). A computer participant in musical
improvisation. Paper presented at the Computer-Human
Interaction, Atlanta, GA.
Ward, T. B., Smith, S. M., & Finke, R. A. (1999). Creative
cognition. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of
creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Welsh, G. S. (1973). Perspectives in the study of creativity.
Journal Of Creative Behavior, 7(4), 231-246.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported through National Science
Foundation Grant CMS-9872699. Additional support was
provided by the iEar Department at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. We thank the musicians who participated in this
study as well as Neil Rolnick and the personnel at Max Trax
Recording Studios.

961

