UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coherence in Perceptions of a Romantic Relationship

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2m20z2rg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Brownstein, Aaron L.
Read, Stephen J.
Simon, Dan

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Coherence in Perceptions of a Romantic Relationship
Aaron L. Brownstein (aaronb@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-1061

Stephen J. Read (read@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-1061

Dan Simon (dsimon@law.usc.edu)
School of Law, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-0071
in which a subset of mutually consistent elements are highly
activated.
Drawing on constraint satisfaction systems, researchers
have begun to show that cognition involves imposing
consistency on related concepts. Simon and colleagues
(Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Simon, Pham, Le, & Holyoak,
2001; Simon, Snow, & Read, in press) developed a
paradigm showing how, when people think about the issues
related to a legal case and then render a verdict, their
perceptions of the issues shift to become consistent with
their eventual verdict, thereby achieving a coherent
understanding of the whole case.
The finding that perceptions of issues shift to become
consistent with an emerging decision violates two important
assumptions of algebraic models of information integration,
such as Bayes theorem and Anderson’s (1962) Information
Integration Theory. Those models assume that (1) the value
of one element is not affected by the values of other
elements and that (2) the value of an element is not changed
when it is integrated with other elements to arrive at a
conclusion. Nevertheless, Simon and colleagues found that
during decision making, evaluations of issues related to a
legal case shift to become consistent with the emerging
decision and with each other.
The present research adapts Simon and colleagues’
paradigm to test for coherence outside the legal context. In
the first phase (pretest) participants read vignettes
describing different couples and ambiguous events in their
relationships, and then rated their agreement with statements
giving different interpretations of the events. Some of the
statements were factual items that involved interpreting the
meaning of an event and others were belief items that
involved interpreting the general implications of an event.
For example, one vignette described how Eric and Daniella
spent a day with Daniella’s aunt Rachel, enabling her to
observe the couple’s interactions and subsequently report
that she thought their relationship was going well. A factual
item related to that vignette asks participants to rate the
extent to which they think Aunt Rachel’s optimistic
impression was correct and a belief item asks them to rate
the extent to which they think that, in general, it is possible
to get a good sense of a couple’s relationship by observing
them for a day.
In the second phase participants read a longer story about
a couple, Jenny and Mark, that combined all of the issues

Abstract
When decision makers perceive all issues related to a decision
as being consistent with their choice, they achieve coherence.
Participants rated their agreement with different views of
various issues related to a couple’s relationship. Those who
later decided whether the couple would get engaged or break
up subsequently reinterpreted the issues to be consistent with
their decision. Increasing the importance of the decision,
highlighting coherent perspectives, or giving participants a
prior preference did not strengthen the coherence shift, but
coherence shifts did not occur without the chance to decide,
suggesting that they occur in an all or nothing fashion.
Individuals with higher need for cognition (Cacioppo & Petty,
1982) achieved a greater degree of coherence among facts
associated with the relationship but not among more general
beliefs about relationships.

Introduction
Early social psychologists attempted to develop a general
model of cognitive functioning based on consistency
maintenance (Festinger, 1957; Heider, 1946; Osgood &
Tannenbaum, 1955; Newcomb, 1953). Those theories
shared the assumption that cognition involves the
interaction among elements, and that those elements tend to
settle into stable states characterized by some type of good
form, in which similar elements are interconnected and
segregated from dissimilar elements. However, early
consistency theories narrowly focused on small sets of two
(Festinger, 1957) or three (Heider, 1946) elements at a time,
and so were unable to represent the larger, more complex
situations that people often encounter in their daily lives.
More recently, computer based models of multiple
constraint satisfaction systems have begun to provide a
mechanism for simulating maintenance of consistency
throughout large, complex systems (Holyoak & Simon,
1999; Read, Vanman, & Miller, 1997; Simon, Snow, &
Read, in press). In these models, units represent cognitive
elements and links between units represent relations
between elements, with excitatory links representing
consistent relations and inhibitory links representing
inconsistent relations. Dynamic processing is simulated by
allowing units connected by excitatory links to increase
each other’s activation and units connected by inhibitory
links to decrease each other’s activation until the system
settles in to a stable state of coherence, a kind of good form
162

raised separately in the pretest. For example, one part of the
story involved Jenny and Mark spending a day with Jenny’s
aunt Rose, so that the aunt formed an impression that the
relationship was going well. In the third phase (posttest)
participants decided whether Jenny and Mark would get
engaged or break up and then rated their agreement with the
different interpretations of the issues, now that they were all
embedded in the context of a single story. For example, on
the posttest a factual item asked participants to rate the
extent to which they thought Aunt Rose’s optimistic
impression of Jenny and Mark’s relationship was correct
and a belief item asked them to rate the extent to which they
think it is possible to get a good sense of a couple’s
relationship by observing them for a day.
We predicted a coherence shift, so that from pretest to
posttest interpretations of ambiguous issues would shift to
become consistent with the decision. Thus, we expected
participants who decided that Jenny and Mark would get
engaged to be increasingly likely to interpret issues in a
manner suggesting that they would stay together, and we
expected participants who decided that they would break up
to be increasingly likely to interpret issues in a manner
suggesting that they would not stay together.
Simon, Snow, & Read (in press) tested several variations
on their paradigm in a legal context, but could not affect the
strength of the coherence shift, so in the present research we
introduced four manipulations designed to moderate the
strength of the coherence shift. First, we tried to increase the
strength of the coherence shift by increasing the perceived
importance of the decision. In a decision (control) condition,
participants simply read about Jenny and Mark’s
relationship and indicated whether they thought the couple
would get engaged or break up. To increase the perceived
importance of the decision, we asked participants in a gift
condition to decide not simply whether they thought the
couple would get engaged or break up, but whether they
would spend a substantial amount of money to buy an
engagement present. We predicted that the added
importance associated with the decision would induce
participants to think about the choice more extensively,
leading to stronger coherence shifts than in the control
condition.
The second way we tried to increase the strength of the
coherence shift was by outlining the two coherent
perspectives on the story. As in the control condition,
participants were asked to decide whether they thought the
couple would get engaged or break up, but in an outline
condition they were also asked to imagine that they had
talked to two friends who gave their perspectives on the
couple’s relationship. The friends’ perspectives were
presented in two lists, with one interpreting each of the
ambiguous issues as suggesting that the couple would get
engaged and the other interpreting each issue as suggesting
that they would break up. We predicted that outlining the
two coherent perspectives would help participants reach
their own coherent perspective more quickly and proceed to
achieve more extensive coherence shifts than participants in
the control condition.

The third way we tried to increase the coherence shift was
by giving participants a prior preference for one of the
alternatives. Russo, Medvec, and Meloy (1996) gave
participants an extraneous reason to prefer one of a pair of
alternatives (called an “endowment”) and then presented
information on the alternatives one attribute at a time,
asking participants to rate the extent to which it favored one
alternative or the other, until they were ready to choose one.
Russo, Medvec, and Meloy found that participants
“distorted” the attribute information so that it favored the
endowed alternative, thereby further increasing their
preference for it until they chose it. We thought that if
decision makers distort information to favor a prior
preference within the pre-decision phase, their attitudes
might also start shifting to become consistent with a prior
preference within the pre-decision phase, producing a
stronger coherence shift by the time they reach the postdecision phase. Therefore, we introduced two new
conditions in which participants were given a prior
preference for one alternative. As in the control condition,
participants were asked to decide whether they thought the
couple would get engaged or break up, but in an
endowment-engage condition they were also asked to
imagine that they knew Jenny and Mark and thought they
should stay together, while in an endowment-breakup
condition they were asked to assume that they thought
Jenny and Mark should break up. We predicted that,
compared to participants in the control condition,
participants in the endowment-engage condition would be
more likely to decide that the couple would in fact get
engaged, participants in the endowment-breakup condition
would be more likely to decide that the couple would break
up, and that participants in both endowment conditions
would report stronger coherence shifts.
A fourth manipulation was designed to decrease the
strength of the coherence shift. We thought that, just as the
degree of importance of a decision may affect the amount of
processing, the degree of involvement in a decision task
may also affect the amount of processing and the strength of
the coherence shift. Therefore, we predicted that decreasing
participants’ involvement in the decision task would
decrease the strength of the coherence shift. In a pair of
assigned decision conditions participants were asked to
think about whether to buy an engagement present (as in the
gift condition), but they were not allowed to make their own
choices; instead, participants in an assigned-buy condition
were asked to assume that they had decided to buy the
necklace and participants in an assigned-not-buy condition
were asked to assume that they had decided not to buy the
necklace. We predicted that depriving participants of the
ability to reach their own decisions would decrease their
involvement and amount of processing, leading to weaker
coherence shifts in the assigned decision conditions than in
the gift condition.
We also tested whether two personality dimensions
moderate the strength of the coherence shift. First, need for
cognition (NFC; Cacioppo & Petty, 1982) involves
individual differences in the “tendency to engage in and
163

live in your town and are pretty close friends of yours. They
have been involved in a relationship for over a year….”
Participants were also informed that “after reading some
information about the relationship, you will be asked to
decide whether you think Jenny and Mark will get engaged
or break up, and then to make some evaluations about the
relationship….” Participants then read the story of Jenny
and Mark, which combined the seven issues that had been
raised in separate vignettes in the pretest. For example, the
story described one incident when Jenny was too busy at
work to join Mark and his parents for dinner and another
incident when she brought him to a family party. After
reading the story participants indicated whether they thought
Jenny and Mark would get engaged or break up (by clicking
on one of two radio buttons) and rated their confidence that
they had made the best possible decision (5-point scale).
The posttest appeared next; participants were asked to give
their “impressions of the issues in Jenny and Mark’s
relationship” and then there was a list of statements
interpreting the facts in the story or expressing related
beliefs. Some of the statements expressed attitudes
consistent with the view that Jenny and Mark would stay
together (e.g. Aunt Rose’s favorable view of the relationship
was correct) and other statements expressed attitudes
consistent with the view that they would break up (e.g. Aunt
Rose’s favorable view of the relationship was influenced by
the fact that on that day Jenny displayed particular affection
towards Mark). Participants rated the extent to which they
agreed with each statement on an 11-point scale. The order
of items in the posttest was counterbalanced between
participants. The posttest was followed by self-report
measures of NFC (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982) and NFS
(Neuberg & Newsom, 1993), and demographic questions.
The outline condition was the same as the decision
condition, except that after reading the story participants
were asked to imagine that, “you have talked to two other
mutual friends and found that they have very different views
on Jenny and Mark’s relationship.” The instructions
continued, “Caitlin doesn’t think Jenny and Mark will get
engaged. When you talked to Caitlin, she explained why she
thinks Jenny and Mark are headed for a breakup” and then
there was a bullet-list of statements interpreting the seven
issues in a manner suggesting that the couple would break
up. The instructions then continued, “Unlike Caitlin, Brian
thinks Jenny and Mark will get engaged. When you talked
to Brian, he explained why he thinks they will get engaged,”
and then there was a list of statements interpreting the seven
issues as suggesting that the couple would stay together.
After reading the lists, participants made their decisions,
confidence ratings, posttest ratings, and personality ratings.
The endowment conditions were the same as the decision
condition, except that before reading the story participants
were told that “we’re going to ask you to get more
‘involved’ with the story, by imagining that you know the
people and playing a small role yourself.” Participants in the
endowment-engage condition were told that “although they
have had some problems (as most couples do), you think
they are good for each other and you hope they work things

enjoy thinking” (p. 116). We thought that participants with
greater NFC would think about the experimental materials
more extensively, leading them to report stronger coherence
shifts than participants with lower NFC. Second, personal
need for structure (PNS; Neuberg & Newsom. 1993) may
involve individual differences in desire for simple structure.
We thought that participants with greater NFS would be
more likely to impose a coherent good form on the
information given to them, thereby achieving greater
coherence than participants with lower NFS.

Methods
Participants and Design
This experiment ran on the Internet. Participants were
recruited by e-mailing notices to people who asked to be
notified of new experiments and giving each participant an
entry in a lottery for a cash prize. Participants were
randomly assigned to the decision (n = 134 usable data
sets), gift (108), outline (118), assigned-buy (105),
assigned-not-buy (132), endowment-engaged (110), and
endowment-breakup (98) conditions.

Materials and Procedure
The pre-test had 12 vignettes, including seven that involved
romantic relationships and five that involved legal cases
(distracters). The seven relationship vignettes concerned (1)
a woman (Michelle) who had broken off several previous
relationships and may appear to have “a problem with
commitment,” (2) a woman (Joanne) who declined to talk to
her boyfriend about the future of their relationship, (3) a
woman (Aunt Rachel) who spent a day with her niece and
her niece’s boyfriend and thought that their relationship was
going well, (4) a woman (Lisa) who was two hours late for a
date with her current boyfriend because she was consoling a
previous boyfriend who was upset about his mother’s
illness, (5) a woman (Suzy) who was too busy at work to
join her boyfriend and his parents for dinner, (6) a woman
(Candice) who joined a gym after her boyfriend disparaged
people who don’t exercise, and (7) a woman (Rona) who
brought her boyfriend to a family party.
After each vignette, there were 1 to 4 statements
interpreting the facts in the vignette or expressing related
beliefs. Some of the statements expressed attitudes
consistent with the view that the couple in the vignette
would stay together (e.g. Aunt Rachel’s favorable view of
the relationship was correct) and other statements expressed
attitudes consistent with the view that they would break up
(e.g. Aunt Rachel’s favorable view of the relationship was
influenced by the fact that on that day Daniella displayed
particular affection towards Eric). Participants rated the
extent to which they agreed with each statement on an 11point scale ranging from -5 (strongly disagree) to 0 (neutral)
to 5 (strongly agree).
The next page presented a set of analogy word games
(distracter task) and the following page introduced the
experimental manipulations. In the decision condition,
participants were asked to imagine that “Mark and Jenny
164

out,” while participants in the endowment-breakup
condition were told that “although they have been fairy
happy together until now, you think that they may be
growing apart and it wouldn’t be a good idea for them to
rush into a commitment.” After reading the story
participants in the endowment-engaged condition were
reminded, “you don’t know whether Jenny and Mark will
get engaged or break up, but you think they are good for
each other and you’d like to see their relationship work out”
while participants in the endowment-breakup condition
were reminded, “you don’t know whether Jenny and Mark
will get engaged or break up, but you think that they are
growing apart and shouldn’t rush into a commitment.”
Participants in both conditions then went on to make their
decisions, confidence ratings, posttest ratings, and
personality ratings.
In the gift condition, participants were told that Jenny
loved Zapotec jewelry, which was available in Cancun,
where the participant was vacationing, so the decision was
framed in terms of whether to buy a $150 Zapotec necklace
as an engagement present for Jenny; since “the necklace
cannot be returned and you cannot think of anything else to
do with it,” the participant should only buy the necklace if
an engagement seemed likely. After reading the story,
participants were reminded of their dilemma – whether the
probability of an engagement was high enough to justify
buying an expensive necklace as an engagement present for
Jenny – and then they indicated whether they would buy the
necklace. After that, participants made their confidence
ratings, posttest ratings, and personality ratings.
The assigned decision conditions were the same as the
gift condition, except that before reading the story,
participants were asked to “get more ‘involved’ with the
story, by imagining that you know the people and playing a
small role yourself” and were instructed, “while you’re
reading, think about your character’s dilemma – whether to
buy the necklace for Jenny. At the end of the story we’ll tell
you what your character decided.” After reading the story,
participants were reminded of their character’s dilemma and
those in the assigned-buy condition were asked to imagine
that “you finally decided to go ahead and buy the
necklace…. your sense was that they probably will get
engaged, so it was worth it to buy Jenny an engagement gift
you know she’ll love” while those in the assigned-not-buy
condition were asked to imagine that “you finally decided
against buying the necklace… your sense was that they
probably won’t get engaged, so it wasn’t worth it to spend
so much money on a necklace you have no use for.”
Participants in both conditions then completed the posttest
and personality measures.

would get engaged (3.52) and those who decided they
would break up (3.77). High confidence in a decision about
an ambiguous situation is consistent with constraint
satisfaction models, in which activation spreads until the
system reaches a stable state of coherence.
In the control condition participants were evenly split
between the alternatives (50.7% chose the engaged
alternative). In the outline condition there was a tendency to
favor engaged (61.0%) but the change from the control
condition was not significant. Participants in the gift
condition were significantly less likely to choose engaged
(36.1%) than participants in the control condition, X2 (1,
239) = 4.90, p < .03, suggesting that people become more
cautious when a decision has financial implications.
Participants who were given an endowment favoring
engagement were more likely to choose engaged (65.4%)
than participants who were given an endowment favoring
breakup (40.8%), X2 (1, 207) = 4.72, p < .04, suggesting that
the endowment manipulation was effective, though the
probability of choosing engaged was not significantly
different in the endowment conditions than in the control
condition. Scores on the NFC, p = .55, and PNS, p = .98,
were not significantly correlated with decisions.
We first tested for an overall coherence shift by running a
2(pretest, posttest, within Ss) by 2(engagement, breakup
items, within Ss) by 2(engage, breakup decision, between
Ss) ANOVA, collapsing across the experimental conditions.
We found a significant three-way interaction, F(1, 799) =
84.51, p < .001, suggesting that after participants decided
whether they thought Jenny and Mark would get engaged or
break up, their attitudes shifted to be more consistent with
their decision. As shown in Figure 1, among participants
who decided that the couple would get engaged, agreement
with statements suggesting that the couple would get
engaged increased from pretest to posttest, t(385) = 3.94, p
< .001, and agreement with statements suggesting they
would break up decreased, t(385) = 4.46, p < .001. In
contrast, among participants who decided that the couple
would break up, agreement with engagement statements
decreased, t(414) = 6.47, p < .001, and agreement with
breakup statements increased, t(414) = 5.86, p < .001.

Results and Discussion

Figure 1: Agreement with Engage and Breakup items at
Pretest and Posttest among participants who decided Engage
(left) and participants who decided Breakup (right).

2

Decision: Engage

2

Breakup Items

0.5
0
-0.5
-1

Collapsing across all conditions (excluding the assigned
decision conditions), participants were evenly split between
deciding that Jenny and Mark would get engaged (49.5%) or
that they would break up (49.8%), suggesting that the story
was highly ambiguous. Average confidence ratings were
fairly high among participants who decided that the couple

1.5

Engage Items

1

Pretest

Posttest

Rating Time

Agreement

Agreement

1.5

Decision: Breakup

1
0.5
0
-0.5

Pretest

Posttest

-1
Rating Time

This pattern of results suggests that as participants
thought about the story and made their decisions, their
attitudes about the issues shifted to become more consistent
165

The unexpected difference in the patterns of results for
facts and beliefs reveals that when people consider the facts
of a specific couple’s relationship they are initially
optimistic about their future together, and those who go on
to decide that the couple will get engaged become
increasingly optimistic, but those who decide that the couple
will break up become less optimistic. However, when it
comes to abstract beliefs about relationships in general,
people are initially pessimistic, and if they decide that a
specific couple is likely to break up their beliefs become
even more pessimistic, but if they decide that they are likely
to get engaged their pessimism decreases. These data
suggest that people are initially pessimistic about
relationships in general but initially assume an optimistic
outlook on specific cases. The data also suggest that
regardless of initial attitude, when people reach a decision
about a specific case their attitudes toward facts related to
the case as well as their general beliefs about relationships
shift in a coherent manner.
To test whether the experimental manipulations affected
the strength of the coherence shift, we added a variable
representing experimental condition, but did not find that it
moderated the three-way interaction. We found three-way
interactions of similar magnitude within the control, F(1,
131) = 47.44, p < .001, gift, F(1, 104) = 23.98, p < .001, and
outline conditions, F(1, 116) = 18.83, p < .001, suggesting
that increasing the material importance of a decision or
outlining the coherent perspectives does not increase the
strength of the coherence shift. The three-way interaction
was significant in the endowment-engage, F(1, 108) = 9.29,
p > .01, and endowment-breakup, F(1, 95) = 14.45, p < .001
conditions, suggesting that giving participants a prior
preference within the pre-decision phase did not increase the
strength of the coherence shift. The finding that introducing
a prior preference within the pre-decision phase did not
increase coherence shifts suggests that coherence seeking
may generally operate within the pre-decision phase, even
when there is no prior preference. Indeed, Simon and
colleagues have found coherence shifts among participants
who had not yet reached decisions (Holyoak & Simon,
1999; Simon et al., 2001; Simon, Snow, & Read, in press).
When we analyzed data from the two assigned decision
conditions the three-way interaction was not significant, p =
.45. The task in the assigned decision conditions was
intended to minimize participants’ involvement in the task,
since they were simply waiting to be told what their
character had decided. Thus, unlike Simon and colleagues’
previous research on coherence shifts, in which participants
expected to make a decision or had a memorization or
communication goal (Simon et al., 2001), participants in the
assigned decision conditions of the present research had no
active processing goal. Our finding that participants in the
assigned decision conditions were less likely to show
coherence shifts, then, suggests that under minimal
conditions, where participants think about a complex
situation without any active processing goal, they may not
achieve coherence.

with their emerging decision and with each other. This
would not have been predicted by algebraic information
integration models (e.g. Anderson, 1962; Bayes’ theorem),
which assume that the value of an element is not affected by
the values of other elements and does not change when it is
integrated with other elements.
We then ran the analysis separately for items relating to
facts and items relating to beliefs. For facts the three-way
interaction was significant, F(1, 799) = 73.75, p < .001, and
the pattern was similar to the overall analysis (Figure 2).
Agreement with engagement items was initially higher than
agreement with breakup items among participants who
chose engage, t(385) = 15.80, p < .001, and among
participants who chose breakup, t(414) = 9.75, p < .001, but
among participants who chose engage agreement with the
two types of items spread apart from pretest to posttest,
while among participants who chose breakup agreement
with the two types of items converged.
Decision: Engage

Agreement

Engage Items

1
Breakup Items

0.5
0

-1

Pretest

Posttest

Agreement

1.5

1.5

-0.5

Decision: Breakup

2

2

1
0.5
0

Pretest

-0.5

Posttest

-1

Rating Time

Rating Time

Figure 2: Agreement with Engage and Breakup fact items at
Pretest and Posttest among participants who decided Engage
(left) and participants who decided Breakup (right).
For beliefs the three-way interaction was significant, F(1,
797) = 30.97, p < .001, indicating the predicted coherence
shift, but the pattern was somewhat different than for the
facts (Figure 3). Agreement with engagement items was
initially lower than agreement with breakup items among
participants who chose engage, t(385) = 6.60, p < .001, and
among participants who chose breakup, t(414) = 6.72, p <
.001. Among participants who chose engage agreement with
the two types of items converged, while among participants
who chose breakup agreement with the two types of items
spread apart.
Decision: Engage
Engage Items

Agreement

1.5

Breakup Items

1
0.5
0
-0.5

2

Pretest

Posttest

-1

Rating Time

Decision: Breakup

1.5

Agreement

2

1
0.5
0
-0.5

Pretest

Posttest

-1
Rating Time

Figure 3: Agreement with Engage and Breakup belief items
at Pretest and Posttest among participants who decided
Engage (left) and participants who decided Breakup (right).
166

chronically engage in more cognitive processing, reported
stronger coherence shifts in attitudes about facts of the
current case, suggesting that individuals with higher NFC
may achieve a greater degree of coherence across a broad
range of situations in their daily lives.

Considering the results of the present research with those
of previous research using the same type of paradigm in a
legal context (Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Simon et al., 2001;
Simon, Snow, & Read, in press) suggests that coherence
shifts may occur in an all or nothing fashion. When
participants think about a situation without an active
processing goal (as in the forced decision conditions of the
present research) they may not achieve coherence. However,
if they do have an active processing goal (involving
memorization, communication, or decision making) they are
likely to report coherence shifts, and increasing the
importance of the decision, outlining coherent perspectives,
giving them a prior preference (as in the present research) or
manipulating other aspects of the context (as in previous
research) does not substantially affect the strength of the
coherence shift. It appears, then, that whenever there is an
active processing goal coherence shifts occur and that it may
not be possible to further adjust their strength.
To test whether personality moderated the strength of the
coherence shift, we added a variable representing
personality measure. We found that PNS did not moderate
the three-way interaction, p < .5, but NFC had a marginal
effect overall, F(1, 794) = 3.41, p < .07, and a significant
effect on fact items, F(1, 794) = 4.39, p < .04. Inspecting the
means revealed that among participants who chose engage,
those with higher NFC scores rated engagement facts higher
at posttest than at pretest, t(188) = 2.19, p < .04, but those
with lower NFC did not, p < .3. This finding suggests that
people who have a greater “tendency to engage in and enjoy
thinking” (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982, p. 116) may achieve a
greater degree of coherence, though increased thought may
only affect coherence among the facts of the issue currently
being considered and may not affect more general beliefs.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by NSF grant SES-0080424 to
Dan Simon and Stephen J. Read.

References
Anderson, N. H. (1962). Application of an additive model to
impression formation. Science, 138, 817-818.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for
cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42(1), 116-131.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Heider, F. (1946). Attitudes and cognitive organization.
Journal of Psychology, 21, 107-111.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional reasoning
in decision making by constraint satisfaction. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 3–31.
Osgood, C. E., & Tannenbaum, P. H. (1955). The principle
of congruity in the prediction of attitude change.
Psychological Review, 62, 42-55.
Neuberg, S. L., & Newsom, J. T. (1993). Personal need for
structure: Individual differences in the desire for simple
structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
65(1), 113-131.
Newcomb, T. M. (1953). An approach to the study of
communicative acts. Psychological Review, 60, 393-404.
Read, S. J., Vanman, E. J., & Miller, L. C. (1997).
Connectionism, parallel constraint satisfaction processes,
and gestalt principles: (Re)introducing cognitive
dynamics to social psychology. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 1, 26-53.
Russo, J. E., Medvec, V. H., & Meloy, M. G. (1996). The
distortion of information during decisions.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
66, 102–110.
Simon, D., Pham, L. B., Le, Q. A., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001).
The emergence of coherence over the course of decision
making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1250–1260.
Simon, D., Snow, C. J., & Read, S. J. (in press). The redux
of cognitive consistency theories: Evidence judgments by
constraint satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology.

Summary and Conclusions
We extended Simon et al.’s (2001; Simon, Snow, & Read,
in press) paradigm to test for coherence shifts in perceptions
of a romantic relationship. When participants thought about
a couple’s future and decided whether they would get
engaged or break up, their attitudes about facts in the
relationship and their general beliefs about relationships
shifted to become coherent with their decision. When
participants were not able to make their own decisions
coherence shifts did not occur, suggesting that an active
processing goal may be necessary to activate coherence
mechanisms. Increasing the importance of the decision,
increasing the ease of perceiving coherent perspectives, and
introducing a prior preference within the pre-decision phase
did not increase the strength of coherence shifts, suggesting
that once there is an active processing goal and coherence
mechanisms are activated it may not be possible to alter
their intensity. Together with previous research in legal
contexts (Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Simon et al.; Simon,
Snow, & Read, in press), these findings suggest that
coherence seeking mechanisms operate within the predecision phase in an all or nothing fashion, being activated
any time there is an active processing goal. Finally, we
found that individuals with higher need for cognition, who
167

