UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Connectionist Modeling of Chinese Character Pronunciation Based on Foveal Splitting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6h1979fd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen
Shillcock, Richard

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Connectionist Modelling of Chinese Character Pronunciation Based on Foveal
Splitting
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (h.hsiao@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Richard Shillcock (rcs@inf.ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK
Abstract
We describe a connectionist model designed to reflect
some of the anatomy of the visual pathways, notably
the precise division of the human fovea and its
subsequent contralateral projection to the cortex. The
model was trained on a realistically large-scale problem,
mapping between Chinese orthography and phonology.
This split-fovea model replicated the interaction
between character regularity and frequency that has
been found in Chinese phonetic compound naming
tasks. It also provided cross-language support for the
hemispheric desynchronization account of dyslexia.
Finally, the model predicted different regularity effects
between characters with different phonetic radical
positions.

Introduction
Cognitive scientists aim to understand language
processing universals. Seidenberg and McClelland’s
“triangle model” of the reading of monosyllabic English
words has been substantially developed (e.g. Harm &
Seidenberg, 1999). However, there is still little
application to languages other than English. The
cognitive modelling of the processing of Chinese
orthography suffers from an input representativeness
problem (cf. Chater & Christiansen, 1999) due to its
complexity; there is ongoing debate as to how to
represent Chinese characters in a psychologically
realistic way. Most of the proposed computational
models of Chinese character reading either have not
been computationally implemented (e.g. Perfetti & Tan,
1999), or have employed relatively small-scale training
data (e.g. Chen & Peng 1994). Cognitive modelling
research in Chinese reading thus has lagged behind
research in the reading of English.
Chinese has a radically different orthography from
any alphabetic language. The basic writing units of
Chinese are characters, which usually contain
meaningful morphemes, instead of the letter-based
representations of speech segments found in alphabetic
languages. In general, there are four different ways of
composing Chinese characters: pictographs, indicatives,
ideographs, and semantic-phonetic compounds. A
semantic-phonetic compound (or simply a phonetic
compound) contains both semantic and phonological

601

information. Such compounds comprise about 81% of
the 7,000 most frequent characters in the Chinese
dictionary (Li & Kang, 1993). Hence, understanding
how Chinese readers recognize these phonetic
compounds is an important goal in psycholinguistic
cognitive modelling.
A phonetic compound can be decomposed into two
major components: a semantic component, which bears
information about the meaning of the character, and a
phonetic component, which may have partial
information about the pronunciation of the character.
Most phonetic compounds have their semantic radicals
on the left and phonetic radicals on the right (SP
characters). For example, the character “ 沐 ” means
“taking a bath” in English and is pronounced as “mu4”
in Pinyin1. It consists of a semantic radical on the left,
which means “water”, and a phonetic radical on the
right, which is pronounced the same as the character.
We call these characters regular phonetic compounds.
Some characters may be pronounced slightly differently
from their phonetic radicals, such as “柚”. Its phonetic
radical “ 由 ” is pronounced as “iou2” in Pinyin.
However, “柚” has a different tone – it is pronounced as
“iou4”. These characters are referred to as semi-regular
phonetic compounds. Finally, there are some characters
pronounced very differently from their phonetic
radicals, such as “洒” (sa3) and “西” (xi1). We call
them irregular phonetic compounds. The opposite
structure to an SP character exists, in which the
phonetic radical is on the left and the semantic radical is
on the right (PS characters). The ratio of SP characters
to PS characters is about 9:1 (Hsiao & Shillcock, in
preparation).
A regularity effect has been found in the processing
of Chinese phonetic compounds: Chinese readers name
regular characters faster than irregular characters. There
is also a frequency by regularity interaction in Chinese,
as in English (see, .e.g., Hue, 1992; Liu, Wu & Chou,
1996; Seidenberg, 1985.)
Researchers have also studied Chinese character
reading in brain-damaged patients (Yin & Butterworth,
1992) and found similar disorders as those found in
1

The Chinese Pinyin system is a spelling system based on the
Latin alphabet. The number at the end indicates the tone type.

English word reading. Chinese deep dyslexics were
found to be able to pronounce irregular characters well
but had difficulties pronouncing pseudo-characters with
real semantic and phonetic radicals. On the other hand,
Chinese surface dyslexics tended to regularize irregular
characters and were able to pronounce about 50% of
pseudo-characters according to their phonetic radicals
(Zhou, 1999).
There is clear evidence that the human fovea is split
precisely about the vertical midline: the left and right
visual hemifields are projected contralaterally to the
right and left hemispheres respectively (see, e.g.
Fendrich & Gazzaniga, 1989). On the basis of
anatomical and other evidence, a “split-fovea model” of
English word reading has successfully captured several
reading phenomena (see, e.g., Shillcock Ellison &
Monaghan, 2000; Shillcock & Monaghan, 2001).
Chinese phonetic compounds provide opportunities not
available in alphabetic languages for examining the
plausibility of this split-fovea model, since
phonological information only comes directly from half
of a character. In other words, the split fovea
architecture seems to correspond fortuitously to the
major functional division in the structure of Chinese
phonetic compounds; the model “carves the problem at
its joints”. Also, when an input character is irregular,
the model faces an XOR-like problem, which makes
interaction between the two halves necessary. Here we
report our results of applying this split-fovea
architecture to the modelling of Chinese character
pronunciation.

Simulations

position. According to the phonetic features of the
Chinese Pinyin system (“Mandarin Consonants and
Vowels”), there are 14 features for consonants: bilabial,
labiodental, dental, alveolar, palatal, velar, stopaspirated, stop-unaspirated, nasal, fricative, affricativeaspirated, affricative-unaspirated, glide, and liquid.
Hence, we encoded every consonant in terms of these
14 features. Vowels were encoded with 8 features: front,
central, back, high, mid, low, unround, and round.
In our phonological representation, the two major
parts were the initial consonant, which consisted of 14
nodes for the 14 consonant features, and the nucleus
vowel, which consisted of 8 nodes for the 8 vowel
features. The glide was represented together with the
vowel features in the nucleus vowel section. The same
applied to the vowel features in the ending position.
After 8 vowel feature nodes, we used 3 nodes to
represent the features of the consonant in the ending
position (nasal, dental, and velar). Notice that there are
only two consonants (n and ng) possible in the final
position. The last 2 nodes represented high and low
tones respectively. 4 different tones in Chinese were
represented with different combinations of the high and
low tones (Yip, 2002). In total, the distributed
phonological representation consisted of 27 nodes (see
Figure 1).

Initial
consonant
features
14 nodes

Nucleus
vowel
features
8 nodes

Final
consonant
3 nodes

Tones
2 nodes

Figure 1: The phonological representation.

Phonological Representations
The sound system of Chinese differs from that of
English. One of the most salient differences is the four
distinct tones in standard Chinese (i.e. Mandarin)2. The
pronunciation of each character has only one syllable,
and every syllable has a nucleus and a tone associated.
Characters with the same nucleus but different tones are
usually not related in their meanings or orthography. In
addition to a nucleus and a tone, there are three optional
components associated with a syllable: a consonant at
the beginning, a glide in the middle, and a glide or a
consonant from a restricted class at the end (Wang,
1973). In total, syllables in Chinese have eight possible
forms.
In Chinese syllables, all consonants can appear in the
initial consonant position, and all vowels can appear in
the nucleus position. On the other hand, there are only
three possible vowels in the medial glide position, and
five possible consonants and vowels in the ending
2

Some dialects in China, such as Cantonese or Southern Min,
may have more than four different tones.

602

Orthographic Representations
Chinese characters consist of several individual strokes.
There are some 20+ distinct strokes in Chinese
orthography. Together, a few strokes may comprise a
“stroke pattern”, a recurrent orthographic unit of
Chinese characters. Some stroke patterns can be
characters by themselves. Units can be constructed
recursively to form another composite unit. Those units
that are integral stroke patterns and cannot be further
decomposed into other units have been referred to as
single bodies (Chen et al, 1996).
Researchers have long believed that Chinese
character recognition starts from an analysis of features
and the number of individual strokes (e.g., Seidenberg,
1985), in contrast with letters in alphabetic writing
systems. In recent years, researchers have found
evidence that this recognition by skilled readers is
based upon well-defined orthographic constituents,
instead of individual strokes (Chen, Allport, and

Marshall, 1996; Zhou & Marslen-Wilson, 1999). Hence,
in the orthographic representation, we used the basic
stroke patterns defined in Cangjie, a Chinese
transcription system developed by Ban-fu Chu in 1978.
From a database analysis, there are 179 such stroke
patterns comprising the radicals of all left-right
structured Chinese phonetic compounds (Hsiao &
Shillcock, in preparation). Hence, we used these 179
stroke patterns to encode the orthographic
representation of the Chinese characters whose
pronunciation we modelled.

Training and Test Corpora
The training corpus contained all left-right structured
Chinese phonetic compounds and all their radicals
which exist as characters on their own. During training,
each character was presented according to its log token
frequency, taken from a Chinese lexical database
(Hsiao & Shillcock, in preparation). The database
contains about 3,000 of the most frequent Chinese
phonetic compound characters. Among them there are
2,159 left-right structured phonetic compounds and 880
radicals that are also existing characters. The test corpus
contained the same phonetic compounds, but not the
radicals on their own.

Network Architecture
Anatomical evidence has shown that the human fovea is
precisely split about a vertical midline: when an
alphabetic word or a Chinese character is fixated, the
parts to the left and right of the fixation point are
directly projected contralaterally. In modelling Chinese
character recognition, we initially abstracted from real
fixation behaviour and assumed that a character
consisting of a semantic and a phonetic radical side by
side could receive three possible fixations (see Figure
2). Characters were presented in the three fixation
positions equally frequently during training. The task
for the model, as for the reader, was to coordinate the
information
across
the
hemifields/hemispheres
(Shillcock et al., 2000).
木

representations of stroke patterns, capturing the claim
that stroke patterns are functional units of character
recognition. The characters were all represented in each
of the three positions necessary to accommodate the
input schema shown in Figure 2. Each position
represented each of the 179 possible stroke patterns.
The input was mapped, via a hidden layer, onto a
feature-level phonological output. For characters with
more than one pronunciation, only the most frequent
pronunciation was employed.
The model is shown in Figure 3. To solve the task,
“interhemispheric” communication is necessary, in the
form of “callosal” connections between the two sets of
hidden units.
Phonological representation: 27 nodes

Hidden layer
100 nodes
Left
radical
179
nodes

Left /
right
radical
179
nodes

Hidden layer
100 nodes

*

Left /
right
radical
179
nodes

Right
radical
179
nodes

Fixation point
Total number of links: 97,000
Figure 3: The split-fovea model for mapping Chinese
orthography to phonology, with callosal connections.
Phonological representation
Hidden layer
100 nods

Hidden layer
100 nodes

由
木

Left
radical

由

*

木

Left /
right
radical

*

由

Left /
right
radical

Right
radical

Fixation point
Total number of links: 97,000

Fixation point
Figure 2: The complete pattern of inputs.

Figure 4: The model with no callosal connections.

The network consisted of three layers. Adjacent
layers were fully connected. Input units were localist

Figure 4 shows a comparison model with no callosal
connections in the hidden layers, which was trained on

603

the same task. In order to compare the performance of
the two different architectures, we equalized their
computational power by putting recurrent links on the
hidden layers of the model with no callosal connections.
Hence, both models had identical parameters and
numbers of weighted connections. Thus, the principal
difference between the models was the network
architecture. We report elsewhere the more
comprehensive comparison with a non-split model. The
learning algorithm was discrete back propagation
through time (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986).

Results
We ran each of the two different models three times
and analyzed their average performance. Figure 5
shows the performance of the two models on regular
and irregular characters, in terms of summed square
error (SSE) at different stages during training. Neither
of the two models had difficulty learning this task well.
The split architecture encouraged the model to discover
the formal similarities within the radicals in the two
halves of the characters; that is, that most phonological
information came from the right half of the characters.
The divided visual system fortuitously mirrored this
distinction in the orthography.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Split-foveal
regular

SSE

Split-foveal
irregular
Split-no-callosal
regular

reading irregular characters (Yin & Butterworth, 1992).
Hence, the implemented split-fovea model provides
cross-language
support
for
the
hemispheric
desynchronization account of dyslexia.
The model with no callosal connections made
regularization errors on irregular characters, as we
might predict from the nature of the problem it faced.
Table 1 shows some examples of such regularization
errors. As can be seen, most characters were mistakenly
pronounced exactly like their phonetic radicals; some
were given the same pronunciation but with a different
tone. Interestingly, we found some which were
pronounced as other irregular characters with the same
phonetic radical (e.g., 俗 in Table 1). This shows that
the pronunciation of an irregular character was not only
affected by its phonetic radical, but also by
orthographic “neighbours” which share the same
phonetic radical.
Character

Correct
pronunciation

Generated
pronunciation

猜
帖
橫
俗
沙
冶
杯

cai1
tie3
heng2
Su2
sha1
ye3
bei1

qing1
zhan4
huang2
yu4 (欲, 裕)
shao2
tai2
bu4

Phonetic
radical
pronunciation
qing1 (青)
zhan4 (占)
huang2 (黃)
gu3 (谷)
shao3 (少)
tai2 (台)
bu4 (不)

Table 1: Examples of regularization errors generated
by the split model with no callosal connections.
.7

Split-no-callosal
irregular

.6

200 400 600 800 1000
X 1,000 Character Presented

.5

Figure 5: Performance of different models on regular
and irregular characters.
The implemented split-fovea model provides an
approach to understanding dyslexia in terms of
hemispheric desynchronization (Shillcock & Monaghan,
2001). In the current simulations, the split-fovea model
with callosal connections outperformed the model with
no callosal connections (equivalent to extreme
hemispheric desynchronization) on both regular and
irregular characters; it especially exhibited more
difficulty learning irregular characters, which constitute
an XOR-like problem for the model with no callosal
connections. Chinese surface dyslexics demonstrate
reading impairments similar and analogous to those of
dyslexics in alphabetic languages: poorer performance

604

.4

95% CI AVERAGE SSE

0

.3

REGULARITY
.2
REGULAR
.1
0.0

IRREGULAR
HIGH

LOW

FREQUENCY

Figure 6: Interaction between frequency and
regularity in the model with callosal connections after
two million character presentations.

.9
.8
.7
.6

95% CI AVERAGE SSE

.5
.4

REGULARITY

.3
.2

REGULAR
.1
IRREGULAR

0.0
SP CHARACTERS

PS CHARACTERS

Figure 7: Interaction between position of phonetic

605

radicals and regularity of characters in the split model
with callosal connections.
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5

95% CI AVERAGE SSE

Figure 6 shows the interaction between frequency and
regularity effects in the split-fovea model with callosal
connections, after two million character presentations.
This same interaction has been shown in experiments
on Chinese character recognition (see, e.g., Shu et al,
2000; Hue, 1992; Liu, Wu & Chou, 1996; Seidenberg,
1985.). The model also produced this behaviour: the
regularity effect was clearer among low frequency
characters; there was a significant interaction between
regularity and frequency (ANOVA analysis, F(1,1075)
= 16.296, p < 0.001). The same significant interaction
was also found in the version of the model with no
callosal connections (F(1,175) = 6.809, p < 0.01).
We also examined the model’s behaviour on SP and
PS characters. It showed that there was no significant
difference in the average SSE between the two groups
in both split models with and without callosal
connections (F(1,2155) = 1.730, p > 0.05;
F(1,2155)=2.117, p > 0.05). A significant interaction
between position of the phonetic radical (i.e. SP or PS
characters) and regularity was also found in both
models (F(1,2155) = 4.719, p <0.05; F(1,2155) = 5.479,
p <0.05. See Figure 7 and 8). In the split model with
callosal connections, there was a significant regularity
effect among SP characters (F(1,1940) = 127.486, p <
0.001), but not among PS characters (F(1,215) = 3.048,
p > 0.05). This may reflect the fact that only 24%
characters are regular in the PS group, compared with
39% in the SP group (Hsiao & Shillcock, in
preparation). On the other hand, the split model with no
callosal connections did not exhibit the same behaviour:
there were significant regularity effects among both SP
characters (F(1,1940) = 140.654, p < 0.001) and PS
characters (F(1,215) = 6.493, p < 0.001. See Figure 8).
Here the modelling makes a testable prediction
regarding human behaviour. Elsewhere we verify this
prediction (Hsiao & Shillcock, submitted).

.4

REGULARITY

.3
REGULAR
.2
IRREGULAR

.1
SP CHARACTERS

PS CHARACTERS

Figure 8: Interaction between position of phonetic
radicals and regularity of characters in the split model
with no callosal connections.

Conclusion and Discussion
We have presented a connectionist model of Chinese
character recognition, an extension of the anatomically
based split-fovea model, and we have compared the
processing of Chinese phonetic compounds in
architectures with and without callosal connections. We
have incorporated several simplifications concerning
the nature of the orthographic input and fixation
behaviour, but several dimensions of our modelling
have been of a psychologically realistic scale and the
modelling has succeeded in capturing a number of
behaviours and also in making experimentally testable
predictions.
On the task of orthography to phonology mapping,
the split-fovea architecture facilitates the network’s
discovery of the relationship between character
substructure and pronunciation. The split architecture
fortuitously corresponds to the major functional
division in the stimuli we have used. This modelling
further demonstrates the potential value of
incorporating the anatomical constraints of the visual
pathways into the computational modelling of reading:
the requirement of a staggered input (Figure 2)
effectively parses the stimuli (a process that is more
apparent in modelling the reading of alphabetic inputs).
Also, we have examined the performance of the
model with no callosal connections and found
behaviour similar to that of Chinese surface dyslexics.
The performance of the “callosally impaired” model is
worse than the split-fovea model especially on irregular
characters. A further examination showed that most

errors made were regularization errors, which matches
the behaviour of surface dyslexics. The modelling
hence provides cross-language support for the
hemispheric desynchronization account of surface
dyslexia.
The model also has made some testable predictions
from its performance. It shows that the regularity effect
is more salient among characters with their phonetic
radicals on the right than on the left. This interaction
reflects a statistical fact that there is greater regularity
among characters with phonetic radicals on the right.
Hence, these phonetic radicals become better cues for
pronunciation.

References
Chen, Y., and Peng, D. (1994). A connection model of
chinese character recognition and pronunciation.
Advances in the study of chinese language processing,
pp.211-240.
Chen, Y. P., Allport, D. A., & Marshall, J. C. (1996).
What are the functional orthographic units in Chinese
word recognition: The stroke or the stroke pattern?
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Experimental Psychology, 49(4), 1024-1043.
Coltheart, M. (1981). Disorders of reading and their
implications for models of normal reading. Visible
Language, 15, 245-286.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2001). Connectionist
psycholinguistics: Capturing the empirical data.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 82-88.
Fendrich, R. & Gazzaniga, M.S. (1989). Evidence of
foveal splitting in a commissurotomy patient.
Neuropsychologia, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 273-281.
Goswami, U., & Bryant, P.E. (1990). Phonological
skills and learning to read. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chinese characters: A Genealogy and Dictionary by
Harbaugh
Harm, M. W. & Seidenberg, M.S. (1999). Phonology,
reading acquisition, and dyslexia: Insights from
connectionist models. Psych. Rev., 106, 491–528.
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2004). Analysis of A
Chinese lexical database (in preparation).
Hsiao, J. H. & Shillcock, R. (2004) Regularity Effect in
Naming
Chinese
Phonetic
Compounds
with the Phonetic Radical on the Left or Right
(submitted)
Hue, C. W. (1992). Recognition processes in character
naming. In Language Processing in Chinese, H.C.
Chen and O.J.L. Tzeng (Eds.) 1992 Elsevier Science
Publishers B.V.
Li, Y. & Kang, J. S. (1993). Analysis of phonetics of
the ideophonetic characters in Modern Chinese. In Y.
Chen (ed.), Information analysis of usage of
characters in Modern Chinese, pp.84-98. Shanghai:
Shanghai Education Publisher. (In Chinese)

606

Liu, I. M., Wu, J. T., & Chou, T. L. (1996). Encoding
operation and transcoding as the major loci of the
frequency effect. Cognition, 59, 149-168.
Mandarin consonants and vowels. (n.d.). Retrieved May
13, 2004, from http://personal.cityu.edu.hk/~cttomlai/
doc/teach/stuff/mancon.htm
Perfetti, C.A. & Tan, L. (1999). The constituency
model of Chinese word identification. In J. Wang, A.
Inhoff & H. Chen (Eds.) Reading Chinese Script,
Erlbaum: London, 115-134.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J.
(1986). Learning internal representations by error
propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart and J. L. McClelland,
editors,
Parallel
Distributed
Processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition; Vol.
1: Foundations, Cambridge, Massachusetts. The MIT
Press.
Seidenberg, M.S. (1985). The time course of
phonological code activation in two writing systems.
Cognition, 19, 1-30.
Shillcock, R., Ellison, T. M., and Monaghan, P. (2000).
Eye-Fixation Behavior, Lexical Storage, and Visual
Word Recognition in a Split Processing Model.
Psychological Review, 2000, Vol. 107. No. 4, 824851.
Shillcock, R. C. & Monaghan, P. (2001). Connectionist
modelling of surface dyslexia based on foveal
splitting: Impaired pronunciation after only two half
pints. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Edinburgh: LEA.
pp.916-921.
Shu, H., Anderson, R.C., and Wu. (2000). Phonetic
Awareness: Knowledge of Orthography-Phonology
Relationships in the Character Acquisition of Chinese
Children. Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol.
92, No. 1, 56-62.
Wang, W. S. Y. (1973). The Chinese language. In
Freeman (Ed.), Readings from Scientific American:
Language, Writing and the Computer (pp. 50-60):
Scientific American.
Yin, W. & Butterworth B. (1992). Deep and Surface
Dyslexia in Chinese. In H.C. Chen and O.J.L. Tzeng
(Eds.), Language Processing In Chinese, pp. 349-366.
Yip, M.J. (2002). Tone. Cambridge University Press.
Zhou, X. & Marslen-Wilson (1999). Sublexical
Processing in Reading Chinese. In J. Wang, A. Inhoff
& H. Chen (Eds.) Reading Chinese Script, 37-63,
Erlbaum: London.

