UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Contribution of Reading Skill to Learning from Expository Texts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2s44j11q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Ozuru, Yasuhiro
Best, Rachel
McNamara, Danielle S.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Contribution of Reading Skill to Learning from Expository Texts
Yasuhiro Ozuru (y.ozuru@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Rachel Best (r.best@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@ mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Psychology Department, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

comprehension of narrative text (e.g., McNamara &
McDaniel, 2004). Moreover, general and domainspecific knowledge is particularly critical for
successful comprehension of expository texts (e.g.,
chemistry, biology). A great deal of research has
shown
that
readers'
knowledge
facilitates
comprehension and learning from expository texts
(e.g., Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979; McNamara &
Kintsch, 1996).
However, there are reasons to believe that other
individual difference factors influence higher level
processing of texts. In particular, factors associated
with general reading skill, such as working memory
capacity (Just & Carpenter, 1992), reading strategy
knowledge (Guthrie, Anderson, Alao, & Rinehart,
1999), and meta-cognition (Baker, 2002) appear to be
important. For example, McNamara and colleagues
(McNamara, in press; O’Reilly, Best, & McNamara,
in press; O’Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, in press)
have shown that meta-cognitive reading strategy
training improves science text comprehension,
particularly for low-knowledge readers. Thus, active,
strategic processing of text is particularly important
to the comprehension of expository texts.
We explore here how reading skill is beneficial to
comprehension of expository texts beyond the impact
of prior knowledge found in various past research
(e.g., Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979) A possibility
explored here is the notion that general reading
ability is associated with a set of skills that facilitate
active processing of expository texts.
We hypothesized that knowledge level and reading
ability would be associated with different aspects of
the reading comprehension of expository texts.
Specifically, whereas “knowledge” should be
important for how easily one can comprehend the
material, “reading ability” or “skill” should influence
active, deep level processing of the material. Thus,
our goal in this paper is to examine how reading
ability as well as prior knowledge contributes to the
“process of learning” from expository texts. We use
the phrase “process of learning” here to refer to the
processes engaged by students to acquire new

Abstract
Our study investigated the importance of reader aptitudes
(prior knowledge and reading skill) in the processing of an
expository text. We analyzed self-explanations produced by
42 high-school students while reading an expository text
about thunderstorms. Specifically, we focused on students
attempts to paraphrase information (i.e., restate sentences in
their own words) and elaborate on the sentence content
(e.g., connect information in different sentences to build a
global representation of the text). Our findings suggest that
reading skill is important for the active processing of
expository texts. Skilled readers produced more
elaborations than less skilled readers, and also a more
diverse range of strategies, which may be crucial for
supporting learning. Implications for learning from text are
discussed.

Introduction
Successful reading comprehension requires the
efficient co-ordination and integration of a number of
underlying processes (Vellutino, 2003). These
processes may include identification of words,
decoding of word meanings, integrating the meaning
of individual words into a coherent sentence level
meaning using sentence syntax, and finally building a
more global level representation of the text by
continuously integrating the individual sentences into
meaningful discourse level representation.
Our focus is on the higher level processes involved
in reading comprehension, in particular, on how
readers construct global mental representations of
situations, and/or topics described by written material
(van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). Further, we focus on the
impact of two reader-related factors on reading
comprehension at this higher level of processing.
The first of these factors concerns the readers’
knowledge of the topic of the text. As readers
comprehension processes move from lower levels
(e.g., word meaning) to higher levels (e.g.,
sentence/discourse
processing),
comprehension
becomes increasingly influenced by the reader’s
knowledge about the topic of the text (Kintsch,
1988). General knowledge clearly influences the

1071

information from a text and integrate it into their own
knowledge structures.
According to constructivist framework, learning
occurs as a function of constructive activity one
engages at the time of processing the materials
(Cobb, 1994). We hypothesized that reading ability is
associated with a set of skills that help readers engage
in constructive activities such as elaborative
inferences during reading, hence contributing to
learning from the materials.
To tap into the effect of reading ability on “the
process of learning,” we analyzed self-explanations
students produced when reading an expository text.
Think aloud protocols are known to be useful for
obtaining an insight into thought processes associated
with problem solving (e.g., Chi, Bassok, Lewis,
Reimann, & Glaser, 1989; Ericsson & Simon, 1993)
and reading (Chi, 2000). Evidence further indicates
that eliciting self-explanations during reading leads
some readers to engage in active reading strategies
that improve text comprehension (Chi, de Leeuw,
Chiu, & Lavancher, 1994). Finally, there is evidence
showing that the number of self-explanations (e.g.,
elaborative inferences) is correlated with learning
(Chi, 2000). These studies reveal strong relations
between self-explanation and the “process of
learning.” Thus, the analysis of self-explanations
should afford an effective method of gaining insight
into the “process of learning” that occur while
students are reading expository texts.
Assuming skilled and less skilled readers possess
different degrees of reading related aptitudes (e.g.,
motivation, working memory, effort, strategies) to
deal with the reading comprehension situation, we
expect variations to emerge in the type of reading
strategies observed in the self-explanations generated
while reading an expository text. In particular we
hypothesize that reading ability will be associated
with high frequency of constructive activities such as
elaborative inferences.
The self-explanation protocols analyzed in this
paper were collected during computerized reading
strategy training, in which students typed their selfexplanations to expository texts (see also, Best,
Ozuru, & McNamara, 2004). The computerized
trainer, called iSTART (Interactive Strategy Trainer
for Active Reading and Thinking), is an automated
reading strategy training program developed by
McNamara, Levinstein, and Boonthum (in press).
iSTART has been shown to be as effective in training
reading strategies as its parallel, live version, called
SERT (McNamara, in press; O’Reilly et al., in press).

Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 42 eighth and ninth grade
children from an east coast suburban school. The
students were enrolled in a learning program, called
Learning Bridge, designed to provide summer school
to students from under-privileged backgrounds.
Design and Materials
Individual differences were measured with two
tests; a modified version of the Gates-MacGinitie
Reading Skill Test and a Prior Knowledge Test. The
Gates-MacGinite test is a standardized reading
comprehension test, designed for grades 10-12. The
test consisted of 40 multiple-choice questions that
assess students’ comprehension on several short text
passages (Cronbach’s Alpha α=.91). Due to time
constraints we omitted the vocabulary comprehension
section. The prior knowledge test had 35 multiplechoice items, which tap knowledge of different
science domains, including biology, scientific
methods, mathematics, earth science, physics, and
chemistry (Cronbach’s Alpha α=.81).
The iSTART system (McNamara et al., in press),
in which the self-explanations were collected,
consists of three phases: Introduction (introduces
concept of self-explanation and reading strategies),
Demonstration (shows users examples of selfexplanation) and Practice (requires students to
generate self-explanations).
In the practice section, students are presented with
science texts one sentence at a time on the computer
screen. For each sentence, they are asked to type a
self-explanation. iSTART assesses the quality of the
self-explanation and provides the feedback to
students via the pedagogical agent, Merlin. The
feedback is largely based on the degree of argument
overlap between the students’ self-explanation and
the target sentence. The system is designed such that
it encourages students to use information that is not
in the target sentence (e.g., elaboration based on
commonsense and previous sections of the text.). For
example, Merlin might respond with “Try adding
some more information that explains what the
sentence means” when the self-explanation is too
similar to the target sentence. Thus, feedback differs
for each user, depending on the quality of selfexplanations produced.
The self explanations analyzed in this paper are the
final versions that the students provided for each
sentence. Thus, they have been affected by the
feedback of the system in that the final self-

1072

aligned to the original sentence in terms of sentence
structure and/or content words. Distant paraphrases
contained the same semantic content as the target
sentence, but did not have the same sentence
structure or content words.
Coding of the elaborations was based on whether
the self-explanations included any ideas that were not
explicitly present in the target sentence. Once a selfexplanation was found to contain an elaboration, it
was further coded for the nature of its contribution:
1) relevant to the comprehension of neither the
current sentence nor the overall text; 2) relevant and
contributes to the comprehension of only the target
sentence; and 3) relevant and contributes to a global
level of comprehension that goes beyond the current
sentence (e.g., actively building the large picture
depicted by overall text). We also coded the
elaborations in terms of their source and accuracy.
However, since the present analysis does not focus on
these aspects, they are not described here (see Best et
al., 2004).
Reliability of the coding was evaluated using
Cohen’s Kappa and simple agreement (when the
coding is binary). Reliability between the coders was
85% or above for all coding dimensions.
Disagreements were resolved via a discussion
between the coders.

explanations reflect better quality protocols than
would otherwise have been provided under
spontaneous circumstances. However, the system
tends to reduce the difference between high and poor
quality self explanations because there is a certain
threshold for the acceptance. In this sense, the effects
of individual differences reported in this paper are
unlikely to be artifacts of the system’s feedback.
Students self-explained two texts in the practice
phase, “Stages of Thunderstorm Development” and
“Origin of Coal.” The present analysis focuses on self
explanations for the thunderstorm text. This text,
which was extracted from a school textbook, has 13
sentences and 197 words, with Flesch-Kincaid Grade
level of 9.4.
Procedure
Individual difference measures were collected
shortly before iSTART training. Students completed
the prior knowledge test followed by the GatesMacGinite reading test. They were given 15 minutes
to complete each assessment. The students then
completed the training with iSTART program.
During the practice phase, they provided explanations
to the Thunderstorms text.
Coding
Students typed their self-explanations, which were
automatically recorded in the database. Two
independent coders analyzed the self-explanations in
terms of the following five dimensions: 1) presence
of comprehension monitoring; 2) presence of
paraphrasing (none, topic identification, repetition,
and paraphrasing); 3) distance of paraphrasing from
the target sentence; 4) accuracy of the paraphrasing;
and 5) presence of elaborations.
Coding of comprehension monitoring assessed
whether
self-explanations
incorporated
the
monitoring of students’ understanding. Explanations
were coded for the presence or absence of
comprehension monitoring statements (e.g., ‘I don’t
understand X’). The presence of paraphrasing was
judged on students’ attempt to restate the target
sentence in their own words. For this coding, a self
explanation was categorized as one of the following:
1) a paraphrase that was a restatement of the sentence
using different words, 2) a repetition of the sentence
that was lexically too similar to the target sentence,
3) a simple topic identification (e.g., ‘this is about
storms’), or 4) no paraphrase, repetition, or topic
identification. If the explanation was categorized as a
paraphrase, the paraphrase was further coded for
accuracy and distance from the target sentences.
Accuracy has three levels (inaccurate, partially
accurate, and accurate); and distance has two levels
(distant and close). Close paraphrases were closely

Results
To explore the role of the reading skill and prior
knowledge, we adopted a median split method;
students were divided into high and low reading
comprehension skill, or high and low-knowledge
groups, using the median scores of The GatesMacGinite test or Prior Knowledge test. The
correlation between the Gates-MacGinite test and the
prior knowledge test was high, r = 0.604, p < .001.
Our data indicated that students’ often attempted to
paraphrase (91.0%) and elaborate (41%), but seldom
expressed comprehension monitoring (4%). Thus, the
subsequent analysis focuses on paraphrase and
elaborations.
We used analysis of variance (ANOVA) to analyze
the students’ use of the strategies. The univariate
ANOVAs comprised reading skill (high or low) or
knowledge (high or low) as the between-subjects
factor and strategy type (e.g., paraphrases) as the
dependent variable.
Frequency distribution of strategy use
Our first analysis investigated the frequency of four
types of strategy used by different types of readers
(low and high reading skill or knowledge students).
For this analysis, we classified all the selfexplanation into one of four categories: 1 =

1073

Repetition or topic identification only; 2 =
Paraphrasing only; 3 = Elaboration I (irrelevant or
current sentence); and 4 = Elaboration II (knowledge
building).
It is important to note that elaboration (both type I
and II) may or may not contain paraphrasing.
Elaboration I and Elaboration II were treated
separately because knowledge building elaborations
are indicative of the investment of a greater effort to
understand the text (i.e., building a more global
representation of the text). Irrelevant elaborations
were coded under Elaboration I because they indicate
that the student is investing an effort to integrate the
information into their knowledge structures.
The levels of the classification scheme reflect an
increase in the construction of integrated and global
representations of the situation described by the text.
For example, repetition does not require any
integration because it only involves rewriting the text
information. In contrast, paraphrasing requires the
restatement of the situation using different words or
sentence structure, revealing how students
understood the meaning of the sentence. Similarly,
Elaboration I indicates that students are making an
effort to understand the target sentence by relating,
integrating, or comparing the information in the
sentence with what they already know. Finally,
Elaboration II involves effort to integrate information
appearing on a multiple sentences into a coherent
model. Therefore, this analysis can examine the
degrees of constructive activities carried out by the
student.
The first analysis investigated the self-explanation
strategies used by skilled and less skilled readers. As
shown in Table 1, skilled readers were more likely to
use elaboration strategies whereas less skilled readers
were more likely to repeat or paraphrase only.
We performed two separate ANOVAs, assessing
the frequency with which skilled and less skilled
readers used elaboration types I and II. Skilled
readers produced more current sentence focused
elaborations (elaboration I), F(1, 39) = 6.75, MSE =
.053, p = .01, and knowledge building elaborations
(elaboration II), F(1, 39) = 7.6, MSE = .003, p < .01,
than did less skilled readers. The difference between
skilled and less skilled readers in current sentence
focused elaboration (Elaboration I) is not solely
attributable to irrelevant elaborations included in
Elaboration I because the difference remained
marginally significant after excluding irrelevant
elaborations: (less skilled readers M=.22 SD=.22) and
(skilled readers M=.33 SD=.20), F(1, 39) = 2.95,
MSE = .043, p =.094.

Table 1. Strategy use and comprehension skill
Strategy use
Less Skilled
Skilled
Repetition/Topic
.08 (.07)
.03 (.07)
identification
Paraphrasing
.62 (.20)
.46 (.23)
Elaboration I
.29 (.23)
.46 (.22)
Elaboration II
.01 (.02)
.05 (.07)
Note: Standard deviations are in parentheses.
The previous analysis was repeated with
knowledge as the between-subjects variable. As
shown in Table 2, there were few differences in the
distribution of strategies used by high and lowknowledge readers. ANOVAs confirmed this
conclusion: there was no difference in the frequency
with which low-knowledge and high-knowledge
students used Elaboration I, F(1,39) = 1.04, p = ns, or
Elaboration II, F(1, 39) = .017, p = ns. There was no
difference, again, in Elaboration I even after
excluding irrelevant elaborations: low-knowledge
(M= .28 SD =.24) and high-knowledge (M= .28 SD =
.19) students.
Table 2. Strategy use and knowledge
Strategy use
Low
High
Knowledge
Knowledge
Repetition/Topic
.07 (.06)
.04 (.09)
identification
Paraphrasing
.55 (.27)
.53 (.20)
Elaboration I
.35 (.26)
.40 (.23)
Elaboration II
.03 (.06)
.03 (.10)
Note: Standard deviations are in the parentheses.
Variety of strategy use
Next, we were interested in how skilled and less
skilled readers and high and low-knowledge readers
differed in terms of the diversity of the strategies they
use in self-explaining the 13 sentences of the text.
We hypothesized that less skilled readers would be
relatively uniform in their strategy use (i.e., use only
one type of strategy). In contrast, skilled readers
would frequently change their strategy use (i.e., adapt
their strategies to different sentences). On the other
hand, we predicted that knowledge level would make
little difference in terms of the variety of strategies
students’ used.
To conduct this analysis, we counted how many of
the aforementioned strategies (paraphrase, type I
elaboration, and type II elaboration) each student
used to self-explain the 13 sentences. We did not
count repetition/topic identification as a strategy
because it is a default technique. Accordingly, the

1074

SD = 0.29) than less skilled readers (M = 0.47, SD =
0.24), F (1, 39) = 2.891, MSE = .057, p =.097.
We also examined accuracy of distant and close
paraphrases by dividing all of the items into distant or
close paraphrases, and analyzing whether the
accuracy differed across distant and close
paraphrases. The analysis revealed that accuracy does
not differ between distant (M =.62, SD = .22) and
close paraphrases (M =.69, SD = .20), F(1, 38) =
2.215, p > 0.1, suggesting that distant paraphrases are
not necessarily less accurate. Overall, these analyses
indicate that students’ prior knowledge has a larger
effect on the production of distant paraphrases. Given
that producing a distant paraphrase without distorting
the meaning of the sentence requires accurate
comprehension of the sentence, this finding confirms
previous findings for effects of knowledge on
comprehension level of the expository text.

score each student obtained varied from 0 (no
strategy used) to 3.
The analysis showed that reading skill was an
important determiner with regard to the variety of
self-explanation strategies used. An ANOVA
indicated that skilled readers used a greater variety of
self-explanation strategies (M = 2.4, SD = 0.6) than
did less skilled readers (M = 2.0, SD = 0.5), F(1, 39)
=5.9, MSE = .277, p = .02.
On the other hand, the analysis based on readers’
knowledge indicated that there was no reliable
differences in the range of self-explanation strategies
used by high (M = 2.3, SD = 0.5) and low-knowledge
students (M = 2.1, SD = 0.3), F(1,39) = 1.45, ns.
Effect of prior knowledge and reading skill on the
quality of paraphrases
Thus far, our analyses have indicated that reading
skill, rather than prior knowledge is an important
factor in determining the frequency of elaborative
inferences and variety of self-explanation strategies
students employ. Does this mean that prior
knowledge does not play an important role in the
reading comprehension process? According to our
argument, and existing literature, prior knowledge
should have a large influence on comprehension level
of expository texts. In order to examine the effect of
prior knowledge on comprehension, we analyzed the
quality of paraphrases. Given that paraphrasing
involves describing the gist of a sentence using one’s
own words, the quality of paraphrases should reflect
the students’ understanding of sentence meaning.
Our analysis focused on two different qualities
related to successful paraphrasing: 1) accuracy of the
paraphrase and 2) distance of the paraphrase. For
accuracy, a score of 0, 0.5 and 1.0 was assigned for
inaccurate, partially accurate, and accurate
paraphrases, respectively. The two sets of univariate
ANOVAs on the accuracy scores indicated that there
were no effects of individual differences. This rather
disappointing result is possibly due to the fact that the
target sentence was available for reference while
students self-explained the sentence.
Turning to the distance of paraphrase, we
compared the frequency of distant paraphrases
produced by high and low-knowledge and/or by
skilled and less skilled students. Two sets of
univariate ANOVAs on the frequency of distant
paraphrases indicated that distant paraphrases
occurred more frequently for high-knowledge (M =
0.63, SD = 0.22) than low-knowledge students (M =
0.44, SD = 0.24), F (1, 39) = 8.153, MSE = .051, p
<.01. Also the main effect of reading comprehension
skill was marginally significant, with more distant
paraphrases produced by skilled readers (M = 0.61,

Discussion
Overall, the analyses support our prediction that
reading comprehension ability is closely associated
with the effort and strategies that readers expend to
understand the expository text, whereas knowledge is
more closely associated with the actual
comprehension level of the material (as indicated by
the distance of the paraphrase analysis). Skilled
readers’ self-explanations tend to include more
constructive activities, such as elaborative inferences
and linking different parts of the text to obtain a
“larger picture.” This finding is remarkable because it
demonstrates that skilled readers’ are able to generate
these elaborative and bridging inferences even when
they are dealing with relatively unfamiliar materials
(i.e., an expository text about thunderstorm as
opposed to narrative texts used in Gates-MacGinite
test). One interpretation of this finding is that skilled
readers possess skills/strategies to effortfully activate
relevant information from relatively unfamiliar textbased information (McNamara, in press). This ability
is associated with constructive activities such as
bridging inferences, and elaborative inferences. Use
of these types of strategies, either naturally or after
being trained to do so, contributes positively to
learning from expository texts.
One limitation of our study is that it focuses solely
on the processes readers employ while reading the
text, and hence, does not directly show learning gains
for skilled readers. However, research supports the
assumption that greater use of elaboration is
associated with learning gains (Chi, 2000;
McNamara, in press).
There are two contrasting views regarding how
elaborations contribute to learning: the incomplete
text view and the self-repair view (Chi, 2000). These
views differ critically with respect to whether (or to

1075

relation to high and low domain knowledge.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
18, 275-290.
Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivism
and sociocultural perspectives on mathematical
development. Educational Researcher, 23, 13-20.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. (1993). Protocol
Analysis (Rev.ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Guthrie, J. T., Anderson, E., Alao, S., & Rinehart, J.
(1999). Influences of concept oriented reading
instruction on strategy use and conceptual learning
from text. Elementary School Journal, 99, 343366.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P.A. (1992). A capacity
hypothesis
of
comprehension:
Individual
differences in working memory. Psychological
Review, 99, 122-149.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in
discourse
comprehension:
A
construction
integration model. Psychological Review, 95, 163182.
McNamara D. S. (in press) SERT: Self-Explanation
Reading Training. Discourse Processes.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning
from texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text
coherence. Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., & McDaniel, M. A. (2004).
Suppressing irrelevant information: knowledge
activation or inhibition? Journal of Experimental
Psychology, Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30,
465-482.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B. & Boonthum, C.
(in press). iSTART: Interactive Strategy Trainer for
Active Reading and Thinking. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers.
O’Reilly, T., Best, R. & McNamara, D. S. (in press).
Self-explanation reading training: Effects for lowknowledge readers. Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
O’Reilly, T., Sinclair, G. P. & McNamara, D. S. (in
press). Reading strategy training: Automated
versus live. Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Vellutino, F. R. (2003). Individual differences as
sources of variability in reading comprehension in
elementary school children. In A. P. Sweet & C.
E.
Snow
(Eds.),
Rethinking
Reading
Comprehension. New York, NY: Guilford.
van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies in
discourse comprehension. New York: Academic
press.

what extent) the accuracy of readers’ elaborations
affect leaning. In line with Chi’s (2000) view, our
assumption here is that elaborations facilitate
learning, regardless of whether they are accurate (see
also, McNamara, in press). But, of course, we do not
rule out the likelihood that there are several different
ways in which elaborations can contribute to leaning.
Accuracy of elaborations may well have important
implications for the learning process, particularly
when the reader does not have the opportunity to
repair inaccurate elaborations based on information
encountered later in the text.
In conclusion, the present research highlights the
important role active reading strategies play in the
comprehension of and learning from expository texts.
Given that active strategies are beneficial, future
work should explore, in more detail, the reader
related factors (e.g., metacognition, knowledge on the
strategies, etc) that underlie the use of the strategies,
and the text-related factors (e.g., sentence difficulty,
that affect active reading.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of the ODU
Strategy Lab who helped to conduct this study. This
project was supported by the NSF (IERI Award
number 0241144). Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the NSF.

References
Baker, L. (2002). Metacognition in comprehension
instruction. In C.C. Block & M. Pressley (Eds.),
Comprehension instruction: Research-based best
practices (pp. 77-95). New York: Guilford Press.
Best, R. M., Ozuru, Y. & McNamara, D. S. (2004).
Self-explaining science texts: strategies, knowledge
and reading skill. Proceedings of the International
Conference for the Learning Sciences, CA, LA.
Chi, M. T. H. (2000). Self-explaining expository
texts: The dual process of generating inferences
and repairing mental models. In Glaser, R. (Ed.).
Advances in Instructional Psychology, Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann,
P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How
students study and use examples in learning to
solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & Lavancher,
C. (1994). Eliciting self explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477
Chiesi, H. I., Spilich, G. J., & Voss, J. F. (1979).
Acquisition of domain-related information in

1076

