UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Creative Abduction as Active Shaping of Knowledge. Epistemic and Ethical Mediators

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6ps954ph

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Magnani, Lorenzo

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Creative Abduction as Active Shaping of Knowledge.
Epistemic and Ethical Mediators
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)

Department of Philosophy and Computational Philosophy Laboratory, Piazza Botta 6
27100 Pavia, Italy, and
Department of Philosophy, Baruch College, The City University of New York,
New York, NY, 10010 USA
to the new product. Hence, in a strictly pragmatic sense,
when we can clarify what behavior we are looking for, we
could implement it in a machine: a methodological criterion
enables us to define and consider just those practical effects
we conceive to be associated with novelty and unconve ntionality (cf. Buchanan, 2001).
I maintain we can overcome many of the difficulties of
creativity studies developing a theory of abduction, in the
light of Charles Sanders Peirce’s first insights.

Abstract
The concept of manipulative abduction is devoted to capturing the role of action in many interesting situations: action
provides otherwise unavailable information that enables the
agent to solve problems by starting and performing a suitable
abductive process of generation or selection of hypotheses.
Many external representations, even if in some cases inert
from an epistemological point of view, can be transformed
into what is called epistemic mediators, active in creative abductive reasoning. An often neglected side of human creativity is related to emotional, artistic, and ethical aspects, and
concerns the active shaping of values in an esthetical and
ethical world. I will present some aspects of this kind of reasoning in the case of scientific and ethical thinking; moreover,
I will illustrate some aspects of what I call “ethical mediators”
in their activity of shaping and reshaping ethical worth of human beings and colle ctives.

Abduction and Epistemic Mediators
If we decide to adopt this kind of methodology it is necessary to develop a cognitive model of creativity able to repr esent not only “novelty” and “unconventionality”, but also
some features commonly referred to as the entire creative
process, such as the expert use of background knowledge
and ontology (defining new concepts and searching heuristically among the old ones) and the modeling activity deve loped in the so called “incubation time” (generating and
testing, transformations in the space of the hypotheses). The
philosophical concept of abduction may be a candidate to
solve this problem, and offers an approach to model creative
processes of hypotheses generation in a completely explicit
and formal way, which can fruitfully integrate the narrowness proper of a merely psychological approach, too experimentally human-oriented.

The Inexplicability of Creativity
Creativity is certainly an important aspect of our definition
of “intelligence” but the literature associates many different
notions to creativity. This ambiguity has brought to a lack of
consensus in the research community. The common views
associate to creativity unusual and mysterious qualities that
drive the concept of creativity to a confused verbosity.
Statements like “to break the rules”, “to think different”, “to
destroy one Gestalt in favor of a better one”, and “to arrange
old elements into a new form”, present in the field of psychological research on creativity since 1950s, certainly do
not clarify the topic, and seem to lead to the Freudian conclusion that creativity cannot be understood. This conclusion has also been supported by many philosophers who
studied conceptual change in science during the second half
of the last century. They distinguished between a logic of
discovery and a logic of justification (i.e. between the psychological side of creation and the logic argument of proving new discovered ideas by facts). The consequent conclusion was that a logic of discovery (and a rational model of
discovery) could not exist: scientific conceptual change is
cataclysmic and irrational, dramatic, incomprehensible and
discontinuous. Many other studies already argued that creativity can be understood (Boden, 1991, Sternberg, Kaufman,
and Pretz, 2002), but paid attention mainly to the psychological and experimental aspects, disregarding the philosophical, logical, and computation ones.
In AI research, however, since Simon, two characteristics seem to be associated to creativity: the novelty of the
product and the unconventionality of the process that leads

Theoretical and Manipulative Abduction
A hundred years ago, C. S. Peirce (CP, 1931-1958) coined
the concept of abduction in order to illustrate that the process of scientific discovery is not irrational and that a methodology of discovery is possible. Peirce interpreted abduction essentially as an “inferential” creative process of generating a new hypothesis. Abduction has a logical form (fallacious, if we model abduction by using classical logic) distinct from deduction and induction. Reasoning which starts
from reasons and looks for consequences is called deduction; that which starts from consequences and looks for reasons is called abduction.
Abduction is the process of inferring certain facts and/or
laws and hypotheses that render some sentences plausible,
that explain or discover some (eventually new) phenomenon
or observation; it is the process of reasoning in which explanatory hypotheses are formed and evaluated. There are
two main epistemological meanings of the word abduction
(Magnani, 2001): 1) abduction that only generates “plausible” hypotheses (“selective” or “creative”) and 2) abduction
considered as inference “to the best explanation”, which
879

also evaluates hypotheses. To illustrate from the field of
medical knowledge, the discovery of a new disease and the
manifestations it causes can be considered as the result of a
creative abductive inference. Therefore, “creative” abduction deals with the whole field of the growth of scientific
knowledge. This is irrelevant in medical diagnosis where
instead the task is to “select” from an encyclopedia of prestored diagnostic entities. We can call both inferences ampliative, selective and creative, because in both cases the
reasoning involved amplifies, or goes beyond, the information incorporated in the premises.
Theoretical abduction1 certainly illustrates much of what
is important in creative abductive reasoning, in humans and
in computational programs, but fails to account for many
cases of explanations occurring in science when the exploitation of environment is crucial. It fails to account for those
cases in which there is a kind of “discovering through doing”, cases in which new and still unexpressed information
is codified by means of manipulations of some external objects (epistemic mediators). The concept of manipulative
abduction2 captures a large part of scientists’ and physicians’ thinking where the role of action is central, and where
the features of this action are implicit and hard to be elicited
Peirce uses the terms “inference” and “inferential process” to refer to abduction. It is useful to try to clarify the
meaning of the term “inference” as considered by Peirce’s
thought. Peirce stated that all thinking is in signs, and signs
can be icons, indices or symbols. Moreover, all inference is
a form of sign activity, where the word sign includes “feeling, image, conception and other representation” (CP
5.283), and, in Kantian words, all synthetic forms of cognition. Feelings, images, simulations, etc., are currently characterized as forms of model-based reasoning (Magnani &
Nersessian, 2002). Consequently, following Peirce, we can
say that a considerable part of thinking activity is modelbased (cf. footnote 1), that most of the forms of constitution
of phenomena are characterized in a model-based way. I use
the term “model-based reasoning” following Nersessian
(1995), that is, to indicate the construction and manipulation
of various kinds of representations, not necessarily sentential and/or formal. Scientific concept formation, scientific
discovery, and – as we will see – diagnostic reasoning are
often related to heuristic procedures that resort to me ntal/internal but also to external “models” and representations.
Peirce gives an interesting example of model-based abduction related to sense activity: “A man can distinguish different textures of cloth by feeling: but not immediately, for
he requires to move fingers over the cloth, which shows that
he is obliged to compare sensations of one instant with those
of another” (CP 5.221); this idea surely suggests that abductive movements also have interesting extra-theoretical
1

Magnani (2001) introduces the concept of theoretical abduction.
He maintains that there are two kinds of theoretical abduction,
“sentential”, related to logic and to verbal/symbolic inferences, and
“model-based”, related to the exploitation of internalized models of
diagrams, pictures, etc., cf. below in this paper.
2
Manipulative abduction and epistemic mediators are introduced
and illustrated in Magnani (2001).

880

characteristics and that there is a role in abductive reasoning
for various kinds of manipulations of external objects (cf.
below, the problem of “action-based, manipulative abduction”). One more example is given by the fact that the perception of tone arises from the activity of the mind only after having noted the rapidity of the vibrations of the sound
waves, but the possibility of individuating a tone happens
only after having heard several of the sound impulses and
after having judged their frequency. Consequently the sensation of pitch is made possible by previous experiences and
cognitions stored in memory, so that one oscillation of the
air would not produce a tone.
Model-based thinking activity also exploits external
models. We have seen that the concept of manipulative abduction is devoted to capturing the role of action on external
models in hypothetical and creative reasoning. This kind of
manipulation provides otherwise unavailable information
that enables the agent to solve a problem by performing abductive processes of generation or selection of hypotheses.
An expert manipulation of objects directed by abductive
movements that implicates the strategic application of old
and new templates of behavior mainly connected with extratheoretical components also esthetical, ethical, and emotional.
Manipulative abduction happens when we are thinking
through doing and not only, in a pragmatic sense, about doing. It refers to an extra-theoretical behavior that aims at
creating communicable accounts of new experiences to integrate them into previously existing systems of experimental and linguistic (theoretical) practices. Gooding (1990)
refers to this kind of concrete manipulative reasoning when
he illustrates the role in science of the so-called “construals”
that embody tacit inferences in procedures that are often apparatus and machine based. The embodiment is of course an
expert manipulation of objects in a highly constrained experimental environment, and is directed by abductive
movements that imply the strategic application of old and
new templates of behavior mainly connected with extratheoretical components, for instance emotional, esthetical,
ethical, and economic.

Epistemic Mediators
Recent research, taking an ecological approach to the analysis and design of human-machine systems, has shown how
expert performers use action in everyday life to create an
“external” model of task dynamics that can be used in lieu
of an internal model (Kirlik, 1998). Not only a way for
moving the world to desirable states, action performs an
epistemic and not merely performatory role that is very relevant to abductive reasoning.
The whole activity of manipulation is devoted to build
various external epistemic mediators that function as an
enormous new source of information and knowledge. I derive this expression from the cognitive anthropologist
Hutchins (1995), that coins the expression “mediating
structure” to refer to various external tools that can be built
to cognitively help the activity of navigating in modern but
also in “primitive” settings. Any written procedure is a simple example of a cognitive “mediating structure” with possible cognitive aims: “Language, cultural knowledge, mental

sorts to the need of specifying how to efficiently examine
and explore and to the need of “interpreting” an object of a
certain type. It is a process of attentive and controlled perceptual exploration through which the agent is able to collect the necessary information: a purposefully moving
through what is being examined, actively picking up information rather than passively transducing (cf. Gibson, 1979).
As suggested for instance by Lederman and Klatzky
(1990), this view of perception may be applied to all sense
modes: for example, it can be easily extended to the haptic
mode. Mere passive touch, in fact, tells us little, but by actively exploring an object with our hands we can find out a
great deal. Our hands incorporate not only sensory transducers, but musculature which, under central control, moves
them in appropriate ways: lifting something tells about its
weight, running fingers around the contours provides shape
information, rubbing it reveals texture. As already stressed
by Peirce in the quotation I already reported above, when
dealing with the hypothesizing activity of what I call manipulative abduction, “A man can distinguish different textures of cloth by feeling: but not immediately, for he requires to move fingers over the cloth, which shows that he is
obliged to compare sensations of one instant with those of
another” (CP 5.221).
Thomas (1999) suggests we can think of the fingers together with the neural structures that control, for example,
running them so that we can consider the afferent signals
that they generate as a sort of (perceptual) instrument to
gather knowledge: a complex of physiological structures
capable of active testing for some environmental property.
The study of manipulative abduction that I outlined above,
can gain from this approach. To give an example, the role of
particular epistemic mediators (optical diagrams) in nonstandard analysis has been studied, and so their function in
grasping and teaching abstract and difficult mathematical
concepts (see Magnani and Dossena, 2002). In this case the
external models (mathematical diagrams) do not give full
available knowledge, but, on the contrary, compel the agent
to engage a continuous epistemic dialogue between the diagrams and its internal knowledge to the aim of understanding an already existing information or at “creating” a new
one (cf. also the geometrical example in the following section).
It is clear that humans and other animals make a great
use of perceptual reasoning and kinesthetic abilities. We can
catch a thrown ball, cross a busy street, read a musical score,
go through a passage by imaging if we can contort out bodies to the way required, evaluate shape by touch, recognize
that an obscurely seen face belongs to a friend of ours, etc.
Usually the “computations” required to achieve these tasks
are not accessible to a conscious description. Mathematical
reasoning uses language explanations, but also nonlinguistic notational devices and models. Geometrical constructions represent a relatively simple example of this kind
of extra-linguistic machinery we know as characterized in a
model-based and manipulative - abductive - way.

models, arithmetic procedures, and rules of logic are all mediating structures too. So are traffic lights, supermarkets
layouts, and the contexts we arrange for one another’s behavior. Mediating structures can be embodied in artifacts, in
ideas, in systems of social interactions […]” (pp. 290-291).
In this light manipulative abduction in science represents
a kind of redistribution of the epistemic and cognitive effort
to manage objects and information that cannot be immediately represented or found internally (for example exploiting
the resources of visual imagery).3
The hypothetical character of manipulations in creativity
is clear: they are a sort of test, they can be developed to examine further chances, they are a provisional creative organization of experience and some of them become in their
turn hypothetical “interpretations” of experience, suggesting
new worldviews. Step by step the new interpretation – that
at the beginning is completely “practice-laden” – relates to
more “theoretical” modes of understanding (narrative, vi sual, diagrammatic, symbolic, conceptual, simulative).

A Cognitive Theory of the Abductive Modeling
Activity
We can say abduction is a complex process that works
through imagination: it suggests a new direction in reasoning by shaping new possible ways for explaining object and
hypotheses (cf. the templates mentioned above). In this
sense imagination should not be confused with an act of intuition. Peirce describes abduction as a dynamic modeling
process that fluctuates between states of doubt and states of
belief. To solve the doubt, and some eventually linked
anomalies, the agent implements a process of information
gathering which at the same time relates to the “problem”,
to the agent’s evolving understanding of the situation and to
its changing requirements. By imagination here I mean this
process of knowledge gathering and shaping. A process, that
Kant considered “blind”, that leads to see things as we
would not otherwise have seen them: “a blind but indispensable function of the soul, without which we should not
have no knowledge whatsoever” (Kant, 1929, A78-B103, p.
112). Scientific creativity, it is pretty obvious, involves
seeing the world in a particular new way: scientific understanding permits us to see some aspects of reality in a particular way and creativity relates to this capacity to shed
new light. Suggestions which make us able to further analyze this process come from a theory developed in the area
of computer vision: the active perception approach (see
Thomas, 1999).
This approach aims at understanding cognitive systems in
terms of their environmental situatedness: instead of being
used to build a comprehensive inner model of its surroundings, the agent’s perceptual capacities are seen as simply
used to obtain “whatever” specific pieces of information are
necessary for its behavior in the world. The agent constantly
“adjusts” its vantage point, updating and refining its procedures, in order to uncover a piece of information. This re-

Creativity and Ethical Mediators

3

For example it is difficult to preserve precise spatial relationships
using mental imagery, especially when one set of them has to be
moved relative to another.

The active process of information gathering through mediators, to shape knowledge, should not be restricted to the
881

such a way that we can overcome the poverty and the unsatisfactory character of the moral options immediately represented or found internally. Moral mediators are also used
to exploit latent constraints in the human-environment system. These new constraints grant additional and precious
ethical information. When we spontaneously act in a way so
that we spend more quality time with our partner to save our
marriage, for example, then our actions automatically can
cause variables relating to “unexpected” and “positive”
contents of the relationship to covary with perceptible new
released informative, sentimental, sexual, and in general
bodily variables. Prior to the adoption of the new reconfigured “social” order of the couple, there is no active constraint between these hidden and overt variables causing
them to carry information about each other. It is also wellknown that also “trained” emotions4 play an important creative role in moral deliberations .

scientific activity and so to the “epistemic” side of them. An
often neglected side of human creativity is, in fact, related to
emotional, artistic, and ethical aspects, and concerns the active shaping of values in an esthetic or in an ethical world.
In the case of morality the role of hypotheses and manipulation of the world is clear in Kant’s moral doctrine. When
Kant considers pure moral rules, in fact, he says that they
could be applied to the concrete experience through a kind
of “typification”, a figurative envisioning of a non existing
world, based on a metaphoric mapping, as a means for
judging a given moral situation (Johnson, 1993).
As already outlined above, for Peirce all knowing is inferring and inferring is not instantaneous, it happens in a process that needs an activity of comparisons involving many
kinds of models (signs) in a more or less considerable lapse
of time. All sensations or perceptions participate in the nature of a unifying hypothesis, in the case of “emotions” too.
In Peircian sense emotions too express a kind of modelbased reasoning and have and “inferential” character. In decision making emotions play a distinguished role: they make
the velocity of the decision process, surely related to what
we care about, and lead directly to actions. But they are also
usually considered irrational because of the serious disadvantages they present: failure to consider other options, lack
of consideration of accurate and relevant information, not
sharability in group situation, when the decisions have be
adopted collectively. It is important to understand that emotions are not inherently irrational, for example they can be
usefully intertwined with cultural aspects.
In general we can say that moral deliberations relate to a
sort of selection or creation of principles (rules, prototypes)
and to their application to concrete cases. We can both just
select (or create, if we do not have any) moral principles
(rules, prototypes) and apply them to concrete cases or
looking for the best ones among them according to some
ethical meta-criteria. When we create new ethics, we provide new knowledge and new rules about problems and
situations not yet clearly covered from the moral point of
view. In this last case we certainly are in front of a particular
case, but the problem is not only the one of ethically solving
the case at hand by applying already available ethical concerns – indeed we lack a satisfactory moral knowledge to
handle the puzzling situation. Instead we need to create
something new, for example new good reasons first which
can provide an acceptable intelligibility of the problem.
Once created, it will be possible to see the new principle and
the new moral knowledge as a crystallization of the various
insights emerging from peoples’ and/or experts’ experience
and thinking.
The role of cognitive delegations to external objects and
structures has to be extended to the case of human actions
and organizations, so viewed as cognitive “mediating”
mechanisms endowed with moral aspects. In this light it is
possible to introduce the concept of ethical (or moral) mediator. Moral mediators play an important role in reshaping
ethical worth of human beings and collectives. They especially involve a continuous reconfiguration of social orders
aimed at rebuilding new moral perspectives and chances.
These mediators represent a kind of redistribution of the
moral effort through managing objects and information in

CURIOUS AND
ANOMALOUS
PHENOMENA

DYNAMICAL ASPECTS
(New perspectives in the case
of abortion...)

MORAL
TEMPLATES I

ARTIFICIAL APPARATUS
(New environments...)
EPISTEMIC ACTING
(Testing moral consequences...)

LOOKING
CHECKING
THE
INFORMATION

COMPARING
EVENTS

RE-ORDERING
CHANGING RELATIONSHIPS

CHOOSING
DISCARDING
IMAGING FURTHER
MANIPULATIONS

Figure 1. Conjectural moral templates I.

Templates of Moral Doing
It is difficult to establish a list of invariant behaviors that are
able to illustrate manipulative reasoning in ethics. As illustrated above, certainly the expert manipulation of nonhuman objects in real or artificial environments implies the
application of old and new templates of behavior that exhibit some regularities. As I have said it is important to remember they are embodied and implicit, as tacit forms of
acting: I are not referring here to the moral actions and manipulations that simply follow previous explicit and devised
plans. Anyway, this moral activity is still conjectural: these
templates are embedded hypotheses of moral behavior
(creative or already cognitively present in the people’s
mind-body system, and ordinarily applied) that enable a
kind of moral “doing”. Hence, some templates of action and
manipulation can be selected in the set of those available
and pre-stored, others have to be created for the first time to
4

That is not just shaped by biological evolution but also by cultural aspects.

882

vides some tactile, visual, kinesthetic, sentimental, emotional, and bodily information (e.g, in taking care of people,
cf. below in the following subsection), otherwise unavailable; 7) action enables us to build new external artifactual
models of ethical mechanisms and structures (for example
through “institutions”) instead of the corresponding “real”
and “natural” ones.5 For instance, we can substitute to the
“natural” structure “family” an environment more adequate
to agent’s moral needs. In this case we aim at reconfiguring
relationships for instance when we exploit the social reshaping role of the “houses” were children molested inside
family are recovered, to rebuild in a whole artificial framework their moral perception for example of the sexual molestation received and of the related bad feelings. Something
similar occurs in the case of the addicted people. We also
establish structures to implicitly favor good manners, for
example fences, barriers in the lines, etc.

perform the most interesting accomplishments of manipulative moral inference.
Some common features of these “tacit” templates that
enable us to manipulate external human and non-human
things and structures to achieve moral effects are related to
(Figure 1): 1. sensibility to the aspects of the moral situation
which can be regarded as curious or anomalous; manipulations can also be performed to be able to introduce potential
inconsistencies in the received knowledge (we suddenly
adopt a different attitude with respect to our wife/husband to
get some reactions we can regard as interesting – or “unexpected” – to confirm or discard hypotheses about
her/feelings or to develop further hypotheses about them; in
an investigation about a crime we spontaneously engage
further manipulations of the evidence to get more interesting
data to morally shape the suspect); 2. preliminary sensibility
to the dynamical character of the situation at hands, and not
only to entities and their properties, common aim of manipulations is to practically reorder the dynamic sequence of
the events correlated to the main problem to promote the
subsequent possibility of new possibilities and options for
action (a women in front of decision in favor of abortion
spontaneously tries to modify the dynamical aspects of her
behavior and the structure of her human relationships to try
to establish new perspectives able to make her able to envi sage a possible decision different from the first one first envisaged); 3. referral to manipulations that exploit artificial
created feelings and environments to free new possibly stable and repeatable sources of information about hidden
moral knowledge and constraints (when dealing with the
moral problem of capital punishment we can spontaneously
handle people, for example with statistics, interviews, scientific research, associations, to artificially reconfigure social orders in a way suitable to get real and not hypocritical
information, for example about the real relief generated in
the victim’s relatives by killing the criminal); 4. various
contingent ways of spontaneous moral acting: looking from
different perspectives, checking the different information
available, comparing subsequent events, choosing, discarding, imaging further manipulations, re-ordering and
changing relationships in the world by implicitly evaluating
the usefulness of a new order (for instance, to help memory)
(in the ethical case they certainly are all useful ways for
getting suitable evidence and for stimulating the derivation
of further consequences to test our previously established
moral judgments; analogous of all these manipulative templates are active in epistemic settings, as illustrated in Magnani, 2001).
More features of our tacit templates and ethical medi ators are related to the following additional issues (Figure 2):
5) moral spontaneous action that can be useful in presence
of incomplete or inconsistent information – not only from
the “perceptual” point of view – or of a diminished capacity
to morally act upon the world: it is used to get more data to
restore coherence and/or to improve deficient knowledge; 6)
action as a control of sense data illustrates how we can
change the position of our body (and/or of the external objects) to reconfigure social orders, collective relationships,
and how to exploit various kinds of artificially created
events to get various new kinds of stimulation: action pro-

MORAL
TEMPLATES II

SIMPLIFICATION
OF MORAL TASKS

TREATMENT OF INCOMPLETE
AND INCONSISTENT
INFORMATION (Getting more data…)
CONTROL OF SENSE
DATA (Reconfiguring social orders...)
EXTERNAL ARTIFACTUAL
MODELS (New institutions…)

NATURAL OBJECTS
AND
PHENOMENA

Figure 2. Conjectural moral templates II.

Moral Mediators
The whole activity of manipulation is also devoted to build
various external moral mediators6 that function as an enormous new source of information and knowledge. Therefore,
these mediators represent a kind of redistribution of the
moral effort through managing objects and information in
such a way that we can overcome the poverty and the unsatisfactory character of the moral options immediately represented or found internally (for example exploiting the resources in terms of merely internal/mental moral principles,
utilitarian envisaging, and model-based moral reasoning).
5

Of course these “real” and “natural” structures are also artificial,
because we can think of a “family” as a kind of not merely natural
institution.
6
I derive this expression from the one “epistemic mediators” I introduced in Magnani (2001, chapter 3): these consist of external
representations, objects, and artifacts that are relevant in scientific
discovery and reasoning processes.

883

cognitively present in the people’s mind-body system, and
ordinarily applied) that enable a kind of moral “doing”.
Hence, some templates of action and manipulation can be
selected in the set of those available and pre-stored, while
others have to be created for the first time in order to perform the most interesting accomplishments of manipulative
moral inferences. These “tacit” templates enable us to manipulate external human and non-human things and structures to achieve moral effects.

Not only a way for moving the world to desirable states,
action performs a moral and not just merely performatory
role: people structure their worlds to simplify and solve
moral tasks when they are in presence of incomplete information or possess a diminished capacity to morally act upon
the world when they have insufficient opportunities to
know. Moral mediators are also used to exploit latent constraints in the human-environment system. These elicited
new constraints grant us additional and precious ethical information: when we spontaneously act in a way in which we
spend more quality time with our partner to save our marriage, then our actions automatically cause variables relating
to “unexpected” and “positive” contents of the relationship
to covary with perceptible new released informative, sentimental, sexual, and, in general, bodily variables. Prior to the
adoption of the new reconfigured “social” order of the couple, there is no active constraint between these hidden and
overt variables causing them of carry information about
each other

References
Boden, M.A. (1991). The Creative Mind: Myths and
Mechanisms . New York: Basic Books, New York.
Buchanan, B.G. (2001). Creativity at the metalevel. AAAI2000 presidential address. AI Magazine, fall 2001, 13-28.
Gibson, J.J.. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, 1979.
Gooding, D. (1990). Experiment and the Making of Meaning. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Johnson, M. (1993). Moral Imagination. Implications of
Cognitive Science in Ethics. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Kant, I. (1929). Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by N.
Kemp Smith. London: MacMillan. Reprint 1998. Originally published 1787.
Kirlik, A. (1998). The ecological expert: acting to create information to guide action. In Proceedings of the 1998
Conference on Human Interaction with Complex Systems
(HICS’98). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press.
Lederman, S.J. and Klatzky, R. (1990). Haptic exploration
and object representation. In M.A. Goodale (Ed.) Vision
and Action: The Control of Grasping (pp. 98-109) Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, Reason, and Science. Processes of Discovery and Explanation. New York: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Magnani, L. and Dossena, R. (forthcoming). Perceiving the
infinite and the infinitesimal world: unveiling and optical
diagrams and the construction of mathematical concepts.
To appear in Foundations of Science, 2002.
Magnani, L. and Nersessian, N.J. (Eds.) (2002). ModelBased Reasoning: Science, Technology, Values. New
York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Nersessian, N.J. (1995). Should physicists preach what they
practice? Constructive modeling in doing and learning
physics. Science and Education, 4 , 87-120.
Peirce, C.S. (1931-1958). Collected Papers 1-6 (CP). Edited
by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss. Collected Papers 7-8.
Edited by A. Burks. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1931-35, 1958.
Sternberg, R.J., Kaufman, J.C., and Pretz, J.E. (Eds.). The
Creativity Conundrum : A Propulsion Model of Kinds of
Creative Contributions. New York: Psychology Press.
Thomas, N.J. (1999). Are theories of imagery theories of
imagination? An active perception approach to conscious
mental content. Cognitive Science, 23(2), 207-245.

Conclusion
What I call theoretical abduction (sentential and manipulative) certainly illustrates much of what is important in
creative abductive reasoning both in humans and computational programs, especially the objective of selecting and
creating a set of hypotheses that are able to dispense good
(preferred) explanations of data, but fails to account for
many cases of explanations occurring in science or in everyday reasoning when the exploitation of the environment is
crucial. The concept of manipulative abduction is devoted to
capture the role of action in many interesting situations: action provides otherwise unavailable information that enables
the agent to solve problems by starting and performing a
suitable abductive process of generation or selection of hypotheses. Many external things, even if usually inert from
the epistemological point of view, can be transformed into
what is called epistemic mediators, which are illustrated in
the second part of this paper, together with an analysis of
the related notion of “external representation steps in a way
that discharges the “internal” mind of a computational load.
To define a cognitive system it seems we can no longer
identify it only with internal processing devices.
By exploiting the concept of “thinking through doing”
and of manipulative abduction I have tried to shed new light
on some of the most interesting cognitive aspects of creative
ethical reasoning of what I call “ethical mediators”. Indeed,
I contend that the whole activity of manipulation can be
seen as an activity for building various external “ethical mediators” that function as an enormous new source of information and knowledge. Furthermore, while describing morality “through doing” a list of “moral templates” as forms
of invariant behaviors that are able to illustrate manipulative
ethical reasoning is furnished. These templates are forms of
behavior which are inclined towards providing ethical outcomes. The application of old and new (creative) moral
templates of behavior exhibits some regularities and expresses expert manipulation of human and non-human objects in real or artificial environments. These templates are
embodied and implicit as tacit forms of acting. They are
embedded hypotheses of moral behavior (creative or already
884

