UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cross-linguistic Semantic Differences Influence Recognition of Pictures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8822f6kv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Anggoro, Florencia
Gentner, Dedre

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cross-linguistic Semantic Differences Influence Recognition of Pictures
Florencia Anggoro (f-anggoro@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Rd., Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract

bilinguals’ English descriptions of the objects were
consistent with the gender in their first language. Sera, et al.
(2002) have also shown that gender retains semantic context
in that cross-linguistic differences influence classification
(Sera et al., 2002).
Our work explores an arena of social categories, namely
kinship terms. As Malinowski (1930) noted, some
dimensions seem likely to be universal in kinship systems—
such as the gender of the person named, the age and/or
generation relative to ego, and the gender of the linking
relative. Nevertheless, kinship systems vary considerably in
how these distinctions play out. Our study focuses on one
pair of contrasting languages – English and Indonesian –
which vary in the way they name sibling relations.
Indonesian makes a lexical distinction for whether a
sibling is older or younger. The word kakak refers to older
sibling while the word adik refers to younger sibling. For
example,
(1)
Saya
mempunyai
seorang
kakak.
1st pers. sing.
have
one (person)
older sib
‘I have an older sibling’

We compared recognition memory for pictures of family
interactions in Indonesian – in which sibling terms are based
on relative age – and English – in which sibling terms are
based on gender. In Experiment 1, participants saw a set of
pictures of family interactions and gave a verbal description
of each picture. They later received a recognition test that
included variants that altered either seniority relations or
gender relations. The same method was used in Experiment
2, except that the recognition variants were changed to be
similar families (with parallel relationships). During study,
participants were asked either simply to remember the
pictures (Experiment 2a) or to provide a verbal description
(Experiment 2b). Results from both experiments suggest
effects of language on memory, particularly when nonidentical transfer is involved.

Introduction
The Whorfian Question
Does the language we speak influence the way we think?
This question, out of favor for many years, has had a
resurgence of interest (Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003;
Gumperz & Levinson, 1996). There is evidence (Bowerman
& Choi, 2003; Sera et al., 2002; Choi, McDonough,
Bowerman, & Mandler, 1999; Levinson, 1998) that
linguistic distinctions may influence non-linguistic
similarity and memory for scenes (but see Munnich,
Landau, & Dosher, 2001; Li & Gleitman, 2002 for contrary
evidence).
The recent investigations have mostly centered around
perceptual arenas such as space, time and motion. However,
classic studies in anthropological linguistics suggest that
there are also substantial differences in semantic categories
in social arenas such as kinship (Romney & D’Andrade,
1964; Danziger, 2001; Foley, 1997). It is important to test
whether these linguistic differences have cognitive
consequences. There are direct studies of the cognitive
effects of social semantics. Boroditsky and Schmidt (2000)
found effects of linguistic gender on people’s encodings of
objects. For example, they taught Spanish-English and
German-English bilinguals English names for objects (such
as “Mary” for a table) and found that people retained the
names better when the gender was consistent with the
gender of the noun in their first language. In addition,

In contrast to English brother and sister, the Indonesian
sibling terms kakak and adik are gender-neutral. When an
Indonesian refers to his/her siblings, he/she speaks not in
terms of sister and brother but rather of older and younger.
Thus, “How’s your older sibling (kakak)?” is as natural in
Indonesian as “How’s your brother?” is in English.
Of course, both languages can specify both gender and
seniority if desired. An English speaker could refer to “your
younger brother” and an Indonesian to “your male youngersibling”
(2)
Adikmu
laki-laki
younger sib.-your
male
‘your younger-sibling boy’
Thus, the Indonesian semantic system focuses on the
relational seniority of siblings, whereas the English systems
focus on gender. Our study investigates a) whether this
linguistic difference matter to the way people think about
family relations, and b) whether it affects the way people
construe scenes involving families.

55

In our previous study (Anggoro & Gentner, 2003,
Experiment 2) we used a recognition task to test whether the
two languages induce different encodings. Indonesian and
English speakers were shown a series of pictures: three
kinship standards and their three corresponding family
pictures, along with 21 other pictures (Figures 1 and 2).
Participants were asked to remember the scenes for a later
memory task. Recognition memory for the scenes was later
tested using variants of the standard pictures. Memory for
each standard was tested using two variants: the Seniority
Variant, which preserved the seniority relation but altered
the gender relation, and the Gender Variant, which
preserved the gender relation but altered the seniority
relation. There was a tendency for Indonesian speakers to
make more false alarms to the Seniority Variants than to the
Gender Variants, suggesting better memory for Seniority
than for Gender. English speakers showed the reverse
pattern. An ANOVA over language and variant type
showed a marginally significant interaction between the two
factors. Other results from the same set of studies also point
to an influence of language on encoding and recognition.
For example, relative to English speakers, Indonesian
speakers showed greater sensitivity to changes in seniority
than to changes in gender in a similarity task. These results
suggest greater sensitivity to the dimension that is required
in naming siblings in each language.

categories on encoding and recognition, then we should find
a significant interaction between language and variant type.

Method
Participants The participants were 15 Indonesian
monolinguals and 13 English monolinguals, ranging in age
from approximately 17 to 20 years old. Participants were
either given credit or a small monetary compensation. Data
from Indonesian speakers were collected in Jakarta,
Indonesia. Data from English speakers were collected at
Northwestern University and other areas near Chicago.
Materials The stimuli were three sets of pictures. One set
(the Kitchen set) involved scenes of siblings performing a
simple activity in the kitchen. The other two sets (the Ritual
sets) involved ceremonies. Family pictures were used to
introduce the ‘characters’ and make clear the sibling
relations.

Family Picture for
Kitchen Set

The Current Study
Slobin (1987) has suggested in his thinking for speaking
hypothesis that “[when] constructing utterances in
discourse, one fits one’s thoughts into available linguistic
forms.” In our current work we seek to test whether verbally
describing the pictures would strengthen the language
effect. In addition, we further explored the effects of a more
challenging task that involved nonidentical transfer.

Family Picture for
Ritual 1 Set

Figure 1: Family pictures used in the Kitchen and Ritual 1
sets.
The triad pictures consisted of one standard picture and two
variants: the Seniority Variant, which preserved the
seniority relation but altered the gender relation, and the
Gender Variant, which preserved the gender relation but
altered the seniority relation.

Experiment 1
As in our previous study, Indonesian and English
speakers were shown a series of pictures: the three kinship
standards (as exemplified in the top picture in Figure 2) and
their three corresponding family pictures (Figure 1), along
with 21 other pictures (a total of 27 pictures). For each
picture, participants were asked to describe the scenes and
remember them for a later memory task. After a brief filler
task, participants were given a recognition memory test. As
in the previous study, the test included two variants: the
Seniority Variant, which preserved the seniority relation but
altered the gender relation, and the Gender Variant, which
preserved the gender relation but altered the seniority
relation
If describing the scenes leads participants’ encodings to
be influenced by the semantics of their kinship systems,
then Indonesian monolinguals will be relatively more
sensitive to changes in relative age than to changes in
gender, as compared to English monolinguals. Specifically,
if verbal description heightens the effects of semantic

Standard

older sister gives bowl to younger sister

Seniority Variant

older sister gives bowl
to younger brother

56

Gender Variant

younger sister gives bowl
to older sister

Figure 2: The Kitchen set. In the Seniority Variant, the
bowl still goes from the older to the younger sibling, but the
gender of the younger sibling is altered. In the Gender
Variant, the gender of both actors is the same as in the
standard, but the bowl now goes from the younger to the
older sibling.

Variants vs. the Seniority Variants. An ANOVA over
Language and Variant Type showed a main effect of Variant
Type (F(1,26) = 7.21, p = .01) such that participants made
more seniority-preserving false alarms (M = .29) than
gender-preserving ones (M =.13) and a main effect of
language (F(1,26) = 6.61, p = .02), such that Indonesian
speakers made more false alarms (M = .29) than English
speakers (M = .12). As predicted, there was a significant
interaction between the two factors (F(1,26) = 4.90, p =
.04). Indonesian speakers made more false alarms to the
Seniority Variants (M = .42, SD = 30) than to the Gender
Variants (M = .16, SD = .21). English speakers showed no
difference in false alarm rates (for Seniority Variants, M =
.13, SD = .17, and for Gender Variants, M = .10, SD = .21).

Standard

younger brother gives crown
to older sister

Exp 1:
Identical with Ling Descr
60
55

Indo nesian

50

English

% False Alarms

45

Gender Variant

older sister gives crown
to younger brother

40
35
30
25
20
15

Seniority Variant

10

younger brother gives crown
to older brother

5
0

Seniority Variant

Figure 3: Ritual 1 set. In the Gender Variant, the genders of
both actors are the same as in the standard, but the crown
now goes from the older to the younger sibling. In the
Seniority Variant, the bowl still goes from the younger to
the older sibling, but the gender of the older sibling is
altered.

Gender Variant

Figure 4: Results from Experiment 1.

Discussion
When participants described scenes verbally, they showed
sensitivity to the dimension ensconced in their language on
a subsequent recognition test. That is, Indonesians were
significantly more able to reject variants that changed
seniority relations than those that preserved seniority but
changed gender. The results are stronger than those of our
previous study (described above), in which linguistic
descriptions were not elicited prior to the memory task. This
suggests a ‘thinking for speaking’ effect whereby giving a
linguistic description strengthens the effects of language on
the encoding of the scenes. Interestingly, in this study the
interaction appears to be driven by the Indonesian pattern;
the English speakers showed roughly equal false alarms.
However, the relative difference between the two language
groups is as predicted: Indonesian speakers attended more to
seniority than did English speakers. This pattern fits with
our prediction of greater relative sensitivity to the dimension
required in naming siblings.
One methodological point to note is that the nature of the
design is limited in terms of the possible variants that we
could devise for a given standard. This resulted in the
Gender Variant being more perceptually similar to the
Standard than was the Seniority Variant. In order to get
around this problem, in the next study we decided to alter
the identity match between the families in the pictures by

Procedure Participants were run individually in a quiet
room. Instructions were given in Indonesian for the
Indonesian speakers and English for the English speakers.
For each set of stimuli, participants were first shown a
family picture to ensure that they understood that the triad
that followed only involved the children. (For the Ritual
sets, the experimenter explained that the family lives on
some island and they held a ritual each year. Then the
standard was shown without further description.) For each
standard, participants were asked to verbally describe what
they saw in the picture. After participants had seen and
described all of the standards, they were given a short break
(approximately 10 minutes) during which they were asked
to solve a few simple puzzles. Then they were given a yesno recognition task. The two variants for each standard were
intermixed in semi-random order among the fillers. The
three standards that the participants had actually seen were
given at the end of the test.

Results
As in the previous study, the key dependent measure is
the mean proportion of times a participant responded ‘yes’
to each variant; i.e., the false alarm rates on the Gender

57

using a different family altogether for the variants. Thus, the
variants did not retain the perceptual aspects of the Standard
but were still designed to be relationally similar to the
standard along either the seniority or gender dimension (see
Figure 5). These new variants always embodied the same
relationships as the previous variants. Thus the new variants
fell further along the literal similarity – analogical
similarity continuum (Gentner, 1989) than the original ones.
The analogous variants were used in a recognition task
like the one described in Experiment 1. The idea was to test
the strength of participants’ “hold” of the relation and to see
whether verbalization would influence the strength of the
language effect. Of course, one might predict that
participants would not false alarm at all to the analogous
variants; after all, the variants depict different people
altogether. On the other side, it seems possible that applying
a linguistic description could invite a more abstract
encoding, and that this could increase participants’
propensity to recognize the same relation in different
characters.
Indonesian and English speakers were shown a series of
pictures: the three kinship standards and their three
corresponding family pictures from Experiment 1, along
with 23 other pictures. Participants were asked to remember
the scenes for a later memory task. Recognition memory for
the scenes was later tested using analogically similar Gender
and Seniority Variants.

Standard

older sister gives bowl to younger sister

Analogous
Seniority Variant

Analogous
Gender Variant

older sister gives bowl
to younger brother

younger sister gives bowl
to older sister

Figure 5: The Kitchen set, showing analogous variants used
in Experiment 2.
Procedure As in Experiment 1, before each standard
picture, participants were shown a family picture to ensure
that they understood that the picture that followed involved
only the children. (For the Ritual sets, the experimenter
explained that the family lives on some island and held a
ritual each year. Then the standard was shown without
further description.) Participants were simply asked to
remember the pictures. Then they were given a short break
(approximately 10 minutes) during which they were asked
to complete an unrelated paper-and-pencil task. Then they
were given a yes-no recognition task. The two analogous
variants for each standard were intermixed in semi-random
order among the fillers. The three standards were given at
the end of the test.

Experiment 2a
Participants Participants were 15 Indonesian monolinguals
and 17 English monolinguals (not previously tested),
ranging in age from approximately 17 to 20 years old. They
were either given credit or a small monetary compensation.
Data from Indonesian speakers were collected in Jakarta,
Indonesia. Data from English speakers were collected at
Northwestern University and other areas near Chicago.

Results

Materials There were 29 study pictures (the three standard
pictures from Experiment 1, their three corresponding
family pictures, and 23 filler pictures). There were 67 test
pictures (the three standards and all six of their variants,
plus 58 fillers, as described below).

An ANOVA over Language and Variant Type showed no
significant main effects or interaction (all p’s > .1).
Qualitatively, there was a weak tendency for Indonesian
speakers to make more false alarms to the Seniority Variants
(M = .36, SD = .32) than to the Gender Variants (M = .18,
SD = .28). The English speakers showed little difference
between the two conditions (Seniority Variants, M = .20, SD
= .31; Gender Variants, M = .16, SD = .27).

Experiment 2b
Identical Family Pict.

Participants Participants were 15 Indonesian monolinguals
and 17 English monolinguals not previously tested, ranging
in age from approximately 17 to 20 years old. They were
either given credit or a small monetary compensation. Data
from Indonesian speakers were collected in Jakarta,
Indonesia. Data from English speakers were collected at
Northwestern University and other areas near Chicago.

Analogous Family Pict.

58

and variant type (which was only marginal in our previous
study) was significant in Experiment 1. Using the analogous
variants (Experiment 2), the interaction between language
and variant type was only significant when participants were
instructed to use linguistic description. Our overall results
suggest that the difference in the semantic patterns of the
two languages may lead to differences in the way speakers
encode situations – even nonlinguistic perceptual scenes.
These results are consistent with the thinking for speaking
idea in that actively using a language influences encoding
and recognition memory.
Our thinking-for-speaking pattern of result is consistent
with previous research showing that cross-linguistic
differences influence judgments of spatial pictures (Gentner
& Feist, submitted) and motion events (Malt, Sloman, &
Gennari, 2003), but only when participants were asked to
use linguistic description. However, it is also important to
note that some studies have shown effects of cross-linguistic
semantic differences on nonlinguistic performance without
asking participants to first verbalize the scenes (e.g.,
Boroditsky, Ham, & Ramscar, 2002; Levinson et al., 2002).
Indeed, in our own previous studies in this arena, we found
cross-linguistic effects in similarity judgments and word
extension without the use of verbalization. The similarity
task was a simple triad judgment task and the word
extension task was a novel name given to a standard picture
and participants were asked to extend the novel name. In
neither case were participants asked to describe the scenes
themselves (Anggoro & Gentner, 2003). Interestingly, a
comparison of the present results with our prior results (in
which no verbal descriptions were elicited) (Anggoro &
Gentner, 2003) suggests that in some cases, the predicted
pattern are qualitatively stronger when prior verbalizations
are elicited.

Materials Same as Experiment 2a.
Procedure Similar to Experiment 2b. The only difference is
that during the study phase, participants were asked to
verbally describe each scene, much like in Experiment 1.

Results
An ANOVA over Language and Variant Type revealed
no significant main effects (all p’s >.1). As predicted, the
ANOVA showed a significant interaction between the two
factors (F(1,30) = 5.16, p = .03). There was a tendency for
Indonesian speakers to make more false alarms to the
Seniority Variants (M = .18, SD = .28) than to the Gender
Variants (M = .11, SD = .21). The English speakers showed
the reverse pattern; they made more false alarms to the
Gender Variants (M = .33, SD = .24) than to the Seniority
Variants (M = .16, SD = .21).
Exp 2b:
Non-Identical with Ling Descr
60

Indo nesian

55

English

50

% False Alarms

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Seniority Variant Gender Variant

Figure 6: Results from Experiment 2b.

Discussion

General Discussion

The results from Experiment 2 suggest that for this more
challenging task, cross-linguistic effects on encoding and
recognition was only evident when participants were asked
to verbally describe the scenes. In Experiment 2a, the effects
of semantic categories on recognition seemed to be
“masked” by the more challenging non-identical transfer
task. When participants described the scenes verbally,
however, as in Experiment 2b, this effect resurfaced. The
pattern from the previous study was also found here:
Indonesian speakers showed greater relative sensitivity to
changes in seniority than to changes in gender in
recognition memory, whereas English speakers showed the
reverse pattern, as evidenced by the marginally significant
interaction between language and variant type. As in
Experiment 1, this pattern suggests greater sensitivity to the
dimension that is required in naming siblings in each
language.
Overall, we find a pattern of stronger results when people
gave verbal descriptions of the scenes. Their descriptions,
which typically included kinship terms, seem to heighten
effects of language on encoding and memory. Using the
identical family variants, the interaction between language

In conclusion, our findings suggest that linguistic
differences in kinship terms (specifically, sibling terms)
influence the way people encode and remember scenes and
perceive similarities among them. Overall our results
suggest that the actual verbalization of these semantic
distinctions strengthens the cross-linguistic effects. Since in
our previous work, cross-linguistic effects were found with
or without linguistic description, the most intriguing aspect
of our current findings is that this influence of verbalization
appears stronger when the variants were non-identical to the
standard1. The use of language may be particularly
important in cases where the bridge between initial
encoding and later experience is somewhat more abstract.
Gentner (2003) has suggested that one role of language in
1

Cross-experiment analyses of recognition results comparing
participants who had initially given linguistic description of the
scenes with those who had not (Anggoro & Gentner, 2003) showed
a stronger pattern in the predicted direction for analogous pairs,
especially among English speakers.

59

cognition is to facilitate memory access between situations
that are not superficially similar but can be categorized in
similar ways, as in the case of relational meanings.
Thus, our findings may provide a link between work in
language and thought with work on analogical processing.
Finally, our findings provide evidence that the use of
language can influence encoding not only in spatial domains
but also in the social arena.

Heider, E. R. (1972). Universals in color naming and
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 93, 10-20.
Imai, M., Gentner, D., & Uchida, N. (1994). Children'
s
theories of word meaning: The role of shape similarity in
early acquisition. Cognitive Development, 9, 45-75.
Levinson, S. C. (1998). Studying spatial conceptualization
across cultures: Anthropology and cognitive science.
Ethos, 26, 7-24.
Levinson, S.C., Kita, S, Haun, D.B.M., & Rasch, B. J.
(2002). Returning the tables: language affects spatial
reasoning. Cognition, 84, 155-188.
Li, P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: Language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83, 265-294.
Malinowski, B. (1930). Kinship. Man, 30, 19-29.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., & Gennari, S. (2003). Speaking
vs. thinking about objects and actions. In D. Gentner & S.
Goldin-Meadow, Eds. Language in mind: Advances in the
study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word
meanings. Cognitive Science, 14, 57-77.
Munnich, E., Landau, B., & Anne Dosher, B. (2001).
Cognition, 81, 171-207.
Romney, A. K., & D’Andrade, R. G. (1964). Cognitive
aspects of English kinship terms. American
Anthropologist, 66, 146-270.
Sera, M. D., Elieff, C., Burch, M. C., Forbes, J., &
Rodríguez, W. (2002). When language affects cognition
and when it does not: An analysis of grammatical gender
and classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131, 377-397.
Slobin, D. I. (1987). Thinking for speaking. Proceedings of
the Berkeley Linguistic Society, 13, 435-444.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF-ROLE award
21002/REC-0087516 and by the Culture, Language, and
Cognition group at Northwestern University. We would like
to thank Jeanne Arijanti, SMU PSKD in Jakarta, Ronnie
Rios, Vini Putri, and Kathleen Braun for their assistance
with data collection and other stages of this project. Special
thanks to Felicia Anggoro for creating the materials.

References
Anggoro, F., & Gentner, D. (2003). Sex and seniority: The
effects of linguistic categories on conceptual judgments
and memory. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Boston, MA.
Boroditsky, L., Ham, W. & Ramscar, M. (2002). What is
universal about event perception? Comparing English and
Indonesian speakers. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Fairfax, VA
Boroditsky, L. & Schmidt, L. (2000). Sex, Syntax, and
Semantics. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Philadelphia, PA.
Bowerman, M. & Choi, S. (2003). Space under
construction: Language specific spatial categorization in
first language acquisition. In D. Gentner & S. GoldinMeadow, Eds. Language in mind: Advances in the study
of language and thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Choi, S., McDonough, L., Bowerman, M., and Mandler,
J.M (1999). Early sensitivity to language-specific spatial
categories in English and Korean. Cognitive
Development, 14, 241-268.
Danziger, E. (2001). Relatively speaking: Language,
thought and kinship in Mopan Maya. Oxford Studies in
Anthropological Linguistics. Oxford University Press.
Foley, W. (1997). Anthropological Linguistics: An
Introduction. Blackwell Publishers.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning (pp. 199-241). London: Cambridge
University Press. (Reprinted in Knowledge acquisition
and learning, 1993, 673-694).
Gentner, D., & Feist, M. I. (submitted). Spatial language
influences memory for spatial scenes.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S.
(Eds.). (2003).
Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and
thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (Eds.). (1996). Rethinking
linguistic relativity.
Cambridge, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

60

