UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cultural Differences in the Cognition and Emotion of Conditional Promises and Threats –
Comparing Germany and Tonga

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02p1h5rz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Beller, Sieghard
Bender, Andrea

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cultural Differences in the Cognition and Emotion of Conditional Promises
and Threats – Comparing Germany and Tonga
Sieghard Beller (beller@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
When addressing conditional inducements using a multilevel approach, several cognitive components appear to
be of basic character: linguistic preferences for either a
promise or threat are connected to the motivational
background; the concepts themselves are unilateral and
complementary; and emotional responses in subsequent
interactions follow appraisal-theoretic predictions.
Whether these apparently essential components really are
basic was examined in a cross-cultural experiment
conducted in Tonga. The results support the conceptual
universality; however, in practice, the Tongan participants
tended to avoid threats in favor of promises and indicated
less anger following broken promises.

Introduction
In pursuing their own individual goals, people occasionally feel a need to change the behavior of others accordingly. When asking to have one’s intentions considered
is not of much use, a strategy often chosen is to formulate a conditional promise or threat. For instance, a
mother longing for silence may tell her noisy son: “If
you are quiet for the next hour, I will give you an icecream.” Or, being already unnerved, she may say
instead: “If you are not quiet for the next hour, there will
be no TV this afternoon!” Being intrigued by the pleasant anticipation of an ice-cream the boy might feel motivated to fulfill her request; if she then fails to keep her
promise, his positive affects will turn negative.
Conditional promises and threats operate, as these
introductory examples show, with goals, expectations,
incentives or penalties, and obligations (cf. von Wright,
1962). They express personal motives and are formulated in a specific linguistic manner (Fillenbaum, 1978).
They demand a decision whether or not to cooperate,
and subsequent actions are often followed by emotional
reactions. In order to efficiently work as inducements,
knowledge about these components needs to be – and
usually is – shared among the partners of an interaction.
But is this knowledge also shared across cultures? In
other words, is the understanding of conditional inducements culture-specific or do conditional promises and
threats belong to the core concepts of human thinking
and acting that are universally equal? If the latter is the
case, are there certain aspects of conditional induce-

85

ments that vary across languages and cultures? Will the
interactions subsequent to inducements universally elicit
emotional reactions, and if so, are the same emotions
then elicited, or will appraisals – and thus the emotional
reactions – differ?
In the reasoning tradition, the analysis of people’s
understanding of conditional promises and threats
focuses on the conditional relation (e.g., Evans & Twyman-Musgrove, 1998; Newstead, Ellis, Evans & Dennis,
1997). By evaluating the inferences that people draw
from such statements with the yardstick of propositional
logic, it was possible to identify several extra-logical
factors: the temporal order of the actions, the promisor’s
control of the incentive, and the directionality. While
this approach helps to detect effects of particular contents on reasoning, it is not sufficient to explain them. To
overcome this limitation, a broader multi-level approach
was recently proposed and empirically tested (Beller,
2002; Beller, Bender & Kuhnmünch, 2004; cf. Beller &
Spada, 2003). It builds on a motivational analysis of
why conditional inducements are used, and integrates
linguistic, deontic, behavioral and emotional aspects.
So far, most of the experimental data has been gathered in “Western” cultures, leaving the question of
whether consensus on conditional inducements may
extend beyond cultural boundaries open. To tackle this
question, we therefore replicated one of our German
experiments in a culture that largely differs from our
individualistic Western culture: the Polynesian Kingdom of Tonga. Before presenting the results, we will
address the theoretical background and give a short
description of relevant aspects of Tongan culture.

Components of Conditional Inducements
Conditional promises and threats are speech acts
(Searle, 1969) that are motivated by personal goals (i.e.
to obtain something with another person’s support) and
expectations of this person’s behavior. The speaker (S)
wants an addressee (A) to perform a certain behavior
with a positive value for the speaker (S+: BehaviorA).
The speaker must expect that the addressee is not willing to show this behavior voluntarily (S–: ¬BehaviorA);
otherwise an inducement would not be necessary. Thus,
the speaker has to induce a behavioral change, which
can be motivated in two ways: by promising to reward
the desired behavior (➥ A+: RewardS) or by threatening

to punish the undesired behavior (➥ A–: PunishmentS).
These consequences should be under the speaker’s control and should not occur for any other reason, as otherwise they would not be able to develop their
motivational effect. The different motivational background of promises and threats are summarized in the
following schemas (grey boxes depict the expected
actions without the inducement):
Promise

{

S–: ¬BehaviorA

A–: ¬RewardS

S+: BehaviorA

➥ A+: RewardS

The Context of Social Interactions in Tonga

Goal of S

Threat

{

preferred the canonical conditionals as appropriate formulations for an intended promise or threat. These are
understood as not reversible, but as implying the complementary threat (or promise). The emotional reactions
were chosen by the participants as predicted by
appraisal theories. The question remains, though, of
how these components are defined by members of a
completely different culture, particularly one in which
individualism is not as marked as in “Western” culture.
Will their linguistic preferences and emotional reactions
converge with – or diverge from – those obtained in
Germany?

S+: BehaviorA

A+: ¬PunishmentS

S–: ¬BehaviorA

➥ A–: PunishmentS

In both cases, the addressee can freely decide whether
to cooperate or not; the speaker then responds to the
addressee’s behavior, that is, the actions are ordered
temporally. Further, the speaker may use a conditional
“If P, then Q” to express the inducement. A conditional
points out a necessary consequence “Q” of an antecedent possibility “P”, and that is exactly what the speaker
intends to do on the motivational level. The canonical
formulations are:
“If you do P [S+], then I will reward you with Q [A+]”
“If you do P [S–], then I will punish you by Q [A–]”.
Due to the temporal order of the events, neither of the
conditionals is reversible, and yet they are tightly interwoven. The speaker always announces (explicitly or
implicitly) that he or she will react positively after the
addressee has shown the desired behavior, and negatively otherwise. The threat may thus be interpreted as
implying the complementary promise
“If you refrain from doing P [S+],
then I will not punish you by Q [A+].”
While the addressee can freely decide whether to
cooperate or not, the speaker cannot. If the addressee
cooperates, the speaker is obligated to cooperate as
well, and when intentionally violating this obligation,
the speaker cheats the addressee.
Because the addressee is induced to change a planned
behavior – and may experience a positive or negative
consequence – the respective interaction will most probably elicit an emotional reaction, as the event has considerable goal relevance (Lazarus, 1991). According to
appraisal theories (cf. Ellsworth & Smith, 1988; Roseman, Antoniou & Jose, 1996; Scherer, 1997), joy should
be elicited when the addressee obtains what was promised to him or her, relief in the case of avoided punishment, and anger in the case of being cheated.
These linguistic and emotional predictions were confirmed in two studies with German samples (Beller,
2002; Beller, Bender & Kuhnmünch, 2004). Participants

86

The Kingdom of Tonga, an island state in the Southwestern Pacific with a Polynesian culture, is inhabited
by roughly 100 000 people. The island group of Ha'apai,
where the data was collected, is one of its most traditional areas with approximately 10 000 people living on
two main islands and fifteen outer islands.
Tongan society is hierarchically structured with older
people having higher rank than younger ones, sisters
higher than brothers, and nobles higher than commoners. While this rank is ascribed through birth, status can
be acquired through individual efforts. However, these
individual efforts need to pursue common interests, and
among the most prestigious behavior is therefore engaging in social activities, keeping social ties and complying with social norms (Bernstein, 1983; Marcus, 1978).
Social harmony is particularly emphasized and consequently, negative emotions such as anger ('ita) or envy
(meheka) as well as open conflicts are disapproved of.
Failing to restrain one’s negative emotions is shameful
and may diminish one’s social status (Morton, 1996).
Cooperation and sharing with others are core values. In
exchange situations, certain (though mostly implicit)
rules apply, depending for instance on the object of the
deal or the participants’ relative social status and rank
(e.g. Bender, 2002; Evans, 2001).
Most of this contextual knowledge still does not
reveal how Tongans understand and deal with conditional promises and threats. In principle, we presumed
that the basic understanding of conditional inducements
does not differ across cultures, but that their use may
differ: depending on what is socially more accepted,
either promises or threats may be preferred. With regard
to appraisal processes, we further presumed a similar
pattern of emotional responses. Taking into account the
disapproval of socially disruptive behavior, however, we
also expected a smaller proportion of both threats and
indication of anger in the Tongan sample.

Experiment
In order to investigate the impact of culture on understanding and dealing with conditional inducements, we
replicated a study we had conducted on linguistic preferences and emotional reactions in Germany (Beller,
Bender & Kuhnmünch, 2004, Experiment 1) in Tonga.

Method
Participants. Sixty-seven students from two classes of
St. Joseph’s College in Pangai participated in the experiment. St. Joseph’s College is the second largest of four
secondary schools in the district center of the Ha'apai
island group. Thirty-one students were male and thirtyfive female (one did not indicate his or her gender). The
mean age was M = 15.4 years (SD = 0.83; range: 14-17
years). Both classes received a small gift for their participation in the form of a contribution (50 pa'anga,
approximately 33 US dollars) to their class funds.
Materials. As in the original study, we used two pairs
of questionnaires that referred to a situation in which a
boy would like to obtain something from a schoolmate.
Sione wants to borrow Finau’s bike, while Finau wants
Sione to help him with his homework. Within each pair,
the speech act was varied. In the first pair, Sione was in
the role of the speaker and used either a promise to
reach his goal (promise version) or a complementary
threat (threat version). In the second pair, the role allocation was switched, with Finau now in the role of the
speaker trying to reach his goal either by a (reversed)
promise or by a complementary threat. Each questionnaire comprised four tasks.
(1) In the formulation task, the individual goals of
both boys were given. For example, the promise version
of Sione’s inducement reads as follows (threat version
printed in square brackets): Usually, Finau doesn’t lend
his bike to his schoolmates. However, Sione wants to
borrow it today. Sione tries to reach this goal by promising [threatening] Finau [with] something. Sione knows
that Finau would like his help with his homework today,
but usually Sione does not help him [and usually Sione
helps him]. The instructions then required the participants to choose the most appropriate conditional for the
speaker’s promise [threat] from four possible formulations: the canonical, the complementary, and the two
reversed statements.
Each of the other three tasks first presented the speech
act in canonical form, for example: Sione promised:
“Finau, if you lend me your bike, then I will help you
with your homework” [Sione threatened: “Finau, if you
do not lend me your bike, then I will not help you with
your homework.”] (2) The sequence task asked participants to identify the typical sequence of actions once the
conditional promise or threat has been uttered: Will
Finau or Sione be the first to decide to act? (3) The
inference task asked participants to draw the most probable conclusion from the given canonical conditional:
What follows – the complementary, the reversed, or the
reversed-complementary conditional? (4) The emotion
task stated that the addressee has fulfilled the speaker’s
goal. The instruction then required participants to indicate first the speaker’s action when “keeping the rule”
(vs. “not keeping the rule”) and second, the addressee’s
feeling towards the speaker afterwards. Four critical
emotions were given (Tongan translation in brackets):
joy (fiefia), relief (fiemalie), sadness (loto-mamahi), and

87

anger ('ita). For exploratory purposes, we also included
shame (ma), un-amusement (ta'eoli) and anxiety (manavahe), as these emotions seem to be particularly salient
in the Tongan context. Participants were instructed to
choose the most appropriate emotion.
All materials were presented in the participants’
native language, that is Tongan in this study and German
in the original study. Both languages have close equivalents to the English terms “promise” and “threat”, and
the situations described are familiar in both cultures.
Design and procedure. A between-subject design
was used. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the four experimental conditions (n = 16 or 17 for each)
corresponding to the four questionnaires. The data collection took place in the classrooms. Each participant
received a booklet with a general instruction and the
four tasks in the following order: formulation, sequence,
inference, and emotion task. Participants were instructed
to answer all questions in the given order, and they were
granted as much time as they needed.

Results
As we found only marginal differences between the two
promise versions and between the two threat versions,
the data is reported in aggregated form. The comparative
data of the German study is taken from Beller, Bender
and Kuhnmünch (2004, Experiment 1).
Formulation task: We expected participants to
choose the canonical promise or threat. The formulation
preferences are shown in Table 1. In the German sample, on average 89.2 % of the participants chose the
canonical form equally for promises and threats
(χ2(1, N = 65) = 1.34; p = .247). The Tongan results differed from this in two respects. First, the canonical conditional was chosen less frequently (52.2 % on average),
and second, this difference mainly resulted from a specific formulation preference: while most Tongan participants also preferred the canonical promise, many of
them indicated that, when a threat was to be made, the
speaker should rather use the complementary promise
instead (χ2(1, n = 52) = 6.10; p = .014).
Sequence task: We expected both conditional promises and threats to be understood as unilateral speech
acts that imply a typical action sequence: the addressee
Table 1: Proportions of choosing each conditional as the
speaker’s adequate promise or threat.

Conditional
Canonical
Complementary
Reversed
Rev.-complementary

Germany

Tonga

Promise Threat
(n = 32) (n = 33)

Promise Threat
(n = 33) (n = 34)

.94
.06
–
–

.85
.15
–
–

.64
.12
.18
.06

.41
.38
–
.21

Table 2: Proportions of choosing the most adequate
implication of a given promise or threat.

Conditional

Germany

Tonga

Promise Threat
(n = 33) (n = 31)

Promise Threat
(n = 33) (n = 34)

given
.88
.09
.03

Canonical
Complementary
Reversed
Rev.-complementary

given
.84
.16
–

given
.48
.45
.06

given
.65
.21
.15

first decides whether or not to cooperate. The predicted
sequence was chosen by 87.8% of the participants in the
German sample (N = 66) and by 74.6% in the Tongan
sample (N = 67) aggregated across all four task versions
(p < 0.001 based on the binomial distribution with
r = 1/2 being the probability of guessing).
Inference task: We expected participants to choose
the complementary conditional “If not-P then not-Q” as
the most appropriate inference from a given canonical
promise or threat “If P then Q”. The results are shown in
Table 2. In the German sample, 85.9 % of the participants inferred the predicted conditional on average.
There was no significant difference between promises
and threats (χ2(1, n = 63) = .648; p = .421). Again, the
Tongan data differed from the German data – the complementary conditional was chosen less frequently
(56.7 % on average) – and this difference again resulted
from a specific inferential preference. While most Tongan participants also preferred the complementary conditional as the most reasonable inference from a threat,
many of them – consistent with their formulation preference – avoided inferring the complementary threat from
Table 3: Proportions of choosing emotional reactions of
the addressee (+ positive; – negative) when the speaker
did vs. did not keep the rule.
Germany
Promise
(n = 33)a

Emotion

Tonga

Threat
(n = 33)a

Promise
(n = 33)

Threat
(n = 34)

Discussion

The Speaker Kept the Rule
Relief
Joy
Others

(+)
(+)
(–)

.27
.67
.09

.52
.18
.30

.21
.70
.09

The cultural comparison revealed many commonalities
in the understanding of conditional promises and
threats, but also some characteristic differences.
First, both German and Tongan participants chose formulations and inferences with the addressee’s action in
the antecedent proposition in accordance with the typical action sequence “addressee first”. The Tongan participants, however, tended to avoid explicit threats and
preferred to use promises instead.
Second, conditional inducements have a potential for
emotional interactions in both cultures. Positive and

.29
.62
.09

The Speaker Did Not Keep the Rule
Sadness (–)
Anger
(–)
Others (+/–)
a

.09
.94
–

.06
.91
–

.48
.27
.24

a promise in favor of the reversed promise (χ2(1, n = 60)
= 3.79; p = .051).
Emotion task: Participants were first required to
decide which action the speaker has to take in order to
keep “the rule” (i.e., to cooperate given that the
addressee cooperated before) or not to keep “the rule”
(i.e., to react defectively even though the addressee fulfilled the speaker’s goal). Almost all participants indicated the appropriate action (all participants in the
German sample and 96.3% in the Tongan sample, aggregated over both questions; n = 134 answers).
How does the addressee respond emotionally after the
speaker did or did not keep “the rule”? The results of the
emotion tasks are shown in Table 3. In line with
appraisal theories of emotion, the addressee was said to
feel a positive emotion if the speaker kept the rule
(85.8 % positive vs. 14.2 % negative), and a negative
emotion was said to result if the speaker did not keep the
rule (3.0 % positive vs. 97.0 % negative; χ2(1, n = 267
answers) = 185.3; p < 0.001).
Separate analyses were performed for the cooperative
and the non-cooperative situation in both samples. The
dependent variable “emotion” was classified into three
categories in both cases: relief, joy, and all other emotions in the cooperative situation, and sadness, anger,
and all other emotions in the uncooperative situation.
In the German sample, keeping the promise resulted
in joy (joy: 66.7 %; relief: 27.3 %), while in the case of
an avoided threat, relief predominated (joy: 18.2 %;
relief: 51.5 %; χ2(1, n = 54) = 10.65; p = 0.001). Interestingly, 24.2 % of the participants indicated that the
addressee feels angry, apparently because the addressee
was “forced” to cooperate by a threat, as described by
Heilmann and Garner (1975). In the Tongan sample, the
addressee was quite uniformly said to feel joy (joy:
65.7 %; relief: 25.4 % on average), independent of the
speech act (χ2(1, n = 61) = 0.604; p = 0.437).
In cases where the speaker did not keep the rule, we
expected a difference between the two cultures with
regard to the attribution of anger. The data supports this
prediction. While the German participants predominantly ascribed anger (anger: 92.4 %; sadness: 7.6 %),
half of the Tongan participants indicated that the
addressee will feel sad in this situation (anger: 26.9 %;
sadness: 50.7 %; χ2(1, n = 118) = 43.9; p < 0.001).

.53
.26
.21

Due to missing/double answers, the proportions
do not always add up to 1.00 in these columns.

88

negative emotions were generally attributed in line with
appraisal-theoretic predictions. Consistent with findings
from another domain (Bender, 2001), indication of
angry reactions is largely reduced in Tonga: in Germany,
anger clearly predominated over sadness after the
speaker’s defection, while the Tongan sample showed
the reversed pattern, with sadness twice as frequent as
anger. While we had expected a difference for the negative emotions, we had not expected any difference for
the positive ones, but found that the German students
distinguished between joy and relief depending on the
speech act whereas the Tongan participants did not.
In general, the differences found in the Tongan sample can be explained by the cultural background.
The tendency of roughly half of the participants to
avoid threats in favor of promises is in accordance with
respective social rules. In addition, as cooperation and
particularly sharing with others are core values in Tongan society, threats may simply be not appropriate as a
means of initiating an exchange.
A conclusion from the affective differences is not as
easy to draw. With regard to the emotional reaction upon
the speaker’s non-cooperation, two explanations are conceivable: the lack of anger indication may either be due
to the fact that anger is socially not acceptable or that it
arises less often in such situations. The latter could be
the case if not fulfilling one’s obligation to reciprocate is
regarded as so unusual that this failure is appraised differently, thus giving rise to different emotions.
Taking together findings from other domains allows
us to presume that our Tongan participants may indeed
have appraised the described event differently from the
German sample. Several studies have indicated that –
despite the culture independence of most appraisal
dimensions – cultural differences do occur with regard
to goals and values and with regard to certain appraisals
that involve rather complex concepts such as causation
or responsibility (e.g., Mauro, Sato & Tucker, 1992;
Norenzayan, Choi & Nisbett, 1999). The latter concepts
are directly relevant for anger as this emotion is elicited
if another person is held personally responsible for a
negative event. Personal responsibility, however, is not
as easily ascribed in some cultures as it is in Western
ones. Particularly in cultures with an interdependent
self-concept (cf. Markus & Kitayama, 1991), causal
attributions are more often also made in view of the circumstances (cf. Morris, Nisbett & Peng, 1995). The
ambivalent or rather open description of the experimental scenario may thus lead to two different interpretations of the speaker’s non-cooperation: in Germany,
participants may interpret the scenario as involving a
rather high level of personal responsibility, while the
Tongan participants may also take circumstances into
account. This difference would then result in diverging
emotional responses: a dominance of angry reactions in
Germany, but one of sad reactions in Tonga. This interpretation is supported by findings from a subsequent
experiment in Germany (Beller, Bender & Kuhnmünch,
2004, Experiment 2) in which we varied personal

89

responsibility: Anger dominated in situations with high
personal responsibility and decreased in favor of sad
reactions in situations with low responsibility.
The different indications of joy versus relief upon
mutual cooperation after a threat also reflect cultural differences. On the one hand, this may again be due to different appraisal patterns. Focusing on the positive outcome of
cooperation elicits joy (as in the Tongan sample), while
focusing on the transition from an expected negative outcome to the final positive one elicits relief (as in the German sample). On the other hand, the difference may also
have lexical origins. There is no Tongan word that precisely translates as “relief”. The word we chose (after discussing the content scenarios with our Tongan partners)
was fiemalie. This comes closest to “relief”, but also
encompasses “to be easy in mind, contented, satisfied, free
from pain, discomfort or sorrow”. These connotations
could also be the reason why some of our Tongan participants did not choose fiemalie in the particular situation.
This last point highlights a particular difficulty of language-based cross-cultural research: even if terms exist
that have the same core meaning across languages, they
often contain a spectrum of connotations that do not
map. Although well known (e.g., Tihanyi, 2002), this
problem is not easy to resolve. While a linguistic tool
has been developed in recent years for identifying and
describing such differences in meaning (Wierzbicka,
1993, 1999), there is no way to circumvent them. Data
interpretation thus requires the differences in meaning to
be noted, and may indeed even profit from this insight
into different semantic fields of a concept.
As we have seen, conditional inducements are fairly
complex concepts as they involve personal values and
goals, a social consensus on reciprocity and obligations,
the consideration of the situational context, and an estimation of the addressee’s goals and the appropriateness
of the chosen inducement. Complex concepts by no
means generally converge across cultures, as has been
shown to be the case, for instance, with concepts of causality (Boyer, 1996; Morris, Menon & Ames, 2001),
concepts of the self (Kanagawa, Cross & Markus,
2001), or even spatial concepts (Levinson, 1996). Our
cross-cultural comparisons suggest, though, that concepts of deontic social norms (Bender & Beller, 2003)
and of promises and threats comparable to ours do exist
in a completely different culture. When used to induce
an exchange, however, they are used somewhat differently, and subsequent interactions may result in different
emotional responses.
In a certain sense, the results of the study produced
more questions than they answered. For this reason, a
replication of the second experiment by Beller, Bender
and Kuhnmünch (2004), which addresses the ascription
of responsibility more thoroughly and includes deontic
aspects, is being conducted in Tonga. As it is part of an
anthropological inquiry into the cultural context of
promises and threats, participant observation and indepth interviewing will provide further data that may
bolster the ecological validity of our present results.

Acknowledgments. The data collection took place during field research of the second author in Tonga, which
was funded by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). We would like to thank Josef Nerb,
Hannah Swoboda, and Stefan Wahl as well as Dan Sperber for discussion and valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper. We are particularly indebted to Moana
and Sione Faka'osi for the Tongan translation of the material, for the opportunity to conduct the research at St.
Joseph’s College in Pangai, and for their unfailing support.

References
Beller, S. (2002). Conditional promises and threats –
Cognition and emotion. In W. D. Gray, & C. D.
Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 113-118). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Beller, S., Bender, A., & Kuhnmünch, G. (2004). Understanding conditional promises and threats. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Beller, S., & Spada, H. (2003). The logic of content
effects in propositional reasoning: The case of conditional reasoning with a point of view. Thinking and
Reasoning, 9, 335-378.
Bender, A. (2001). “God will send us the fish” – Perception and evaluation of an environmental risk in
Ha'apai, Tonga. Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, 9, 165-190.
Bender, A. (2002). Environmental models, cultural values, and emotions: Implications for marine resource
use in Tonga. International Research in Geographical
and Environmental Education, 11, 58-62.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2003). Polynesian tapu in the
‘deontic square’: A cognitive concept, its linguistic
expression and cultural context. In R. Alterman, & D.
Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. CDROM; Cognitive Science Society (USA).
Bernstein, L. M. (1983). Ko e lau pe (It’s just talk):
Ambiguity and informal social control in a Tongan village. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International.
Boyer, P. (1996). Causal understandings in cultural representations: Cognitive constraints on inferences from
cultural input. In D. Sperber, D. Premack, & A. J.
Premack (Eds.), Causal cognition (pp. 615-649).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Smith, C. A. (1988). From appraisal
to emotion: Differences among unpleasant feelings.
Motivation and Emotion, 12, 271-302.
Evans, M. (2001). Persistence of the gift: Tongan tradition in transnational context. Waterloo, Canada: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Twyman-Musgrove, J. (1998).
Conditional reasoning with inducements and advice.
Cognition, 69, B11-B16.
Fillenbaum, S. (1978). How to do some things with IF. In
J. W. Cotton, & R. L. Klatzky (Eds.), Semantic factors
in cognition (pp. 169-231). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

90

Heilman, M. E., & Garner, K. A. (1975). Counteracting
the boomerang: The effects of choice on compliance to
threats and promises. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 31, 911-917.
Kanagawa, C., Cross, S. E., & Markus, H. R. (2001).
“Who am I?” The cultural psychology of the conceptual self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
27, 90-103.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Relativity in spatial conception
and description. In J. J. Gumperz, & S. C. Levinson
(Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 177-202).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marcus, G. E. (1978). Status rivalry in a Polynesian
steady-state society. Ethos, 6, 242-269.
Markus, H. R. & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the
self: Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-253.
Mauro, R., Sato, K., & Tucker, J. (1992). The role of
appraisal in human emotions: A cross-cultural study.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 301317.
Morris, M. W., Menon, T., & Ames, D. R. (2001). Culturally conferred conceptions of agency: A key to
social perception of persons, groups, and other actors.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5, 169-182.
Morris, M. W., Nisbett, R. E. & Peng, K. (1995). Causal
attribution across domains and cultures. In D. Sperber,
D. Premack & A. J. Premack (Eds), Causal cognition
(pp. 577-612). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Morton, H. (1996). Becoming Tongan: An ethnography
of childhood. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press.
Newstead, S. E., Ellis, M. C., Evans, J. St. B. T., & Dennis, I. (1997). Conditional reasoning with realistic
material. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 49-76.
Norenzayan, A., Choi, I., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Eastern and Western perceptions of causality for social
behavior: Lay theories about personalities and situations. In D. A. Prentice & D. T. Miller (Eds.), Cultural
divides: Understanding and overcoming group conflict
(pp. 239-272). New York: Russell Sage.
Roseman, I. J., Antoniou, A. A., & Jose, P. E. (1996).
Appraisal determinants of emotions: Constructing a
more accurate and comprehensive theory. Cognition
and Emotion, 10, 241-277.
Scherer, K. R. (1997). Profiles of emotion-antecedent
appraisal: Testing theoretical predictions across cultures. Cognition and Emotion, 11, 113-150.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Tihanyi, C. (2002). Ethnographic and translation practices. Anthropology News, 43, 5-6.
von Wright, G. H. (1962). On promises. Theoria, 28,
276-297.
Wierzbicka, A. (1993). A conceptual basis for cultural
psychology. Ethos, 21, 205-231.
Wierzbicka, A. (1999). Emotions across languages and
cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

