UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Distortions of perceptual judgment in diagrammatic representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/19d444tj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Peebles, David

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

tates certain basic reading and lookup procedures.
These issues are not only of academic concern. They
have been brought into the public arena recently by the
decision of the UK government to publish its national
police performance data in the form of a set of diagrams
that are relatively unfamiliar to the general public. With
much media attention and at a reported cost of £70,000
(approx. US $128,688), the UK government developed
the performance monitor (Police Standards Unit, 2003,
20041), a variation of a diagram otherwise known as a
spidergram, radar or kiviat chart. The purpose of the
performance monitor is to present in summary form performance data for individual police forces in five key areas or “domains” (citizen focus, promoting public safety,
resource usage, investigating crime, and reducing crime)
and to allow easy comparison with average performance
computed from a set of police forces most similar to the
individual force in terms of socio-economic, demographic
and geographic makeup.

been augmented with five bar charts that illustrate the
spread of performance for the most similar police forces
in each of the domains. The bar charts are similar in
form to the one displayed in Figure 3. In the police performance bar charts, each bar represents the value on
that domain of one of the forces from which the average
has been computed.

Figure 3: Bar chart used in the experiment.

Figure 2: Kiviat chart used in the experiment.
An example of such a diagram is shown in Figure 2.
This diagram is taken from the experiment reported here
but it is identical in form to the police performance monitor. The subject matter of the diagrams was changed
for the experiment to the (fictitious) performance of UK
local authorities in five domains (the environment, housing, education, transport and leisure), each of which is
indicated by a point on a spoke. The points are connected by straight lines to form a pentagon and the regular shaded pentagon represents the average performance
of a set of most similar local authorities. Better performance is shown further out from the centre.
In the most recent version of the police performance
report, the central performance monitor diagram has
1
A hypertext version of the current Home Office document
is available on the Web as performancemonitors.html at
http://www.policereform.co.uk/docs/

One striking feature of both the kiviat and bar charts
used in the police performance report is the lack of any
tick marks on the spokes or axes. Usually the purpose
of a scale of numbered tick marks on a chart or graph is
to provide numerical values relating to locations in the
chart. When numerical values are not deemed necessary, (perhaps because the purpose of the chart is simply
to display relative magnitudes), tick marks still provide
an objective reference frame within which to compare
lengths. Without such a reference frame, it may be the
case that perceptual judgements of quantities such as
line length become more susceptible to distortion by visual illusions.
For example, in kiviat charts, the two lines connecting
a point on a spoke with the two points on the adjacent
spokes form a wide range of shapes and angles. In the
absence of anchoring tick marks on the spokes, it may
be the case that perceptual judgements of distance will
be distorted by these angles and shapes by processes
analogous to those involved in the Müller-Lyer illusion.
Similarly, in bar charts, the lack of tick marks may also
permit distortions in perceptual judgements of distance
to occur because of the parallel lines illusion.
Another widely used diagram that shares many properties with bar charts is the line graph (see Figure 4),
the main obvious difference being that points plotted
against the y-axis are joined by lines rather than being
represented as the top of a column. In the context of
this study, however, an important consequence of this
difference is that judgements of distance would not be

1090

susceptible to the parallel lines illusion in line graphs.

Experiment
The primary purpose of the performance monitors and
bar charts is to allow a rapid visual comparison of an
individual institution’s performance with a meaningful
average. This could be either at a global level (i.e. to
determine how much better or worse than average the
institution is overall), or at the level of specific domains.
The purpose of the experiment reported here is to determine whether the perceptual judgement of this distance
for a particular target domain is affected by the values
of the surrounding domains.

numbered 0 to 6 (although these divisions or numbers
were not visible to the participants). The numbers 0
and 6 were situated at the bottom and top of the y axes
and the centre and outermost points of the kiviat spokes
respectively. Only the numbers 1 to 5 were used in the
experiment and the locations of these on the diagrams
can be seen in Figures 2–4. For example in Figure 2,
Derry council has a housing value of 1, a transport value
of 2, a leisure value of 3, an environment value of 4, and
an education value of 5. The locations of the values on
the y axes of the bar chart and line graph are illustrated
in Figure 3, where Shropshire council has a housing value
of 1, an education value of 2, a leisure value of 3, an
environment value of 4, and a transport value of 5.
Target value = 1
1.2

Kiviat
Bar
Line

Mean response

1

0.8

0.6

1,1

1,2

1,3

1,4

1,5

2,2

2,5
2,4
2,3
Surrounding values

3,3

3,4

3,5

4,4

4,5

5,5

Figure 5: Mean response to target 1, all three diagrams.

Figure 4: Line graph used in the experiment.

Method
Design The experiment was a mixed design with one
between-subjects variable and two within-subjects variables. The between-subjects variable was the type of
diagram used (kiviat chart, bar chart, or line graph).
The within-subjects variables were the value of the target domain that subjects were required to rate and the
values of the two domains adjacent to the target domain.
Participants Sixty-three members of staff from the
University of Huddersfield took part in the experiment.
The occupations of participants varied from academic,
clerical and technical positions to graduate students.
Materials The experiment was conducted using three
identical PC computers with 17-inch (43-cm) displays.
The stimuli used in the experiment were diagrams similar to those in Figures 2–4. The information content
of the diagrams was the performance of 150 UK local
authorities across five domains.
In order to generate a manageable range of values, the
spokes of the kiviat chart and the y axes of the bar chart
and line graph were divided into six equally sized sections

The average value was the number 3 located at the
centre of the y axes and kiviat spokes. In the bar chart
this was represented by a horizontal red line and in the
line graph as the same red line with red squares as markers (to conform to the format of the line graph). In the
kiviat chart, the average was represented by a red regular pentagon formed by joining the centre points on the
five spokes. This produced a kiviat chart identical to
those used in the police performance document.
Below each diagram was a scale consisting of 31 buttons. The centre button in the scale was the same red
colour as the average marker on the diagrams and underneath it was written the word “average” in red. The
15 buttons on either side of the centre button allowed
the scale to be divided into six equally sized units, each
containing four buttons. Below the scale were two arrows indicating that increases in performance were represented by buttons further to the right of the scale.
To test the full range of target and neighbouring
lengths, each of the five target values was combined with
the 15 possible permutations of two adjacent values (1,1;
1,2; 1,3; 1,4; 1,5; 2,2; 2,3; 2,4; 2,5; 3,3; 3,4; 3,5; 4,4; 4,5;
5,5) to create a total of 75 triplets.
In the kiviat charts, each domain spoke has an adjacent domain on either side but in the bar charts and
line graphs, two domains (environment and leisure) have
only one adjacent domain. To ensure that the target domain on each trial had an adjacent domain on either side,
therefore, if the target value was 1, 2, 4, or 5, the target

1091

domain was selected randomly from housing, education,
and transport, as these had two adjacent values in the
bar and line graphs. If the target value was 3, however,
the target domain was randomly selected from all five
domains. The values of the two remaining domains not
adjacent to the target domain were randomly allocated a
value of between 1 and 5. Responses to the target value
of 3 were not to be included in the analysis as they were
expected to be rapid and accurate for all graph conditions as this value was marked on both the graph and
the scale.
Target value = 2
2.2

Mean response

2

1.8

Results
Participants’ responses were coded to re ect the underlying scale of the diagrams. A response click on the button
to the extreme left of the scale was given the value 0 and
each successive button was incremented by 0.2 to end at
a final value of 6 at the extreme right of the scale.
An initial examination of the data revealed the existence of several outlying values that were not associated with a specific participant or condition but were
sufficiently large to distort the mean for a specific cell.
To reduce the in uence of these outliers, the 42 values in each cell were standardised and those cases at
the extreme end of the distribution (i.e. with a z score
greater than 3.29, p < .001, two-tailed test) were discarded (Tabachneck & Fidell, 2001). From the original
set of 9450 data points, this procedure resulted in the removal of 165 cases (1.75%) of the response data and 128
(1.35%) cases of the RT data. Data from the target value
= 3 condition were not included in the analysis because,
as predicted, responses were almost entirely accurate for
all of the diagrams.
Target value = 5

Kiviat
Bar
Line

5.2

Kiviat
Bar
Line

1.6

1,1

1,2

1,3

1,4

1,5

2,2

2,5
2,4
2,3
Surrounding values

3,3

3,4

3,5

4,4

4,5

5,5

Figure 6: Mean response to target 2, all three diagrams.
Mean response

Procedure Participants were randomly allocated to
one of the diagram conditions. Before starting the task,
participants were shown an example of the diagram they
were to use and given as much time as they required
to become familiar with it. The format of the example was the same for each diagram and was modelled
closely on the format used in the Home Office document.
When the participant had finished studying the example, the experimenter then explained the diagram further, explaining the subject matter, highlighting salient
points and making sure that they were completely familiar with it. Participants were then told that on each
trial of the experiment their task was to judge how much
better or worse than average the performance of a particular authority was on a given domain. Participants were
also shown how to enter their judgement by clicking the
mouse on the scale below the diagram. It was stressed
to participants that they should attempt to respond as
rapidly but also as accurately as possible.
On each trial of the experiment, the target domain was
first presented in the centre of the screen for 1500 ms,
after which it was removed from the screen and replaced
by a diagram. As soon as the participant had clicked
the mouse cursor on one of the scale buttons the diagram was removed from the screen and, after a pause of
500 ms, the next target domain was presented for a new
trial. Response times were recorded from the onset of the
diagram to the mouse click on a scale button. Participants saw all 75 triplets twice—a total of 150 trials—in
random order and were given the opportunity to take a
brief, self-terminated break after 50 and 100 trials.

5

4.8

4.6

1,1

1,2

1,3

1,4

1,5

2,2

2,5
2,4
2,3
Surrounding values

3,3

3,4

3,5

4,4

4,5

5,5

Figure 7: Mean response to target 5, all three diagrams.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was carried out on
the response data. In the ANOVA, Mauchly’s test of
sphericity was significant for the target value (Mauchly’s
W = .23, df = 5, p < 0.01) and adjacent values
(Mauchly’s W = .25, df = 104, p < 0.01) so the more
conservative Greenhouse-Geisser test was used in the
analysis. The ANOVA showed that there was a significant main effect of the diagram used, F(2, 59) = 15.48,
p < .001, the target value F(1.66,97.66) = 4847.11, p
< .001 and the adjacent values, F(9.87,582.49) = 3.96,
p < .001, together with significant interactions between
the adjacent value and diagram, F(19.75,582.49) = 2.84,
p < .001, and between target value and adjacent value,
F(16.07,974.94) = 2.51, p < .01. The ANOVA also revealed a three-way interaction between diagram, target
value and adjacent value, F(32.13,974.94) = 1.56, p <
.05. Although response times were also recorded, due to
lack of space, the data are not reported here. The main
difference observed was that responses were slower in the
kiviat condition than in the other two, probably due to
the greater degree of unfamiliarity.
The complex effects revealed by the ANOVA are most

1092

Figure 8: Kiviat charts illustrating a target value of 1 (education) with adjacent values 1,1 (left) and 2,3 (right).
clearly illustrated in Figures 5–7 which present the mean
response for target values 1, 2, and 5 respectively as a
function of the adjacent values. In these graphs, each
labelled tick mark on the y-axis represents a button on
the scale. The graphs show a large degree of variation in
responses to individual target values both for individual
diagrams and between the different diagram types.
One of the most striking differences in responses between the diagrams is shown in Figures 5 and 6, both
of which show that participants viewing the line graphs
consistently perceive target values of 1 and 2 to be closer
to the average than bar chart users, despite the fact
that the values are represented at exactly the same locations in the coordinate system in the two diagrams. This
marked difference between the graphs is not present for
target values of 4 and 5, however, and this may provide
a possible explanation. Unlike points in a line graph,
bars are attached to and proceed from the x-axis and so
form a concrete object. When comparing the distance
between the top of a bar with the mean line, therefore,
participants’ attention is drawn to the length of the bar
in comparison to the height of the mean line, (rather
than to the distance between them), which may serve to
accentuate the perceived difference. In contrast, participants using the line graph may simply attempt the more
accurate procedure of judging the distance between the
points on the plotted and mean lines.
According to this account, the lack of such a major
difference when the target values are 4 and 5 is because
users of the bar chart are still judging the length of the
bar but, this time are comparing it to the mean line
below it. This is very similar to the procedure carried
out by the line graph users in that both are judging
the same distance. At the moment this is a plausible
hypothesis that remains to be tested in a further eye
movement study.
Figure 5 also illustrates the wide range of responses
that users of the kiviat chart gave to the same target
value. It is clear that the perception of the difference

between the target value 1 and the mean value 3 is affected by values of the adjacent domains. To provide
a clearer demonstration of this effect, two of the diagrams resulting in widely differing ratings are shown in
Figure 8. In both diagrams, the target value of 1 is represented on the education domain. The chart on the left
has adjacent values of 1,1, for which the mean rating is
0.67, whereas that on the right has adjacent values of 2,3,
given a mean rating of 1.0. A t-test shows the difference
between these ratings to be significant t(60.11) = 3.10,
p < .001. Figure 5 shows that participants viewing the
kiviat charts perceive the target value of 1 to be much
closer to the average when surrounded by the values 2
and 3 than for any other combination but that the surrounding values of 1 and 1 were perceived as relatively
far from the average. Although a precise explanation for
this is still being considered, it is clear that the shape
produced by the lines connecting the target value and
the adjacent values has a distorting effect on viewers’
perception of distance. Figure 5 shows that this effect
is not a simple linear function in which greater adjacent
values result in a larger perceived target value.
The distortion of perceived distance in the bar chart
condition is perhaps best illustrated in Figure 7 which
reveals a wide range of responses to the target value 5.
As with the kiviat charts, the pattern of results does
not conform to a simple analysis. At least one example,
however, may be best explained by reference to the parallel lines illusion. The two bar charts in Figure 9 were
given ratings at the extreme ends of the range. Both
represent a target value of 5 on the education domain
and the chart on the left has adjacent values of 1,1, for
which the mean rating was 5.07, whereas that on the
right has adjacent values of 4,4, given a mean rating of
4.69. A t-test shows the difference between these ratings to be significant t(76.02) = 3.88, p < .001. The
target domain in the chart on the left of Figure 9 was
perceived as being further away from the average line
than that in right-hand chart. This can be explained in

1093

Figure 9: Bar charts illustrating a target value of 5 (education) with adjacent values 1,1 (left) and 4,4 (right).
terms of the parallel lines illusion as it re ects the phenomena of contrast and assimilation described earlier.
The target domain in the left-hand chart is seen as being larger because it contrasts with two relatively small
adjacent values. The target domain in the right-hand
chart, however, was perceived as being smaller because
viewers perceived the lengths of the target and adjacent
bars to be closer than they actually are (assimilation).
It is also interesting to note in Figure 7 that this pattern
of responses is not found in the line graph condition.

Discussion
The results of this experiment provide concrete evidence
of distortions in perceptual judgements of distance in
two graphical representations of a type currently being
employed to present public data in the UK. Specifically,
the three examples clearly illustrate that simple comparative judgements between two points on a dimension can
be significantly affected by the values of adjacent variables. Further work is required before firm conclusions
can be drawn but from this initial analysis it seems that,
as currently designed, the kiviat and bar charts in the
UK government’s police monitoring documents may be
susceptible to the distorting effects highlighted here.
The use of anchor points, typically tick marks on axes,
is generally seen as a way of facilitating the accurate
reading of locations relative to a scale. Whether the
incorporation of such anchor points into these diagrams
reduces the distortions in distance judgements observed
in this experiment is to be tested in a future study.

References
Derȩgowski, J. B. (1980). Illusions, Patterns, and Pictures. London: Academic Press.
Jordan, K., & Schiano, D. J. (1986). Serial Processing and the parallel-lines illusion: Length contrast
through relative spatial separation of contours. Perception & Psychophysics, 40, 384–390.

Peebles, D., & Cheng P. C.-H. (2001). Graph-based reasoning: From task analysis to cognitive explanation,
Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, 23, 762–767.
Peebles, D., & Cheng P. C.-H. (2002). Extending task
analytic models of graph-based reasoning: A cognitive model of problem solving with Cartesian graphs
in ACT-R/PM, Cognitive Systems Research, 3, 77–86.
Peebles, D., & Cheng, P. C.-H. (2003). Modeling the
effect of task and graphical representation on response
latency in a graph reading task. Human Factors, 45,
28–46.
Peebles, D., Cheng P. C.-H., & Shadbolt, N. (1999).
Multiple processes in graph-based reasoning, Proceedings of the Twenty- rst Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 21, 531–536.
Police Standards Unit. (2003). Police Performance
Monitoring 2001/02. London: Home Office.
Police Standards Unit. (2004). Police Performance
Monitoring 2002/03. London: Home Office.
Poulton, E. C. (1985). Geometric illusions in reading
graphs. Perception & Psychophysics, 37, 543–548.
Schiano, D. J. (1986). Relative size and spatial separation: Effects on the parallel-lines illusion. Perceptional
& Motor Skills, 63, 1151–1155.
Schiffman, H. R. (1995). Sensation and Perception: An
Integrated Approach (Fourth Ed.). New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Tabachneck, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2001). Using multivariate statistics, (Fourth edition). Needham Heights,
MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Zacks, J., Levy, E., Tversky, B., & Schiano, D. J. (1998).
Reading bar graphs: Effects of extraneous depth cues
and graphical context. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied. 4, 119–138.

1094

