UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does Irrelevant Information Play a Role in Judgment?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25t6k2ng

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Kokinov, Boicho
Hristova, Penka
Petkov, Georgi

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does Irrelevant Information Play a Role in Judgment?
Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg) 12
Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg) 1
Georgi Petkov (gpetkov@cogs.nbu.bg) 1

1

Central and East European Center for Cognitive Science, Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1635, Bulgaria
2

Institute of Mathematics and Informatics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad. G. Bonchev Street, bl.8
Sofia 1113, Bulgaria

Abstract
This paper presents an unusual prediction made by the
DUAL-based model of judgment JUDGEMAP and its
verification. The model is shortly presented as well as the
simulation data obtained with it. These data predict that
people will use the information on an irrelevant dimension
when judging another dimension. This prediction is then
tested in a psychological experiment and confirmed.

Introduction
Suppose that you are judging how tall a person is. Do you
expect that the color of his or her eyes will play a role in
that process? Or suppose you are judging the quantity of oil
in the bottle you are buying, do you expect that the font
used on its label will have an effect? Finally, suppose you
are judging the length of a given line segment. Do you
expect that the color of the line will make a difference?
Both our intuition and the theories of judgment would
answer these questions negatively. Basically they would
assume that when judging length we ignore all irrelevant
features (including color) and only physical length plays a
role. Of course, many other factors, like order of
presentation and context, may play a role, but only the
length of the lines will take part in the judgment.
This paper is challenging this assumption of standard
theories of judgment and is trying to answer the above
seemingly stupid and self-evident questions and
surprisingly to show that all features (including the
irrelevant ones) do matter or more precisely they may matter
under certain circumstances.

Approaches to Judgment
There are a number of theories of judgment and a few
running models. Most of the theories originate from
psychophysics and are mathematical in their nature; they do
not describe the process of judgment, but only characterize
the end result. Since we are interested in describing the
process of judgment we will briefly outline only the main
approaches proposed so far in that direction.
Judgment as measuring similarity/dissimilarity with a
standard. The classical ideal point approach proposed by
Coombs (1964, Wedell & Pettibone, 1999) falls into this
720

category. He believes individuals have their “ideal points”
and therefore judging a stimulus can be described as
comparing it to this standard and measuring the distance
toward it. The Adaptation Level Theory (Helson, 1964) falls
into the same category, however, here the standard
(adaptation level) is changed depending on context. Finally,
the Norm Theory (Kahneman & Miller, 1986) follows a
similar approach, however, the standard here is called
“norm” and what is more important is that this norm is
constructed on the spot rather than retrieved from long-term
memory. A comparison set is constructed in working
memory consisting of known exemplars and its norm is
computed. Thus all three theories can be described as
relying on comparison of the target stimulus with a standard
(Figure 1), but they differ in the degree to which they
subscribe to the constructivist approach toward this
standard.
Comparison Set

Target
Standard

Figure 1. Judgment as comparison with a standard.
Judgment as classification task. Within this approach
the comparison set is subdivided into subcategories each of
them corresponding to a judgment label (or scale element)
and the target stimulus is classified within one of these
subcategories. The Range-Frequency Theory (Parduci, 1965,
1974) postulates the constraints which should be met by
such category subdivision: the range of value variation
within all subcategories should be about the same, and the
number of examples in all subcategories should be about the
same. The Theory of Criterion Setting (Treisman &
Williams, 1984, Treisman, 1985) is a process model that
explains how dynamically we change the boundaries of the
subcategories. Finally, the ANCHOR model (Petrov &

Anderson, 2000, in press) describes the process of learning
of these subcategories and solves the classification task by
comparing the target stimulus to the prototypes of each
subcategory, these prototypes are supposed to be hold in
long-term memory and are called anchors (Figure 2). The
comparison set represented by the set of anchors is
dynamically formed.
Comparison Set
1
2

Target

3
4
5
Figure 2. Judgment as classification task. Comparing the
target to the standard of each of the subcategories.
Judgment as a mapping task. The DUAL-based model
of judgment discussed in this paper follows a third
approach: The target stimulus is not compared to the
comparison set, but is rather included in it and then a
mapping is established between the elements of the
comparison set and the set of rating labels (or scale
elements). This mapping should be as close as possible to a
homomorphism, i.e. the relations among the elements of
the comparison sets should be kept among their
corresponding rating labels. Thus the process of judgment
involves construction of the comparison set, joining the
target to it, and mapping between the comparison set and
the rating labels (Figure 3).
a)

Comparison Set

Target

DUAL-Based Model of Judgment
The current model – JUDGEMAP (Judgment as Mapping) –
is based on a general cognitive architecture – DUAL
(Kokinov, 1994b, 1994c). This architecture is a hybrid
(symbolic/connectionist) one and is explicitly designed to
model context-sensitivity of human cognition. It is based
on decentralized representations of concepts, objects, and
episodes and parallel emergent computations.
The AMBR1 (Kokinov, 1988, 1994a) and AMBR2
(Kokinov, 1998, Kokinov & Petrov, 2001) models are built
on DUAL and integrate memory and analogy-making. Since
the process of judgment, as described above, involves
memory (construction of the comparison set in working
memory) and mapping (which is a central mechanism in
analogy-making) the JUDGEMAP model is most naturally
integrated in DUAL and borrows many of the mechanisms
developed for analogy-making in AMBR. Because of the
lack of space the model is described only in broad strokes.
Interested readers are invited to consult the literature on
DUAL and AMBR for more details.
Construction of the comparison set. The comparison set
is formed from perception (the target as well as potential
context stimuli) and from long-term memory (familiar or
recently presented exemplars as well as generalized
prototypes, if such exist in LTM). The mechanism
responsible for that construction is spreading activation. The
sources of activation are the INPUT and GOAL nodes, i.e.
the perceived target (and possibly context) stimuli and the
goal to judge the stimuli on a scale predefined in the
instruction (e.g. a scale from 1 to 7). Thus the
representations of the target and the scale elements become
sources of activation which is then spread through the
network of micro-agents. Naturally, concepts related to the
representation of the target become active, e.g. various
features of the target – these include both relevant and
irrelevant features (of course, relevant features receive more
activation than irrelevant ones). The activation spreads
further from the general concepts (like RED, GREEN, etc.)
towards specific examples of the concepts (other red or green
objects). However, there are only a few links from the
general concepts to their exemplars – only to the most
familiar (typical) exemplars or to recently experienced ones.
Thus gradually a number of exemplars (and possibly
prototypes) are activated and become part of working
memory – all these form the comparison set (Figure 4).
Comparison Set

b)

Comparison Set

Scale
1

Target
2

3
4
5
Figure 3. Judgment as mapping in the DUAL-based model.
721

Figure 4. Formation of the comparison set in WM by the
spreading activation mechanism of DUAL.

Mapping of the comparison set onto the scale elements.
We can now consider the comparison set as a retrieved base
and map it onto the scale elements which are the target. The
mapping process should preserve the relations among the
elements of the comparison set among their images on the
scale. The mapping should also follow the range-frequency
principle described in the previous section. How is the
mapping achieved in JUDGEMAP? Similarly to AMBR, a
constraint-satisfaction network is constructed by the markerpassing and structure-correspondence mechanisms. This
network consists of temporal agent-hypotheses representing
possible correspondences between members of the
comparison set and elements of the scale. These initial
hypotheses are formed according to the range principle.
Excitatory and inhibitory links are constructed among the
hypotheses and the spreading activation mechanism selects
the winning hypotheses which form the mapping (Figure 5).
The competition among the hypotheses implements the
frequency principle. As result of this process not only the
target stimulus but also each element of the comparison set
receives a judgment. This does not mean that people would
be aware of all these judgments – most or even all of them
might remain unconscious.
Comparison Set

of the comparison set (Figure 7). Now, if it happens that the
known red lines are longer than the known green lines, then
the two target stimuli (differing only in color) will be
included in different comparison sets and thus judged
differently and there will be a shift in favor of the green
target. Therefore the speculative prediction of JUDGEMAP
will be that even such irrelevant feature of the line like its
color will play a role in the judgment process. This
prediction is in sharp contrast to all theories and models
described in the first section, which assume that only the
relevant features play a role.
Comparison Set

Scale
1
2
3

T

4
5
Figure 6. The target stimulus is red and therefore we expect
more red exemplars in the comparison set. They happened
to be larger in size and thus they compete for the upper part
of the scale. In this case the target stimulus (of the same
size as in Figure 7) will compete with them and will be
mapped onto 4.

Scale
1
2
3
4

Comparison Set

5

Scale
1

Figure 5. The process of mapping accomplished by the
constraint satisfaction mechanism. The winning hypotheses
are in black.
Speculative prediction. Since the activation spreads from
the target stimulus (represented in a decentralized way by
many agents), exemplars, similar in some respect to it
(sharing some feature with the target), can be potentially
activated and thus become members of the comparison set
in working memory. This means that in addition to
currently perceived stimuli, to recently activated exemplars,
and to highly familiar (typical) exemplars, exemplars which
are simply similar to the target will also participate in the
comparison set. Moreover, these exemplars might be similar
along the relevant (judged) dimension or along an irrelevant
dimension.
Let us consider the following example. Suppose we are
judging the length of line segments but the lines are
colored. Let the target stimulus be a red line of certain
length. In this case we may expect that there will be more
red lines in the comparison set (Figure 6) – they will be
activated through the RED concept which is shared with the
target. On the other hand, if the target stimulus is a green
line of the same length, more green lines will become part
722

2
3
4

T
5

Figure 7. The target stimulus is green and therefore we
expect more green exemplars in the comparison set. They
happened to be smaller in size and thus they compete for the
lower part of the scale. In this case the target stimulus (of
the same size as in Figure 6) will compete with them and
eventually will be mapped onto 5. In this way we receive an
upward shift in the judgment.

Thus we will first describe a simulation experiment with
JUDGEMAP that tests in practice this speculation and will
also give us a rough estimation of the order of this color
effect (if any). If we are successful, we will run a
psychological experiment to text the model’s prediction and
thus verify the model.

Simulation Experiment
In this simulation experiment we use a stimulus set of 56
lines. They are all in the long-term memory of the model.
The lines differ in length and color. There are 7 different
sizes (from 10 units of length to 34 unit with increment of
4 units) and two different colors (red and green). Thus in
each size group there are 8 lines. The frequency of the red
(respectively green) lines varies across the size groups. In
size group one (the shortest lines - length 10 units) there are
7 green and 1 red line, in the second shortest group (length
14 units) there are 6 green and 2 red lines, etc. In the largest
group size (length of 34 units) there are 7 red lines and one
green line. Thus we have positively skewed distribution of
the green lines and negatively skewed distribution for the
red lines.
Each line is represented by a coalition of 5 agents
standing for the line itself, for its color, for its length, and
for the two relations (color_of and length_of). In addition
there are agents standing for the numbers from 0 to 8, but
only the agents standing for 1 to 7 are instances of “scale
element”.
On each run of the program we connect one of these lines
to the input list thus simulating the perception of the target
stimulus, and connecting the agent standing for
“scale_from_1_to_7” to the goal node thus simulating the
instruction for rating on a 7 point scale.
We have produced 42 variations of the knowledge base of
the system thus simulating 42 different participants in the
experiment. The knowledge bases differ mainly in the
associative and instance links among the agents, thus
although all our “artificial participants” will know the same
lines and the same concepts, they will activate different
instances in the comparison set.
For each of these knowledge bases we have run two
judgment trials: one for a red line of size 22 and one for a
green line of the same size.

Simulation Results

mean ratings

The results from the simulations are presented in Figure 8.
As we can see the mean rating of the green lines are in most
cases slightly higher than the mean rating of the red lines
with the same length.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

green lines
red lines

line lengths

Figure 8. Simulation data. The mean rating of each line
with a certain length (1-7) and color (green and red) obtained
from all subjects.
723

Thus the mean of the mean ratings of all red categories is
4.012, while the mean of the mean ratings of all green
categories is 4.065, which makes a difference of 0.053
which turns out to be almost significant tested with repeated
measurements analysis (F(1,41)=3.917, p=0.055). The data
show that the possible size of the color main effect is very
small, but may still be significant. This prediction makes
sense: on one hand it is small enough, so that we can ignore
it in everyday life and this explains why our intuition says
that irrelevant information does not play a role in judgment.
On the other hand, the simulation predicts that the irrelevant
information does play a role and shifts a bit the evaluation.
This means that under specific circumstances this shift
might be larger and become significant.
The experiment described below is designed to test this
prediction of the model. Basically it replicates the
simulation experiment with a larger number of lines.

Psychological Experiment
In this experiment human participants rate the length of red
and green lines of various sizes. The interesting question is
whether we will obtain a main effect of color, i.e. whether
there will be a difference between the ratings of the red and
green lines of the same size.

Method
Design
The experiment has a 14x2 within-subject factorial design.
The independent variables are length (varying at 14 levels)
and color (varying at 2 levels: green and red) of the lines.
The dependent variable is the rating of the length of the
lines on a 7-point-scale. The experimental question is
whether there will be a main effect of color, which is
supposedly an irrelevant factor in judging length.
Material
A set of 14 color lines has been presented horizontally
against a gray background on a 17-inch monitor. The
shortest line is 12 pixels, the longest one is 727 pixels and
the increment is 55 pixels. Each particular line length has
been shown eight times in red or green color. The short
lines were predominantly green while the long ones were
predominantly red. The color distribution within the set of
all 112 lines (14 lengths x 8 times) is presented in Table 1.
The frequency of the stimuli was calculated in order to
receive a positively skewed distribution for the green color
and a negatively skewed one for the red lines.

Table 1. Frequency of the presented stimulus lines (where 1
represents stimulus length 12 pixels, 2-67 pixels and so
on).

number of the

number of the red

green lines

lines

1&2

7

1

3&4

6

2

5&6

5

3

7&8

4

4

9 & 10

3

5

11 & 12

2

6

13 & 14

1

7

mean rating

lengths

7
6
5
4

green
red

3
2
1
0
line length

Figure 9. The mean rating of each line with a certain length
(1-14) and color (green and red) obtained from all subjects.

Conclusions
Procedure
The participants were tested individually in front of a
computer screen where all 112 stimuli were shown
sequentially and in random order. They were instructed to
judge the length of each line presented on the screen on a
seven point scale: 1-“it is not long at all”, …, 7-“it is very
long”. No feedback was provided to the participants and no
time restrictions have been imposed on them. The whole
experiment typically lasted about 15 minutes.
Participants
The participants were 18 undergraduate students (9 men and
9 women none of whom was color-blind) from the
introductory classes in psychology at New Bulgarian
University who participated in order to satisfy a course
requirement.

Results and Discussion
We had 14x2=28 data points for each participant. The
results averaged over subjects are shown in Figure 9. Each
bar stands for the mean rating that a line of the
corresponding size and color has received during the
experiment. The repeated measurements analysis showed
that the difference (0.046) between the mean judgment of
the green lines (4.239) and the mean judgment of the red
lines (4.193) is significant (F(1, 17)=5.966, p=0.026).
Surprisingly enough we obtained a difference (0.046) that
is almost the same as the difference we obtained in the
simulation (0.053). No tuning of the model was possible
since we did not have the experimental data in advance.
Thus the prediction of the JUDGEMAP model has been
experimentally confirmed.

724

The JUDGEMAP model of human judgment has been
presented. This model is based on a general cognitive
architecture (DUAL) and is thus integrated with the memory
and analogy-making model AMBR. Moreover, this model
inherits the underlying assumptions of DUAL and AMBR:
human cognition is context-sensitive (Kokinov, 1994c),
judgment included; human memory is constructive
(Kokinov & Hirst, 2003), analogy-making is at the core of
human cognition (Gentner, Holyoak & Kokinov, 2001) and
its mapping mechanisms may be used in judgment.
The JUDGEMAP model is similar to the Norm theory
and the ANCHOR model with respect to the constructive
approach to the formation of the comparison set. However,
unlike all the models described in the first section judgment
in JUDGEMAP is not based on comparison of the target
with some aspect of the comparison set, but rather the target
stimulus is included in the comparison set and it receives a
rating along with all other members of this set. This rating
process is based on establishing a mapping between the
comparison set and the set of scale elements which mapping
preserves the order relations.
Unlike all other models JUDGEMAP does not ignore the
irrelevant features of the to be judged targets, moreover
these irrelevant features play a role in the construction of the
comparison set (retrieving similar objects according to these
irrelevant dimensions). The model makes a strange
prediction that the color of the target line may play a role in
the rating of its length and thus predicts a shift of the mean
rating (although a small one) with the change of color. This
prediction has been tested in a psychological experiment and
has been confirmed.
The size of this color effect is very small, but the stimuli
have been very simple and the features unremarkable. It is
difficult to imagine that the green color reminds us of a
particular green line. That is why we plan to repeat the
experiment with more complex stimuli (human figures and
clothes) and more memorable features (human faces). It is
possible the size of the effect in this case to become larger.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the AMBR research team for their
continuous support and stimulating environment as well as
Stefan Mateeff and Maurice Grinberg for the valuable
discussions.

References
Coombs, C. (1964). A Theory of Data. NY: Wiley.
Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. & Kokinov, B. (2001). The
Analogical Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Helson, H. (1964) Adaptation-Level Theory: An
Experimental and Systematic Approach to Behavior. NY:
Harper and Row.
Kahneman, D., Miller, D. (1986). Norm Theory:
Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives. Psychological
Review, vol. 93 (2), pp 136-153.
Kokinov, B. (1988). Associative memory-based reasoning:
How to represent and retrieve cases. In T. O'Shea and V.
Sgurev (Eds.), Artificial intelligence III: Methodology,
systems, applications. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Kokinov, B. (1994a). A hybrid model of reasoning by
analogy. In K. Holyoak & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances
in connectionist and neural computation theory: Vol. 2.
Analogical connections (pp. 247-318). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex
Kokinov, B. (1994b). The DUAL cognitive architecture: A
hybrid multi-agent approach. Proceedings of the Eleventh
European Conference of Artificial Intelligence. London:
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Kokinov, B. (1994c). The context-sensitive cognitive architecture DUAL. Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kokinov, B. (1998). Analogy is like cognition: Dynamic,
emergent, and context-sensitive. In K. Holyoak, D.
Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in analogy
research. Sofia, Bulgaria: NBU Press.
Kokinov, B. & Hirst, W. (2003). Constructive Memory.
Sofia: NBU Press.
Kokinov, B. & Petrov, A. (2001). Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In: Gentner, D., Holyoak, K., Kokinov, B. (eds.) The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Luce, D. (1959). On the Possible Psychophysical Laws.
Psychological Review, 66(2), 81-95.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category Judgment: A RangeFrequency Model. Psychological Review, vol. 72 (6), pp
407-418.
Parducci, A. (1974) Contextual Effects: A Range-Frequency
Analysis. In: Carterette, E., Friedman, M. (eds)
Handbook of Perception. vol. II. Psychophysical
Judgment and Measurement. NY:Academic Press, pp
127-141.
Petrov, A. & Anderson, J. (2000). ANCHOR: A MemoryBased Model of Category Rating. In: L. Gleitman & A.
Joshi (eds.) Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
725

Petrov, A. & Anderson, J. (submitted). The Dynamics of
Scaling: A Memory-Based Anchor Model of Category
Rating and Absolute Identification.
Sarris, V., Parducci, A. (1978) Multiple Anchoring of
Category Rating Scales. Perception and Psychophysics,
vol. 27 (1), pp 35-39.
Thurstone, L. (1927). A Law of Comparative Judgments.
Psychological Review, 34, 273-286.
Treisman, M. (1985). The Magical Number Seven and
Some Other Features of Category Scaling: Properties of a
Model for Absolute Judgment. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 29, 175-230.
Treisman, M. & Williams, T. (1984). A Theory of
Criterion Setting with an Application to Sequential
Dependences. Psychological Review, 91(1), 68-111.
Wedell, D., Pettibone, J. (1999) Preference and the
Contextual Basis of Ideals in Judgment and Choice.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, vol. 128,
pp 346-361.

