UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Does the Viewpoint Deviation Effect Diminish if Canonical Viewpoints are used for the
Presentation of Dynamic Sequences?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2bk3t67b

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Garsoffky, Barbel
Schwan, Stephan
Hesse, Friedrich W.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Does the Viewpoint Deviation Effect Diminish if Canonical Viewpoints are used for
the Presentation of Dynamic Sequences?
Bärbel Garsoffky (b.garsoffky@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center (IWM-KMRC)
Tübingen, Germany

Stephan Schwan (Stephan.Schwan@jku.at)
Johannes Keppler University
Linz, Austria

Friedrich W. Hesse (f.hesse@iwm-kmrc.de)

Knowledge Media Research Center (IWM-KMRC)
Tübingen, Germany

that could by now only be shown for static objects (e.g.
Palmer, Rosch & Chase, 1981) (Experiment 1), and further
it will be investigated, if these canonical viewpoints have an
influence on the viewpoint deviation effect found by
Garsoffky et al. (2002) (Experiment 2).
The concept of canonicality in connection with
visual viewpoints was firstly empirically investigated and
defined by Palmer et al. (1981). They discuss the idea of
canonical viewpoints from an information-processing
approach, a categorization perspective, in terms of
phenomenology, and with regard to the concept of
affordances (Gibson, 1982) and they conclude, that
canonical viewpoints compared to other viewpoints contain
more information as well as information of high salience,
are the most typical viewpoints of an object, are those
viewpoints from which an object is most perceivable, and
are especially qualified to present the affordance structure of
an object.
Empirically canonical viewpoints are defined e.g.
by asking participants to imagine an object and then to
describe the viewpoint from which the imagination took
place, or participants were asked from which viewpoint they
would make a photo of an object, or participants had to
choose between photos with varying viewpoints which
photo in their opinion presented the object best (Blanz, Tarr
& Bülthoff, 1999; Palmer et al., 1981). Evidence for
canonical viewpoints is stated if there is high inter- and
intraindividual agreement.
At least for static objects some conclusions about
the nature of canonicality can be made that do not mutual
exclude each other. (i) Functionality and familiarity:
Especially objects of everyday life we often see from a
specific viewpoint that corresponds with the functionality of
that object, i.e. when interacting with that object we see the
object from a specific, i.e. canonical viewpoint that allows
optimal interaction (Blanz et al., 1999). (ii) Information
richness: In some studies canonical viewpoints were
discovered even for abstract or nonsense objects – a fact that
can not be explained by familiarity or functionality (Cutzu
& Edelman, 1994; Edelman & Bülthoff, 1992; Perrett &

Abstract
Two studies examine the visual presentation of
dynamic sequences. Experiment 1 tests if there are
canonical viewpoints, that are especially appropriate
for presentation. Participants agreed that viewpoints
with 90 degree deviation between axis of sight and
axis of main movement in the sequence are better
than other viewpoints. Experiment 2 examines if
these canonical viewpoints weaken the perspective
deviation effect in a recognition task according to
their postulated information richness. A perspective
deviation effect was found both for canonical and
less canonical views, even if it was weaker for the
canonical views.

Viewpoint Deviation and Canonicality
This paper deals with questions concerning the cognitive
representation of visually presented dynamic sequences,
specially the role of viewpoint. A first experimental series
(Garsoffky, Schwan & Hesse, 2002) showed that the
viewpoint from which one sees a dynamic sequence
becomes part of the cognitive representation of that
sequence and therefore influences later memory retrieval
processes. This viewpoint deviation effect appeared in three
experiments examining recognition memory for visually
presented dynamic sequences (Garsoffky et al., 2002) and
comprises the stable result, that cuttings from sequences are
best recognized if they are presented in a viewpoint most
similar to the viewpoint from which participants before saw
the whole sequence. This means the cognitive representation
of dynamic sequences is not uncoupled from the viewpoint
from which one primarily saw the specific sequence and
therefore influences later memory retrieval processes. The
question now is, if this viewpoint deviation effect holds for
all kinds of viewpoints or if the use of special viewpoints
may reduce this effect. The following studies therefore ask,
if various viewpoints differ in their qualification to present a
sequence – i.e. if there exist so called canonical viewpoints
428

Harries, 1988). It was concluded that canonical viewpoints
present more information and especially more salient
information of an object than other, less canonical
viewpoints. They present a high number of visible surfaces
of an object, important parts of an object are not covered,
and they are stable against small variations of the viewpoint,
i.e. the informational advances of that viewpoint remain the
same even if the viewpoint is changed slightly (for a
comprehensive list see Blanz et al., 1999). (iii)
Discriminability: Cutzu and Edelman (1994) concluded
from their findings using abstract objects, that because of
limited cognitive capacity for every specific object only the
diagnostically valuable attributes are stored, that help to
distinguish this object from other objects. This means that it
varies with changing contexts or tasks, which viewpoint is
more canonical than other viewpoints.
This paper investigates if the usage of such high
informative viewpoints, that allow optimal discrimination,
leads to a more viewpoint independent cognitive
representation of visually presented dynamic sequences. I.e.
the question is if so called canonical viewpoints help to
recognize sequences better even if they are presented from
new viewpoints.

Stimulus materials and design Eleven dynamic sequences
were programmed using xyZET (Härtel & Lüdke, 2000), a
simulation program to teach physics in school. Each
dynamic sequence consisted of four spheres (balls) with
different colors, sizes, starting positions and velocities. All
balls moved on parallel laps towards a kind of blue goal at
one end of the rectangular space. So the sequences were
similar to a kind of race, with the exception that the balls
did not start at the same line and that not all of them reached
the goal within the duration of the sequence. Each sequence
was filmed from 5 different viewpoints: All viewpoints had
the same height but differed according to the horizontal
amount of deviation between the axis of sight realized by
the camera perspective and the axis of movement direction
of the balls; this amount of deviation could be either 0˚ (i.e.
parallelism), 22.5˚, 45˚, 67.5˚ or 90˚ (i.e. orthogonality); see
Figure 1. This resulted in 55 film clips (11 sequences by 5
viewpoints); three of these sequences, i.e. 15 film clips,
were used for training, eight sequences, i.e. 40 film clips, in
the experimental test. This variation resulted in a design
with the variable "canonicality of presentation" (0˚ / 22.5˚ /
45˚ / 67.5˚ / 90˚; within-subjects).

Experiment 1
In the first study it has to be determined if there exist
canonical viewpoints not only for static objects but also for
dynamic sequences and how they can be defined. The study
picks up one classical way to examine the canonicality of
different visual viewpoints (Palmer et al., 1981) – namely
rating measures, i.e. participants judge the goodness of
various viewpoints for presenting the dynamic sequence.
For dynamic sequences, there often is one main direction of
movement, and it is supposed, that viewpoints are the more
appropriate to present the sequence the more they allow the
observer to understand this movement. Moreover it is
assumed, that viewpoints deliver the more information
according to this movement the more orthogonal they are to
the main movement direction of the dynamic sequence. This
is argued because viewpoints with the axis of sight parallel
to the main movement direction cause perspective
shortenings. So it is hypothesized, that viewers prefer
viewpoints that are as much as possible orthogonal to the
direction of the main movement and that viewers rate
viewpoints worse if these viewpoints are more parallel to
the main movement direction.

Figure 1: Visual presentations of the ball races used in
experiment 1 with 0˚/22.5˚/45˚/67.5˚/90˚ amount of
deviation between axis of ball movement (indicated by the
little grey arrow) and axis of sight.
Procedure Participants were tested individually. The
written instructions to the main part of the experiment –
namely the rating of the film clip presentations at the
computer - told them that they would see various dynamic
sequences and that their task would be to rate the goodness
of the viewpoint to present the dynamic sequence. It was
explained, that the sequences were similar to races and that
the relative positions of the objects to one another therefore
is important when presenting the sequence. Further it was
explained, that they always would see two film clips in
succession presenting the same sequence but with different
viewpoints and that they afterwards always should rate,
which of the two film clips was the better presentation of
that dynamic sequence by clicking with the mouse on one of
two buttons (a button underneath the window of the film
clip presented in the left half of the screen if they preferred
this viewpoint or a button underneath the window of the
film clip presented in the right half of the screen if they
preferred that viewpoint). If participants had no more
questions they were seated in front of the computer and a
training phase started, which introduced some examples of
the pair comparison task and trained to use the buttons. Data
of the training phase were not analyzed.
When the film clip on the left side of the screen
ended the last picture stayed in the window; after a short
delay of one second the second film clip started on the right

Method
Participants Six male and ten female students, from the
University of Tübingen participated in this experiment.
They were paid for their participation.
Apparatus Experimental procedures were controlled by a
Microsoft computer and realized by a html-program. Film
clips were presented on a black background in the left and
the right half of a color monitor.

429

choice of viewpoint when presenting a dynamic sequence
the first time (i.e. canonical viewpoints in the learning
phase) can lower the effect of viewpoint deviation during
recognizing cutouts of dynamic sequences (in the test
phase). The rational for this question is the idea, that
canonical viewpoints are information richer (Blanz et al.,
1999; Cutzu & Edelman, 1994; Palmer et al., 1981), and
that therefore it should be easier to recognize cutouts from a
sequence even from deviating viewpoints, because one has
more information about the sequence.

side of the screen. At the end of the film clip also the last
picture stayed on the screen. Now the participant had to
made his or her rating by clicking one of two buttons. Then
a short text note followed on the screen, inviting participants
to click another button when they wanted to start the
presentation of the next two film clips.
The order of the dynamic sequences was
randomized as well as the order of viewpoint combinations.
For each dynamic sequence there were 5 different
viewpoints and each viewpoint was paired two times with
each other viewpoint of this sequence: one time presented
on the left half of the screen (i.e. the film clip they saw
firstly) and one time presented on the right half of the screen
(i.e. the film clip they saw secondly). So subjects in the
experimental phase saw eight sequences, each in form of 20
pairs of film clips. All together subjects had to make 160
pair decisions; each specific viewpoint could reach a
maximum of 64 preferences.

Method
Participants Eight male and twelve female, from the
University of Linz, Austria participated in this experiment.
Because the task was very difficult we tried to motivate the
participants by informing them that the best three
participants receive a gift coupon for a local cinema.
Apparatus The experimental procedures were controlled by
an Apple computer (Power Macintosh 8100/80AV) and
programmed using PsyScope (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt &
Provost, 1993). Film clips and video stills were presented on
a black background in the middle of a color monitor.
Reaction times were measured by the computer internal
clock, thereby resulting in an unsystematic measurement
inaccuracy of 17 msec.

Results
Ratings For each participant it was counted, how often he
or she favored a certain viewpoint compared to another
viewpoint (number of "preferences"). An ANOVA with
repeated measurement was performed, including the
variable "canonicality of presentation" (0˚, 22.5˚, 45˚, 67.5˚
or 90˚; within-subjects). There was a significant main effect
for this variable, F (4, 60) = 8.457, MSE = 227.802, p < .01
and also a significant linear contrast, F (1, 15) = 17.512,
MSE = 397.233, p < .05. The viewpoints were rated better,
the more the axis of camera sight deviated from the axis of
sequence movement (0˚: 21.375 preferences; 22.5˚: 25.688
preferences; 45˚: 27.688 preferences; 67.5˚: 36.125
preferences; 90˚: 49.125 preferences). Single comparisons
according to Scheffé revealed significant differences
between 90˚ on the one hand and 0˚, 22.5˚ or 45˚ on the
other hand.

Stimulus materials and design Sixteen dynamic sequences
were programmed, now using 3D canvas (amabilis.com)
because this software offered more different colors than the
simulation software used in experiment 1. Each of the
sequences consisted of four balls with different colors, that
moved on a rectangular plane in a linear parallel manner.
The balls either moved towards a kind of goal or away from
this goal and had different starting points. Further the balls
moved with different and individually varying speed, i.e.
they accelerated and decelerated – so again some kind of
"races" resulted. Acceleration and deceleration was
necessary to prevent that viewers could predict the end of
the race after seeing only the first parts of the sequences by
simply extrapolating the starting speed and position of each
ball. Each sequence was filmed with a desktop camera from
two different viewpoints (all camera viewpoints were 20˚
above the horizontal plane) – with 90˚ deviation between
axis of ball movement and axis of camera sight
(hypothesized to be the more canonical viewpoint) and with
0˚ deviation between the two axes (hypothesized to be the
less canonical viewpoint). In the 90˚ condition the balls
moved in 50% of the cases from the left to the right side and
in 50% of the cases from the right to the left side to preclude
that the 90˚ viewpoint simply is better, because it realizes
the familiar reading direction. Accordingly in the 0˚
condition, the balls moved in 50% of the cases towards the
observer and in 50% of the cases away from the observer
(see Figures 2 and 3).
For each sequence 5 points of time that were
evenly distributed throughout the sequences were defined,
to get enough measurement possibilities. For each of these

Discussion
The results allow three statements: (i) In presentations of
dynamic sequences specific viewpoints are preferred against
other viewpoints. That means there are "canonical
viewpoints" not only for static object presentations but also
for sequences presenting dynamic movement. (ii) More than
that it can be defined, which viewpoints are preferred,
namely as predicted those viewpoints whose axes of sight
are orthogonal to the axis of main movement in the
sequences. (iii) Further it could be shown that viewpoints
are rated worse the more they differ from this best, i.e.
canonical viewpoint. The significant linear trend is a hint
that canonicality – measured by preference judgements - is
not an all-or-none concept.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 now examines if there is a relation between
the canonicality of viewpoints found in experiment 1 and
the viewpoint deviation effect (Garsoffky et al., 2002). A
recognition task is used and it is investigated if a thoughtful
430

saw a dynamic sequence twice from either a canonical (90˚)
or a less canonical (0˚) viewpoint, i.e. they saw the same
film clip two times in succession from the same viewpoint.
One second later, they successively saw 15 video stills (five
points of time of the sequence each presented from three
different viewpoints) as well as 15 distractor video stills
which used the same viewpoints but presented other
sequences, i.e. the sequences showed the same balls (same
colors) but the video stills stemmed from other races with
the balls moving with other speeds. So to perform the
recognition task participants had to decide, if a video still
showed a moment of the race seen before in the film or
another race by checking the relative positions of the balls
to each other. The order of the video stills was randomized.
Each video still stayed on the screen until the participant
pressed one of two reaction keys (one marked with "j" for
the german word "ja" which means "yes", and one marked
with "n" for the german word "nein" which means "no").
After the participant had reacted to a video still there always
was a short delay of one second before the next video still
was presented. The order of blocks (i.e. the different
sequences) was randomized and each sequence was
presented in the learning phase to half of the participants
from a canonical viewpoint and to the other half of
participants from a less canonical viewpoint.

points of time video stills for the recognition test phase were
produced. These video stills had varying viewpoints on the
sequence: All viewpoints had the same camera height (20˚
above the horizontal plane) but differed according to their
horizontal deviation compared to the viewpoints in the film
clips. This deviation could be 0˚, 45˚ or 135˚. Keep in mind
that 0˚ does mean two different things for the film clips
(learning phase) and the video stills (test phase): We speak
of film clips with a 0˚ viewpoint, if there is no deviation
between axis of ball movement and axis of sight. In contrast
a video still with 0˚ is a video still the viewpoint of which
does not deviate from the formerly presented viewpoint in
the film clip – may this be a viewpoint with 0˚ or 90˚
deviation between axis of sight and axis of ball movement.
These variations resulted in a design with the
variables "canonicality" (high / low; within-subjects), and
"viewpoint deviation" (0˚ / 45˚ / 135˚ deviation between the
viewpoints in the learning and the test phase; withinsubjects).
balls
moving balls
moving
towards
the away from the
goal
goal
90˚; from left to
right

a)

b)

90˚; from right
to left

0˚;
towards
observer

Figure 3: Example pictures of the film clips used in
experiment 2, arrows indicating direction of ball movement.
a) shows balls moving towards the goal from the left to the
right with 90˚ deviation between axis of ball movement and
axis of sight. b) shows balls moving away from the goal
towards the observer with 0˚ deviation between the two
axes.

0˚; away from
observer

Results
Recognition accuracy For each participant his or her
number of "hits" (the number of video stills correctly
recognized as showing a moment from the ball sequence
which he or she had previously seen) was determined.
Across all participants and conditions a mean of 67.3 hits%
resulted. Then an ANOVA with repeated measurement was
performed, including the variables "canonicality" (high vs.
low; within subjects), and "viewpoint deviation" (0˚, 45˚ or
135˚; within subjects). A significant main effect for
"viewpoint deviation" was found (F (2, 38) = 32.646, MSE
= 0,006571, p < .01) with 72.9 hits% at 0˚ viewpoint
deviation between learning and test phase, 69.9 hits% at 45˚
viewpoint deviation and 59 hits% at 135˚ viewpoint
deviation. Single comparisons according to Scheffé revealed
significant differences between 0˚ and 135˚ viewpoint
deviation as well as between 45˚ and 135˚ viewpoint
deviation (p < . 01). Accordingly, there was a significant
linear effect of viewpoint deviation (F (1, 19) = 52.432,

Figure 2: Movement directions of the balls in experiment 2
towards / away from the goal, from the left to the right /
from the right to the left, towards / away from the viewer,
and with 0˚/ 90˚ deviation between axis of ball movement
and axis of sight.
Procedure Again all participants were tested individually
and received written instructions to the main part of the
experiment – namely a description of the kind of dynamic
sequences and their recognition task. First they passed
through a training phase, the data of which were not
analyzed. The experimental phase encompassed 8 races, i.e.
8 blocks. Each block consisted of an initial learning phase
followed by a test phase. In the learning phase participants
431

transformed data. A significant effect was found for
"viewpoint deviation" (F (2,38) = 12.194, MSE = 0.01284, p
< .01). Applying single comparisons there were significant
differences between 0° (2685 ms) and 45° (2944 ms)
deviation (p < .01) as well as between 0° and 135° (3041
ms) deviation (p < .01). Accordingly also the linear trend for
viewpoint deviation became significant (F (1, 19) = 16.387,
MSE = 0.0179, p < .05). There were no more significant
effects in this analysis of variance.

MSE = 0.007386, p < .01), also indicating that recognition
accuracy becomes worse the more the viewpoint used in the
test phase differs from the initially presented viewpoint in
the learning phase. In addition, the interaction (see Figure 4)
between "viewpoint deviation" and "canonicality" became
significant (F (2, 38) = 9.364, MSE = 0.004185, p < .01).
Single comparisons revealed significant differences between
high and low canonical viewpoints in the learning phase
only if there was 0˚ viewpoint deviation (p < .01); further if
the viewpoint in the learning phase was low canonical, there
were significant differences between 0˚ (77.8 hits%) and 45˚
(71.5 hits%) viewpoint deviation (p < .05) as well as
between 45˚ and 135˚ (57.7 hits%) (p < .01); but if the
viewpoint in the learning phase was high canonical, there
was no significant difference between 0˚ (68 hits%) and 45˚
(68.3 hits%) deviation, but only between 45˚ and 135˚ (60.3
hits%) deviation (p < .01). There were no more significant
effects in this analysis of variance.

Discussion
In first line the results show once more (Garsoffky et al.,
2002) a clear effect of viewpoint deviation: Recognition
becomes worse the more the viewpoint from which one sees
a cutout differs from the viewpoint from which one initially
saw the sequence. This holds for recognition accuracy as
well as for speed of recognition (see the two significant
linear effects of viewpoint deviation). But the hypothesis
that high canonical views in the learning phase weaken this
viewpoint deviation effect receives only little support: On
the one hand there is a significant interaction in recognition
accuracy between canonicality and viewpoint deviation
which shows that at least between 0° and 45° viewpoint
deviation recognition accuracy does not become worse if in
the learning phase a high canonical viewpoint is used. But
on the other hand the use of a high canonical viewpoint in
the learning phase does not weaken the viewpoint deviation
effect between 45° and 135°. And at last there is no
significant influence of canonicality on the viewpoint
deviation effect for speed of recognition.

80
75

hits%

70

high
canonicality

65

low canonicality

60
55
50
0?

45?

135?

view po int deviation

General Discussion
The results in the first place again support the stability and
robustness of the viewpoint deviation effect for dynamic
sequences (experiment 2): We used viewpoints that before
(experiment 1) were rated as especially qualified to present
critical aspects of visual dynamic sequences, namely the
relative positions of the various balls to each other. I.e. these
viewpoints were rated as being especially informative for
this kind of dynamic event and therefore should allow to
store in memory a maximum of discriminative information
about the event. We hypothesized that if observers see
dynamic sequences initially from these information rich
"canonical" viewpoints, then the cognitive representations
of the event should encompass more information and should
therefore be more flexible if one has to rethink the event
into other viewpoints – as demanded in the recognition task
of experiment 2. But results show that the recognition
performance still declines if the viewpoint presented during
a later memory task differs from the viewpoint used in the
initial learning phase, even if the observer initially saw the
event from a canonical, information rich viewpoint. This
means that the cognitive representation of a dynamic
sequence still is viewpoint dependent, even if this viewpoint
is especially information rich, i.e. delivers information about
all or most important aspects of an event. This once more
shows, that findings for static objects found by Biederman
(Biederman, 1987; Biederman & Gerhardstein, 1993)

Figure 4: In experiment 2 for recognition accuracy there
was a significant interaction between „viewpoint deviation“
and „canonicality“.
Recognition speed As a second dependent variable,
reaction time was measured, i.e. the lapse of time from the
beginning of each video still presentation until the
participant pressed either the "j"- or the "n"-button. The
following analysis only accounted for reaction times (RTs)
to "hits" (i.e. correct "j"-reactions). Extreme RTs above 10
sec (i.e. more than 3 standard deviations above the overall
mean) were excluded. This resulted in an exclusion of
1,16% of all RTs. To exclude outliers from analysis is a
common method when dealing with reaction times (e.g.
Cameron & Frieske, 1994; Diwadkar & McNamara, 1997;
Eley, 1982; Hamm & McMullen, 1998; Lawson &
Humphreys, 1996) because extremely slow responses
indicate lapses of a participant´s attention on a particular
trial. As the distribution of RTs was positively distorted,
data were transformed by using natural logarithm, and
analyzed in an ANOVA with the variables "canonicality"
(high vs. low; within subjects), and "viewpoint deviation"
(0°, 45° or 135°; within-subjects). For better vividness, the
means reported in the text and figures are nontransformed
RTs, despite the fact that the analysis of variance as well as
the single comparisons were conducted using ln432

scenes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28 (6), 1035 – 1050.
Gibson, J. J. (1982). Wahrnehmung und Umwelt: Der
ökologische Ansatz in der visuellen Wahrnehmung (transl.
ed.). München, Wien, Baltimore: Urban und
Schwarzenberg.
Härtel, H. & Lüdke, M. (2000). XyZET: Ein
Simulationsprogramm zur Physik. Berlin, Heidelberg,
New York: Springer.
Hamm, J. P. & McMullen, P. A. (1998). Effects of
orientation on the identification of rotated objects depend
on the level of identity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24 (2),
413 – 426.
Lawson, R. & Humphreys, G. W. (1996). View specificity
in object processing: Evidence from picture matching.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 22 (2), 395 – 416.
Palmer, S., Rosch, E. & Chase, P. (1981). Canonical
perspective and the perception of objects. In J. Long &
Baddeley, A. (Eds.), Attention and Performance IX (pp.
135 - 151). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Perrett, D. I. & Harries, M. H. (1988). Characteristic views
and the visual inspection of simple faceted and smooth
objects: Tetrahedra and potatoes. Perception, 17, 703 –
720.
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701 - 703.
Tarr, M. J. (1995). Rotating objects to recognize them: A
case study on the role of viewpoint dependency in the
recognition of three-dimensional objects. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 2 (1), 55 - 82.

cannot simply be assigned to dynamic sequences: According
to the geon structural description theory (Biederman, 1987)
the cognitive representations of static objects are viewpoint
independent, as long as these objects are shown from
viewpoints that encompass the discriminative details of
these objects, i.e. the so called "geons", and their relative
positions to each other. Our findings contradict the
applicability of this idea for dynamic sequences: Even using
high discriminative viewpoints does not lead to a viewpoint
independent cognitive representation; in fact the rethinking
in other viewpoints still is critical for recognition
performance. So our present findings rather point out, that
findings with static objects or static arrangements of objects
e.g. from Diwadkar and McNamara (1997), Shepard and
Metzler (1971) and Tarr (1995) are more appropriate to
predict memory processes of observers watching dynamic
sequences, namely the formation of a viewpoint dependent
cognitive representation (see the two significant effects of
viewpoint deviation in experiment 2 for recognition
accuracy and speed of recognition) and the occurrence of
mental rotation processes (see the significant linear trend of
viewpoint deviation in experiment 2) if new viewpoints are
brought into play.

References
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: A
theory of human image understanding. Psychological
Review, 94, 115 - 147.
Biederman, I. & Gerhardstein, P. C. (1993). Recognizing
depth-rotated objects: Evidence and conditions for threedimensional
viewpoint
invariance.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 19, 1162 - 1182.
Blanz, V., Tarr, M. J. & Bülthoff, H. H. (1999). What object
attributes determine canonical views? Perception, 28, 575
– 599.
Cameron, G. T. & Frieske, D. A. (1994). The time needed to
answer: Measurement of memory response latency. In A.
Lang (Ed.), Measuring psychological responses to media.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 149 – 164.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M. & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 25, 257 271.
Cutzu, F. & Edelman, S. (1994). Canonical views in object
representation and recognition. Vision Research, 34 (22),
3037 – 3056.
Diwadkar, V. A. & McNamara, T. P. (1997). Viewpoint
dependence in scene recognition. Psychological Science,
8 (4), 302 - 307.
Edelman, S. & Bülthoff, H. H. (1992). Orientation
dependence in the recognition of familiar and novel views
of three-dimensional objects. Vision Research, 32, 2385 –
2400.
Eley, M. G. (1982). Identifying rotated letter-like symbols.
Memory & Cognition, 10 (1), 25 - 32.
Garsoffky, B., Schwan, S. & Hesse, F. W. (2002).
Viewpoint dependency in the recognition of dynamic

Acknowledgments
The work on these experiments was supported by grant from
the DFG (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft). The authors
thank Andreas Wacker and Markus Huff for their help doing
the programming of the stimulus material.

433

