UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Domain-Specificity in Shape Categorization and Perception

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0274j4kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Balas, Benjamin J.
Tenebaum, Joshua B.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Domain-Specificity in Shape Categorization and Perception
Benjamin J. Balas (bjbalas@mit.edu)
Joshua B. Tenenbaum (jbt@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307 USA
from high-level theories to low-level perception of shapes.
At the top is amodal knowledge of particular domains. At
this level (L1), abstract facts about objects in a broad
domain (e.g., “artifacts”) are stored propositionally (as in,
“Machines are often built in factories to precise
specifications”). At the second level (L2), object categories
are defined in terms of the visual properties shared by
members of common groups. This knowledge could be
symbolic (“Tigers have stripes”) or encoded in terms of
visual measurements (“Tigers have lots of contrast energy at
a particular spatial frequency”). Finally, at the bottom level
(L3) lies the representation constructed in perceiving an
object as a category instance, expressed in terms of its visual
features such as size, shape, color, etc. Our work set out to
explore the possibility that abstract knowledge at the highest
level of this hierarchy could affect representations
underlying both shape categories (L3 → L2) and shape
perception (L3 → L1).

Abstract
We examine the influence of domain-specific knowledge on
the process of learning and representing simple visual
categories. Depending on whether subjects’ construe simple
objects as living kinds or machines, they show differential
sensitivity to the importance of basic shape features. In
particular, subjects who treated the objects as machines
placed less importance on coarse shape differences unrelated
to the described function of the objects in both categorization
and productive (drawing) tasks. These findings suggest that
domain-specific functional understanding of objects may
influence the formation of shape categories, and perhaps the
perception of these shapes.

Introduction
It is typical in the study of pattern recognition to discuss
the classification of objects as though they are a relatively
homogeneous class of stimuli. Many sets of 2D and 3D
shape primitives have been proposed, all with the goal of
describing how a wide variety of forms can be catalogued
by a small set of simple building blocks (Hoffman &
Richards, 1986; Biederman, 1987). Special-purpose
mechanisms are seen as add-ons that are only used to
process particularly interesting and ecologically significant
stimuli. The nature of these specialized processes has also
been explored, and there is much debate over what defines a
“special” class of stimuli (Yin, 1969; Diamond & Carey,
1986; Gauthier & Tarr, 1997).
The suggestion that object recognition only employs
unique processes for a small minority of object classes
stands in stark contrast to work concerned with the
formation and application of domain-specific theories
(Carey, 1985). It has been suggested that knowledge of
particular domains (like biology, physics, or psychology)
may substantially affect the reasoning employed in a range
of tasks. Given that theory-based reasoning may guide
performance in complex scenarios, it may also be possible
that human observers possess theories concerning the visual
properties of objects in various domains that affect the way
they recognize and represent object categories. Should this
prove to be the case, it may suggest that general accounts of
object recognition are too coarse, in that they fail to consider
the richness of subjects’ visual knowledge of a particular
object category.
It is important to establish exactly what we mean when
we suggest that subjects may possess theories about visual
properties of objects that affect perception. We envision a
simple hierarchy of object knowledge (Figure 1) ranging

Level 3 (L3): ABSTRACT DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE

↓
Level 2 (L2):

CATEGORIES OF OBJECT SHAPES

Level 1 (L1):

PERCEPTION OF A PARTICULAR
OBJECT’S SHAPE

↓
Figure 1: A schematic view of the relationships between
domain theories and perception.
Previous experiments by Goldstone (1994) have
demonstrated the influence of categorization on perception
(L2 → L1). After forming categories of simple objects
based on perceptual attributes (like luminance), subjects’
ability to discriminate between luminance levels was altered
to support the newly learned perceptual groups. No abstract
domain knowledge (L3) was implicated in these studies.
Kelemen and Bloom (1994) demonstrated an influence of
domain knowledge on the representation of shape categories
(L3 → L2), but did not look at influences down to L1. Their
stimuli were uniform circles that could vary both in size and
color. Subjects who were told the circles were microscopic
animals preferred to categorizethem according to color,
while those who construed them as machines preferred to
categorize based on size.
Visual categorization relies on the ability to learn object
attributes that vary more across categories than within them,
and to accurately measure those attributes in new images.
67

Knowing that an object is a member of a particular domain
(say “living things”) may bias the observer to expect
particular patterns of variability. The Kelemen and Bloom
study, as well as Keil’s work (1998), have both shown that
color is expected to be useful for categorizing living things.
We suggest that different aspects of shape may also be
differentially weighted to categorize objects in different
domains. The abstract (Level 3) knowledge observers
possess about animals’ growth and movement as well as
knowledge about artifact construction may lead to
influences on representations of shape categories (Level 2),
and the ability to make fine-grained perceptual distinctions
at Level 1.
Another possibility relevant to the categorization of living
and non-living things concerns the influence of functional
information on shape perception. It has been proposed that
function helps set the core meaning of artifact concepts, and
perceived shape may be relevant to artifact categorization
primarily to the extent that it supports a functional
interpretation (Bloom, 2000). A theory of non-living things
may not induce any a priori preferences for particular visual
features, but rather, flexibly bias resources towards
functionally relevant information. Function may also
influence which shape features are perceived to be
important for biological categories, but in different ways.
Landau et al. (1998) have shown that people will be more
tolerant of certain non-rigid shape variation when
classifying objects construed as animals (relative to those
construed as artifacts).
In sum, our studies here ask two main questions not
addressed in previous work. First, how far down in the
hierarchy of Figure 1 do domain-specific conceptual
influences extend? In particular, do they extend down to
perceptual representations of individual objects? Second,
what is the range of conceptual influences? Specifically, is
there a role for functional understanding in forming
representations of shape categories and individual shapes?
In the spirit of Kelemen and Bloom, we have created novel
2-D shapes that we have named “Marcons” and “Draxels.”
These two populations of objects both consist of ellipses
whose perimeters have been modified to contain sinusoidal
bumps (Figure 2). The result is a set of stimuli that can be
distinguished both by coarse shape information (ellipse
eccentricity) and fine details (the frequency and/or
amplitude of the bumps). This allows us to explore subtler
aspects of object appearance than previous studies have
done, and provides us with the ability to easily attribute
function to shape properties.

In the experiments we present, subjects were asked to
learn the distinction between Draxels and Marcons. While
both groups are given identical information about the
behavior of these objects and the function of particular
features, some subjects are told that the stimuli are
nanomachines and others are told they are amoeba-like
animals. In Experiment 1, we use productive data (subjects’
drawings) to determine whether domain knowledge
influences perceptual representations. Drawings are a
particularly useful tool in that they require subjects to make
their perceptual representations explicit. In Experiment 2,
we look for the effects of domain knowledge on category
representations through a more controlled categorization
task.

Experiment 1
We begin by presenting the results of a learning task in
which subjects learn to discriminate between Marcons and
Draxels. We assess the nature of their post-learning
representations of the two kinds of object by collecting
drawings from all subjects, and examining the extent to
which differences in elongation and ‘bumpiness’ are
expressed.

Methods
Stimuli 32 Marcons and 32 Draxels were hand-drawn on 2
⅛” x 2 ¾” cards for this task using Crayola™ magic
markers. A stencil was used to enforce a major/minor axis
ratio of 2.9:1 for Draxels compared to a 2:1 ratio for
Marcons. Bumps were applied to the perimeter of each
ellipse such that Draxels contained 2.9 bumps/cm and
Marcons contained 2.0 bumps/cm. The length of the major
axis could take on one of 8 values for both Draxels and
Marcons, and a dual-color contour was applied to the
perimeter of the finished figures. The figures were also
depicted at four different orientations (0, 90, +20, -20
degrees from vertical). No conjunction of color, size, and
orientation was diagnostic of object identity, leaving only
ellipse eccentricity and bump frequency as useful criterion
for discrimination.
Subjects 24 naïve subjects (9 men, 15 women) were
recruited from the MIT community to participate in this
task. Subject age ranged from 18-40 years of age.
Procedure Subjects were initially presented with a brief
introductory paragraph explaining that Marcons and Draxels
were either unicellular organisms (Animals condition) or
nanomachines (Machines condition). In both cases, the two
kinds of object were said to participate in “agricultural
revitalization” by grabbing onto various chemical
compounds with their bumps, and redistributing them across
depleted soil. Subjects were told that Marcons and Draxels
were quite similar, but that experts could identify them very
accurately despite the range of individual sizes, shapes, and
colors in which the objects appeared.

Figure 2: Constructing a Draxel.

68

After reading this paragraph, subjects were shown one
example each of a Marcon and Draxel on an 8 ½” x 11”
placemat. These two items were the same dimension as the
largest exemplars in the stimulus set mentioned previously,
but were depicted with a novel dual-color contour. Subjects
were presented with the shuffled deck of 64 cards, and
asked to sort the pile into two stacks such that Draxels were
on one side and Marcons on the other. Subjects were
permitted to take as much time as they liked to sort the
cards.
After each round of sorting, the experimenter determined
what false classifications were made, and presented these
items to the subject for further study (grouped underneath
their proper place on the sorting mat) before they were
shuffled back into the deck for the next round. Subjects
sorted the cards until they made fewer than 8 errors, or until
they had sorted through the entire deck 4 times.
When the card-sorting task had been completed, subjects
were then presented with new instructions asking them to
produce drawings of Draxels and Marcons. 8 examples of
each object were requested, with the additional instruction
that their drawings should depict what they believed
“typical” members of each category looked like, and that
their set of 8 drawings should attempt to cover the range of
variations that existed within each category. After
completing their drawings, subjects were given a brief
questionnaire asking them to rate on a 1-10 scale how
important were various visual features in their concepts of
these two classes, and to enumerate in free-response style
the differences they perceived between the two kinds of
objects.

Post-Learning Questionnaire Subjects’ responses to the
post-experiment questionnaire were analyzed to determine if
there were differences between the Animal and Machine
groups’ explicit feature preferences. A two-factor ANOVA
was run on subjects’ ratings of the importance of shape
differences between the two object categories, with feature
type as one factor (elongation v. bumps) and subject group
(animal v. machine) as the other factor. No main effects
were found in the analysis, but a significant interaction (p <
0.05) was found between feature type and subject group.
Subjects in the Animal group rated eccentricity as a more
important feature, compared to subjects in the Machine
group who preferred to use the bumps. (Table 1)
Table 1:
Mean ± SD ratings of feature importance (1-10 scale)
Animals
Machines
Elongation
8.3 ± 4.1
6.5 ± 2.6
Bumps
6.8 ± 2.0
8.8 ± 3.0
Subjects’ Drawings Using these responses as a guide, we
turn next to the drawings of Marcons and Draxels produced
by subjects after learning. (Figure 3) The eccentricity and
number of bumps/cm for each figure was measured by first
inscribing the largest ellipse possible inside the bumpy
contour. If a particular drawing was sufficiently irregular
that this proved impossible, that figure was excluded from
the analysis. Only 4 out of 384 drawings (all from different
subjects) were excluded in this fashion. Eccentricity was
determined for each figure by measuring the major and
minor axes of the inscribed ellipse, and the number of
bumps/cm was determined by counting the number of
bumps on the drawing and dividing by its perimeter. We use
the YNOT approximation of the perimeter of an ellipse
(Maertens & Rousseau, 2000) here, which was also used in
the creation of the stimuli.
For each subject, we then compute the mean values of
both eccentricity and bumps/cm for Marcons and Draxels
across all eight drawings. The difference between these
means is taken for each feature type, and divided by the
maximum standard deviation of that feature within an object
population. In this way, we express the differences in
Marcon and Draxel shapes as a function of the separation
and spread of the populations produced by each individual
subject(Table 2).

Results
Learning Rates To determine if either group showed a
particular affinity for learning to discriminate between
Marcons and Draxels, we examine the number of errors
made by each group after their first and second rounds of
sorting. These two rounds are of particular importance in
that they indicate to what extent the task is difficult with
only one example of each object type and how much
improvement each group undergoes by viewing a population
of labeled examples.
A two-way ANOVA, with sorting round and domain as
factors, revealed only a main effect of sorting round (p <
0.05). Subjects improve from across rounds, but neither
group was particularly better at performing the
discrimination between Marcons and Draxels, nor benefited
more than their counterparts from receiving multiple labeled
examples after their first round of sorting. We note that of
the 24 participants who performed this learning task, 6
subjects (3 Animals, 3 Machines) were unable to reach our
performance criterion of fewer than 8 mistakes after 4
rounds of sorting. We take this to mean that the difficulty of
this initial task was intermediate, and unrelated to the
domain of the objects.

Table 2:
Normalized differences between Marcon and Draxel
features (Mean ± SD)
Animals
Machines
Elongation
1.93 ± 0.98
0.79 ± 1.04
Bumps
2.42 ± 1.55
2.31 ± 1.27
A two-way ANOVA was performed on these
measurements, using feature type and subject group as
factors. A main effect of feature type was found, (bumps >
eccentricity, p < 0.05) with a marginally significant effect of
69

subject group (Animals > Machines, p < 0.08). No
significant interaction was found. However, to tease apart
the contributions of each feature type to the weak effect of
perceived domain, we conducted a further analysis for
simple main effects across the Animal and Machine groups.
We find in this analysis that subjects in the Animal
condition expressed differences in eccentricity significantly
more than subjects in the Machine condition (p < 0.05),
while no such difference exists for the expression of bump
density (p > 0.8).

drawings of Animal subjects. It may be that more aspects of
bump shape need to be explicitly considered when
constructing stimuli and examining subjects’ drawings.
We note that both of these effects may be a consequence
of the introductory scenario given to subjects at the
beginning of the task. By indicating that the bumps had a
particular functional importance, the representation of bump
differences may have been weighted more heavily in both
groups. It is interesting to note that in the Machines
condition, this seems to have resulted in an overall tendency
to ignore additional shape differences. The significance of
elongation differences in this group may have been
compromised by the direction of functional information
away from these features.
Experiment 1 provides us with direct evidence that
domain knowledge can influence shape categorization (L3
→ L2, in Figure 1). Evidence for effects of L3 on L1
(perceptual shape representations) is only indirect, insofar as
subjects are thought to produce drawings by translating a
Level 2 representation into perceptual primitives. This is an
important distinction, since Level 2 representations may be
more symbolic (“Draxels are skinnier than Marcons”) rather
than truly visual (“Draxel elongation is about 3:1”). A
valuable next step would be to measure perceptual abilities
directly using psychophysical methods (e.g., Goldstone,
1994), thereby establishing a more direct L3 → L1 link.

Figure 3: Examples of Draxels (left) and Marcons (right)
created by subjects in the “Animals” condition (top) and the
“Machines” condition (below). Note the lack of elongation
differences in the lower drawings.

Figure 4: Over-expression of symmetry and asymmetry in
“Machines” subjects. Draxels are at left, Marcons right.

Discussion

Experiment 2

Subjects’ ratings of feature importance indicate an
intriguing interaction between domain and the visual
features perceived to be important. The drawings produced
after completing the learning task show significantly more
exaggeration of bumps across both domains, as well as
significantly more expression of elongation differences in
the Animal condition compared to the Machine condition.
Bumpiness was not significantly more exaggerated in the
Machine group compared to the Animal group, as one might
expect from the interaction in subjects’ ratings, yet there are
some interesting qualitative differences in the way
differences in bumpiness are expressed. Subjects in the
Machine condition often pointed out subtle differences
between the two categories that were not expressed or
described by subjects in the Animal condition. Subjects in
the Machine condition often pointed out aspects of bump
symmetries and asymmetries that they felt were important to
the task, and often included these details in their drawings
(Figure 4). Though these features are not directly related to
the difference in bump frequency, and therefore did not
contribute to our quantitative analysis, it is interesting to see
how these features appear in the drawings of Machine
subjects while remaining almost wholly absent from the

In our second task, we pursue possible domain-specific
differences in shape processing using a more controlled
task. Rather than relying on subjects’ drawings, we use a
triad task in which subjects are asked to classify a new
object given labeled examples of our two categories. This
second task allows us to more closely align our findings
with the color/size asymmetry noted by Kelemen and
Bloom, and allows us to balance the freedom given to
subjects in Experiment 1 with a more constrained
environment.
Subjects in this task are asked to make classifications
given first a single example of each class, and then multiple
examples of each class. Use of a single example allows for a
relatively pure measure of subjects’ prior beliefs concerning
what visual features are important to the task, while multiple
examples gives us some sense of what (if anything) changes
when subjects are given evidence of what features vary
across a population of objects. We look for evidence of the
interaction between domain and perceived relevance of
features suggested by our previous experiment, while also
investigating whether or not the domain-general preference
for expressing differences in bumpiness persists in a task in
70

which the two feature types are pitted directly against one
another. In terms of our proposed hierarchy, we are looking
for influences of Level 3 on Level 2, without examination of
Level 1 representations in any form.

Methods
Stimuli For this task, a subset of the original stimuli were
used. 4 Draxel/Marcon pairs of different color schemes were
selected, with 2 pairs taken from the largest items in the
original set, and the remaining 2 pairs being of intermediate
size. All of these stimuli appeared at horizontal orientation
to ensure that subjects would only consider shape
information when making their decisions.
Additionally, two novel stimuli were created for each pair
to serve as ‘unclassified’ items. Each novel item matched
both their parents’ color and size, but would match their
Draxel parent for one feature type (say, elongation), and
their Marcon parent for the other (bump frequency, in this
example). The two stimuli in each “hybrid” pair were
complementary, such that each “Draxel elongation/Marcon
bumps” item had a partner with the opposite pattern of
feature inheritance.

Figure 5: Digital versions of Draxels (left) and Marcons
(right). Actual stimuli were hand-drawn, but we present
these more regular, schematic images for clarity.

Results
On subjects’ first judgments, 21 subjects in the Animals
condition choose to categorize the novel stimulus by
referring to the bump frequency of the examples, with 11
favoring eccentricity. In the Machines condition, 25 subjects
used the bumps as a diagnostic feature, with 7 participants
using the elongation of the ellipse. A chi-squared test
reveals that these two distributions do not differ from each
other. However, an additional goodness-of-fit test shows
that the distribution of responses in the Machines condition
differs from chance (p < 0.05), while the responses of
subjects in the Animals condition do not.
Moving on to consider the responses given by subjects
after viewing multiple examples, we see that 19 subjects in
the Animals condition favor bump frequency for
classification, compared to 13 individuals who prefer to use
eccentricity. In the Machines condition, the corresponding
numbers are 27 and 5 subjects respectively. Unlike the
single-example data, these two distributions do differ from
one another by a chi-squared test (p<0.05). Also, the
responses of the Machines subjects differ from chance while
the other responses do not.
In each group of subjects, only two subjects changed their
mind when presented with multiple examples of the object
classes. This indicates that our efforts to minimize undue
pressure on the subjects to change answers suceeded, and
that subjects were confident in their classifications.

Subjects 64 subjects participated in this task, drawn from
the MIT community.
Procedure Each subject read the same short description of
Draxels and Marcons presented in our first task. Subjects
were then told that they were being asked to help classify a
new object that was either a Draxel or a Marcon, but
currently unlabeled. Subjects were told that their initial
answer would be based on the observation of only one
example each of a Draxel and a Marcon, and that after their
first response they would be given multiple examples to
look at regardless of their first answer. To ensure that
subjects did not feel undue pressure to change their answer
given new information, all stimuli to be presented to the
subject were laid face-down on the table before any
responses were solicited. In this way, we minimize the
possibility that subjects’ might consider the new stimuli as
additional information selected by the experimenter to guide
them to a particular answer.
Subjects were first shown one example each of a Draxel
and a Marcon, (Figure 5) matched for all attributes except
eccentricity and bump frequency. A new item was then
shown, drawn from one of the two hybrid stimuli created for
that initial pair of stimuli. This third item matched the color
and overall scale of both original examples. Subjects were
then asked to classify the new item as a Draxel or a Marcon.
After their response was recorded, they were shown the
three remaining examples of Draxels and Marcons. Subjects
were asked a second time for a response, which was then
recorded prior to rewarding the subject with M&M’s for
volunteering. The initial pair of examples displayed, as well
as the particular probe used as the third stimulus were
balanced across subjects, as was the left-right arrangement
of Draxels and Marcons.

Discussion
In our triad task, we continue to see domain-specific
differences in the preference for different aspects of object
shape. In correspondence with our results from Experiment
1, we see that subjects in the Animals condition do not
significantly prefer one feature type to another. Moreover,
as a whole, subjects who perceive the objects as machines
have a greater tendency to ignore differences in elongation
in favor of differences in bump frequency.
Additionally, in both conditions we see the same overall
bias towards using bumps that characterized subjects’
drawings in Experiment 1. The distribution of responses in
the Animals condition is never different from chance in this
study, making it difficult to draw a firm conclusion on this
matter. However, the qualitative agreement between the
pattern of results obtained here and those obtained in
Experiment 1 suggests that the effects we observe genuinely
71

reflect people’s representations of these categories, rather
than task artifacts.

Conclusions
Taken together, these studies demonstrate that the
categorization and perception of simple visual stimuli may
be affected by the domain in which these objects are
construed, functional reasoning about object properties, and
by the amount of experience one has with a particular
stimulus set. Understanding all of these influences, both as
separate mechanisms and as a coherent whole, may lead to a
richer understanding of human object categorization and the
perception-cognition interface.

General Discussion
Two studies demonstrated that perceptual representations
of simple visual shape categories differ depending on
whether the stimuli are conceived of as living or non-living
things. Our results show a difference in how various shape
features are weighted across domains, but they do not yet
speak to the origins of those differences. The difference
could be simply one of spatial scale, or it could reflect
deeper differences in how function or shape variation is
conceptualized in different domains. We conjecture that the
functional description of the objects plays a driving role in
the effects we observed. In a pilot study, we have presented
subjects with the same stimuli and task of Experiment 2,
eliminating only the instruction sheet’s explicit description
of bump function. Preliminary results indicate that this
manipulation eliminates the domain effects we see here, in
that both “animal” and “machine” subjects appear equally to
favor the bumps for categorization, and at a level equal to
“machine” subjects in Experiment 2.
Hence, for these
shape stimuli, functional information appears to exert a
greater influence when the objects are construed as living
kinds, and its primary role appears in decreasing the
distinctiveness of the bumps for classifying these two kinds
of microorganisms. The bumps may be seen as pseudopods, non-rigid appendages of the microorganisms that are
used to grab compounds but are not essential shape features
that are stable across time in an individual, let alone as a
distinctive feature for classifying objects into kinds. This
interpretation is consistent with our data, although subjects’
post-experiment surveys did not mention any explicit
reasoning of this sort. Further research is needed to
determine precisely how functional knowledge and shape
representations interact here, but it is intriguing to speculate
that intuitive domain theories are guiding implicit inferences
concerning the possible dynamic aspects of simple shapes.
The potential effects of exposing subjects to multiple
examples of an object class are also worth exploring further.
In this task, we see very little change in subjects’ behavior
from one response to the other, but the number of
observations they are allowed to make is still quite small. If
presented with an extremely large population of Marcons
and Draxels, subjects might undergo a more profound
evolution of shape processing strategies. We note that in the
Experiment 1, subjects gained far more experience with
Marcons and Draxels than those that participated in our triad
task. Subjects in the Animals condition also expressed an
explicit preference for elongation rather than bumps in that
task, which we did not see in Experiment 2. The difference
between these two patterns of response may be related to the
size of the observed population of each object class. The
possible interaction of statistical reasoning given a
population of novel objects and prior beliefs about feature
relevance may prove to be a rich area for further research.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the members of the Sinha
lab, as well as Erin Conwell, who put up with talking about
fictitious unicellular organisms for far too long. An
anonymous reviewer also provided many helpful comments.
BJB was supported by an NIH pre-doctoral training grant.
JBT was supported by the Paul E. Newton chair.

References
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: A
theory of human image understanding. Psych. Review, 94,
115-147.
Bloom, P. (2000). How Children Learn the Meanings of
Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Diamond, R. & Carey, S. (1986). Why faces are and are not
special: An effect of expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 115(2), 107-117.
Gauthier, I. & Tarr, M.J. (1997). Becoming a ‘greeble’
expert: Exploring the face recognition mechanism. Vision
Research, 37(12), 1673-82.
Goldstone, R.L. (1994) Influence of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Hoffman, D. & Richards, W. (1986). Parts of Recognition.
In A.P. Pentland (Ed.), From Pixels to Predicates,
Norwood, N.J: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Keil, F.C. (1998). Cognitive science and the origins of
theoretical knowledge. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.),
Theoretical Models of Human Development. New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Kelemen, D. & Bloom, P. (1994). Domain-specific
knowledge in simple categorization tasks. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 1(3), 390-395.
Landau, B., Smith, L, & Jones, S. (1998). Object perception
and object naming in early development. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 2(1), 19-24.
Maertens, R. & Rousseau, R. (2000). Een nieuwe benaderde
formule voor de omtrek van een ellips, Wiskunde &
Onderwijs, 26, 249-258.
Yin, R.K. (1969). Looking at upside-down faces. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 81, 141-145.

72

