UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Educational Effects of Reflection on Problem Solving Processes: A Case of Information
Seeking on the Web

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2t42k1hv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Saito, Hitomi
Miwa, Kazuhisa

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Educational Eﬀects of Reﬂection on Problem Solving Processes:
A Case of Information Seeking on the Web
Hitomi Saito (hsaito@auecc.aichi-edu.ac.jp)
Programs in Education for Information Sciences, Faculty of Education, Aichi University of Education
Kariya, 448-8542, JAPAN

Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University
Nagoya, 464-8601, JAPAN
Abstract
In this study, we design a learning environment that supports reﬂective activities for information seeking on the
Web and evaluate its educational eﬀects. The features
of this design are: (1) to visualize the learners’ search
processes as described, based on a cognitive schema,
(2) to support two types of reﬂective activities, such
as “reﬂection-in-action” and “reﬂection-on-action,” and
(3) to facilitate reﬂective activities by comparing their
own search processes to other learners’ search processes.
We have conducted an experiment to investigate the
eﬀects of our design. The experimental results conﬁrm that (1) the participants’ search performance in
the instructional group supported by our instructional
design improved eﬀectively than in the control group,
(2) they changed their ideas about important activities
when seeking information on the Web, and (3) they activated their search cycles more than the control group
did.

Introduction
In the ﬁeld of learning science, many researchers have investigated metacognitive activities that facilitate learners’ problem solving and deep understanding (Lin &
Lehman, 2001). Metacognition is generally referred to
as knowledge and activities to monitor, control, and manipulate individual cognitive processes (Brown et al.,
1983). Several studies have shown that experts or good
learners practice metacognitive strategies more actively
than novices or poor learners (Chi et al., 1989; Ertmer, Newby, and MacDougal, 1996; Leinhardt & Young,
1996). Additionally, based on the ﬁndings from these
studies, various systems or instructional designs that
support learners’ metacognitive activities have been developed, and their educational eﬀects have been examined (Aleven & Koedinger, 2002; Hershkowitz &
Schwarz, 1999).
Metacognitive activities to monitor and control individual cognitive processes are fostered by various activities connected with cognitive eﬀorts, such as selfexplanation, self-regulation, and reﬂection. We focus on
reﬂective activities within these metacognitive activities.
Reﬂection is deﬁned as a cognitive activity for monitoring, evaluating, and modifying one’s thinking and process (Lin, Kinzer, & Secules 1999). In this study, based
on the standpoint that metacognitive activities help students learn with greater understanding, we examine effective methods for supporting reﬂective activities.

1191

Lin et al. (1999) proposed that there are at least two
levels of reﬂection in learning: reﬂection on a product
and its value and reﬂection on a process by which the
product was created. They suggested that supports reﬂection on a process is more important because the process is less explicit than the product for learners. Moreover, they identiﬁed a process display as one of the scaffolds that supports reﬂection on the processes. A process display shows learners explicitly what they are doing to solve a task or learn a concept. This method allows learners to observe and analyze their own problemsolving processes and evaluate the eﬀectiveness of their
learning. For example, Geometry Tutor, which was designed by Anderson, Boyle, & Reiser (1985) to help students learn geometry, displays learners’ geometric reasoning processes as a proof graph that consists of tree
diagrams of their own solution paths between the “given”
and “goal” states of problem-solving. Schauble, Raghavan, & Glaser (1993) also developed the Discovery and
Reﬂection Notation (DARN) system, which shows students a graphical trace notation to support students’ reﬂection on their scientiﬁc reasoning with computer-based
laboratories. Although many studies have developed systems that provide students with learning processes, the
educational eﬀects of reﬂection on the problem-solving
processes are not clear. It is also necessary to examine
how we should show learners their problem-solving processes and how learners should reﬂect on their problemsolving processes. In this study, we design a learning environment that supports learners’ reﬂection on problemsolving processes when seeking information on the Web
and evaluate its educational eﬀects.
First, in order to show learners their problem-solving
processes, we have developed a feedback system for
search processes that provides learners with their own
information-seeking processes, which are described based
on a cognitive schema. In problem-solving studies, a
cognitive schema has been widely used to describe human problem-solving processes. We use such a cognitive
schema to visualize learner’s problem-solving processes
and provide them with learners. We then investigate
whether a cognitive schema can be applied as a cognitive tool in learning science. We will explain our system
and the cognitive schema in the next chapter. Second,
in order to help learners reﬂect on their problem-solving
processes more eﬀectively, we focus on two types of reﬂective activities that are referred to as “reﬂection-in-

action” and “reﬂection-on-action,” proposed by Schön
(1987). Schön categorized reﬂection as “reﬂection-inaction” and “reﬂection-on-action” from the viewpoint of
a context and time. The former refers to monitoring
ongoing learning activities, while the latter means revisiting and monitoring critical events in one’s own learning experiences after learning activities. Schön suggested
that these two types of reﬂection are imperative factors
for learning in any ﬁeld with the purpose of eﬀective
learning transfer. In this study, we investigate an educational design to support these two types of reﬂective
activities.

Keyword Space

wedding
Korea

Result-of-Search Space

search

249,wedding
Korea,1

link

Web Space
Web-Page Space

287,249,1

link

335,287,2

return

287,249,1
jump
wedding
Korea plant

search

255,wedding
Korea plant,1

256,wedding
Korea plant,2

A Search Process Feedback System

return

We constructed a feedback system for search processes
that supports learners’ reﬂections on their problemsolving processes when seeking information on the Web.
This system supports learners’ reﬂection on their own
search processes by (1) providing visual support for their
search processes, and (2) prompting searchers to reﬂect
on their search processes.

Pebeku

search

274,Pebeku,1

link

415,274,1

return

274,Pebeku,1

next

415,274,1

Figure 1: Sample description of the search-process description schema.

A Search-Process Describing Schema
The system describes learners’ information-seeking processes on the Web based on a schema for describing
search processes, and allows these processes to be shown
in real time. The search-process description schema
was proposed to analyze searchers’ processes for seeking information on the Web (Saito & Miwa, 2002). This
schema was constructed based on the Problem Behavior Graph (PBG), proposed by Newell & Simon (1972),
which is well known as one of the most fundamental
schema for describing the subjects’ problem-solving processes.
Usually, we begin the search with a search engine when
we want to ﬁnd something on the Web. Following that,
we consider keywords and search queries to input to a
search engine, and browse the results of a search or each
Web page. In this schema, a phase in which keywords
and search queries are considered is deﬁned as a search
in the Keyword space, while a phase in which information on the Web, such as the results of a search and
Web pages, is searched is deﬁned as a search in the Web
space. Furthermore, the Web space is subdivided into
the Result-of-Search space and the Web-Page space. Figure 1 shows a sample description of the search-process
description schema.
The searchers’ processes are described as transitions of
nodes and operators through these three search spaces.
A node represents a searcher’s behavioral state, and each
node’s components diﬀer from space to space. In the
Keyword space, a node consists of a serial number and
search queries, a node in the Result-of-Search space consists of a serial number, search queries, and the number
of search results page, and a node in the Web-Page space
includes a serial number and the depth of links. An operator shows an operation to the node. The following six
operators are deﬁned in this schema:
Search: searching with a search engine

1192

Link: going to a page connected with a link
Next: going forward to the next page after having gone
backward
Return: going backward to the last page just visited
Jump: revisiting a page
Browse: browsing search results just obtained

Prompting
The system prompts questions to help learners reﬂect
on their own search processes presented by the system.
When the system prompts a question, learners are required to answer the question while referring to the
learners’ own search processes. Table 1 shows each type
of question presented by the system. The following three
types of questions were used: (a) questions on the Keyword space, (b) on the Result-of-Search space, and (c)
on the Web-Page space.

Experiment
We have devised an instructional design that includes
the search process feedback system as a core part of the
design and two types of reﬂection. In this section, we
conducted an experiment to evaluate how support for
reﬂection aﬀects learners’ problem-solving processes and
their search performance.

Participants
Thirty-eight university freshmen participated in our experiment as a part of a class. The participants were
divided randomly into two groups. One group (the instructional group) was supported based on our instructional design, whereas the other (the control group) was

Table 1: Each type of prompt presented by the system.
Types of Prompts
Keyword Space
Result-of-Search Space
Web-Page Space

Questions
What kinds of keywords did you use, or how did you combine these keywords ?
How many results of search pages did you browse per search ?
How many links did you click on per page ?

INSTRUCTIONAL GROUP

CONTROL GROUP

Phase 1
Phase 1.1 The pre-test

Phase 1
Phase 1.1 The pre-test

(a) Questionnaires about daily Web use
(b) Listing important activities to find information on the Web effectively
(c) Two information-seeking tasks

(a) Questionnaires about daily Web use
(b) Listing important activities to find information on the Web effectively
(c) Two information-seeking tasks

Phase 1.2 Reflection in information-seeking activities

Phase 1.2 Information-seeking activities

The participants are asked to solve a search task.
(a) The system prompts every three minutes, and the participants are then
presented with their search processes
(b) Answering the questions raised by the prompts while referring to a
diagram of their own search processes

The participants are asked to solve a search task.

Phase 1.3 Reflection on information seeking activities
Analyzing and evaluating the participants’ own search processes

Phase 2
Phase 2.1 Reflection on information seeking activity

Phase 2
Phase 2.1 The post-test

Analyzing and evaluating the participants’ own search processes while
comparing their search processes with other three learners’ processes

(a) Two information-seeking tasks
(b) Listing important activities to find information on the Web effectively

Phase 2.2 The post-test
(a) Two information-seeking tasks
(b) Listing important activities to find information on the Web effectively

Figure 2: Summary of the experimental procedure.

not supported. The instructional group comprised 19
participants, as did the control group. We examined
the participants’ experiences of using the Web. The
average time consumed per day was 26.5 minutes for
the instructional group and 33.3 minutes for the control
group. There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the
two groups (t(37) = .879, n.s.).
The experiment consisted of two phases, which were
separated by an interval of at least one day. Figure 2
shows a summary of the experimental procedure. In the
following, we explain the experimental procedures.

while seeking information on the Web. Following the
pre-test, we explained to them the experimental task and
how to use the system. Next, they were asked to solve a
search task using the system. The search task lasted for
about 20 minutes, and the participants in the instructional group were shown a prompt every three minutes
then presented with their search processes described by
the system. They considered the questions raised by the
prompts while referring to a diagram of their own search
processes, and entered their answers to the answer sheet.

Pre- and Post-tests

Phase 1.3 Reflection on information-seeking activities In Phase 1.3, the participants in the instructional group experienced “reﬂection-on-action.” After
the search task, the participants reﬂected on their own
search activities, analyzing and evaluating their own
search processes for twenty minutes as instructed by an
experimenter. First, they analyzed their search processes
based on the perspective of a search among the three
spaces (the Keyword space, the Result-of-Search space,
and the Web-Page space) while referring to their own
search processes. Second, they considered the advantages and disadvantages of their search processes and
how to improve those disadvantages. Following that,
they ﬁlled in their answer sheets with their ideas.

We conducted the pre- and post-tests to conﬁrm whether
the participants’ search performance and their ideas
about information seeking on the Web improve through
their reﬂective activities. Each test consisted of (1) listing at least ﬁve important activities to ﬁnd information
on the Web eﬀectively, and (2) solving two informationseeking tasks to measure the participants’ search performance. In the information-seeking tasks, the participants were asked to ﬁnd target information within
ten minutes for each task, using a normal Web browser,
where none of the participants were provided with their
search processes. The tasks were counterbalanced between the participants.

The instructional group
Phase 1.2 Reflection in information-seeking activities In Phase 1.2, the participants in the instructional group experienced “reﬂection-in-action,” wherein
the participants reﬂect on their own search processes

1193

Phase 2.1 Reflection on information-seeking activities In Phase 2.1, the participants in the instructional group also experienced “reﬂection-on-action.” In
contrast to Phase 1.3, the participants reﬂected on their
search activities through comparing their own search

Process A

Process B

Process C

Three out of thirty-eight participants were eliminated
because one did not understand the experimental instruction and the others did not participate in Phase
2. Therefore, we analyzed the results of the 35 participants: 17 participants from the instructional group and
18 participants from the control group.

Search Performance

The control group
The participants in the control group engaged in the
pre- and post-tests and the search task in Phase 1.2. In
Phase 1.2, the participants in the control group solved
the search task without receiving the prompts and the
presentation of their own search processes.

Eﬀectiveness of the instructional design
In this section, we evaluate the eﬀects of our instructional design based on the experimental results. We
compare changes from the pre- to post-tests in the instructional group with those in the control group based
on the following three points: (1) the participants’ search
performance, (2) their ideas about important activities
in information-seeking on the Web, and (3) their search
processes.

1194

Table 2: Participants’ performances in pre- and posttests.
(a) Instructional group

Pre Test

processes with the other three learners’ processes that
had been selected from the control group by one of the
authors.
The presented three processes are shown in Figure 3.
Process A is a process by a participant who found a
correct answer. One feature of this process is that the
balance of searching each space is relatively well coordinated (balanced search). Process B and Process C are
processes of participants who could not ﬁnd a correct
answer. In contrast to Process A, these processes tend
to cling to a search of one or two of the three spaces.
The participant followings Process B hardly searched the
Web-Page space at all. He or she repeatedly shuttled
between searching in the Keyword space and the Resultof-Search space (breadth-ﬁrst search).
The participant followings Process C searched the
Web-Page space in great detail (depth-ﬁrst search). The
instructional group was provided with these three processes plus information on whether each participant
found the correct answer. Then, they analyzed and evaluated their own search activities while comparing their
own search processes to the three typical processes, just
as in Phase 1.3.

0
1
2
Sum

0
9
1
0
10

Post Test
1 2 Sum
7 0
16
0 0
1
0 0
0
7 0
17

(b) Control group

Pre Test

Figure 3: The three processes presented to the participants in the instructional group.

The scores of the search tasks in the pre- and post-tests
were estimated to determine whether the participants
could locate Web pages containing the target information. The participants’ performances in the pre- and
post-tests are shown in Table 2. Each score (0, 1, and
2) shows the number of tasks in which the participants
could ﬁnd a correct answer, and each frequency in each
cell of this table show the number of the participants
getting each score. We compared the number of participants who increased their scores from the pre-test to
post-test with the number of participants who did not.
From the result of the chi-square test, Groups (the
instructional/control groups) × Performances (improving/not improving), we found that the number of participants who improved their search performance from
the pre- to post-tests signiﬁcantly diﬀered for the two
groups (χ2 (1) = 4.13, p < .05). This result indicates that
the participants, who engaged in reﬂective activities supported by our instructional design, improved their search
performance more eﬀectively.

0
1
2
Sum

0
11
2
0
13

Post Test
1 2 Sum
1 0
12
2 0
4
0 0
0
3 0
16

Important activities in information seeking
on the Web
In the pre- and post-tests, the participants were asked
to propose ﬁve activities that they considered important
in information-seeking on the Web. The participants’
answers in each test were categorized into the following
eight types.
Keyword space: activities with search in the Keyword
space

Pre
Post

+

2
1.5

**

1

*

0.5

**

0
Keyword
space

Result-ofSearch space

Web-Page
space

Interaction

Ability

Knowledge

System

Other

+: p<.10, *: p<.05, **: p<.01

Average number of answers

(a) Instructional group

Number of search cycles

Average number of answers

12
2.5

10

Instrucional
Control

8
6
4
2
0

2.5

Pre
Post

2

Pre

Post

1.5
1

*

0.5

Figure 5: Average number of search cycles in the preand post-tests.

*

0
Keyword
Space

Result-ofSearch Space

Web-Page
Space

Interaction

Ability

Knowledge

System

Other

+: p<.10, *: p<.05, **: p<.01

Search processes

(b) Control group

Figure 4: Average number of answers in each category
in the pre- and post-tests.
Results-of-Search space: activities with search in the
Results-of-Search space
Web-Page space: activities with search in the WebPage space
Interaction: activities with transitions among multiple
spaces
Ability: necessities of abilities and attitudes
Knowledge: knowledge required in information seeking
on the Web
System: functions of a search system, such as a search
engine
Figure 4 shows the average number of items in each
category in the pre- and post-tests. In the instructional group, paired t-tests indicated signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the increase of the number of items in “Resultsof-Search space” (t(16) = 2.582, p < .05), “Web-Page
space” (t(16) = 3.846, p < .01), “Interaction” among
spaces (t(16) = 2.954, p < .01) and a slight diﬀerence
in the increase of the number of items in “Keyword
space”(t(16) = 2.073, p < .10).
The items above were related to the search processes
on which the participants reﬂected. On the other hand,
in the control group, paired t-tests indicated signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in the increase of the number of items in
“Web-Page space” (t(17) = 2.557, p < .05) and “Knowledge” (t(17) = 2.204, p < .05). These results indicate
that the participants who reﬂected on their search processes in the instructional group acquired diﬀerent notions as important concepts for the Web search than
those in the control group; in particular, they realized
their own search activities more profoundly.

1195

Finally, we discuss whether the participants’ processes
improved with our instructional design by comparing the
pre- and post-tests in each group. In this study, we consider learners’ information seeking processes as a cycle
of search in the Keyword space and the Web space. This
approach, where problem solving is considered to be a
search for multiple spaces, has been widely approved in
the studies on scientiﬁc discovery and creative processes.
These studies have suggested that target activities are
developed while repeating the cycle of searching multiple
spaces. Therefore, we focused on the cycle of searching
multiple spaces. We deﬁned one search cycle as “a set
of transitions from the Keyword space to the Web-Page
space.” We counted the number of search cycles in each
task, and Figure 5 shows the average number of search
cycles in each group.
The number of search cycles was analyzed in a
two-way mixed ANOVA with the group (the instructional/control) as a between-subjects factor and the
test (pre-test/post-tests) as a within-subjects variable.
There was a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of the test (F (1, 33) =
6.37, p < .01), indicating that the number of cycles increased from the pre-test to the post-test. The Group ×
Test interaction was also found to show a trend toward
signiﬁcance (F (1, 33) = 3.07, p < .10), which indicates
that the participants in the instructional group more effectively increased the number of cycles than did in the
control group. These results prove that the participants
in the instructional group searched two spaces more actively in the post-test than in the pre-test.

Discussions and Conclusions
In this study, we proposed an instructional design
that supports reﬂective activities by presenting learners’
problem solving processes in information seeking on the
Web and evaluated its educational eﬀects. We conducted
an experiment to evaluate the eﬀects of our design. Experimental results revealed that the participants’ search
performance in the instructional group improved more
eﬀectively than in the control group. Additionally, their
ideas about important activities in information-seeking

Table 3: Multiple scaﬀolds in our instructional design.
Process Display
Process Prompt
Process Models

Reﬂection in Action



×
×

Reﬂective social discourse

on the Web and that their search processes also changed
from the pre-test to the post-test in comparison with
the control group. These results indicate that our design
helps learners improve their search performances and acquire search skills.
Finally, we discuss scaﬀolds in our instructional design. In this study, we focused on the process display,
pointed out by Lin et al. (1999) to support learners’
reﬂection on their problem-solving processes. Furthermore, they also proposed the following three scaﬀolds
for reﬂective thinking:
Process prompts: prompting students’ attention to
speciﬁc aspects of processes while learning is in action
Process models: modeling of experts’ thinking processes that are usually tacit so that students can compare and contrast with their own process in action
Reflective social discourse: creating
communitybased discourse to provide multiple perspectives and
feedback that can be used for reﬂection
Lin et al. (1999) suggested that it is important to incorporate all four scaﬀolds when developing designs because each method supports a diﬀerent aspect of reﬂective thinking. We designed a learning environment in
which learners could experience two types of reﬂection,
such as “reﬂection-in-action” and “reﬂection-on-action”,
providing multiple methods for scaﬀolds referred by Lin
et al. (1999) to support learners’ reﬂective activities.
Table 3 summarized types and methods of scaﬀolds in
our design. In this paper, we empirically veriﬁed the effectiveness of combining these multiple methods for supporting reﬂective thinking.
Additionally, experimental results also imply that a
cognitive schema is useful for not only analyzing human
cognitive processes, but also supporting learning activities. However, we need to conduct further investigations on how each component in our educational design,
such as a cognitive schema, “reﬂection-in-action,” and
“reﬂection-on-action,” and above scaﬀolds, aﬀects the
learners’ improvements.

References
Aleven, V. & Koedinger, K. R. (2002). An eﬀective metacognitive strategy: learning by doing and
explaining with a computer-based cognitive tutor.
Cognitive Science, 26(2):147–179.
Anderson, J. R., Boyle, C. F., & Reiser, B. J. (1985).
Intelligent tutoring systems. Science, 228:456–462.

1196

Reﬂection on Action


×



×

Brown, A. L., Bransford, J. D., Ferrara, R. A., & Campione, J. C. (1983). Learning, remembering, and
understanding. In Flavell, J. & Markman, E., editors, Cognitive Development. John Wiley and Sons,
New York. Handbook of child psychology: Vol. III.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P.,
& Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: how students study and use examples in learning to solve
problems. Cognitive Science, 13(2):145–182.
Ertmer, P. A., Newby, T. J., & MacDougal, M. (1996).
Students’ responses and approaches to case-based
instruction: the role of reﬂective self-regulation.
American Educational Research Journal, 33(3):719–
752.
Hershkowitz, R. & Schwarz, B. (1999). Reﬂective processes in a mathematics classroom with a rich
learning environment. Cognition and Instruction,
17(1):65–91.
Leinhardt, G. & Young, K. M. (1996). Two texts, three
readers: distance and expertise in reading history.
Cognition and Instruction, 14(4):441–486.
Lin, X., Hmelo, C., Kinzer, C. K., & Secules, T. J.
(1999). Designing technology to support reﬂection.
Educational Technology Research and Development,
47(3):43–62.
Lin, X. D. & Lehman, J. (2001). Designing metacognitive activities. Educational Technology Research
and Development, 49(2):23–40.
Newell, A. & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human Problem Solving. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs, N.J.
Saito, H. & Miwa, K. (2002). Discovery process on
the www: Analysis based on a theory of scientiﬁc
discovery. In Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Discovery Science (DS 2002), LNCS
2534, (pp. 449–456).
Schauble, L., Raghavan, K., & Glaser, R. (1993). The
discovery and reﬂection notation: A graphical trace
for supporting selfregulation in computer-based laboratories. In Lajoie, S. & Derry, S., editors, Computers as Cognitive Tools. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J.
Schön, D. A. (1987). Educating the Reflective Practitioner. Heath, Boston.

