UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emergent Meaning in Affective Space: Conceptual and Spatial Congruence Produces Positive
Evaluations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jx9k274

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Schnall, Simone
Clore, Gerald L.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emergent Meaning in Affective Space: Conceptual and Spatial Congruence
Produces Positive Evaluations
Simone Schnall (schnall@virginia.edu)

University of Virginia, Department of Psychology, 102 Gilmer Hall
Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA

Gerald L. Clore (gclore@virginia.edu)

University of Virginia, Department of Psychology, 102 Gilmer Hall
Charlottesville, VA 22904 USA

results in the image schema of VERTICALITY, or the
understanding that we usually function in an upright
position, with a clear up-down orientation. Indeed, spatial
perceptions and spatial language are closely intertwined
(Hayward & Tarr, 1995; Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976;
Richardson, Spivey, Barsalou, & McRae, 2003; Tolaas,
1991). Spatial metaphors derived from the concrete concept
of VERTICALITY can be used to describe various abstract
concepts:

Abstract
Based on the theory of conceptual metaphor we investigated
the evaluative consequences of a match (or mismatch) of
different conceptual relations (good vs. bad; abstract vs.
concrete) with their corresponding spatial relation (UP vs.
DOWN). Good and bad words that were either abstract or
concrete were presented in an up or down spatial location.
Words for which the conceptual dimensions matched the
spatial dimension were evaluated most favorably. When
neither of the two conceptual dimensions matched the spatial
dimension, ratings were not as favorable as when the
dimensions did match, but were still significantly more
favorable than when one conceptual category was matched
with the spatial category (e.g., UP and abstract), while the
other one was not (e.g., UP and bad). Results suggest that a
metacognitive feeling of fluency can produce an additional
layer of evaluative information that is independent of actual
stimulus valence.

GOOD IS UP; BAD IS DOWN:
Things going downhill; Feeling down in the dumps
ABSTRACT IS UP; CONCRETE IS DOWN:
Higher-order categories; sub-types

Background
A recent theory of conceptual structure proposes that bodily
processes influence and constrain cognitive information
processing, and that the resulting knowledge is structured in
a largely metaphorical way (Gibbs, 1994; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980, 1999). According to this view, the body is a
source of knowledge, and by means of conceptual
metaphors, very basic “embodied” concepts are mapped
onto more abstract concepts. For instance, the basic
orientation of the human body in space (certain things are
“up” or “down”, relative to the body) is used when
conceptualizing abstract categories, such as emotions, when
metaphorically talking about “feeling up” or “down”. Thus,
metaphor, defined as “understanding and experiencing one
kind of thing in terms of another (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999,
p. 5, emphasis in original),” does not merely concern
language usage. How we use metaphor to talk about things
also has implications for how we act upon, and think about
those things.
Central to the theory of conceptual metaphor is the notion
of “image schema” (Johnson, 1987, 1999), which describes
a pattern of perceptual experience that emerges from very
basic bodily activities. For instance, the sensorimotor
experience of moving with one’s own body through space

Thus, many image schemata are hypothesized to be
derived from the basic experience of the body functioning in
three-dimensional space: By definition, all human behavior
takes place in space. As a consequence, the source domain
of space provides a metaphor for multiple target domains
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, 1999).
Indeed, evidence has been obtained supporting the notion
that concrete spatial relations provide opportunities for
mapping conceptual relations. For instance, time is often
conceptualized as movement through space (Boroditsky,
2000; Boroditsky & Ramscar, 2002; Gentner & Imai, 1992;
Gentner, Imai, & Boroditsky, 2002). Graphs are easier to
understand when an increase in quantity is represented by an
increase in slope, corresponding to the spatial metaphor of
MORE IS UP (Gattis & Holyoak, 1996). Inferences about
given premises are more accurate when the premises are
mapped onto a spatial medium, compared to when they are
not (Schnall & Gattis, 1998). Positive words are categorized
faster when they are presented in an upward location,
whereas negative words are categorized faster whey they are
in a downward location (Meier & Robinson, 2004). Thus,
when spatial relations can be mapped onto corresponding
conceptual relations, cognitive operations are facilitated.
In the current study we investigated the confluence of
spatial relations and conceptual relations. As noted earlier,
spatial concepts, such as VERTICALITY, serve as the
source domain for various target domains, such as
goodness/badness, and concreteness/abstractness. Figure 1

1209

describes the relationship between the source domain
VERTICALITY and those two target domains. Both target
domains have an implicit connection with the source
domain. For example, the concept “ love” is good and
abstract, and both those conceptual categories are
conceptualized as UP.

and strongly negative words that were either abstract or
concrete, and thus the content of the words crossed both
conceptual
dimensions
of
goodness/badness
and
abstractness/concreteness. Each word was presented either
on top, or on the bottom of a piece of paper, and participants
evaluated how good the word was.

Table 1: Relationship between spatial and conceptual
dimensions.

Table 2: Congruent (“ + +” “ - -“ ) and incongruent
(“ + -“ “ - +” ) relations of spatial and conceptual dimensions.

CONCEPT

Stimulus

SPACE

Good = UP
Bad = DOWN

VALENCE CONCRETENESS

SPACE

UP

Good

Abstract

DOWN

Bad

Concrete

The goal of the current study was to investigate the effect
of a match (or mismatch) of two different conceptual
relations with their corresponding spatial relation. The
spatial dimension we investigated was VERTICALITY (UP
vs. DOWN), and the two conceptual dimensions were
VALENCE (good vs. bad) and CONCRETENESS
(concrete vs. abstract). The spatial dimension was varied by
a simple perceptual manipulation: The stimulus word, which
consisted of a good (or bad) word that was either abstract
(or concrete) was placed either on top, or on the bottom of
the page on which participants evaluated the word.
Table 2 describes the different ways in which the relations
can either be matched or mismatched. Congruent relations
are present when both relations are matched, such as when
good, abstract concepts are UP (top panel of Table 2,
denoted by “ + +” ), but also when both relations are
mismatched, such as when bad, concrete concepts are UP
(denoted by “ - -“ ). In the latter case neither of the
conceptual dimensions matches the spatial dimension,
therefore no conflict between the spatial and conceptual
relations exists. In contrast, incongruent relations are
present when only one of the two conceptual dimensions
matches the spatial dimension, and the other one does not.
We expected that the extent to which the two conceptual
dimensions were in accordance with the spatial dimension
would influence the perceived valence of the stimulus
words. Specifically, we predicted that when both
relationships are matched, as is the case for the congruent
“ + +” conditions, stimuli should be rated more favorably.
Further, for the congruent “ - -“ conditions, stimuli should be
perceived as less positive than in the congruent “ + +”
conditions, but as more positive than in any of the
incongruent “ + -“ “ - +” conditions. This hypothesis
regarding the mapping of spatial and conceptual dimensions
was tested by presenting participants with strongly positive

VALENCE

Good
Abstract
e.g., talent

UP

Good
Concrete
e.g., palace

UP

Bad
Abstract
e.g., malice

UP

Bad
Concrete
e.g., bullet

UP

CONCRETENESS
Abstract = UP
Concrete = DOWN

Bad
Concrete
DOWN
e.g., blister
Bad
Abstract
DOWN
e.g., neglect
Good
Concrete
DOWN
e.g., circus
Good
Abstract
DOWN
e.g., passion

Method
Participants
Participants were 61 undergraduate students from the
University of Virginia who received course credit.

1210

Procedure
Participants filled out a survey as part of an experimental
session. Instructions specified that the participant’s task was
to make a judgment about how good or how bad certain
words were. It was emphasized to participants that they
should go with their first intuition, and that judgments
should be made according to what they personally thought,
rather than what other people might think.
The word stimuli were presented in the following manner
(see Figures 1 and 2). Each stimulus was printed on a
separate sheet of paper measuring 4 ¼ by 5 ½ inches. A
horizontal line was drawn in the middle of the paper to
emphasize up and down locations. The stimulus word was
printed either in the space on top of the line (in the upper
half of the page), or below the line (in the lower half of the
page). Each word was followed by a rating scale on which
the participant evaluated the word from 1 (very good) to 7
(very bad). All stimuli were assembled into a booklet that
presented the stimuli in a fixed random order. Half of the
stimuli were strongly positive words, the other half were
strongly negative words. These words were selected from a
word list for which normative affective ratings have been
established (Bradley & Lang, 1999), and were matched for
word length and word frequency. For each valence, half of
the words were abstract (e.g., “ honor,” “ greed” ), the other
half were concrete (e.g., “ bouquet,” “ thief” ), thus resulting
in eight different experimental conditions. Each stimulus
was presented only once, and each participant received all
conditions.

GARBAGE

Very
Good

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 2: Spatial set-up of survey: “ Bad” concrete item in
downward location.

Table 3: List of word stimuli.
Good Words
Abstract

Very
Good

KINDNESS
1

2

3

4

5

6

Very
Bad
7

joy
fun
wise
honor
brave
talent
fantasy
miracle
passion
kindness
intimate
ambition
affection

Very
Bad
7

Bad Words

Concrete

Abstract

Concrete

toy
kiss
gift
jewel
dinner
palace
circus
delight
sunset
bouquet
treasure
sunlight
butterfly

sin
scorn
greed
upset
devil
deceit
malice
misery
hatred
failure
neglect
jealousy
ignorance

fat
tomb
bomb
thief
bullet
prison
poison
blister
morgue
garbage
hostage
mosquito
hurricane

Results
Figure 1: Spatial set-up of survey: “ Good” abstract item in
upward location.

Because the valence of the words was strongly positive or
strongly negative, and no interaction effect of valence and
spatial position was expected (i.e., positive words were not
expected to be rated as negative, or negative words as
positive depending as a function of their spatial location),
separate within-subjects ANOVAs were conducted for
positive and negative items. For “ good” words, the

1211

interaction of spatial position and level of abstractness was
significant, F(1, 60) = 64.48, p < .0001, with the highest
mean for the congruent condition, namely abstract positive
words presented in the up location (M = 5.43, SD = .40)(see
Figure 3). Subsequent paired-samples t-tests showed that
words in the congruent condition received significantly
higher positive ratings than concrete positive words in the
up location (t(60) = -15.95, p < .0001), abstract positive
words in the down location (t(60) = -2.18, p < .03), and
concrete positive words in the down location (t(60) = -7.91,
p < .0001). Thus, when the perceptual dimension (UP) was
matched with both conceptual dimensions (good and
abstract), evaluations of the positive words became even
more positive compared to when they were not.

1 = very bad 7 = very good

1.8

++

1.6
1.4
1.2

-+

1

--

+-

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

++

5.4

+-

5.2
5

Up

4.8

-+

4.6

Down

4.4
4.2
4
Abstract

Concrete

Figure 4: Mean ratings for “ bad” words.

--

Concrete

Figure 3: Mean ratings for “ good” words.
For the “ bad” words, there was also a significant
interaction of space and level of abstractness, F(1, 60) =
54.60, p < .0001. Words in the congruent condition, that is,
concrete negative words presented in the down location
received the most positive ratings (M = 1.39, SD = .39), and
differed significantly from abstract negative words in the
down location (t(60) = 11.06, p < .0001), concrete negative
words in the up location (t(60) = 9.24, p < .0001), and
abstract negative words in the up location (t(60) = 10.68, p
< .0001) (see Figure 4). Remarkably, this match between the
perceptual dimension and its corresponding two conceptual
dimensions did not result in making the negative words
more extreme, and thus more negative; rather, as was the
case for the positive words, it led to more positive ratings
for the negative words.

The analyses so far have dealt with the “ + +” match
conditions of perceptual and conceptual dimension, denoted
with two plus signs in Table 2. In addition, more positive
ratings were also observed for the “ - -“ match conditions,
denoted with two minus signs in Table 2, where the spatial
dimension neither matched the valence, nor the level of
abstractness of the words.
To compare specifically the congruent “ + +” with the
congruent “ - -“ conditions, as well as with the incongruent
“ + -“ “ - +” conditions of spatial dimension with the two
conceptual dimensions, composite scores were computed.
As predicted, the composite average rating for the two
congruent “ + +” conditions (M = 3.41, SD = .23) was
significantly more positive than the composite average
rating for the two congruent “ - -“ conditions (M = 3.12, SD
= .26), t(60) = -8.49, p < .0001 (see Figure 7). In addition,
the composite average rating for the two congruent “ - -“
conditions was significantly more positive than the
incongruent “ + -“ “ - +” conditions (M = 2.72, SD = .23),
t(60) = -9.83, p < .0001.

3.6

Composite Mean Rating

1 = very bad 7 = very good

5.6

Down

0.8

Abstract
5.8

Up

3.4
3.2
3
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.2
2
Congruent
++

Congruent
--

Incongruent
+- -+

Figure 5: Composite ratings for congruent and incongruent
matching conditions.

1212

To summarize, abstract positive words presented in an up
location, and concrete negative words presented in a down
location were evaluated most favorably. Furthermore, when
neither of the two conceptual dimensions matched the
spatial dimension, that is when abstract good words were
down, or when concrete bad words were up, ratings were
not as favorable as when the dimensions did match, but
were still significantly more favorable than when one
conceptual category was matched with the spatial category
(e.g., UP and abstract), while the other one was not (e.g., UP
and bad).

Discussion
We found evidence for a connection between a spatial
source domain and two conceptual target domains. A match
between the source domain of VERTICALITY and the two
corresponding target domains of goodness/badness and
abstractness/concreteness resulted in more positive
evaluations for affectively toned material, regardless of
whether this material was positive or negative in valence.
Abstract good things were rated as even better when they
were presented on top of the page, but concrete bad things
were also rated as better when they were presented on the
bottom of the page.
The finding regarding the negative words might be
considered surprising. A different outcome might have been
that the meaning of bad things was intensified with
congruent spatial and conceptual dimension, so that bad
things became even worse. But this is not what we found.
How can this somewhat counterintuitive finding be
explained? One possibility is that if conceptual relations are
indeed as inherently connected to spatial relations as our
findings suggest, then people are more familiar with
spatially represented conceptual structure. As a consequence
of this familiarity, these mappings are experienced as more
pleasant. Indeed, it has been well documented that the
repeated presentation of a stimulus is sufficient to increase
positive affect toward that stimulus, relative to a stimulus
that has not been presented repeatedly. In a classic study
originating the work on the so-called mere exposure effect,
Zajonc (1968) presented Chinese-looking characters,
nonsense words, or yearbook photographs for either 0, 2, 5,
10 or 25 times to participants. Participants subsequently
rated how “ good” or “ bad” the meaning of the Chinese
characters, or of the nonsense words was, and how much
they liked the person shown in the photographs. For all
three kinds of stimuli, participants’ ratings became more
positive with increased number of presentation. Many
studies have since replicated and extended this basic effect,
suggesting that the mere exposure effect is a very robust
phenomenon (Bornstein, 1989).
Thus, it is possible that external conceptual organization
that conforms with one’s own representational structure is
perceived as more familiar, and therefore, as more pleasing.
Perhaps our results may be regarded a representational
mere exposure effect, where the highest positive valence is
assigned to those conceptual organizations that have the
highest degree of familiarity. In this regard, it is instructive

to review the explanations that have been put forward to
explain the mere exposure effect.
Some have proposed that fluency of cognitive operations
can explain why people like things better the more often
they experience them. Fluency refers to properties of
continuous information processing, such as the speed, or
ease of processing (Jacoby, Kelley, & Dywan, 1989). These
properties emerge as a feature of the process, rather than the
content of cognitive functioning (Winkielman, Schwarz,
Fazendeiro, & Reber, 2003). Generally, high fluency, that
is, fast and effortless processing of information, signals
positive states of the environment, and of one’s cognitive
processes. As a consequence, fluency can result in positive
affect, as well as positive evaluations of target stimuli
toward which fluency is experienced. Research on this
effect has generated compelling evidence for the fluency
hypothesis (Winkielman et al., 2003).
Further, studies involving affective evaluations in
particular demonstrate an asymmetric effect, such that only
positive evaluations, but not negative evaluations, are
influenced by fluency manipulations, regardless of how
questions concerning the ratings are worded. For instance,
Reber et al. (1998) found that high fluency led to increased
judgments of liking and decreased judgments of disliking.
Similarly, Winkielman and Cacioppo (2001) instructed half
of their participants to report positive affect, and half of the
participants to indicate negative affect after a fluency
manipulation. Only those reporting on positive affect
showed increased positive affect when exposed to high
fluency, whereas those reporting negative affect did not
show such an effect. Our finding that congruence between
spatial and conceptual dimensions led to increased positive
ratings even for negative words is consistent with this
documented asymmetric effect where only positive
evaluations increase as a function of fluency, but not
negative evaluations.
An additional finding in the present study was that not
only words in the congruent “ + +” conditions, but also
words in the congruent “ - -“ conditions were rated more
positively than words in the incongruent “ + -“ “ - +”
conditions. Other data are consistent with the present
finding that sometimes two negatives combine to make a
positive, so to speak. For instance, according to the affective
certainty model (Tamir, Robinson and Clore, 2002), when
personality traits match with current affective states, people
experience facilitated performance on motivationally
relevant cognitive tasks. Thus, people who are generally
happy, and who found themselves in a happy mood, were
more successful at processing affectively valenced
information, but the same was true of people who are
generally unhappy and found themselves in an unhappy
mood, compared with people who are in conflict regarding
their beliefs about themselves, and their actual experiences.
Similarly, in the present study, more fluency, and therefore
higher positive ratings was the result of a lack of
representational conflict between the source domain and the

1213

target domain, even if that meant that neither of the target
domains could be mapped onto the source domain.
In conclusion, we found that “ metaphorical” mappings
between inherent spatial and conceptual relations can
produce an additional layer of complexity, where the
confluence of source domain and target domains has
emergent affective properties: Both good and bad things are
evaluated as more positive when an explicit spatial
representation fits with implicit conceptual structure. In
such situations, metacognitive processes involving
perceived fluency provide information that goes well
beyond representational content itself.

Acknowledgments
Support from NIH grants 1R03MH67580-01 (to S. S.) and
5R01MH050074-06 (to G. L. C.) is acknowledged. We
thank Steven Cholewiak, Jeffrey Claiborne and Irina
Komarovskaya for assistance in data collection, and Jeanine
Stefanucci for helpful comments on an earlier draft of the
manuscript.

References
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and
meta-analysis of research, 1968-1987. Psychological
Bulletin, 106, 265-289.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body
and mind in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13,
185-189.
Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (1999). Affective norms for
English Words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual and
affective ratings. Technical Report C-1, Gainesville, FL:
Center for research in psychophysiology, University of
Florida.
Gattis, M., & Holyoak, K. J. (1996). Mapping conceptual to
spatial relations in visual reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 231-239.
Gentner, D., & Imai, M. (1992). Is the futures always
ahead? Evidence for system mappings in understanding
space-time metaphors. Proceedings of the Twenty First
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
510-515).Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
537-565.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative
thought, language, and understanding. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hayward, W. G., & Tarr, M. J. (1995). Spatial language and
spatial representation. Cognition, 55, 39-84.

Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C. M., & Dywan, J. (1989). Memory
attributions. In H. L. Roediger & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.),
Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays in honor
of Endel Tulving. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind: The bodily basis
of meaning, imagination, and reason. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Johnson, M. (1999). Embodied Reason. In G. Weiss & H.
Fern Haber (Eds.), Perspective on embodiment: The
intersections of nature and culture. London: Routledge.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
New York: Basic Books.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2004). Why the sunny
side is up: Associations between affect and vertical
position. Psychological Science, 15, 243-247.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Richardson, D. C., Spivey, M. J., Barsalou, L. W., &
McRae, K. (2003). Spatial representations activated
during real-time comprehension of verbs. Cognitive
Science, 27, 767-780.
Schnall, S., & Gattis, M. (1998). Transitive inference by
visual reasoning. Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 929934). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tolaas, J. (1991). Notes on the origin of some spatialization
metaphors. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 6, 203-218.
Winkielman, P., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2001). Mind at ease
puts a smile on the face: Psychophysiological evidence
that processing facilitation increases positive affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 9891000.
Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., Fazendeiro, T. A., & Reber,
R. (2003). The hedonic marking of processing fluency:
Implications for evaluative judgment. In J. Musch & K.
C. Klauer (Eds.), The psychology of evaluation: Affective
processes in cognition and emotion. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.

1214

