UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enhancing Example-Based Learning in Hypertext Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8980s9c4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Schuh, Julia
Gerjets, Peter
Scheiter, Katharina

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enhancing Example-Based Learning in
Hypertext Environments
Julia Schuh (j.schuh@iwm-kmrc.de)
Virtual Ph.D. Program: Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New Media
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen Germany
Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)
Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)
Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Abstract
In previous research, Gerjets, Scheiter, and Tack (2000)
demonstrated that learners experience serious difficulties in
utilizing instructional examples according to their profitability
when interacting with a hypertext-based learning
environment. In this paper we focus on possible causes of
these difficulties and on different instructional methods for
improving learners' utilization of worked-out examples in
hypertext environments. The results of two experimental
studies are reported.

Learning from Worked-Out Examples:
The Role of Example Processing
Strategies and Example Design
Research over the last 15 years in the domain of learning
and problem solving has demonstrated that instructional
examples play an important role for knowledge acquisition
in domains like mathematics, physics, or programming
(Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989). In
particular for initial skill acquisition, learning from
worked-out examples seems to be superior to actively
solving training problems (Sweller, van Merriënboer, &
Paas, 1998). However, numerous findings also indicate
major drawbacks of example-based learning. In particular,
poor learners tend to overuse examples during problem
solving without reflecting on their appropriateness
(VanLehn & Jones, 1993). In addition, learners have
difficulties identifying relevant information in worked-out
examples and are often distracted by examples' surface
features (Ross, 1989). Furthermore, Renkl (1999) assumes
that students often suffer from illusions of understanding
when learning from worked-out examples. I.e., they may
have the false impression of having grasped the solution
rationale of an example problem. Finally, learners have
difficulties generalizing solutions from examples to novel
problems (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Reed, Dempster,
& Ettinger, 1985).
A number of empirical studies have identified features of
example processing strategies and example design that are
efficient for successful knowledge acquisition (cf. Atkinson,
Derry, Renkl, & Wortham, 2000).
•Important strategical aspects mainly concern the adequate
selection and elaboration of instructional examples. Reed,
Ackinclose, and Voss (1990) showed that learners failed
to select sufficiently complex instructional examples for
learning although the profitability of these examples for
1231

subsequently solving test problems could be demonstrated.
However, Reed, Willis, and Guarino (1994) found that
learners who were allowed to select worked-out examples
while solving test problems were able to select suitable
examples. Additionally, it has been shown that selfexplanations are an important aspect of good learners’
example processing (Chi et al., 1989; Pirolli & Recker,
1994; Renkl, 1997). In particular, anticipations of solution
steps and inferences with regard to the relations between
solution steps, goals, and abstract principles have been
proven useful for knowledge acquisition.
•With respect to design issues it could be shown that
multiple examples can support schema induction which
helps learners to solve novel problems (Cummins, 1992).
Providing multiple examples with different surface
features might further improve this process of abstraction
(Quilici & Mayer, 1996). Additionally, it has been
proposed that the provision of completion problems where learners have to fill in some details of worked-out
examples’ solution steps - is a helpful instructional device
as it fosters self-explanations (Van Merrienboer, 1990). In
particular, presenting completion problems along with
evaluative feedback on subjects’ gap-filling performance
seems to improve learning outcomes. For instance, Stark
(1999) showed that learners benefit from such a
combination of completion problems and feedback and
stresses the point that completion problems foster example
elaboration whereas giving feedback on the learning
success might prevent learners from illusions of
understanding.
From these findings on learning from examples it can be
argued that strategies of example selection and processing
as well as features of example design have to be taken into
account to improve learning outcomes.
The aspect of adopting suitable strategies gains increasing
importance the more the control of the learning process is
left up to the learner. In learning situations where the learner
can select instructional material as well as determine the
sequence and the pace of presentation, the importance of
strategies increases (Gerjets, Scheiter, & Tack, 2000).
Therefore, an identification of suitable strategies of
information utilization and an examination of whether
learners can adopt these strategies is highly relevant when
more focus is put on self-regulated learning in the field of
instruction.

Example-Based Hypertext Environments
One domain in which these issues of learner control are
stressed is the field of hypertext-based learning where the
user can select among different kinds of information and
where he can choose according to his goals when the
information is to be presented and in which order (Rouet &
Levonen, 1996).
On the one hand, this allows for great flexibility and
adaptivity of learning and problem solving. Generally, it is
assumed that the nonlinear structure of hypertext
environments improves learners’ ability to use knowledge in
a flexible way, so that they learn to apply one information
unit to serve different purposes in a variety of situations.
Non-linearity also enables learners to utilize information
units according to their goals and to their prior knowledge.
With regard to example-based learning, providing multiple
examples with different surface features in a nonlinear
hypertext environment allows the learner to compare
examples within one problem category as well as to
compare examples between different problem categories.
These comparisons are fundamental for processes of
abstraction in that they allow learners to identify structural
features that define different problem categories. Therefore,
non-linearity and the resulting opportunities of flexible
information utilization may be especially suitable when
learning from examples.
On the other hand, learners can "face new problems in
selecting and accessing relevant information" (Rouet,
Levonen, Dillon, & Spiro, 1996, p. 3). Problems can arise if
learners do not possess the necessary prerequisites to cope
with the demands that have been imposed to them by
redirecting control over the learning process to them (Rouet
& Levonen, 1996). Learning with a nonlinear hypertext
increases the amount of control demands by making it
necessary that learners permanently make decisions about
the profitability of individual information units with regard
to their current learning tasks. Even if all information
provided is relevant to the current task, the information
items may differ with respect to their profitability in terms
of their processing costs and their contribution to improving
the learning outcome (cf. Pirolli & Card, 1999). Therefore,
learners may have to develop adequate strategies of
information selection and processing in order to make use of
the potential benefits of hypertext-based information
presentation.
Based on these considerations a question of central
importance in example-based learning with hypertext is
whether learners are capable of utilizing examples
according to their profitability, i.e., select, sequence, and
compare them in a suitable way. Most research on learning
from examples up to now has focused on learning situations
where learners have been forced to process the examples
provided in a predefined sequence and, in some studies,
even for a fixed amount of learning time. However, it is not
clear whether these findings can be easily transferred to
more natural learning situations that allow subjects to select
information in different sequences and to control their own
pace of studying.

Results of Previous Experiments
In a series of previous experiments Gerjets, Scheiter, and
Tack (2000) demonstrated that learners experience
difficulties in hypertext environments with regard to their
1232

ability to utilize examples according to their profitability.
These experiments were conducted using a web-based
hypertext environment for training and testing in the domain
of combinatorics (HYPERCOMB). During the learning phase
subjects could retrieve abstract information on six problem
categories from the domain of combinatorics. Depending on
the experimental condition, this abstract information was
either not augmented by any additional instructional
information or was augmented by one or three worked-out
examples that illustrated the six problem categories.
Learners could retrieve the information they wanted to
study and could determine the pace and sequence of
information presentation. When they had the impression
that they had learned sufficiently well learners could switch
to a test phase where they had to solve three test problems.
Automated logfile analyses were used to track subjects’
strategic navigation behavior. Additionally, subjects’
problem-solving performance was registered.
In order to investigate strategic adaptation to different
instructional situation Gerjets et al. (2000) studied learners
with either low or high domain-specific prior knowledge
using different instructional versions of HYPERCOMB (no or
one example or three examples per problem category) with
or without time pressure.
As a result of their experiments Gerjets et al. (2000)
showed that learners have difficulties in selecting the most
profitable information in a specific instructional situation.
A comparison among the three instructional conditions
yielded no beneficial effects of merely providing examples
compared to providing only abstract information. However,
if subjects made use of the examples in a suitable way (e.g.
by comparing different examples) this clearly improved
their learning and problem solving performance compared
to subjects who made insufficient use of the instructional
material. These findings on information profitability were
contrasted with learners' actual information utilization
behavior. Despite the fact that example processing proved to
be useful, about half of the subjects demonstrated poor
example processing strategies as they neither processed
each example in the one-example condition more than once
nor did they study more than one example per problem
category in the three-example condition.

Hypotheses: Possible Explanations for
Learners’ Problems to utilize instructional
examples according to their profitability
There might be two different explanations for learners’
problems to utilize instructional examples according to their
profitability, which will be described in the following
paragraphs. Furthermore, two experimental conditions will
be outlined that were designed to counteract these
hypothesized causes of subjects’ failures in using examples
adequately.

Non-linearity
A first explanation is related to the fact that the
experimental material is designed as a nonlinear hypertext
environment. According to Niederhauser, Reynolds,
Salmen, and Skolmoski (2000) additional control demands
caused by non-linearity may result in extraneous cognitive
load (cf. Sweller, Van Merrienboer, & Paas, 1998), which in
turn impedes learning activities. Learners may suffer from

cognitive overload due to additional control and
navigational demands caused by the nonlinear environment.
Additionally, learners may be in general overwhelmed
by the need to decide which information is profitable to
select in which situation (cf. Rouet et al., 1996). As a result
subjects may be unable to utilize examples according to
their profitability, either because of cognitive overload or
because of inadequate navigational decisions. In order to
counteract these problems of cognitive overload and of
information selection we introduced a linear-hypertext
condition of HYPERCOMB that contained exactly the same
information as the nonlinear-hypertext condition and that
forced learners to recognize every information available in a
predefined order. Thereby, only pacing was left up to the
learner. Eliminating the need to select and sequence
information should reduce extraneous cognitive load and
should free cognitive resources for processing instructional
examples adequately. Furthermore, profitability judgements
are less critical in a linear-hypertext condition.

Illusions of understanding
A second explanation for the insufficient use of the
examples provided in HYPERCOMB is not related to the nonlinearity of the information presentation but is related to the
fact that learners may suffer from illusions of understanding
when learning from worked-out examples (Renkl, 1999). To
prevent learners from such illusions we introduced an
instructional condition with incomplete examples and
feedback where we presented fragmentized example
solutions and asked the learners to complete these gaps by
selecting one of two possible multiple-choice answers. After
the completion, learners were provided with feedback
concerning the correctness of their answers. This procedure
may improve intensive example processing as it may help
learners to realize that they are far away from an in-depth
understanding of the example solutions. As a result, learners
may notice that examples proved a profitable source of
information and are helpful in order to overcome these
comprehension failures.
In experiment 1 a nonlinear version of HYPERCOMB with
three complete worked-out examples per problem category
(baseline condition) was compared to a linear version in
order to test the first hypothesis that subjects’ inadequate
use of examples results from additional navigational and
control demands in nonlinear hypertext.
In experiment 2 the baseline condition was compared to a
condition with three incomplete examples with feedback in
order to test the second hypothesis that subjects’ failures in
using examples adequately results from an illusion of
understanding.
We expected that both instructional manipulations should
increase the time spent on processing examples and thereby
improve learning outcomes. Additionally, we assumed that
the instructional devices would especially foster learning
outcomes of subjects with low prior knowledge who may
suffer from control demands as well as from illusions of
understanding to a greater extent that learners with high
prior knowledge.

1233

Experiment 1: Linear Hypertext
Method
Participants Subjects were 80 students of the Saarland
University, Germany, who either participated for course
credit or for payment. Average age was 23.4.
Materials and procedure Subjects used the HYPER C OMB
environment for learning and problem solving. First, a short
introduction to the domain of combinatorics was presented.
During the subsequent learning phase subjects could
retrieve abstract information on six problem categories
(defined by their associated formula) from the domain of
combinatorics. Additionally, three worked-out examples
that varied with regard to their complexity and their cover
story were provided for each problem category. In the test
phase subjects were instructed to solve three probability
word problems. Neither the abstract information nor the
worked-out examples of the learning phase were available
during the test phase.
Design and dependent measures As a first independent
variable two levels of domain-specific prior knowledge
were introduced. Additionally, two different instructional
conditions were implemented (2 x 2 design):
In the nonlinear-hypertext condition (baseline) learners
could choose by themselves which information to retrieve
(i.e., abstract information and three different examples per
problem category) and in which sequence to pursue.
Learners could retrieve all information pages as often as
they wanted and they could study them as long as they
wanted. The learners themselves controlled the learning
process so they could as well neglect all the provided
information as study them very carefully. This condition
served as baseline condition.
In the linear-hypertext condition the same instructional
material as in the first condition was presented in a linear
fashion. Learners had to follow a so-called guided tour
through the hypertext environment by using “next”-buttons
to get from one page to another. All problem categories
were explained successively. For each problem category,
first the abstract information page was displayed followed
by three example pages. Every information page was
presented only once, learners could not look back to
information already seen and they could not skip any of the
information. Therefore, selection and sequencing of the
information pages were controlled by the system and only
pacing was left up to the learner.
In the test phase subjects had to solve three word problems
by marking the appropriate solution principle and the values
of two variables for each of the test problems in a multiplechoice form. No calculations had to be made. One error was
assigned for each wrong answer (i.e., subjects could obtain
overall error rates between 0 and 9). Problem-solving time
as well as learning time on example pages and on abstract
pages was recorded by using logfiles. Following the test
phase subjects had to pass a knowledge test with multiplechoice questions related to abstract concepts from the
domain of combinatorics. Similar questions were posed as a
pretest at the beginning of the experiment to register
subjects’ domain-specific prior knowledge. Subjects were

assigned to high and low prior knowledge groups by means
of a median splits according to their pretest results.

Results and Discussion
First, we compared high and low prior-knowledge subjects
learning either in the nonlinear or in the linear-hypertext
condition within the two levels of prior knowledge with
regard to their pretest errors (table 1). An overall ANOVA
(instructional condition x prior knowledge) yielded no
differences between the instructional conditions (F < 1).
Table 1: Time data (in sec) and error rates (in %) as a
function of prior knowledge and instructional condition
Instructional condition
Prior knowledge
Pretest errors
Time on example pages
Problem-solving time
Problem-solving errors
Knowledge-test errors

Nonlinear
High Low
28.6 63.2
608
465
602
550
33.3 42.2
11.0 32.0

Linear
High Low
30.3 64.3
948 1069
617 606
27.2 39.4
18.5 26.5

Time data With regard to example-processing time, an
overall ANOVA (instructional condition x prior knowledge)
yielded a significant main effect of instructional condition.
Subjects in the linear-hypertext condition spent more time
on example pages than subjects in the nonlinear-hypertext
condition (F(1,76) = 36.39; M SE = 122363.7; p < .001).
Additionally, it could be shown that there was no difference
between subjects with high and low prior knowledge
concerning example processing time (F < 1). The
interaction between instructional condition and prior
knowledge was marginally significant (F(1,76) = 2.84; MSE
= 122363.7; p < .10). The increase of example-processing
time due to the linear information presentation was slightly
more pronounced for subjects with low prior knowledge (t
(38) = 5.37; p < .001) than for subjects with high prior
knowledge (t (38) = 3.13; p < .01).
Furthermore, we analyzed whether there was a trade-off
between example-processing time and problem-solving
time, in that learners in the nonlinear hypertext-condition
might need less time for studying the examples but more
time for later problem solving. However, an ANOVA for
problem-solving time yielded no significant results (all Fs <
1).
Performance data In order to test the assumption that an
increase in example-processing time leads to better
problem-solving performance, we conducted an overall
ANOVA (instructional condition x prior knowledge) that,
however, only yielded a significant main effect for prior
knowledge (F(1,76) = 5.59; MSE = 399; p < .05). There
neither was a main effect for instructional condition nor was
there an interaction between instructional condition and
prior knowledge (both Fs < 1).
Besides problem-solving performance we also analyzed
knowledge-test performance as an indicator of learning
success. An overall ANOVA (instructional condition x prior
knowledge) for knowledge-test errors yielded a main effect
for prior knowledge (F(1,76) = 10.51; MSE = 400.1; p < .01)
which was due to the high degree of item overlap between
the pretest and the knowledge test at the end of the

1234

experiment. There was, however, no main effect for
instructional condition as well as no interaction (both Fs <
1).
To conclude, providing subjects with linear hypertext
increased example-processing time to a large extent as
expected. However, this increase in time spent on examples
was not accompanied by the expected gains in performance.
Furthermore, it could be shown that learning in the
nonlinear-hypertext condition was even more efficient
because subjects needed less example-processing time for
achieving the same level of performance without increases
in problem-solving time. Therefore, our first explanation
that subjects shallow example processing in hypertext
environments observed in previous experiments (Gerjets et
al., 2000) can not be traced back to additional control and
navigational demands caused by nonlinear information
presentation: Reducing these demands does not result in
improved performance although example utilization
behavior is intensified.
Thus, it seems that merely quantitative increases in
example-processing time are not sufficient to ensure
successful learning. Therefore, in experiment 2 we
implemented incomplete examples with feedback as an
instructional method that focuses on more qualitative
improvements of example processing instead of only
increasing example-processing time. This is in accordance
with our second hypothesis that superficial example
processing can be traced back to illusions of understanding
when learning from worked-out examples.

Experiment 2:
Incomplete Examples with Feedback
Method
Participants Subjects were 80 students of the Saarland
University, Germany who either participated for course
credit or payment. Average age was 23.7 years.
Materials and procedure Subjects used the same
HYPERCOMB environment for learning and problem solving
as the subjects in the nonlinear-hypertext condition in
experiment 1. It consisted in a short introduction to
combinatorics, a learning phase with abstract information
and three worked-out examples per problem category, and
finally a subsequent test phase with three probability word
problems.
Design and dependent measures As a first independent
variable two levels of domain-specific prior knowledge
were introduced. Additionally, two instructional conditions
were implemented (2 x 2 design):
As a baseline condition we used the nonlinear-hypertext
condition from experiment 1 where subjects could decide by
themselves which information to review (abstract
information and three fully worked-out examples per
problem category) and in which sequence to pursue.
In the feedback condition the solution steps of the workedout examples where fragmentized and subjects where asked
to fill these gaps by choosing among two multiple-choice
answers. It is, however, important to note that subjects
could decide by themselves whether they filled in the gaps
and used the opportunity to receive feedback or not. Every

example solution was fragmentized two or three times and
the gaps were related to structural features of the problem
categories. After having determined the gap-filling answer
subjects automatically received feedback on whether their
answer was right or not. In case of choosing the wrong
alternative the right answer was presented.
The subsequent test phase was identical to experiment 1.
As dependent measures error rates and time date were
recorded. In the feedback condition the frequency of
feedback utilization was additionally registered. As in
experiment 1 subjects had to pass a knowledge test with
multiple-choice questions related to abstract concepts from
the domain of combinatorics after the test phase. Subjects’
answers to similar questions at the beginning of the
experiment were used to distinguish between low and high
prior-knowledge subjects.

Results and Discussion
The results of experiment 2 are shown in table 2. A first
comparison revealed that there were no differences between
the instructional conditions with respect to pretest errors (F
< 1). (cf. table2).
Table 2: Time data (in sec) and error rates (in %) as a
function of prior knowledge and instructional condition
Instructional condition
Prior knowledge
Pretest errors
Time on example pages
Problem-solving errors
Knowledge test errors

Baseline
High Low
28.6 63.2
608
465
33.3 42.2
11.0 32.0

Feedback
High Low
33.6 63.7
692 785
36.4 46.1
21.5 27.0

Time data In order to test the hypothesis that subjects in the
feedback condition process the examples more intensively
than subjects in the baseline condition, we conducted an
overall ANOVA (instructional condition x prior knowledge)
for the time spent on example pages. However, this
ANOVA only yielded a marginally significant main effect
for instructional condition (F(1,76) = 3.67; MSE = 222102.5;
p < .10) with subjects in the feedback condition spending
more time on studying example pages than subjects in the
baseline condition. There was neither a main effect for prior
knowledge (F < 1) nor an interaction (F(1,76) = 1.25; MSE
= 222102.5; p > .40).
Performance data With regard to problem-solving errors
an overall ANOVA (instructional condition x prior
knowledge) yielded no main effect for the instructional
condition (F < 1). Thus, although there was a slight increase
in example-processing time in the feedback condition this
increase was not accompanied by respective improvements
in problem-solving performance. For prior knowledge, the
analysis yielded a main effect (F(1,76) = 4,08; MSE = 658.8;
p < .05). No interaction between the two factors could be
demonstrated (F < 1).
Additionally, we conducted an ANOVA (instructional
condition x prior knowledge) for knowledge-test errors,
which yielded no significant main effect for the knowledge
test errors (F < 1). The interaction between these two factors
was marginally significant (F(1,76) = 3.56; MSE = 381.3; p
< .10).

1235

To conclude, at first sight asking subjects to fill in gaps
and providing feedback on these gap-filling activities does
not seem to be an effective way of improving subjects’
learning outcomes in example-based hypertext
environments. However - because the use of feedback was
not obligatory - it can be expected that only subjects who
retrieved feedback sufficiently would often show better
learning outcomes.
Therefore we calculated the correlation between the
number of times subjects used feedback and the resulting
learning outcomes in the feedback condition for high and
low prior-knowledge subjects separately. These analyses
show that subjects with low prior knowledge indeed
benefited from an extended use of feedback (correlation
between frequency of feedback utilization and problemsolving errors: r = -.45; p < .05; knowledge-test errors: r = .44; p < .05, one-tailed test) whereas there were no or only
weak associations between frequency of feedback
utilization and learning outcomes for high prior-knowledge
subjects (problem-solving errors: r = -.12; p > .30;
knowledge-test errors: r = -.31; p < .10).
To sum up, subjects with low prior knowledge who
made sufficient use of feedback clearly improved their
problem-solving performance compared to subjects with
low prior knowledge who made insufficient use of the
instructional material. This is in line with our second
hypothesis that the provision of incomplete examples with
feedback may be useful to reduce illusions of
understanding. These findings on the profitability of
feedback information for learners with low prior knowledge
were contrasted with their actual information utilization
behavior in a next step of analysis: Despite the fact that the
use of feedback proved useful for learners with low prior
knowledge, they did not retrieve feedback more often than
learners with high prior knowledge (t (38) = -.42; p > .60; 2tailed test). To conclude, although the use of feedback
fostered problem-solving and knowledge-test performance
of low prior-knowledge subjects they did not use it more
extensively. Thus, similar to the findings of example
utilization it could be demonstrated again that subjects may
experience serious difficulties in utilizing beneficial
information provided in hypertext-environments according
to its profitability.

Conclusions
With regard to the impact of two different instructional
manipulations reported in this paper the following
conclusion can be drawn. Although a linear information
presentation increases example-processing time this does
not automatically lead to improvements in learning
outcomes. Linear presentation might reduce extraneous
cognitive load due to control and navigational demands in
nonlinear hypertext environments, however, this may also
imply that learning advantages of nonlinear environments
are neutralized. I.e., learners in a linear environment no
longer have the opportunity to select and sequence
information according to their needs. This lack of
opportunity to self-control information utilization also may
impair important processes of example comparison.
Therefore, there may be a trade-off between the benefits and
the drawbacks of non-linearity.
With regard to the provision of incomplete examples
with feedback it could be demonstrated that this

instructional device was beneficial for subjects with low
prior knowledge but that these subjects often made
insufficient use of it.
Therefore, learners do not only have problems in utilizing
worked-out examples according to their profitability for
learning but also in using feedback extensively when
learning in nonlinear environments. On the one hand,
learners skip helpful information like feedback if they can
control their learning process by themselves. On the other
hand, when restricting learner control by presenting
information in a linear environment learning becomes less
efficient.
Therefore, the development of a learning environment
where both of these findings are combined might be most
successful. It can be assumed that learning in a nonlinear
hypertext environment might be improved by forcing
subjects to recognize information units of crucial
importance for learning - like a minimal number of
examples or the use of feedback on example completions.
When developing learning environments, the specific
learning situation must be considered to guarantee the
advantages of non-linearity and at the same time to reduce
the drawbacks by forcing the user to recognize profitable
information. There must be a balance between the control
that is given to the learner and the system control.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by German Research Foundation
(Collaborative Research Center 378: Resource-Adaptive
Cognitive processes at the Saarland University,
Saarbruecken). We thank Carina Kraemer for conducting
the experiments and Simon Albers for programming work.

References
Atkinson, R. K., Derry, S. J., Renkl, A., & Wortham, D. W.
(2001). Learning from examples: Instructional principles
from the worked examples research. Review of
Educational Research, 70, 181-214.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1990). Learning
subgoals and methods for solving probability problems.
Memory and Cognition, 18, 593-603.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Cummins, D. D. (1992). Role of analogical reasoning in the
induction of problem categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 11031124.
Gerjets, P., Scheiter, K., & Tack, W. H. (2000).Resourceadaptive selection of strategies in learning from workedout examples. In L. R. Gleitman & A. K. Joshi (Eds.),
Proceedings from the 22nd Annual Conference from the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 166-171). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Niederhauser, D. S., Reynolds, R. E., Salmen, D. J., &
Skolmoski, P. (2000). The influence of cognitive load on
learning from hypertext. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 23, 237-255.
Quilici, J. L., & Mayer, R. E. (1996). Role of examples in
how students learn to categorise statistics word problems.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 144-161.

1236

Reed, S. K., Ackinclose, C. C., & Voss, A. A. (1990).
Selecting analogous solutions: Similarity versus
inclusiveness. Memory & Cognition, 18, 83-98.
Reed, S. K., Dempster, A., & Ettinger, M. (1985).
Usefulness of analogous solutions for solving algebra
word problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 106-125.
Reed, S. K., Willis, D., & Guarino, J. (1994). Selecting
examples for solving word problems. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 86, 380-388.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A
study on individual differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 129.
Renkl, A. (1999). Learning mathematics from worked-out
examples: Analysing and fostering self-explanations.
European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 477488.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 456-468.
Rouet, J.-F., & Levonen, J. J. (1996). Studying and learning
with hypertext: Empirical studies and their implications.
In J.-F. Rouet, J. J. Levonen, A. Dillon & R. J. Spiro
(Eds.), Hypertext and cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rouet, J.-F., Levonen, J. J., Dillon, A., & Spiro, R. J.
(1996). An introduction to hypertext and cognition. In J.F. Rouet, J. J. Levonen, A. Dillon & R. J. Spiro (Eds.),
Hypertext and cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stark, R. (1999). Lernen mit Lösungsbeispielen. Göttingen:
Hogrefe.
Sweller, J., Van Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1999). Information foraging.
Psychological Review, 106, 643-675.
Pirolli, P. & Recker, M. (1994). Learning strategies and
transfer in the domain of programming. Cognition and
Instruction, 12, 235-275.
VanLehn, K. (1989). Problem solving and cognitive skill
acquisition. In M. I. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of
cognitive science (pp. 527-580). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
VanLehn, K., & Jones, R. M. (1993). Better learners use
analogical problem solving sparingly. In P. E. Utgoff
(Ed.), Machine Learning: Proceedings of the Tenth
Annual Conference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Van Merrienboer, J. J. G. (1990). Strategies for
programming instruction in high school: program
completion vs. program generation. Journal of Computing
Research, 6, 265-286.

