UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Everyday Conditional Reasoning with Working Memory Preload

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7kk1x3qx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Verschueren, Niki
Schaeken, Walter
d'Ydewall, Gery

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Everyday Conditional Reasoning with Working Memory Preload
Niki Verschueren (Niki.Verschueren@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Gery.d’Ydewalle (Gery.d’Ydewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
University of Leuven, Lab of Experimental Psychology, Tiensestraat 102
3000 Leuven – Belgium
Abstract
There are two accounts explaining how background
information can affect the conditional reasoning
performance: the probabilistic account and the mental
model account. According to the mental model theory
reasoners retrieve and integrate counterexample
information to attain a conclusion. According to the
probabilistic account reasoners base their judgments on
likelihood information. It is assumed that reasoning by
use of a mental model process requires more working
memory resources than solving the inference by use
of likelihood information. We report a thinking-aloud
experiment designed to compare the role of working
memory for the two reasoning mechanisms. It is found
that when working memory is preloaded participants use
less counterexample information, instead they are more
inclined to accept the inference or to use likelihood
information. The present results add to the growing
evidence showing that working memory is a crucial
determinant of reasoning strategy and performance.

Introduction
There is evidence for a general link between working
memory capacity and performance in a range of
reasoning tasks (see e.g., Barrouillet, 1996; Gilhooly,
Logie, & Wynn, 1999; Kyllonen & Christal, 1990).
Previous studies showed that skilled reasoners
generally give more normative answers and follow a
high demand reasoning strategy (see e.g., Copeland &
Radvansky, in press; Gilhooly, Logie, & Wynn, 1999).
It is assumed that these normative answers are obtained
by an analytic reasoning mechanism that hinges on
working memory capacity (Klauer, Stegmaier, &
Meiser, 1997; Meiser, Klauer, & Naumer, 2001). The
present research continues this line of research and
concerns causal conditional reasoning with everyday
sentences.
Without labeling conclusions as (in)valid, we will
investigate how people solve the following two
conditional inferences with everyday causal sentences:
Modus Ponens (MP)
If cause, then effect
Cause occurs.
Does the effect follow?
Affirmation of the Consequent (AC)
If cause, then effect
Effect occurs.
Did the cause precede?

1399

Examples of everyday ‘if cause, then effect’ sentences
are: If you phone someone, then his telephone rings.
If you eat salty food, then you will get thirsty.
If someone has a high income, this person will be rich.
If a dog has fleas, then it will scratch constantly.

Abundant research established that when people reason
on everyday conditionals, they spontaneously bring
relevant background knowledge into account (for a
review see Politzer & Bourmaud, 2002). This
contextualization process is characteristic for commonsense reasoning and is responsible for our ability to
adaptively cope with everyday situations. The current
study focuses on how background knowledge is used
for deriving conditional inferences.
There are two reasoning mechanisms describing how
background information is used during reasoning. First,
according to the probabilistic account reasoners derive
the probability that the conclusion follows given the
categorical premise and use this probability to draw a
gradual conclusion (Lui, Lo, & Wu, 1996; Oaksford,
Chater, & Larkin, 2002). For MP, reasoners will
confine their knowledge base to the situations where
the cause occurs. Based on this range of situations they
then determine the likelihood that the effect follows. If
they can induce that a particular effect always or
mostly follows the cause, they conclude that the effect
will (probably) follow. The endorsement of MP is thus
directly proportional to L(effect|cause). AC is solved in
analogy with MP. Reasoners activate all relevant
situations where the effect occurs. Within this subset
they infer the likelihood that the cause preceded the
occurring effect. This likelihood L(cause|effect)
directly reflects the AC acceptance rate.
According to the second reasoning mechanism the
conclusion is attained by taking possible
counterexamples into account. There is a strong and
reliable effect of the number of available
counterexamples on inference acceptance (see e.g.,
Cummins, Alksnis, Lubart, & Rist, 1991). The mental
models theory describes how participants reason with
counterexample information (Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991; Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002). When given a
problem based on a causal rule, for instance, ‘If you
water a plant well, the plant stays green’, reasoners
will start by representing the content of the conditional
as a possibility: It is possible that a plant is well
watered and green. Active consideration of the problem

content will then lead to an automatic activation of
relevant background information. This information is
used to complement the initial model. For MP and MT,
the categorical premise triggers the retrieval of
disablers. Some examples of disablers are: ‘the plant
caught a disease’ or ‘the plant was deprived of
sunlight’. When reasoners retrieve at least one disabler,
they do not conclude that the effect follows. For AC an
automatic search for alternative causes starts, for
example, ‘the lack of water was compensated by
adding fertilizer’ or ‘the plant is a succulent’. When
reasoners retrieve an alternative cause, their mental
models inform them that there are two conclusions
possible (watered and not watered). As a result, they do
not accept the default conclusion.
It is clear that the probabilistic and the mental model
reasoning mechanisms both rely on available
background information, but they focus on a different
type of background knowledge: probabilities versus
exemplars. Both information types have already been
brought together by, e.g., Weidenfeld & Oberauer
(2003); Verschueren, Schaeken and d’Ydewalle (2003;
2004a) integrated the two theories that explain how the
information is taken into account in a dual process
perspective. They label the probabilistic mechanism as
heuristic and the mental model mechanism as analytic.
Heuristic processes are generally considered as fast,
automatic mechanisms that operate at a low cognitive
cost and at the periphery of awareness. Analytic
processes are generally slower, more demanding
reasoning mechanisms that operate in a conscious and
strategic manner (Stanovich & West, 2000).
Verschueren et al. (2004a) manifest three reasons for
linking the two reasoning processes to a heuristicanalytic polarity. (1) The heuristic reasoning process is
mainly implicit - reasoners have no recollection of the
range of situations that are taken into account to
calculate a likelihood estimate whereas people
reasoning by use of mental models are conscious of the
counterexample(s) they retrieve. (2) The process based
on likelihood information yields relatively fast results
whereas using counterexamples requires a sequential
thus slower reasoning process. (3) The heuristic
conclusion is overwritten when a more analytical
conclusion can be produced (see Verschueren, et al.,
2004a for experimental evidence for 2 and 3). At
present we will investigate whether both reasoning
mechanisms differ in their working memory demands.
If indeed the mental model account describes an
analytical reasoning mechanism it should pose more
demands on working memory capacity than the
heuristic likelihood process.

Experiment
It is assumed that reasoning with counterexample
information draws heavily on working memory
resources, whereas the use of mere likelihood estimates
imposes a far lesser demand on working memory.
When participants reason based on counterexample
information, the problem content as well as all models
1400

of relevant situations have to be represented. The larger
the number of mental models that participants have to
represent and maintain, the heavier the load on working
memory during reasoning (Barrouillet & Lecas, 1999).
Additionally, it has been found that counterexample
retrieval efficiency suffers from dual task loads, which
indicates that working memory is also involved in the
retrieval of counterexample information (De Neys,
2003). In case the reasoners have a representation of
both the conditional sentence and at least one
counterexample, they subsequently have to integrate
this information to see that there are two different
conclusions for the same problem. This information
manipulation and integration is considered as a crucial
task of working memory.
For the reasoning process based on likelihood
information, the demands on working memory are far
less. The situations used for attaining a likelihood
estimate are not actively represented in working
memory, but rather briefly accessed. There is neither an
active controlled search process nor a need for premise
integration. The likelihood estimate is based on all
relevant situations at a time and the final conclusion
directly mirrors the obtained likelihood estimate.
When reasoners are asked to think aloud during
reasoning, we can monitor which information they use
for deriving conclusions. By concurrently checking the
information that people use we get a direct indication
of the underlying reasoning process. Only in case
where people do not provide extra information but
accept the conclusion without further argumentation,
this procedural aspect is unclear. It can be that
participants did use their background knowledge and
found that the likelihood that the conclusion follows is
sufficient to grant acceptance or that there are no
counterexamples available. Or else it can be that they
did not rely on background information and just
satisfied the conclusion by restating the given
information.
In a previous thinking-aloud study Verschueren,
Schaeken and d’Ydewalle (2004b) showed that
participants with low working memory capacity more
often use likelihood estimates to solve an inference,
whereas participants with a larger working memory
capacity rather use counterexample information. These
results can be considered as an indication for the
difference in working memory demands of the heuristic
and analytic process. This setup provides however only
correlational evidence. Indeed, it is still possible that a
third factor (e.g., general intelligence, motivation, etc.)
explains both the performance on working memory
tests as well as on reasoning tasks. The following
experiment was designed to test whether there is a
difference in the actual working demands of the two
processes.
In this experiment we examined the effect of
secondary task interference on the applied reasoning
mechanisms. In the dual task methodology, a secondary
task chosen to burden working memory capacity has to
be carried out concurrently to the criterion task. The
degree of disruption in the criterion task under dual

task conditions – as compared to single task conditions
– is taken to reflect the dependence of the criterion task
on working memory. The criterion task we used was a
thinking-aloud conditional reasoning task. Concurrent
verbalization allows us to monitor the information that
reasoners consult for deriving conclusions. By
checking the information that people refer to
(likelihood or counterexample information) we get a
direct indication of the underlying reasoning process.
Because the criterion task entails spontaneous
verbalization, the choice of secondary tasks is limited.
Pilot work revealed that concurrent motor, auditory or
articulatory activity interfered with the participants
verbalization. We therefore opted for a preload
paradigm. Because a spatial load is less likely to
interfere with verbalization than a verbal or numerical
load, we worked with a spatial preload set-up. The
evidence that spatial storage tasks tap a working
memory feature crucial for reasoning is twofold:
Klauer, et al.(1997) report that a concurrent spatial load
led to a significant disruption of propositional
(including conditional) reasoning. Second, in the
visuospatial domain simple storage tasks have a similar
correlation with executive functioning and reasoning as
classic
processing-and-storage
tasks
(Miyake,
Friedman, Rettinger, Shah, & Hegarty, 2001; Suess,
Oberauer, Wittman, Wilhelm, & Schultze, 2002). We
can thus assume that the preload task taps working
memory resources that are needed for reasoning, while
at the same time minimizing a possible interference
with the verbalization process. The dot memory task
we used is a classic simple storage task (adapted from
Miyake, et al., 2001; Oberauer, Suess, Wilhelm, &
Wittman, 2003). We briefly presented a 3x3 matrix
with 4 dots forming a complex pattern, afterwards
participants were asked to reproduce this dot pattern.
In the preload-condition participants had to memorize
the pattern of the dots while solving a reasoning
problem. We will verify whether the use of
counterexample information decreases when working
memory is preloaded, compared to performance in the
control condition. The decreement in the use of
likelihood information should be significantly smaller
than the decreement in counterexample use.

Method
Participants A total of 52 first year psychology
students participated in the study.
Procedure and Design The participants were tested
individually. The experiment was run on computer.
Participants started by reading the instructions. They
were told that they will be asked to think aloud while
solving conditional inference problems. The reasoning
instructions read that they should answer the question
as in an everyday setting. Each participant then solved
two test problems, e.g.,
If someone catches a cold, then he will cough.
Someone coughs.

1401

Did this person catch a cold or not?

The participants read the premises aloud and answered
immediately. When they found that they had completed
their answer, they pressed a key to go to the following
problem. After the presentation of the reasoning
instructions, the participants either reasoned with or
without working memory preload. In the preload
conditions participants started by practicing two dot
patterns: A pattern was presented for 500ms and
participants were immediately asked to reproduce this
pattern. The overall performance on the test problems
was nearly perfect. After these dot pattern practice
trials, participants were given instructions for reasoning
under preload. First, a dot pattern was presented for
500ms, next the reasoning problem occurred,
participants read the premises aloud and answered
immediately. The answers participants gave were
recorded on tape. When they finished their answer, they
pressed a key and a blue screen appeared where they
were asked to reproduce the dot pattern. When they
completed the dot pattern, they pressed a key to start
the next trial. It was explicitly mentioned that they had
to memorize the dot patterns correctly; they were told
that an incorrect reproduction rendered the trial invalid.
This was done to make sure that participants actively
attended the dot pattern and tried their best in
memorizing it. In the control condition, the dot patterns
were presented for 500ms before the premise
presentation. Participants were told that these dot
patterns are presented as a control condition, they were
asked to look at the dot patterns but not to memorize
them. They read the premises and pressed a key when
their answer was complete, the next trial started
immediately. The time that participants needed to read
and solve the reasoning problem was measured.
Materials and Design Based on previous research we
selected 12 sentences with a maximally varying
necessity and sufficiency of the cause (maximal
variation in L(effect|cause), L(cause|effect), and in the
number of available disablers and alternatives). We
made sure that the reading time of all 12 sentences was
comparable (Mnumber of words = 9.5, SD = .314). Twentysix participants solved 12 AC inferences; the others
solved 12 MP problems. The 12 sentences occurred
always in the same order; the causes of the first six
sentences and the last six sentences were equally
necessary and sufficient. For both reasoning forms, half
of the participants solved the first six problems under
preload; the other six problems were solved without
preload (control condition). For the other half of the
participants the order of the preload/control conditions
was reversed. Because we used 12 different sentences,
transfer effects between the two conditions could be
excluded.

Results
The obtained reasoning answers were literally
transcribed. Next, the condition-codes were removed
and the answer types were rated. It was indicated
whether the answer reflected a simple acceptance of the

default conclusion or whether there was reference to a
counterexample or to a likelihood estimate. There was
no overall difference in the average response time for
the preload (18.19s) and the control condition (18.53s).
In the control condition, there was 26% inference
acceptance, in 22% of the trials participants used
likelihood information and in 64% they referred to
counterexamples. These results are similar to those
observed by Verschueren et al. (2004a; 18%, 18% and
66% respectively).
In the preload condition there were 6.4% combination
trials (in a ‘combination trial’ participants refer to
counterexample and likelihood information) whereas in
the control condition there were 23.1% combination
trials. The observation that combining the two types of
information becomes less prevalent when working
memory is preloaded, suggest that the information
integration process that is characteristic for
combination answers taps on working memory
resources. For comparing the relative importance of
both reasoning processes, we confined the analysis to
trials where participants either referred to a likelihood
or to counterexample information. Combination trials
were excluded from the analysis (14.4%).
Task interference. Only 69% of the dot patterns were
reproduced correctly. There was an effect of answer
type on the correct reproduction of the dot patterns,
F(2, 21) = 6.696, p < .01 (Wilks’lambda = .611). This
interaction is displayed in Figure 1. When the dot
patterns were correctly reproduced, there were fewer
counterexamples mentioned than when the dot patterns
were incorrectly reproduced, F(1, 22) = 11.96, MSE =
.458, p < .05. On the correctly reproduced trials, there
were more answers where participants referred to
likelihood information, F(1, 22) = 5.21, MSE = .037, p
< .05. There was no significant effect on the inference
acceptance rates. These results reflect a task
interference. When participants rely on a reasoning
process that puts only a minor demand on working
memory there are enough resources left to maintain and
reproduce the dot pattern. In contrast, when participants
rely on retrieval, manipulation and integration of
counterexample information, working memory capacity
is severely burdened. There are then not enough
resources left to actively maintain the dot patterns,
resulting in an incorrect reproduction. These results
support the idea that using counterexample information
draws heavily on working memory resources.
0,76

Proportion of Responses

0,8
0,7
0,56

0,6
0,5
0,4
0,3

Correct

0,33

Incorrect

0,27

0,2
0,06

0,1

0,01

0,0
Inference
Acceptance

Likelihood

Counterexample

Figure 1: Difference in the proportion of the three types of
answers for preload trials where the dot pattern was correctly
versus incorrectly reproduced.

1402

Effect of preload on the reasoning process. For
examining the effect of preload on the types of
answers, we only included the preload trials where the
dot pattern was correctly reproduced. All analyses were
run on proportions; the number of times each answer
type occurred was divided by the total number of
correctly reproduced trials. We ran an analysis of
variance with sentences as the unit of analysis, and a 2
(inference type, between subjects) * 2 (preload, within
subjects) * 3 (answer type, within subjects) design. We
found a main effect of answer type. There were more
answers referring to counterexample information
(60.1%) than there was plain inference acceptance
(27.7%) or likelihood information used (5.6%), F(2,
21) = 102, 72, p < .001 (Wilks’lambda = .08). The
interaction between answer type and preload condition
was marginally significant, F(2, 21) = 3.120 p = .065
(Wilks’lambda = .771). Figure 2 illustrates this
interaction. There was a clear yet marginally significant
decrease in the use of counterexample information
when working memory was preloaded, F(1, 22) = 3
304, MSE = 0.078, p = .082. There were significantly
more inferences accepted in the preload condition, F(1,
22) = 8.255, MSE = 0.131, p<.01 while there was no
significant increase in the use of likelihood
information. No other interaction effects reached
significance. The observation that there is more
inference acceptance under preload corroborates
previous effects of secondary task load on the
conditional reasoning performance (De Neys, 2003).
The explanation provided by De Neys (2003) is that
under preload, the resources available to participants
are insufficient to retrieve counterexample information.
The currently observed decrease in counterexample use
is in line with this explanation. The increase in
inference acceptance can also be - at least partially related to an enhanced matching heuristic. We can
assume that some reasoners do not engage in an active
reasoning process based on counterexample retrieval,
but simply restate the information from the conditional
and blindly accept MP and AC. In this case the
preloading should cause more participants to accept all
conclusions, even on sentences where counterexamples
can be automatically retrieved and likelihood
estimations are high. In the preload condition, there
were indeed more participants (13.5%) who accepted at
least 75% of the inferences than in the control
condition (7.7%). Even for sentences with many
available counterexamples – for these sentences
counterexamples can be retrieved automatically and
likelihood estimations are very low - we found an
increase in the inference acceptance rates (7.1% control
vs. 19.8% preload). This shows that it is unlikely that
participants consulted their background knowledge for
deriving the conclusion and lends support for the
hypothesis that the working memory preload led to an
enhancement of the computationally low demanding
matching heuristic.
In sum, as expected the resource dependent use of
counterexample information decreased under preload,
while the use of likelihood information was unaffected

Proportion of Responses

0,8
0,7

0,64
0,56

0,6
0,5

No Load

0,4
0,3

0,33

Load

0,22

converges with the observed interference of
counterexample use and correct dot pattern recall.
In general, these results sustain the idea that using
counterexample information draws heavily on working
memory resources whereas using likelihood
information or matching is less resource demanding.

0,2
0,05

0,1

Discussion

0,06

0,0

Inference Acceptance

Likelihood

Counterexample

Figure 2: Proportion of answers of the three types for the
preload versus control condition (only preloaded trials with
correctly reproduced dot patterns).

by preload conditions. The decrease in use of the
counterexample based reasoning process is at least
partly compensated by shifting to inference acceptance.
Number of counterexamples used. Does the decrease
in the use of counterexample information under preload
reflect a decrease in a strategic validation tendency? If
participants retrieve counterexample information to
merely check whether the default conclusion can be
falsified (see e.g., Schroyens, Schaeken, & Handley,
2003) they would need to retrieve only one
counterexample to falsify the given conclusion.
However, we did not find a difference in the number of
trials where participants referred to only one
counterexample (preload: 73% vs. control-condition:
82.4%). This raises doubt on the validation-hypothesis.
In contrast, we observed a decrease in the proportion of
trials where more than one counterexample was
mentioned, t(23) = 2.77, p < .05 (preload: 17% vs.
control-condition: 26%). This underscores the idea that
in tasks without deductive instructions reasoners
retrieve counterexample information to provide an
adequate and informative conclusion rather than to
merely falsify a default conclusion. When looking at
the total number of specific counterexamples used,
there were significantly more counterexamples used in
the control condition (1.09) than when working
memory was preloaded (0.86), t(23) = 3.97, p < .01.
If counterexample retrieval, representation and
integration demand effort, we should observe an effect
of counterexample retrieval on the secondary task
performance. We tested whether there was a difference
in the number of counterexample answers for the trials
where the dot pattern was correctly versus incorrectly
reproduced. We included the number of available
counterexamples (few/many; measured by the
generation task) because it is a strong predictor of
counterexample use. There was a marginally significant
interaction between the number of counterexamples
used and the (in)correct reproduction of the dot pattern,
F(1.20) = 4.120, MSE = 2.866, p = .056. Pairwise
comparisons revealed that for sentences with many
available counterexamples there were significantly
more counterexamples produced when the dot patterns
were not recalled correctly, F(1, 20) = 6.946, MSE =
4.832, p<.05 (not significant for few-sentences). This
1403

Correlational studies revealed that differences in
working memory capacity relate to differences in the
conditional answer patterns. A possible explanation is
that differences in reasoning performance do not
simply relate to differences in a single reasoning
predisposition, but are mediated by differences in the
working memory demands of the active reasoning
mechanisms. Highlighting the distinction between more
heuristic strategies (such as matching and likelihood
use) and more cognitively demanding analytical
strategies (relying on counterexamples) may provide a
more differentiated picture of the specific role of
working memory in conditional reasoning. We found
evidence for two conditional reasoning mechanisms
with a differing working memory demand: a
probabilistic account relying on likelihood information
and a mental model account relying on counterexample
information.
The results reveal that using counterexample
information to attain a conclusion taps heavier on
working memory resources than deriving the
conclusion based on likelihood information. This
provides additional support for considering the
reasoning process based on likelihood information as
heuristic and the reasoning process based on
counterexample information as analytic. The
differences in use of counterexamples/likelihood on
participants with varying working memory capacity
observed by Verschueren et al. (2004b) may thus be
attributed to the working memory demands of the two
reasoning mechanisms.
We found a large effect of working memory preload
on the inference acceptance rates. When relating
inference acceptance to the two reasoning strategies, it
can reveal that either no counterexamples can be
retrieved or that the likelihood estimation is sufficiently
high. However, because we also observed an increase
in inference acceptance on sentences for which pretests
revealed many available counterexamples as well as
likelihood estimates that are well below 1, it rather
seems that the inference acceptance rates show that
under preload some reasoners do not consult their
background knowledge. When working memory
capacity is burdened by preload, these participants are
discouraged to engage in a demanding retrieval
process. Instead they provide an answer that satisfies
the inference question, simply by restating information
from the premises. This strategically placed escape
hatch can explain the increase in inference acceptance
rates under preload.
Taken this together, we found evidence for the
involvement of working memory in conditional
reasoning. By analyzing the answers participants gave
we were able to pinpoint which information
participants used to attain their conclusion. We found

support for distinguishing two heuristic reasoning
strategies -use of likelihood information and matchingand for an analytic strategy that takes counterexamples
into account. Working memory preload yielded an
increase in the use of heuristic strategies whereas the
use of the analytical strategy decreased.
The present study is one of the first to combine a
secondary task paradigm with a verbalization criterion
task. Using a preload-paradigm is probably the best
way to investigate the working memory demands of
tasks involving verbalization. Although we cannot be
entirely conclusive on a possible secondary task
interference on verbalization processes (the answers
were structurally similar to baseline results) this
procedure enabled us to experimentally test the
difference in working memory demands.
The effect of working memory capacity on inference
making is at present only discussed on an intensive
level: We investigated the global effect of a working
memory dependent secondary task on the use of
likelihood and counterexample information. Whether
the working memory demands of the two processes
coincide with the assumed differences in
representation, retrieval and manipulation cost cannot
be decided upon based on the present results. The data
may also reflect the cost of determinacy: Giving a
gradual uncertain answer may be overall less
demanding than providing a determinate conclusion.
There is also no information about the relative
functional involvement of the different working
memory components. Specific research with different
types of well-chosen secondary tasks may reveal this
crucial information.
In sum, distinguishing different reasoning
mechanisms that can be used to solve conditional
inferences can enhance our comprehension of how
working memory mediates the reasoning performance.
The specific working memory demands of different
reasoning strategies co-determine the robust effect of
working memory capacity on the conditional reasoning
performance.

Acknowledgments
This research was conducted thanks to funding of the
Fund for Scientific Research (F.W.O-Vlaanderen).

References
Barouillet, P., Lecas, J. F. (1999). Mental models in
conditional reasoning and working memory. Thinking
and Reasoning, 5, 289-302.
Copeland, D. E. & Radvansky, G. A. (in press).
Working memory and syllogistic reasoning.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Cummins, D.D., Lubart, T., Alksnis, O., & Rist, R.
(1991). Conditional reasoning and causation. Memory
and Cognition, 19, 274-282.
De Neys, W. (2003). In search of counterexamples: A
specification of the memory search process for stored
counterexamples during conditional reasoning.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Leuven, Belgium.
Gilhooly, K.J., Logie, R.H., & Wynn,V. (1999).
Syllogistic reasoning tasks, working memory and
1404

skill. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 11,
473-498.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991).
Deduction. Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum.
Klauer, K. C., Stegmaier, R. & Meiser, T. (1997).
Working memory involvement in propositional and
spatial reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 9-47.
Liu, I., Lo, K., & Wu, J. (1996). A probabilistic
interpretation of ‘if-then’. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48, 828-844.
Markovits, H. & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The
development of conditional reasoning: A mental
model account. Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Miyake, I., Friedman, N. P., Rettinger, D. A., Shah, P.,
& Hegarty, M. (2001). How are visuospatial working
memory, executive functioning and spatial abilities
related? A latent variable analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 130, 621-640.
Meiser, T., Klauer, K. C., & Naumer, B. (2001).
Propositional reasoning and working memory: the
role of prior training and pragmatic content. Acta
Psychologica, 106, 303-327.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000).
Probabilities and polarity biases in conditional
inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 26,
883-899.
Oberauer, K., Suess, H.-M., Wilhelm, O., & Wittmann,
W. W. (2003) The multiple facets of working
memory: Storage, processing, supervision and
coordination. Intelligence, 31, 167-193.
Politzer, G. & Bourmaud, G. (2002). Deductive
reasoning from uncertain conditionals. British
Journal of Psychology, 93, 345-981.
Schroyens, W. Schaeken, W., & Handley, S. (2003). In
search of counterexamples: Deductive rationality in
human reasoning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology.
Stanovich, K. E. & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate? Behavioural and Brain Sciences,
23, 645-726.
Suess, H.-M., Oberauer, K., Wittmann, W., Wilhelm,,
O., & Schultze, R. (2002). Working memory explains
reasoning ability – and a little bit more. Intelligence,
30, 261-288.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2003). Two reasoning mechanisms for solving the
conditional ‘fallacies’. Proceedings of the 25rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
Mahwah: Erlbaum.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W. & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2004a). A dual process theory on causal conditional
reasoning. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Verschueren, N., Schaeken, W. & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2004b). Working memory capacity determines
which reasoning process is used for solving
conditional inferences. Accepted for publication in
Memory and Cognition.
Weidenfeld, A. & Oberauer, K. (2003). Reasoning
from causal and non-causal conditionals: Testing an
integrated framework. Proceedings of the 25rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
Mahwah: Erlbaum.

