UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence of Muddy Knowledge in Reaching for the Stars: Creating Novel Endings for Event
Sequences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g81x308

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Grimes-Maguire, Rebecca
Keane, Mark T.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence of Muddy Knowledge in Reaching for the Stars:
Creating Novel Endings for Event Sequences
Rebecca Grimes-Maguire (rebecca.grimes@ucd.ie)
Mark T. Keane (mark.keane@ucd.ie)

Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland
eyes, ears) and appendages (e.g. legs, tails). Ward concluded
that the participants were constrained by their experience of
real world animals and could not deviate easily from such
prototypes. This type of influence from background
knowledge has been subsequently demonstrated in studies
on the generation of novel product names (Rubin, Stoltzfus
& Wall, 1991), ideas for traffic improvement (Marsh,
Landau & Hicks, 1997), and even the generation of nonwords (Marsh, Ward & Landau, 1999). Haught & JohnsonLaird (2003) have reported similar findings in a task where
people were asked to come up with a creative sentence
incorporating two or three specific nouns. They found that
people were quite restricted in their output; for example, the
words ‘lion’ ‘strawberry’ and ‘harp’ tended to result in
similar sentences, such as “The lion was playing the harp
while eating the strawberry”. In Ward’s (1994) view, these
“structured imagination” effects occur because, when faced
with a problem whose solution requires creativity, people
tend to take the path of least resistance by retrieving domain
specific information or an existing solution (whether this is
an experimenter provided example or self-generated from
previous knowledge) and then attempt to modify the old
construct in some novel way.
In the present study, we look at the constraint placed by
background knowledge in a task that deals with novel
sentence generation involving script-like scenarios (Bower,
Black & Turner, 1979; Schank & Abelson, 1977). In our
task, people are presented with typical event sequences that
have incomplete, but predictable, endings (see Appendix).
These scenarios either involve conventional events that
proceed uninterrupted (e.g. “Matthew had wanted to quit his
job for months. One day he walked into his boss’s
office…”), or events that are interrupted by some surprising
event or state (e.g. “The cup of coffee was balanced on the
arm of the chair. Suddenly, Richard sneezed….”). In both
cases, the main manipulation was to ask people to come up
with a creative outcome to the sequence. In the remainder of
this paper, we detail this study and sketch the properties of a
computational model that might capture the effects found.

Abstract
This experiment examines people’s ability to invent creative
outcomes to simple event sequences. We report a study where
participants are given everyday event descriptions and asked
to describe either a predictable outcome (Predictable group)
or a creative outcome (Creative group). Following the
Creative Cognition approach (Finke, Ward & Smith, 1992),
we expected that though those instructed to be creative might
generate novel and interesting outcomes, they would also be
bound by their knowledge of the outcomes that typically
occur. The results support this prediction, in that while the
Creative group manifested more inventive variability in their
outcomes relative to the Predictable group, their proposed
outcomes still overlapped in part with those of the Predictable
group. These results show that although creativity may take
people beyond their knowledge, they can never fully break
free from that knowledge.

Introduction
Creativity is like reaching for the stars with your feet firmly
stuck in the mud of everyday life. While the creative act
takes us beyond what an individual or a society has thought
before, it seems to be inextricably constrained by what is
known already (see e.g., Boden, 1995; Finke, Ward &
Smith, 1992; Perkins, 1981; Sternberg, 1999). In science,
new theories come from reactions to old paradigms, but still
work from the same methodologies and findings of previous
decades. In the arts, similar reactions to the conventions of a
previous age occur, though often themes and materials
remain the same. In this paper, we examine this interplay
between creativity and the constraints placed on it by prior
knowledge by studying people’s generation of novel
outcomes to conventional event sequences. We often need
to imagine unconventional or novel outcomes to typical
happenings (e.g., in launching a new product or assessing
the impact of new technologies). Yet, we know of little
work which examines people’s creativity in such situations.
The idea that creativity is often constrained by prior
knowledge has been strongly and convincingly argued for in
Finke et al.’s (1992) Creative Cognition Approach and their
‘Geneplore model’. This approach has been supported by
several appropriate empirical demonstrations. For example,
Ward (1994) asked participants to imagine and then draw
creatures that live on a distant planet very unlike earth. This
simple creative task revealed that converse to the
instructions, almost all the participants produced animals
very like the ones living on this planet, in that they exhibited
features such as bilateral symmetry, external organs (e.g.

Proposing Creative Outcomes to Events
Following the Creative Cognition Approach, we expected
that our creative-ending generation task would manifest the
constraining influence of prior, background knowledge in
our participants. In the experiment, there were two main
groups, the Predictable and Creative groups. Both groups
were given the same set of event sequence materials

506

scenario appeared on each page (one sentence per line with
a prompt stating ‘your ending:’ in the space below each
scenario). Participants in the Predictable group were given
the instructions to “think of a typical ending to the
scenario”, whilst those in the Creative group were asked to
“think of a creative ending” to be written as a concluding
sentence. In the Creative group participants were also asked
to describe a “creative turn of events, not just the use of
creative language” so as to avoid a misinterpretation of the
instructions. An earlier pilot showed that without this
instruction, some people just produced purple-prose
versions of typical endings rather than truly novel endings.
Scoring Participants’ responses in completing the presented
sentences were firstly rated for level of creativity. Then the
responses were analysed into propositions. As a further
measure of creativity, we wished to examine the diversity
and richness of responses made, but we also examined the
commonalities between responses to determine if there was
any overlap across the different conditions.
To measure creativity, following Haught & JohnsonLaird’s (2003) procedure, two judges independently rated
each sentence (blind to condition) on a 7-point scale, with a
score of 1 denoting a highly uncreative sentence and a score
of 7 denoting an extremely creative sentence.
To measure diversity, for each item we categorised the
distinct propositions used in people’s endings. So for
example, for the “Cathy looked at the cake in the shop
window. She hadn’t had lunch that day…” item, there were
three distinct classes of responses given as endings:
(1) Cathy gets the cake.
(2) Cathy decides not to get the cake for some reason
(e.g., diet).
(3) Cathy was hungry.
To measure the richness of the responses, we scored the
endings produced for their word length and the number of
different events mentioned in them. This measure was used
because, even though people were asked to provide just one
sentence, in many cases multiple events/states were
included in the responses. So for example, in the cakeseeing scenario, the response “But she knew she was on a
diet so decided to wait until she got back to her office, and
then ate something less fattening”, was classed as having
three events/states:
(1) Attribute of being on a diet (a state).
(2) Cathy went back to office (event 1).
(3) She ate something less fattening (event 2).
To measure commonality, we noted the most common
response, i.e. the frequency of occurrence of a given
response across a given group. In the cake-seeing scenario
the most common event was “Cathy gets the cake” which
received 11 counts in the Predictable group and 9 in the
Creative group.
For each of these measures, two raters independently
scored the materials. The inter-rater reliability was
uniformly high on each; for example, in the diversity
measure a random sample of ratings showed 94.99% interrater reliability in categorising the different responses.

(divided into Unfolding and Surprise scenarios). However,
the Predictable group was asked to “think of a typical
ending to the scenario…”, whereas the Creative group was
asked to “think of a creative ending to the scenario…”. Thus
the design was a 2 x 2 one, with Group being a betweenparticipants variable (Predictable or Creative) and Scenario
being a within-participants variable (Unfolding or Surprise).
The main prediction was that the Creative group would
generate many of the same outcomes as the Predictable
group, as they would be constrained by their background
knowledge of the typical endings of these events. However,
we thought that something additional would also be
included in these endings, giving them an added novel twist.
So, in the specific measures we used, we expected more
elaborate endings in the Creative group (i.e., more
propositions generated), but we also expected that some of
these propositions would overlap with those produced by
the Predictable group (i.e., propositions reflecting a
common ending). To put it another way, the Predictable
group’s endings should strongly overlap with those
generated by the Creative group.
We had no apriori grounds for expecting a difference
between the Unfolding and Surprise scenarios, though they
do appear to be distinct categories. In the Unfolding
scenarios the sequence of actions proceeds unchecked in a
predictable way. In the Surprise scenarios one state or
sequence of actions is cut across by another sequence of
actions. Interestingly though, in the Surprise scenarios the
interrupting sequence is also predictable, it’s a “typical
surprise” (e.g., a poorly balanced object being knocked).

Experiment
Method
Participants Thirty native English-speaking undergraduate
psychology students from University College Dublin
volunteered for this experiment.
Materials Twenty-four scenarios involving typical
everyday event sequences (see Appendix). All scenarios had
two sentences and required a third to complete the sequence.
The 24 materials consisted of three types of sequences: 8
Unfolding items, 8 Surprise items and 8 filler items. The
Unfolding items described two events/states in a typical
sequence with a predictable outcome (e.g. “Cathy saw the
cake in the window. She hadn’t had lunch that day…”). The
Surprise items described one event/state that was interrupted
by another event/state leading to a predictable outcome
(e.g., “The little boy played by the edge of the pond.
Suddenly he slipped on some moss…”).
Design In the 2 x 2 (Group x Scenario) design, participants
were randomly assigned to one of two between-participant
groups, Predictable (N=15) and Creative (N=15). All
participants received the same 24 scenarios, which were
presented in a different random order to each participant.
Procedure Each participant was given a booklet containing
all the materials, the first page of which included
instructions. The items were presented so that only one

507

it is harder to break the inevitability of the outcome to a
surprise scenario because its outcome is much more highly
determined. However, we should exercise some care in
making sweeping conclusions about this difference, as it is
not reflected in any of the other measures. The reliable
interaction showed that the most creative condition was the
Creative-Unfolding one (M = 3.68), followed by the
Creative-Surprise (M = 3.36), Predictable-Unfolding (M =
2.24) and Predictable-Surprise (M = 2.23) conditions
respectively.

Table 1: Sample responses from two scenarios
“Katie searched everywhere for her little kitten.
Then she heard a miaow from the bin”
Predictable

N

Creative

N

Katie opened bin
An explanation that kitten
was in bin
Kitten walked out of bin

11

Katie opened bin
An explanation that kitten was
in bin
Katie found whole cluster of
kittens
Katie found wrong kitten
Kitten was being carried away
Katie couldn’t understand how
kitten was in bin
Bin collector came
Katie was relieved
Katie was disappointed

4

3
1

4
1
1
1

Diversity of Responses Overall, one would expect a greater
diversity of responses in the Creative group versus the
Predictable group. This is exactly what we found (see
Figure 1). A 2 x 2 ANOVA on the diversity scores revealed
a reliable main effect of Group, with the Creative group
generating more classes of responses (M = 6.37) than the
Predictable group (M = 3.5), F(1, 14) = 34.6, p < 0.01, MSe
=66.13. There was no reliable effect of Scenario and no
reliable interaction. An indication of the greater diversity in
Creative responses can be seen in Table 1 where both
scenarios show more diversity in the Creative condition.

1
1
1
1

“The cup of coffee was balanced on the arm of the chair.
Suddenly Richard sneezed”

Cup of coffee fell
Richard saved cup from
falling
Richard’s snot went into
coffee

N

Creative

N

13

Cup of coffee fell
Richard saved cup from
falling
Richard’s snot went into
coffee
Chair propelled backwards
Friend got shock and dropped
her cup of hot chocolate
Spaceship flew out of nose
A gust of wind went through
the window

7

1
1

1
7

3
1

Mean no. of different responses

Predictable

1
1
1

Results & Discussion
To summarise, analysis of the results showed that, though
the Creative group produced more creative, diverse and
richer responses than the Predictable group, they also could
not avoid the commonly occurring events that were invited
by the scenario. These results demonstrate that in generating
novel outcomes, people are restricted by their background
knowledge. Table 1 illustrates samples of the responses
made by participants in two scenarios in the experiment.

6

Unfolding
Surprise

5
4
3
2
1
0

Predictable (N = 15)

Creative (N =15)

Figure 1: Diversity - the mean number of different
responses generated for each condition
Richness of Responses Another index of creativity is the
elaborateness or richness of the endings generated. In
general, one would expect a greater richness in the
responses made by the Creative group than by the
Predictable group. Like Haught & Johnson-Laird (2003) we
tapped this dimension by examining the average sentence
length of people’s endings. In addition to this we calculated
the mean number of different events in each response.
A 2 x 2 ANOVA again revealed a main effect of Group
but no other reliable effects. The Creative group was more
likely to provide longer responses (M = 12.5 words) than the
Predictable group (M = 9.24 words), F (1, 233) = 35.071, p
< 0.01, MSe=1220.29. An example of a Predictable response
for the first scenario in Table 1 was “She reached in and
pulled the kitten out” (word count = 8), a creative response
for the same scenario was “She pulled a white kitten from
the bin, her kitten was black so she put the white kitten back
and carried on looking” (word count = 23).

Creativity of Responses All of the responses were rated
blind-to-condition by two judges independently on a 7-point
scale. The judges’ ratings were reliably correlated
(Pearson’s r = 0.748, p < 0.01). A 2 x 2 ANOVA on these
ratings for the Group (between-participants) and Scenario
(within-participants) variables revealed a main effect of
Group, Materials and a reliable interaction, F(1,478) = 4.65,
p < 0.05, MSe = 6.01. As expected, responses from the
Creative group (M = 3.523) were rated as being more
creative than those of the Predictable group (M = 2.245),
F(1,478) = 188.82, p < 0.01, MSe = 397.84. It was also
found that the Unfolding materials were rated as more
creative (M = 2.96) than the Surprise materials (M = 2.80),
F(1, 478) = 4.897, p < 0.05, MSe = 6.338. This finding
suggests that such unfolding events promote greater creative
products. This was an unexpected result. It may indicate that

508

Predictable group, certain elements of the endings provided
by both groups overlapped considerably. Thus, it appears
that whilst creativity in essence involves some degree of
variability and unpredictability, it is firmly rooted in our
background knowledge of events. In the remainder of this
section, we discuss the relationship of these results to the
literature on comprehension, and how they might be
modeled computationally.

Number of participants giving a
common response

A 2 x 2 ANOVA on the mean number of different events
in the ending showed a comparable pattern; a reliable main
effect of Group, but no other effects. The Creative group
was more likely to include additional events per ending (M
= 1.8) than the Predictable group (M = 1.46), F(1,233) =
19.583, p < 0.01, MSe =13.86. Using the example above, the
predictable response was classed as having one event and
the creative was classed as having three events.

Consistency With Theories of Comprehension

Unfolding

12

Graesser Singer & Trabasso (1994) stress that knowledge of
goals, actions and events are deeply embedded in our
perceptual and social experience. As we interact with the
environment, we have a strong tendency to interpret event
sequences as causal seqeunces, and a similar process occurs
in comprehension by means of inferences (Kintsch, 1998;
Zwaan, 1999). For example, Duffy (1986) observed that
when reading, we continually form expectations about
future events, so as to develop a causal chain of narrative.
The ‘Situation Model’ of comprehension holds that we
construct a detailed mental representation of people, objects,
locations, events and actions described in a text (e.g. Zwaan,
1999). Consequently, when reading the scenarios of the
present experiment, it was difficult for participants to avoid
making rapid, almost automatic inferences about the mental
states of the characters and/or the events that would
typically occur. In the scenario where Cathy sees the cake
for example, it can easily be inferred that Cathy is hungry
and that she would like to eat the cake. It could be
hypothesised that in this task, the participants naturally link
the two sentences together, and in order to provide a
coherent ending, they must fit their response with the
depicted events so that it is easily understandable and
‘makes sense’ when read. It is this fundamental knowledge
constraint that often overrides instructions to be creative.

Surprise
10
8
6
4
2
0

Predictable (N = 15)

Creative (N = 15)

Figure 2: Commonality – count of most common response
for each scenario across conditions
Commonality of Responses The above measures show the
generativity of the Creative group at work relative to the
Predictable one, but they do not reveal the constraints we
expected from background knowledge based on Ward’s
(1994) proposals. If this constraint is in evidence we should
see that, in spite of the clear differences in the creativity of
responses, there should be certain commonalities between
the Creative and Predictable groups too. Specifically, we
should see many of the Creative group using the same,
inevitable events as some part of their endings. As Figure 2
illustrates, this is exactly what we found. In an analysis of
the most commonly produced response, we observed that
while those in the Predictable condition (M = 10.25) were
more likely to produce the common event, those in the
Creative condition (M = 6.313) also produced this same
event to a high degree, F(1, 14) = 31.042, p < 0.01,
MSe = 124.03). Again an example of this can be seen in the
second scenario in Table 1: the most common response for
all participants is that the “cup of coffee fell”, which
received high counts in both conditions.

Possible Computational Models
Connell & Keane (2002, 2003, in press) have developed a
computational model of plausibility judgements for event
sequences that is consistent with the above general theory of
comprehension. At present, this model takes some event
description and finds alternative possible inferential paths to
link the events described, this elaborated representation then
being scored to assess the plausibility of the description. As
such, this Plausibility Analysis Model (PAM) is one
possible candidate model that could be extended to deal
with the present findings. Such an extension would have to
rely on two significant changes: (i) the generation of further
possible events to a given sequence based on background
knowledge and then (ii) the application of some set of
selection heuristics to rank order these possible outcomes
for their novelty. As a first pass, such rules could just favour
less likely outcomes; that is, outcomes that could possibly
occur but that are not strongly supported by prior
experience. Obviously such an extension would invite new
predictions about the relationship between plausibility and
creativity too.

General Discussion
The aim of this study was to explore how creative
instructions would influence an individual’s completion of a
common event sequence. The Creative Cognition approach
argues that background knowledge can play a constraining
role in the creative process, a proposal that is confirmed by
the present results. More specifically this experiment has
shown that the expectations we have about certain events in
the world have a profound influence on our thought
processes. We found that although responses of the Creative
group were more creative, rich and diverse than those in the

509

This research was funded by a grant to the first author from
the Irish Research Council for Science, Engineering and
Technology and supported by Science Foundation Ireland
under Grant No.03/IN.3/I361 to the second author. Thanks
to Phil Maguire and three anonymous reviewers who
provided some helpful comments.

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 886-897.
Marsh, R. L., Ward, T. B., & Landau, J. L. (1999). The
inadvertent use of prior knowledge in a generative
cognitive task. Memory & Cognition, 27, 94-105.
Perkins, D.N. (1981). The Mind's Best Work. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Rubin, D. C., Stoltzfus, E. R., & Wall, K L. (1991). The
abstraction of form in semantic categories. Memory and
Cognition, 19, 1-7.
Schank, R. C., & R. P. Abelson. (1977). Scripts, Plans,
Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human
Knowledge Structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Sternberg, R. J. (Ed.). (1999). Handbook of Creativity.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Ward, T. (1994). Structured imagination: The role of
category structure in exemplar generation. Cognitive
Psychology, 27, 1-40.
Zwaan, R. (1999). Situation models: The mental leap into
imagined worlds. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 8, 15-18.

References

Appendix: Materials Used in the Study

Concluding Comments
The present paper reports a novel study of people’s ability
to generate creative endings to sentences describing
commonplace event sequences. This work connects several
areas that have previously been quite separate; namely
creativity, sentence comprehension and plausibility. The
convergence of these three areas presents a real opportunity
for understanding this type of creativity in a new and
computationally well-specified way. In short, we should be
able to characterise the mud of everyday knowledge, exactly
how it glues us to the ground and, yet, the exact nature of
the way in which we reach for the stars.

Acknowledgments

Boden, M. A. (1995). Creativity and unpredictability.
Stanford Education and Humanities Review, 4 (2).
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. (1979). Scripts in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177-220.
Connell, L., & Keane, M.T. (2002). The roots of
plausibility: The role of coherence and distributional
knowledge in plausibility judgments. Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Connell, L., & Keane, M.T. (2003). PAM: A cognitive
model of plausibility. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Connell, L., & Keane, M.T. (in press). What plausibly
affects plausibility: Concept coherence and distributional
word coherence as factors influencing plausibility
judgments. To appear in Memory and Cognition.
Duffy, S. A. (1986). Role of expectations in sentence
integration. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 208-219.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
Cognition: Theory, Research, and Applications.
Cambridge. MA: Bradford-MIT Press.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994).
Constructing
inferences
during
narrative
text
comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Haught, C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2003). Creativity and
constraints: The creation of novel sentences. Proceedings
of the Twenty-Fifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A Paradigm for
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marsh, R. L., Landau, J. D., & Hicks, J. L. (1997).
Contributions of inadequate source monitoring to
unconscious plagiarism during idea generation. Journal of

Unfolding Scenarios
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Cathy looked at the cake in the shop window. She
hadn’t had lunch that day.
The dog saw the bone in kitchen bin. He wagged his
tail in anticipation.
Thomas the cat felt bored. He noticed the dangling
tablecloth.
Katie searched everywhere for her little kitten. Then
she heard a miaow from the bin.
James wanted to read the paper. He stopped at the shop
on his way home from work.
Robert hated his old car. He decided to call the bank.
Matthew had wanted to quit his job for months. One
day he walked into his boss’s office.
Jim felt very cold. He got some coal and firelighters.

Surprise Scenarios:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

510

John and Pat were kicking a football on the street. A
speedy car sharply turned the corner.
Michael’s shopping bags were bursting with groceries.
He felt one of the handles begin to break.
The cup of coffee was balanced on the arm of the chair.
Suddenly, Richard sneezed.
The yacht sailed on as the crew slept. A rocky reef lay
directly ahead.
Paul was crossing a busy road. Unexpectedly his
mobile phone rang.
Peter and Sally ate lunch in the small restaurant. They
didn’t realise that the meat wasn’t properly defrosted.
The little boy played at the edge of the pond. Suddenly,
he slipped on some moss.
The sheep were grazing in the field. Suddenly, a wolf
approached the flock.

