UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Explorations of the (Meta) Representational Status of Desire in the Theory-Theory of Mind
Framework

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vd5d69h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Ferres, Leo

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Explorations of the (Meta)Representational Status of Desire
in the Theory-Theory of Mind Framework
Leo Ferres (lferres@ccs.carleton.ca)
Human-Oriented Technology Laboratory
Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6 Canada

Abstract

The previous assumption appears to have been
brought about by a body of evidence that suggests that
the concept of desire is acquired around a year before
the concept of belief (Wellman, 1991; Tan & Harris,
1991; Astington & Gopnik, 1991; Harris, 1996; Bartsch
& Wellman, 1995). Thus, in order to make it fit the
evidence available from research on the concept of belief, it has been claimed that at least until three or four
years of age –that is, until they acquire the concept of
belief– desire ascriptions are to be thought of as nonmetarepresentational. The reasoning behind this claim,
I presume, goes along the following lines: on the one
hand, a) reasoning by means of beliefs taps an organism’s (children’s, for example) metarepresentational capacities; on the other hand, b) the capacity to reason by
means of beliefs is acquired at age X. Thus, if (a) and
(b) hold, then c) metarepresentation should be acquired
at age X, and not before X. Now, because of this conclusion, the rest of the argument tells us that if (c) is
the case, then e) reasoning by means of desires taps an
organism’s metarepresentational capacities if and only if
f) the capacity to reason by means of beliefs is acquired
at age X. However, it is not the case that (f). Therefore, the argument goes on to say, reasoning by means
desire does not tap an organism’s metarepresentational
capacities.
However, characterizing reasoning by means of the
concept of desire as non-metarepresentational simply because it is acquired before the concept of belief and the
latter is, only by assumption (as we saw a couple of paragraphs above), the flagship of the child’s metarepresentational capacities is, at all extents, an ad hoc solution. In
these pages, I will take position against the conclusion of
the argument that reasoning by means of desire does not
tap on metarepresentational capacities. In other words,
it is, I will argue, far from clear that reasoning by means
of the concept of desire is non-metarepresentational in
nature, even though it is acquired a year before the concept of belief.

Some researchers have proposed that what accounts for
children’s earlier ability to reason by means of desire
compared to reasoning by means of belief is the fact that
desires do not necessarily invoke the ability to metarepresent. In this paper, I argue that this is a misconception stemming from the confusion between desire ascription and simple desire states. In other words, there
would be no way to entertain a thought about someone’s desire without metarepresenting, in Leslie’s (1991)
terms. I provide some empirical evidence in the fashion
of Bartsch and Wellman (1995) that also points in this
direction.

The problem
Although the concept of desire is at least as important as
the concept of belief for describing, explaining and predicting the behavior of different entities (Fodor, 1987;
Dennett, 1978b, 1987), substantially more attention has
been paid to the development of the concept of belief
in Theory-Theory of Mind research (henceforth, TToM)
(Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001; Astington, 2001). In
fact, quite often, metarepresentation (defined here as the
internal representation of an epistemic relation (Leslie,
1991), a “second-order” representation (Sperber, 1999))
has been somewhat fused with the child’s ability to entertain/ascribe a belief that stands for a counterfactual
state of affairs (Dennett, 1978a; Davies & Stone, 1995),
without any reference to the explanatory power of the
concept of desire or to its being an epistemic relation
itself.
This incipient collapsing of metarepresentation and
reasoning by false beliefs (beliefs that stand for counterfactual states of affairs) in TToM research is due, in
part, to the assumption that the concept of belief, and
especially that of false belief, taps the child’s metarepresentational capacities; while, arguably, the concept of
desire does not. This is a common assumption despite
the fact that beliefs and desires share several important
characteristics (such as defining opaque contexts, being
intentional in the philosophical sense, being subject and
object specific (Wellman & Woolley, 1990), etc. to name
but a few). In the developmental literature, more often
than not, desires have been understood as a special case
of mental state ascription; namely, one that does not demand of the agent doing the ascription (a child in our
case), that he or she be able to metarepresent.

Desires as Metarepresentational
For reasoning by means of desires to be nonmetarepresentational at ages younger than four years
means that a child at those ages does not represent other
people (or even themselves) as representing the desired
object as part of the desire relation. Thus, these children
are supposed to be merely in some sort of “connection”

381

to the desired object. According to this view, then, when
a two-year-old child says something like “Peter wants a
car”, he or she is not ascribing Peter (representing Peter as entertaining) a desire for a given car, but merely
putting Peter in some sort of connection to either the
car he wants (Wellman, 1990; Wellman & Bartsch, 1994;
Bartsch & Wellman, 1995) or to a hypothetical situation
in which Peter has the car (Perner, 1991). Consider the
following proposition as a state of affairs in the world;
that is, a proposition that holds:
Loreto wants to be in Chile.

The proposition in [1] is independent of any folk psychological theory-theory because it is not tokened as a
belief about the world in the mind of a particular agent
engaging in folk psychological practice. It is just a true
proposition (of the external world) at time T . Thus, part
of the argument here is that if it is so difficult for us as
adults to imagine a non-metarepresentational account
of desire at early ages, then it might be the case that
this non-metarepresentational characterization is wrong
(Astington & Gopnik, 1991).
There seems to be no obvious alternative formalizing of desire ascription (not desire states) except for
[2] above. Thus, even at younger ages, every time children talk about their own or other people’s desires, they
should be entertaining a thought along the lines of [2].
It is hard to characterize the thoughts the child is entertaining when explaining or reporting behaviors by means
of desires when the latter are merely understood as “subjective connections” to objects. Suppose for the sake of
argument, that children do in fact see desires as a “subjective connection” between the organism they are trying to explain the behavior of and the object that this
organism desires. This could be relatively easy to see
for desire ascription to organisms other than self. However, it would be hard to believe that when talking about
their own desires and explaining their own behaviors by
means of desires (“because I wanted to go to the park”),
children think of themselves as just holding a subjective
connection to a state of affairs that does not hold. It is
in fact very hard to believe that when reasoning about
their own behaviors by means of desires, children are not
representing themselves as wanting something in particular; to be in the park, for example. But suppose further that they do not representing themselves as wanting
something in particular. It is undeniable that the very
act of communicating those desires involve a metarepresentation of both the communicator and the person the
speaker is talking to. When communicating, and more
so when communicating mental states, there should be
mutual metarepresentation of the communicator and the
addressee (Sperber, 1999).
Given the arguments above, it is hard to take desire
ascriptions to either other people (“Peter wants to have
a car”) or to oneself (“I want to be in Chile”) as nonmetarepresentational (at least) in Leslie’s (1991) terms.
Now, assuming desire talk stands proxy for desire reasoning about the behavior of other people (see, for example, Dennett (1978a), Bretherton and Beeghly (1982),
Tager-Flusberg (1993), Bartsch and Wellman (1995) and
the literature spawned by these studies), then we would
expect desire talk to actually tap on the child’s metarepresentational capacities, albeit indirectly. One way to
look at this is to follow Wellman and Bartsch (1994)
and Bartsch and Wellman (1995). If we were able to
tell genuine psychological references to desire apart from
mere communicative uses of particular words associated
to the expression of desire, then we should find difference between talk about desires and talk about other
communicative uses of these words. Specifically, while
genuine psychological references to desire should change

[1]

Within the general Theory of Mind (ToM) framework,
there are two ways to interpret this proposition, and they
have usually been confounded. In a first, trivial interpretation, Loreto is just in a state such that she wants
to be in Chile. That merely means that she has tokened
the proposition “I am in Chile” in her desire box (Fodor,
1975) and will take action to bring it about that she is
in Chile. This interpretation is useless at the time of
explaining behavior because the agent trying to explain
Loreto’s behavior (maybe Loreto herself) may not know
that that is the proposition she is tokening in her desire
box. The second interpretation, however, is the nontrivial interpretation that to be able to explain someone else’s (even one’s own) behavior in terms of desires,
one must entertain a belief about the organism’s desire
state (Davies & Stone, 1995). To explain or predict behaviors and actions, it is not enough that we are able
to be in desire states (unlike, for example, the case of
Simulation-Theory of Mind, see Gordon (1995)). What
is a conditio sine qua non is that we are able to entertain beliefs about an organism’s desire states (Dennett,
1987; Sperber, 1999). For example, one way to explain
why Loreto is buying a ticket to Chile this morning is
to entertain a belief with the embedded proposition in
[1] above. Thus, in order to engage in folk psychological
practice (Davies & Stone, 1995), we need to entertain a
thought along the following lines:
Bu [D(Loreto, P ) ∧ ¬P ]

[2]

where Bu stands for the agent’s belief state at the time of
ascription of the desire state, D stands for the “desire”
predicate which takes two arguments, the organism to
which the agent is ascribing the desire (Loreto, in [2])
and the organism’s desired state of affairs (the variable
P in [2] or “I am in Chile” or any other proposition).
For this quasi-formalization of desire ascription to work,
P should also be part of the belief state as a proposition
that does not hold; since, for something to be a desire, it
is by definition that the conditions are false. Simplifying
the issue slightly, it would indeed be a contradiction to
desire something that one already has.
Notice further that there is in fact no way to formalize
the first (trivial) interpretation of [1] above in the TToM
framework. You may be able to formalize it for logical
purposes as something like D(Loreto, P ) ∧ ¬P , but that
will be of no use to someone trying to explain behavior.

382

Table 1: Information on the samples.

as a function of age (because they are presumably tapping on metarepresentational abilities), communicative
uses should not. They should not because there is no
need to be in a belief state about an epistemic state
when using a mental state term for mere communicative purposes. If a child repeats an adult’s utterance,
for example, it may be that he or she is just repeating it for the sake of not being silent during an interaction, but without having analyzed the utterance itself. More arguably, when a child says something like
“I want a cookie” while the cookie is in plain view, the
child might be actually saying something like “pass me
the cookie”, without imputing a mental state either to
self or to someone else. Instead of entertaining a thought
such as Bu [D(self, IHaveACookie)∧¬IHaveACookie],
the child is simply in a desire state, maybe, such that
Du (self, IHaveACookie) ∧ ¬IHaveACookie. But that
does not qualify as a metarepresentational state in our
terms here. The following study tests the prediction that
there should be a difference between communicative uses
of “want” (the desire term par excellance (Wellman &
Bartsch, 1994; Bartsch & Wellman, 1995)) and its genuinely psychological uses.

Ages (mo.)
18-24
25-28
29-32
33-36
37-40
41-44

N
12
12
12
12
12
12

#TotUtt
3483
1830
2694
2972
2041
1876

MLU(x)
1.480
1.697
2.246
2.709
2.981
3.202

MLU(SD)
0.252
0.430
0.566
0.446
0.390
0.425

the other three categories do not, they fulfill a mostly
communicative function.
Genuine psychological references to desire (henceforth,
GPRDs) are instances of children’s unequivocally referring to themselves or other people as being in a mental state of desire. Behavioral requests, in turn, (henceforth, BRs) are ‘unadorned’ instances in which the child
uses a desire term to fulfill an immediate goal, like receiving something that is beyond her reach but in plain
view. Bartsch and Wellman (1995) take these instances
to mean nothing more than “give me x ”. Direct repetitions (henceforth, DRs) are dialog turns in which the
child merely repeats the adult (or his own) utterance. Idiomatic expressions (henceforth, IEs) are high-frequency
collocation of words in the particular language. This is
the case of Spanish “I don’t want to” or “I want more”,
when they appear without an object. Uncodable utterances (henceforth, UU) are instances of the desire
term “want” for which categorization was impossible,
due mainly to failure in retrieving contextual information from the dialog.
To code each of them into one of the five mutually
exclusive categories, child utterances containing “want”
were not taken in isolation, but embedded in a window
of the four previous and the four following utterances of
the whole sample. However, sometimes this short context did not help defining which category the utterance
belonged to. Thus, the whole transcript had to be analyzed in order to assign a category to the utterance in
question. An independent rater, unaware of the hypothesis of the study rated a subset of the data (10%=60 utterances, Cohen’s κ=.85). Disagreements were resolved
by discussion and, in the light of the discussions, there
was a second coding pass to the whole data set.

Method
Data. A total of 14,896 child utterances were taken from
the Wells corpus (Wells, 1981) in the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000). These data come from the longitudinal observation of spontaneous speech production
of 12 children (6 boys and 6 girls) whose ages ranged
from 18 months at the time of the first observation to 60
months at the time of the last observation and who were
acquiring English as their mother tongue. Each child
was observed a total of 10 times, for about 40 minutes
each, in 3-month intervals. Since the objective of Well’s
(1981) research was to obtain spontaneous speech samples, a timing mechanism was devised to set off a tape
recorder – connected to a wireless microphone in the
child’s garment – at different times between 9am and
6pm, to prevent parents from planning activities, for example. Twenty-four 90-second samples were recorded in
each observation. These were later transcribed into several files using normal English orthography. Table 1 in
page 3 gives some general information about the samples,
where Ages(mo.) means ages in months, N means number of participants in each age group (all twelve participants are the same children at different ages), #T otU tt
means the total number of utterances in the samples,
M LU (x) means the average mean length of utterance
for that age group, and M LU (SD) means the standard
deviation of the mean for the MLU values for that group.
Procedure. The first step was to identify all and
only the instances of the term “want” in all and only
the target child’s exchanges. Once the “want” utterances were identified and cleaned for false positives, they
were coded as belonging to one of five mutually exclusive categories: genuine psychological references to desire (GPRDs), behavioral requests(BRs), direct repetitions (DRs), idiomatic expressions (IEs) and uncodable
utterances (UUs). While GPRDs refer to mental states,

Results
There were a total of 602 “want” utterances in the analyzed corpus. 347 (57.35%) were GPRDs, 145 (23.96)
were other communicative uses of “want”. Of those 145
communicative uses, 37 (6.11% of total “want” utterances) were behavioral requests, 92 (15.20%) were direct repetitions and 16 (2.65%) were idiomatic expressions. Figure 1 below shows the average frequency of
talk about genuine desires as a percentage of the total
number of utterances for each particular child at each
particular age. It is evident that the developmental picture I have obtained resembles the one in Bartsch and
Wellman (1995) very closely, even the ranges of the percentages are similar (see Bartsch and Wellman (1995),

383

p. 73, Figure 4.2B). Talk about genuine desire seems
to be present at the first age analyzed (AGE1, 18-24
months), to increase slowly by AGE2 (25-28 months
of age) and then more drastically again at AGE3 (2932 months). The frequency of genuine talk about desires seems to peak at around AGE4 (33-36 months)
to drop and stabilize thereafter. In order to test for
significant differences in children’s talk about desires at
any given age group, a repeated measures ANOVA with
age as a 6-level variable was used. There was an overall significant main effect F (5, 55)=6.72, p<.000. Post
hoc analyses using the Bonferroni criterion for significance indicated that the average frequency of GPRDs
for AGE1 (M =0.51, SD=0.55) and AGE2 (M =0.96,
SD=0.80) were significantly lower than frequency of talk
about GPRDs at AGE4 (M =4.28, SD=2.24) and AGE6
(M =3.54, SD=2.10).

nificant effects for age and each of the communicative
uses of “want”, p > .05. However, a repeated measures
ANOVA with age and communicative uses as withinsubjects variables yielded a significant effect for both
age F (2.96, 32.61)1 =3.174, p=.038 and communicative
uses F (2, 22)=12.708, p<.000. No main effect was found
for the interaction between age and communicative uses
F (3.36, 36.97)1 =0.682, p>.05, n.s.

Figure 2: Communicative uses of “want” by age as a percentage of the total number of utterances for that child at
that age.
Figure 3 shows quite clearly that although both
GPRDs and all communicative uses start at roughly the
same frequency, it is only GPRDs that increase the frequency significantly, while the other communicative uses
of “want” stay roughly the same across ages. A repeated
measures ANOVA with AGE as a 6-level variable (Ages
1 through 6) and communicative uses as a 4-level variable (GPRDs, BRs, IE, DRs) was used to test for differences. As expected from the previous analyses, there
was an overall significant main effect of communicative
uses, F (3, 33)=59.545, p<.000, a significant main effect
for age, F (5, 55)=7.444, p<.000 and a significant interaction of Age and Communicative uses, F (3, 33)=4.861,
p<.000.

Figure 1: GPRDs by age as a percentage of the total number of utterances for that child at that age, error bars are
standard errors.
Figure 2 below shows the development of children’s
communicative uses of “want” as a function of age. Except for direct repetitions, both idiomatic expressions
and behavioral requests do not appear in the first age
stage sampled (AGE1=18-24). By AGE2, all three categories of communicative uses are present, although not
extremely different from the previous age. The frequency
of DRs seems to grow and separate from the main trend
at AGE3 and then again at AGE4, while at AGE3 both
BRs and IEs are at the same level. Something indeed
seems to happen at AGE4, when all three categories
seem quite different in their frequencies, with DRs leading the frequency count, followed by BRs and IE in the
last place. Both AGE5 and AGE5 seem to show the new
convergence of these categories. It seems then that after
AGE4, all three kinds of communicative uses of “want”
stabilize. To test for significant effects, a repeated measures ANOVA with age as the within-subject variable
was carried out for each communicative use of “want”.
The tests show that, taken one by one, there is no sig-

Discussion
From the theoretical discussion above, we concluded that
if children undergo some metarepresentational change of
the concept of desire as a function of age, then while
the developmental picture of GPRDs reflect this change,
communicative uses of “want” should stay relatively the
same across ages.
The analyses carried out yield some results that point
towards this direction. Although there are differences
among the communicative uses themselves (that is, there
are differences between DRs and IEs, for instance, at
33 months, see Figure 2), there is no main effect for
1

384

F corrected for sphericity by Greenhouse-Geisser.

passing this more complicated task, the child has now
acquired another ability, one different from the metarepresentational abilities acquired two years earlier. The
same argument holds for desires: just because children
talk and reason by means of desired a year before they do
so with belief, that does not mean that a new ability has
been acquired. That children are able to calculate this
double-embedding of the same belief concept a couple of
years later than 4 years of age points in the direction of
problems with some of the computational mechanisms
that help children deal with metarepresentation (Fodor,
1992), but not with the ability to metarepresent itself.

General conclusions and future work
The main point of this paper is that it is extremely hard
to consider reasoning by means of desire (at any age
stage) as a non-metarepresentational endeavor. This hypothesis has been analyzed in two ways: a) by means of a
logical analysis of what is involved during desire reasoning and communication and b) by providing some preliminary empirical evidence that even talk (as a proxy
for reasoning) about desire shows a clear developmental
trend when compared to communicative uses of the same
words used to talk about desire (“want”, in this case).
If the main point of this paper is right, then the most
pressing issue to deal with is the lag between the acquisition of the concept of belief and that of desire. In
other words, if metarepresentation lies in the nature of
both belief and desire but children have less difficulty
understanding the representational nature of the latter
while failing to understand the equivalent metarepresentational character of the former (Astington & Gopnik,
1991), then again it may be the case that something
other than metarepresentation is at stake. Of course,
much more work is needed in this area. Nonetheless, I
would like to propose that the answer to this riddle lies
in the computational mechanisms dealing with metarepresentation at the different stages. Not with metarepresentational abilities themselves. In other words, I would
like to propose that the ability to metarepresent is acquired as soon as children start talking about and reliably communicating their own and other people’s mental
states, starting with desire at around the 30th month of
life. This is somewhat earlier than previously thought,
but it would help explain and make sense of the whole
philosophical tradition of belief and desires as belonging
to roughly the same theoretical arena as the rest of the
propositional attitudes.

Figure 3: Communicative uses of “want” by age as a percentage of the total number of utterances for that child at
that age.

age for each of these communicative uses taken in isolation. However, there is a main effect for GPRDs between the first age analyzed (18-24 months) and AGE4
(33-36 months) and AGE6 (41-44 months). This, obviously, draws a difference between the communicative
uses of “want” and genuine psychological references to
desire. This difference, I am inclined to say, may be
related to metarepresentational issues during the acquisition of the concept of desire. If it were not about matters metarepresentational, it would be very difficult to
explain why the other communicative uses (BRs, in particular), which are morphosyntactically very similar to
GPRDs, do not provide a main effect for age.
This paper is not calling into question the hypothesis that belief (and particularly false belief) taps an organism’s representational capacities, nor that belief is
acquired at whatever age (probably, on all conservative
accounts, at 4 years of age). What is being questioned
here is the working assumption that if belief taps on representation and belief is acquired at 4 years of age, then
metarepresentation is acquired at 4 years of age.
The argument that uses the premise above seems to
be, at least, enthymematic. It could be said that reasoning by means of belief is tapping certain kinds of
metarepresentational abilities, the kinds for which many
computational resources have to be in place (Wimmer,
Hogrefe, & Perner, 1988; Leslie, 1988; Davies & Stone,
1995). As an analogy, you can take the difference that
exists between a belief attribution such as “Loreto believes there’s a blue car outside school” and “Loreto believes Namic thinks there’s a blue car outside school”.
Terminological differences aside, children seem to acquire
the ability to solve problems like the latter by around 6
years of age (Perner & Wimmer, 1985), two years after
they have allegedly acquired the ability to metarepresent
(metarepresent by false belief, that is). However, just because of this empirical fact, one would not argue that by

Acknowledgments
This paper was written while the author was holding
a postdoctoral fellowship at the Human-Oriented Technology Laboratory at Carleton University. I would like
to thank, particularly, John Logan, Andrew Brook and
Gitte Lindgaard for insightful comments and support.

References
Astington, J. (2001). The future of theory-of-mind
research: Understanding motivational states, the
role of language, and real-world consequences.

385

Commentary on “Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind
development: The truth about false belief.”. Child
Development, 72 (3), 685-687.

Perner, J., & Wimmer, H. (1985). ”John thinks that
Mary thinks that”: Attribution of second-order beliefs by 5-to 10-year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 39, 437-471.

Astington, J., & Gopnik, A. (1991). Developing understanding of desire and intention. In A. Whiten
(Ed.), Natural theories of mind (p. 39-50). Oxford,
UK: Blackwell.

Sperber, D. (1999). Metarepresentation. In R. A. Wilson
& F. C. Keil (Eds.), The MIT Encyclopedia of the
Cognitive Sciences. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press:
Bradford Books.

Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. (1995). Children talk about
the mind. New York: Oxford University Press.

Tager-Flusberg, H. (1993). What language reveals
about the understanding of minds in children with
autism. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, &
D. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding other minds: Perspectives from autism. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Bretherton, I., & Beeghly, M. (1982). Talking about internal states: The acquisition of an explicit theory
of mind. Developmental Psychology, 18 (6), 906921.
Davies, M., & Stone, T. (Eds.). (1995). Mental simulation. Oxford: Blackwell.

Tan, J., & Harris, P. (1991). Autistic children understand seeing and wanting. Development-andPsychopathology, 3 (2), 163-174.

Dennett, D. (1978a). Beliefs about beliefs:. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 1 (4), 568-570.

Wellman, H. (1990). The child’s theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Dennett, D. (1978b). Brainstorms: Philosophical essays on mind and psychology. Montgomery, VT.:
Bradford Books.

Wellman, H. (1991). From desires to beliefs: Acquisition of a theory of mind. In A. Whiten (Ed.),
Natural theories of mind: Evolution, development
and simulation of everyday mindreading (p. 19-38).
Oxford: Blackwell.

Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge,
MA.: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1975). The language of thought. New York,
NY: Crowell.

Wellman, H., & Bartsch, K. (1994). Before belief: Children’s early psychological theory. In C. Lewis &
P. Mitchell (Eds.), Children’s early understanding
of mind. Hove: Lawrence Earlbaum.

Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1992). A theory of the child’s theory of mind.
Cognition, 44, 283-296.

Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory of mind development: The truth
about false-belief. Child Development, 72 (3), 655684.

Gordon, R. (1995). Folk psychology as simulation. In
M. Davies & T. Stone (Eds.), Folk psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.

Wellman, H., & Woolley, J. (1990). From simple desires to ordinary beliefs: The early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35, 245-275.

Harris, P. (1996). Desires, beliefs and language. In
P. Carruthers & P. Smith (Eds.), Theories of theories of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Wells, C. (1981). Learning through interaction: The
study of language development. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.

Leslie, A. (1988). Some implications of pretense for
mechanisms underlying the child’s theory of mind.
In J. Astington, P. Harris, & D. Olson (Eds.), Developing theories of mind (p. 19-46). Cambridge
University Press.

Wimmer, H., Hogrefe, J., & Perner, J. (1988). Children’s
understanding of informational access as source of
knowledge. Child Development, 59, 386-397.

Leslie, A. (1991). The theory of mind impairment in
autism. In A. Whiten (Ed.), Natural theories of
mind (p. 63-78). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The childes project : Tools
for analyzing talk (3rd ed.). Hillsdale, N.J.: L.
Erlbaum.
Perner, J. (1991). On representing that: The asymmetry between belief and intention in children’s
theory of mind. In D. Frye & C. Moore (Eds.),
Children’s theories of mind (p. 139-155). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.

386

