UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fear of Isolation, Cultural Differences, and Recognition Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xw841ks

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Kim, Kyung Il
Markman, Arthur B.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fear of Isolation, Cultural Differences, and Recognition Memory
Kyung Il Kim (kyungil@psy.utexas.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin
1 University Station A8000, Austin TX 78712-0187 USA

Arthur B. Markman (markman@psy.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Texas, Austin
1 University Station A8000, Austin TX 78712-0187 USA

Abstract
Previous research suggests that members of East Asian
cultures show a greater sensitivity to context (vs. target)
information than do members of Western Cultures. We
suggest this difference is rooted in a greater chronic
fear of isolation (FOI) in East Asians than in
Westerners. To support this hypothesis, we first
compare chronic levels of FOI between East Asian and
Western participants. Then we manipulate FOI in a
group of Western college students and assess their
recognition memory for object as a function whether
the background is the same or different from when the
picture was first seen. Consistent with our proposal, the
manipulation affected people's sensitivity to
background context in picture recognition in a manner
consistent with previous studies of cultural differences.

Introduction
Previous research has uncovered cultural
differences in reasoning and decision making
performance between East Asian and Western
populations (Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001).
Clearly the study of cultural differences has practical
implications for international commerce and theoretical
implications for claims about the universality of
cognitive processing.
This work is based on the observation that
cognitive and perceptual orientations can differ in the
degree to which they are analytic versus holistic. For
instance, Masuda and Nisbett (2001) showed Japanese
and American subjects pictures of animals and fish with
a surrounding background. Later, subjects were shown
pictures of animals or fish they had seen as well as new
animals and fish appearing either with the same
background or in a new background. Japanese (but not
American) subjects were more likely to correctly
recognize an old animal when it appeared with the
original background than when it appeared in a new
context.
Findings like this suggest there are significant
differences in reasoning between cultures, but only a

684

few studies in cross-cultural research have manipulated
potential causal variables in studies. For example,
Briley and Wyer (2002) manipulated the degree of
group membership and cultural identity in Asian and
Western college students.
They found that
experimentally induced feelings of being part of a
group produced a greater preference for equality and
compromise in individual choice tasks in both
populations. Similarly, Gardner, Gabriel, and Lee
(1999) examined the causal role of self-construal by
investigating whether priming independent or
interdependent self-construals within a culture could
result in differences in psychological worldview that
mirror those traditionally found between cultures. For
instance, in one experiment of the study, they found
that European-American participants primed with
interdependence displayed shifts toward more
collectivist social values and judgments that were
mediated by corresponding shifts in self-construal.
These studies provide insight into our understanding
causes of observed cultural differences (Chiu, Morris,
Hong, & Menon, 2000; Hong et al., 2003).
In previous work, we proposed that these cultural
differences may be caused by a higher chronic fear of
isolation (FOI) in East Asian populations than in
Western populations (Kim & Markman, 2003). FOI is
the degree to which people are anxious or afraid about
being cut off from peers and relatives (Gilbert, Fiske, &
Lindzey,
1998;
Noelle-Neumann,
1984).
Communication theories define FOI as a force that
leads people to conceal their views when they believe
they are in a minority (Noelle-Neumann, 1984). This
pressure is assumed to be related to their fears of being
negatively evaluated by others. The theory maintains
that mass media works simultaneously with majority
public opinion to silence minority beliefs on cultural
issues. On this view, FOI prompts those with minority
views to examine the beliefs of others and to conform
to what they perceive to be a majority view. In this
paper we discuss a difference in chronic FOI between
cultures and then present a study that addresses the
relationship between FOI and attention/memory
respectively.

Different sensitivities to FOI between East
Asian and Western culture

Similarly, Dinnel, Kleinknecht, and Tanaka-Matsumi
(2002) shows that TKS (Taijin Kyofusho, a Japanese
variant of social anxiety) - like symptoms (e.g., fear of
offending others) were more likely to be reported
Japanese university students than by their American
counterparts. It is unlikely that social anxiety discussed
in the current study is more related to other
subcomponents then FOI.
Given that members of East Asian and Western
culture differ in chronic FOI, it is important to discuss
why this difference might lead to differences in
reasoning. Social anxiety, especially FOI, motivates
people to focus on social activity, to interact with other
members in the social network and to consider others’
responses seriously (Gilbert, 2001; Scheufele,
Shanahan, & Lee, 2001).
Thus, members of
collectivistic cultures are expected to be generally more
interested in relations among items in the environment
than do members of individualistic cultures (Morris &
Peng, 1994; Nisbett et al., 2001). It is also possible to
observe such differences within a single culture by
manipulating a potential cause. For example, as
discussed earlier in the previous section, Gardner
(1999) showed that manipulation of self-construals by
priming interdependence induced a more collectivistic
thinking in Western participants. Note that such
patterns of behavior and thinking caused by primed
interdependence are consistent with observed patterns
rooted in a greater level of FOI (Gilbert et al., 1998;
Noelle-Neumann, 1984).
In sum, social anxiety is higher in Eastern than
Western populations. Increased social anxiety leads to
increased attention to relations among items and to
context. We connected these two and suggested that
levels of FOI are positively related to the degree of
dialectical thinking which has been treated as
characteristic reasoning mode of collectivism culture
(Kim & Markman, 2003).
We developed this idea further in the current study
by examining the influence of a manipulation of FOI on
recognition memory. As discussed above Masuda and
Nisbett (2001) found that members of collectivist
culture were more holistic in their analysis of scenes
than were members of an individual culture. If a high
level of FOI indeed makes people to attend to
interpersonal relationships (and more broadly to
relations between objects and their environments), then
inducing a high level of FOI should make Americans
less likely to attend to target information, which in turn
should increase their memory for context vs. target
information.

Before discussing how a difference in degree of
FOI can influence judgment and decision making, we
must first show that members of different cultures are
likely to differ in their chronic level of FOI.
As a measure of FOI, we used the Fear of Negative
Evaluation scale (Watson & Friend, 1969).1 This 30item instrument measures social anxiety about receiving
negative evaluations from others. Scores on this scale
reflect a fear of the loss of social approval. Items on
the measure include signs of anxiety and ineffective
social behaviors that would lead to disapproval by
others. We gave this scale to 41 Asian students
enrolled in University of Texas Austin and their
spouses participated for the measurement of FOI in East
Asian population. The participants were all born in
East Asia (31 Korean 6 Japanese, 4 Chinese) and had a
native language other than English. The length of stay
in the US was less than 5 years before their
participation (M = 3.1 years). Western participants
were 49 undergraduate students at the University of
Texas (all born in the US). Both groups filled out Fear
of Negative Evaluation scale along with questions for
demographic information. The East Asian Group
showed significantly higher scores on the FNE (M =
17.54) than did the Western group (M = 11.54), t (88) =
11.56, p < .01. This finding supports the proposal that
members of East Asian culture have a higher chronic
FOI than do members of Western culture.
The social anxiety literature provides some insight
about why different cultures have different levels of
FOI. Cross-cultural differences in social anxiety have
been studied in various ways, and the consensus among
researchers is that members of relatively societyoriented cultures have more social anxiety than do those
in individual-oriented cultures. For example, Okazaki
and colleagues (Okazaki, 1997; Okazaki, Liu,
Longworth, & Minn, 2002) found that Asian-American
report higher distress on various measures of social
anxiety. A practical merit of such studies is that they
enable a comparison of two cultures controlling out
other confounding variables such as language or
culture-specific patterns in reporting /interviewing. For
this reason these results provide insight into chronic
differences in social anxiety between cultures. Other
cross-cultural comparisons assessed the difference in
social anxiety between Asian and Western populations.
For example, Sato and McCann (1998) studied
Japanese and American students and found a positive
relation between social anxiety and interdependent selfconstruals (which are typical of collectivistic cultures).

Manipulation and measurement of FOI
In our studies, FOI was manipulated as an
independent variable following the method used by
Kim and Markman (2003). Participants in the High

1
There are other scales that have been used to measure FOI,
but these scales also ask questions about physical rather than
social isolation.

685

FOI group described experiences in which they were
socially isolated from others (e.g., “you might have
been anxious once when your friends were not talking
to you at all, or when you went to a new place where
you didn’t know anyone and had difficulty meeting new
people”). The Low FOI group described experiences in
which they caused someone else to be socially isolated
from other (e.g., “you might have been at a party and
you didn’t talk to one of your friends who did not know
many people at the party and you felt bad about it
later”). Many clinical techniques such as prolonged
exposure treatment that is used to treat post-traumatic
stress disorder are based on the premise that asking a
patient to recall and describe a previous experience and
associated emotion will activate and retrieve relevant
feelings and memories, and put the person into that
state again (Foa, Cashman, Jaycox, & Perry, 1997).
Then we measured a person’s FOI with the Fear of
Negative Evaluation (FNE) scale as a manipulation
check.

In the second phase, participants saw 96 pictures.
24 of them were same with the pictures seen in the first
phase (old animal and old background). To create the
rest of the 72 pictures, an additional 24 animals (new
animal) and 24 backgrounds (new background) were
used and the combination between the animal and the
background information was manipulated. Because
each animal could have one of two different
backgrounds – the original background or a novel
background, there were four different conditions: (a)
old background and old animal, (b) old background and
new animal, (c) new background and old animal, and
(d) new background and new animal (see Figure 1). All
of these pictures were used in Masuda and Nisbett’s
(2001) study.
Procedure
Participants were asked to describe their previous
experiences relating to an anxiety producing situation.
In the High FOI condition, participants wrote about
being socially isolated from others. In the Low FOI
condition, participants wrote about socially isolating
someone else from them or other people. After
completing this self-descriptive priming task,
participants in both conditions responded to the Fear of
Negative Evaluation scale as a manipulation check.
Then participants viewed 24 photos of animals in
naturalistic environments. After a 2-minute delay,
participants viewed 96 photos in a recognition memory
test that varied whether the animals were old or new
and whether the background was old or new. Subjects
responded whether they had seen the animal in the
photo regardless of the background of the test photo.

Experiment
Method
Participants
Eighty nine American undergraduate students (all
born in the US) of the University of Texas participated
in the study.
Half of participants were randomly
assigned to the High FOI condition and the other half
were to the Low FOI condition.
Materials
In the first phase of the study, 24 animal pictures
were presented. Each picture has an animal and a
particular background (see Figure 1).

Results
First, we checked the effectiveness of our FOI
manipulation. Average values on the Fear of Negative
Evaluation scale were significantly higher in the High
FOI condition (M = 15.61) than in the Low FOI
condition (M = 10.60), t (87) = 3.92, p < .01. Note that
the mean score of High FOI group approaches that seen
in the East Asian group (M = 17.54) we measured.
For "old" and "new" responses, we subtracted
people's accuracy for the pictures with the new
background from their accuracy with the original
background. Positive scores indicate sensitivity to the
context.
The pattern of data in this study shows the same
pattern observed by Masuda and Nisbett (2001) (see
Figure 2). There was a significantly higher index (M =
2.39) for the High FOI condition than for the Low FOI
condition (M = 1.22), F (1, 87) = 6.01, p<.05. This
effect is mediated by level of FOI. In an ANCOVA
including FNE score, there is a significant correlation
between FNE and the response index (r = .33, p <.01)
and the main effect of FOI is reduced in significance, F
(1, 87) = 1.91, p = .171.

Figure 1. Sample pictures used in this study.
(A) A study picture. (B) A new animal in the
old background. (C) An old animal in a new
background. (D) A new animal with a new
background.

686

2003; Kuhl & Kazen, 1999), an increase in negative
affect supports a analytic processing mode whereas
positive affect induce a relatively more holistic thinking.
We tested this possibility in another study, in which
participants’ relative preference for dialectical proverbs
were measured, and found that there was no meaningful
difference on emotion scales (e.g., hedonic tone and
general arousal) between the two FOI groups and that
only FNE scale values explained the variation in the
relative
preference
for
dialectical
proverbs
within/between group (Kim & Markman, in
preparation).
Thus it is unlikely that emotion
systematically influenced the current results.
It is also important that, as discussed earlier, East
Asian participants exhibited a significantly greater FOI
than did Western participants. Note that East Asian
without FOI manipulation showed a greater average
values on the Fear of Negative Evaluation scale than
did those in the High FOI group in the current
experiment.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis
that chronic differences in FOI in members of East
Asian and Western cultures lead to the differences in
attention observed in the previous studies (Masuda &
Nisbett, 2001). We are not claiming that FOI is the
only cause of cultural differences in reasoning. Indeed,
differences in culturally accessible concepts such as
collectivism and individualism may influence cognition
either by affecting level of FOI through some other
route (Aaker & Lee, 2001; Hsee & Weber, 1999). This
issue has been much discussed in communication
theories, which have yielded no clear consensus on
whether FOI is an antecedent or an intervening variable.
For example, Shoemaker, Breen, and Stamper (2000)
tested whether FOI is antecedent to opinion formation
or an intervening variable between opinion formation
and willingness to voice the opinion. Their path
analysis suggested that FOI is an antecedent variable,
but they could not exclude possibility that it is an
intervening variable. However, it seems that FOI is a
robust causal factor explaining previously observed
difference between cultures. Kim and Markman (2003)
found that a manipulation of FOI induced a difference
in degree of dialectical reasoning.
Thus, chronic levels of Fear of Isolation may be a
causal factor underlying observed cultural differences
in reasoning. The mechanisms that relate FOI to these
reasoning differences will be the subject of future
research, but we speculate that high levels of FOI lead
people to think more about their relationship to others,
and hence are more open to compromise in reasoning
and more attentive to contextual and situational factors
that guide behavior.
The current study also has implications for
Cognitive Science in general. Most behavioral research
assumes that the average performance of participants

For "new" responses there is also a marginally
significant difference between the High (M = -1.43) and
Low FOI conditions (M = -2.01), F (1, 87) = 1.18,
(Masuda and Nisbett (2001) found no
p<.28.
significant difference between their Japanese and
American subjects for "new" responses.) This finding
is consistent with the hypothesis that participants in the
High FOI condition attend more on background
information than do those in the Low FOI group even
when misleading cues of original background interfered
with recognition.
3

Relative accuracy

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

High FOI

Low FOI

Figure 2. Participants’ relative accuracy for “old”
response.
Interestingly, this combination of results does not
indicate greater overall accuracy between groups. A
calculation of d' shows no difference for the High FOI
condition (M = 1.74) and the low FOI condition (M =
1.76), F (1, 87) = .01, p = .916.

General discussion
This experiment demonstrated the influence of fear
of isolation on attention and memory. Inducing a
higher level of FOI in American college students made
their attention more similar to that of East Asian
students observed in previous studies. Participants in
the High FOI condition showed greater accuracy for the
memory of background information than did those in
the Low FOI condition. When Fear of Negative
Evaluation scale values were incorporated into the
analyses as a covariate, they were significantly related
to the degree of sensitivity to context, and the strength
of the effect of FOI manipulation was decreased.
However, an alternative interpretation of the
current results is that the induction of low FOI
primarily induced the feeling of guilt, and hence a more
negative mood than in the condition designed to induce
high FOI. Some previous studies showed that negative
mood leads to more analytic thinking (Bolte, Goschke,
& Kuhl, 2003). For example, according to the
personality systems interaction theory (Bolte et al.,

687

reflects the basic functioning of the cognitive
architecture. However, work on cultural differences
points out dimensions along which performance on
cognitive tasks may reflect learned strategies rather
than constraints of the cognitive architecture itself. In
line with this viewpoint, the study we present in this
paper indicates that “some” of the observed cultural
differences may reflect straightforward differences in
chronic social anxiety rather than fundamental
differences in knowledge gathered over years of
experience within a culture.
Finally, it is important to bear in mind that we
induced significant differences in memory for objects
based on a simple manipulation of a participant's level
of fear of isolation. As these findings demonstrate, a
straightforward change in motivational state can lead to
a large difference in basic cognitive functioning. This
work highlights the need to include more research on
the influence of motivation on cognitive processing
within the canon of research in Cognitive Science.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NIDA grant NIH
#1 R21 DA015211-01A1 to the second author. The
authors thank Hunt Stilwell, Lisa Narvaez, Levy Larkey,
Serge Block, Nathan Janak and Leora Orent for helpful
discussion about and/or aid in conducting experiments.
They also thank Takahiko Masuda and Richard Nisbett
for their providing experimental materials for the
current study.

References
Aaker, J. L., & Lee, A. Y. (2001). "I" seek pleasures
and "we" avoid pains: The role of self-regulatory
goals in information processing and persuasion.
Journal of Consumer Research, 28(1), 33-49.
Bolte, A., Goschke, T., & Kuhl, J. (2003). Emotion and
intuition: Effects of positive and negative mood on
implicit judgments of semantic coherence.
Psychological Science, 14(5), 416-421.
Briley, D. A., & Wyer, R. S. (2002). The effect of
group membership salience on the avoidance of
negative outcomes: Implications for social and
consumer decisions. Journal of Consumer Research,
29(3), 400-415.
Chiu, C. Y., Morris, M. W., Hong, Y. Y., & Menon, T.
(2000). Motivated cultural cognition: The impact of
implicit cultural theories on dispositional attribution
varies as a function of need for closure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 78(2), 247-259.
Dinnel, D. L., Kleinknecht, R. A., & Tanaka-Matsumi,
J. (2002). A cross-cultural comparison of social
phobia symptoms. Journal of Psychopathology and
Behavioral Assessment, 24(2), 75-84.
Foa, E. B., Cashman, L., Jaycox, L., & Perry, K. (1997).
The validation of a self-report measure of

688

posttraumatic stress disorder: The Posttraumatic
Diagnostic Scale. Psychological Assessment, 9(4),
445-451.
Gardner, W. L., Gabriel, S., & Lee, A. Y. (1999). "I"
value freedom, but "we" value relationships: Selfconstrual priming mirrors cultural differences in
judgment. Psychological Science, 10(4), 321-326.
Gilbert, D., Fiske, S. T., & Lindzey, G. (1998). The
handbook of social psychology (4th ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Gilbert, P. (2001). Evolution and social anxiety. The
role of attraction, social competition, and social
hierarchies. The Psychiatric Clinics Of North
America, 24(4), 723-751.
Hong, Y. Y., Chan, G., Chiu, C. Y., Wong, R. Y. M.,
Hansen, I. G., Lee, S. L., Tong, Y. Y., & Fu, H. Y.
(2003). How are social identities linked to selfconception and intergroup orientation? The
moderating effect of implicit theories. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(6), 1147-1160.
Hsee, C. K., & Weber, E. U. (1999). Cross-national
differences in risk preference and lay predictions.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12(2), 165179.
Kim, K. I., & Markman, A. B. (2003). The effect of
cultural differences in fear of isolation on dialectical
reasoning. Paper presented at the 27th Annual
Conferences of the Cognitive Science Society,
Boston, USA.
Kim, K. I., & Markman, A. B. (in preparation).
Differences in fear of isolation as an explanation of
cultural differences: Evidence from memory and
reasoning.
Kuhl, J., & Kazen, M. (1999). Volitional facilitation of
difficult intentions: Joint activation of intention
memory and positive affect removes Stroop
interference. Journal of Experimental PsychologyGeneral, 128(3), 382-399.
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending
holistically versus analytically: Comparing the
context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5),
922-934.
Morris, M. W., & Peng, K. (1994). Culture and Cause American and Chinese Attributions for Social and
Physical Events. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67(6), 949-971.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K. P., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A.
(2001). Culture and systems of thought: Holistic
versus analytic cognition. Psychological Review,
108(2), 291-310.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1984). The spiral of silence :
public opinion, our social skin. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Okazaki, S. (1997). Sources of ethnic differences
between Asian American and White American
college students on measures of depression and social

anxiety. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106(1),
52-60.
Okazaki, S., Liu, J. F., Longworth, S. L., & Minn, J. Y.
(2002). Asian American-white American differences
in expressions of social anxiety: a replication and
extension. Cultural Diversity & Ethnic Minority
Psychology, 8(3), 234-247.
Sato, T., & McCann, D. (1998). Individual differences
in relatedness and individuality: An exploration of
two constructs. Personality and Individual
Differences, 24(6), 847-859.
Scheufele, D. A., Shanahan, J., & Lee, E. (2001). Real
talk - Manipulating the dependent variable in spiral
of silence research. Communication Research, 28(3),
304-324.
Shoemaker, P. J., Breen, M., & Stamper, M. (2000).
Fear of social isolation: testing an assumption from
the spiral of silence. IRISH communication review, 8,
65-78.
Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measurement of
social-evaluative anxiety. Journal of consulting and
clinical psychology, 33(4), 448-457.

689

