UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Grammatical Gender and Meaning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88x2t3h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Vigliocco, Gabriella
Vinson, David P.
Paganelli, Federica

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Grammatical Gender and Meaning
Gabriella Vigliocco (g.Vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London, Gower Street
London WC1H 6BT, England

David P. Vinson (d.vinson@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London, Gower Street
London WC1H 6BT, England

Federica Paganelli (f.paganell@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University College London, Gower Street
London WC1H 6BT, England
Abstract
Two experiments assessed whether grammatical gender of
Italian nouns referring to animals and tools affects conceptual
representations of the corresponding objects, comparing results from Italian and English. In the first experiment, we elicited semantic substitution errors (e.g., saying “hammer” when
“axe” is intended), finding language-specific gender effects
(more errors in Italian than English for words sharing gender)
for words referring to animals but not for words referring to
tools. In the second experiment, words sharing gender were
judged as more similar in meaning by Italian speakers than
English speakers, again only for animals and not for tools.
Moreover, no such gender effect was observed for pictures of
the same animals.

Introduction
As Roman Jakobson (1959) put it: "Languages differ essentially in what they must convey and not in what they may
convey" (p.236). That is, languages differ in which conceptual or formal properties must be realized in sentential form.
For example, in English the word "friend" does not indicate
the sex of the friend, while in Italian the corresponding word
is differentially inflected for a man ("amico") or a woman
("amica"). In English, adjectives used as predicates (e.g.,
"tall" in "The boy is tall" and “The girl is tall”) do not agree
in gender with the subject of the sentence, while they must
in Italian (e.g., "Il ragazzo e’ alto" or “La ragazza e’ alta”).
Such differences in obligatory expression may imply that
speakers of different languages pay more or less attention to
those dimensions of meaning. For example, Italian speakers
may pay more attention to the sex of referents than English
speakers. By extension, Italian speakers may tend to think of
objects in the world as more male- or female-like on the
basis of the words’ grammatical gender (as suggested by the
work of, e.g. Boroditsky, Schmidt & Phillips, 2003; Sera,
Elieff, Forbes, Burch, Rodriguez, & Dubois, 2002). But how
strong and pervasive can these effects be?
Here we present experiments investigating the conditions
under which effects of a language-specific property (grammatical gender of Italian nouns) are present, contrasting
performance by Italian and English speakers on translationequivalent nouns. Grammatical gender allows a conservative test of language-specific effects on cognition because it

is largely arbitrarily linked to meaning (although see Foundalis, 2002).
How could grammatical gender affect conceptual representations for objects? Effects of grammatical gender could
arise as a consequence of general language-learning mechanisms based on similarity. According to this hypothesis (to
which we will refer as “Similarity and Gender”), words that
are similar to each other on any linguistic dimension (including but not limited to grammatical gender) may become
more semantically similar as a consequence of the fact that
words of the same syntactic class (e.g., same gender, same
grammatical class, etc.) appear in the same syntactic contexts. For example, in languages with grammatical gender,
nouns are used in sentences along with gender-marked determiners and adjectives, whether the nouns refer to
sexuated entities or not. Sensitivity to shared sentence context could allow children to bootstrap properties of similarity in meaning from the syntactic contexts in which the
words occur during language acquisition (Landauer & Dumais, 1997). This hypothesis does not require any explicit
associations between grammatical gender and sex of human
referents; instead it predicts that any effects of grammatical
gender on semantic representations should be found in any
gendered language (no matter how many gender classes are
in the language), and that they should be found for all words
(whether the referents are sexuated or not).
However, mechanisms mediating such effects may be more
specific and limited. According to this other hypothesis (to
which we will refer as “Sex and Gender”), effects of grammatical gender could arise because children would treat all
grammatical categories as revealing specific semantic properties (Boroditsky, et al., 2003). In the case of grammatical
gender, these effects would require linking the grammatical
gender of nouns referring to humans to the sex of referents.
Across languages there is a core correspondence between
grammatical marking of gender and biological sex (Corbett,
1991), although the consistency of this mapping differs
across languages. According to this view, children learning
a gendered language would first notice the core correspondence between the gender of nouns and male/female semantic properties of human referents (and some animals). They
would then generalize this correspondence to other nouns
for which there is no clear conceptual foundation of gender,

1405

assigning male or female features to referents in agreement
with the grammatical gender of the corresponding words.
Thus, words of the same gender would be more similar
among themselves than words of different gender because
they share male or female-like properties. Such a mechanism could be strongest for languages with the greatest degree of correspondence between the gender of nouns referring to humans and the sex of referents. This is the case in
Romance languages which have only two genders and few
exceptions to the consistent mapping between the gender of
nouns referring to humans and sex of the referents. It could
be weaker (if present at all) in languages with multiple genders and/or in which nouns referring to humans fall into
more than two classes. Moreover, any effect of gender could
be stronger for words referring to sexuated entities (e.g.
animals) than for words referring to objects and abstract
concepts, because semantic properties of sex are less relevant in these latter domains. Most of the studies investigating language-specific effects of grammatical gender (e.g.
Boroditsky, et al., 2003; Sera, et al., 2002) have tested this
hypothesis, either implicitly or explicitly.
In the experiments below we tested some predictions stemming from these views, considering grammatical gender of
Italian nouns. As in other Romance languages, all nouns in
Italian are marked for gender, either masculine or feminine.
For nouns referring to humans and some animals, the gender
depends on the sex of the referent (e.g., “ragazzo/ragazza”
[boy/girl]; “leone/leonessa” [lion/lioness]), while for other
animals gender does not depend upon the sex of the referent
(e.g., “lupo” refers to both male and female wolves, although it is possible to mark the gender in some cases). For
words referring to objects and abstract entities, instead,
there are no such clear semantic correlates (with certain
exceptions not addressed here). We investigate two semantic fields, animals and tools, to test the hypotheses outlined
above. Both predict language-specific effects of grammatical gender on meaning, such that word pairs sharing Italian
gender will show greater semantic similarity effects than the
same word pairs in English translation. The two hypotheses
make different predictions, however, suggesting that these
effects may have different breadth. The Sex and Gender
hypothesis predicts that greater language-specific gender
effects should be observed for animals than for tools (as
animals are sexuated entities), while the Similarity and
Gender hypothesis predicts no category difference.

Experiment 1
Here we assessed whether grammatical gender affects online linguistic tasks such as picture naming. We begin with a
linguistic task, as finding language-specific gender effects is
not only evidence for a “thinking for speaking” view of language-specific effects on cognition (Slobin, 1996), but is
also a pre-requisite to testing for broader language specificity in tasks less tightly tied to linguistic encoding. We focus
upon semantic substitution errors (i.e., instead of producing
a target word, speakers produce another word related in
meaning, e.g., saying “hammer” when “saw” is intended) in
picture naming. In previous work we have introduced a con-

tinuous picture-naming paradigm to elicit such errors (Vigliocco, Vinson, Lewis & Garrett, in press). Here we investigate whether semantic substitution errors in Italian tend to
preserve the gender of the target word (i.e., masculine nouns
are more likely to substitute for other masculine nouns, and
feminine nouns for other feminine nouns). It is generally
agreed upon in the language production literature that semantic substitutions arise during the process of retrieving
the lexical entry corresponding to a concept, thus tapping
into the interface between linguistic and conceptual knowledge (e.g., Garrett, 1984; Levelt, 1989). Moreover, these
errors are sensitive to fine-grained semantic similarity: the
likelihood of errors increases with greater semantic similarity (Vigliocco et al., in press). Thus, other factors being
equal, if grammatical gender has a semantic effect, it should
increase the likelihood that words of the same gender substitute for each other in a language such as Italian. However,
other factors may not necessarily be equal, particularly nonlanguage-specific factors such as semantic similarity not
related to gender in a language-specific manner, or visual
similarity among pictorial referents. In order to provide the
tightest controls, we selected English as a baseline comparison language, using the same items (translation equivalent
words) and the same tasks. This allows us to test for language-specific effects of Italian gender while avoiding concerns related to general semantic or visual similarity among
the items used in our experiments. We investigate whether
Italian errors tend to preserve gender above the English
baseline level (based upon assigning Italian gender to English translations). It should also be noted that substitution
errors are sensitive to phonological similarity between target
and intruder (Dell & Reich, 1981), and Italian gender does
have strong and reliable phonological correlates. To minimize the possibility that any observed language-specific
effects of gender are due to phonological similarity, we also
conducted analyses in which we excluded all errors with
substantial phonological similarity to the target word.

Method
Participants
Participants were 27 native speakers of Italian from the
London community and 20 English speakers from the UCL
subject pool. The Italian participants had only rudimentary
knowledge of English, and none of the English speakers
reported moderate or better competence in any Romance
language.
Materials
We selected 27 black and white line drawings of animals,
avoiding those animals for which the gender of the noun
strictly depends upon the sex of the referent. We further
selected 50 black and white line drawings of tools. Most
pictures came from Snodgrass and Vanderwart (1980), with
additional ones prepared for the experiment. Name agreement was established for each of our participants during the
experimental session (see also Vigliocco et al., in press); in
general there was very strong name agreement in both languages, further ensuring that the words are suitable translation equivalents. Because in previous work we have established that substitution errors in this paradigm do not cross

1406

semantic fields, we used a blocked presentation design, analyzing the data for the animals and the tools separately. We
presented 77 blocks of 10 pictures each to every participant.
Each block contained only animal or tool pictures (presented in random order within the block), and each picture
appeared 10 times in the course of the experiment.
Procedure
The experiment began with a name agreement phase in
which each picture was presented and participants were
asked to name them. This phase allowed us to ensure name
agreement across participants and also to identify specific
naming preferences by individual participants (which might
otherwise have been considered errors). Next, a practice
series of blocks were presented in which the speed of presentation of each picture was adjusted for each participant
(between 600ms and 1100ms) in order to render the task
difficult but manageable for each speaker. After the training,
the experiment started. Participants were told that their task
was to name each picture as it appeared on a computer
screen as quickly as possible.
Scoring Criteria
Participants' responses were transcribed and scored in the
following categories: Correct responses: participants uttered
the correct target word. Different label: participants used a
different word than our intended target (e.g. "stag" for
"deer"), but this different label was consistently used by that
participant and did not refer to another item in the experiment. Lexical errors: participants produced a word that differed from the target and that did not qualify as a "different
label". Lexical errors were further classified as "out of set"
(intruding words that are not among the experimental items)
and "within set" (those items from within the present response set). Because of the repeated presentation of a limited set of pictures to be named, most lexical errors tended
to be other items from the response set. Because of this, and
to minimize the possibility of linguistic variability beyond
this particular set of item, analyses were performed only
upon within-set lexical errors items. Miscellanea: other responses not included above, such as dysfluencies, incomplete utterances, inaudible responses, omissions and selfcorrections. Table 1 reports a breakdown of the proportions
of responses in the different scoring categories.
Table 1: Response Types
(IT: Italian, EN: English; A: Animals, T: Tools)
Response type
Correct &
Different Label
Lexical errors
Within-set
Out of set
Miscellanea

IT: A

EN: A

IT: T

EN: T

.876

.935

.948

.910

.021
.004
.100

.024
.001
.04

.013
.002
.133

.018
.002
.062

or for which the average correct performance differed more
than 15% across the two languages in order to exclude additional cross-cultural differences. For each semantic field
(animals and tools) we carried out two 2x2 ANOVAs. In all
ANOVAs, proportion of errors was the dependent variable
with target-error pair as a random factor. Independent variables were language (Italian, English) and Italian gender
(shared between target and intruder or not shared). English
words were assigned Italian gender for the purpose of the
analysis. The first ANOVA was carried out on the withinset errors remaining after we excluded the cases discussed
above (for animals: 103 errors in Italian and 73 errors in
English; for tools: 90 in Italian, and 117 in English). For
animals, this analysis showed a significant interaction between language and Italian gender, such that errors sharing
gender with the target were more common in Italian (68%)
than in English (41%); F(1,63) = 8.03, p = .006. Neither
main effect was significant (F < 1). The results of the analysis for tools were similar; only the interaction between language and gender was significant: gender preservation was
greater in Italian (61%) than in English (36%); F(1,79) =
4.6, p = .04; main effect Fs < 1).
In the second analysis we excluded all errors for which the
target and the intruder shared phonological similarity. Phonological similarity between target and intruder was assessed as in Vigliocco et al. (in press). In this second analysis, only errors for which either of two measures of phonological overlap did not exceed the average + one standard
deviation of that measure (in either language) were considered (for animals, leaving 64 errors in Italian and 42 in English; for tools, leaving 39 errors in Italian and 42 in English). This analysis for animals also showed a significant
interaction between language and gender; such that even
among target-intruder pairs with low phonological similarity, Italian target-intruder pairs tended to share gender
(77%) more often than English pairs (43%) (interaction F(1,
37) = 5.88, p = .020; main effect Fs < 1). However, this interaction was not significant in the analysis for tools (all Fs
< 1). Thus, for the tools, the language x gender effect observed in the complete set of errors may just be a consequence of greater phonological similarity in Italian for
words sharing the same gender.
To summarize the results of this experiment, we found language-specific effects of grammatical gender; gender affects
the likelihood of producing a lexical error for Italian speakers, compared to the errors produced by English speakers
naming exactly the same pictures. This language-specific
effect of grammatical gender, however, survives only for
words referring to animals once phonological similarity is
taken into account. This result suggests that languagespecific effects are constrained even in a linguistic encoding
task such as picture naming.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion
All analyses were carried out on within-set lexical errors.
First, we eliminated all those items for which the average
correct performance was not above 75% in both languages

The results of the error induction task in Experiment 1 show
that language-specific effects of grammatical gender can be
observed in an on-line task requiring lexical retrieval. In this

1407

second experiment we sought to obtain converging evidence
using a very different task. Moreover, we assessed the generalizability of these effects beyond linguistic materials by
performing the same experiment using pictures as well as
words as stimuli. As in Experiment 1, we contrast responses
from Italian speakers for words and pictures referring to
animals and tools with responses from English speakers. In
this experiment we used the triadic similarity judgment task.
Speakers of Italian and English were presented with triplets
of words or pictures (translation equivalents in Italian and
English) and their task was to judge which two of the three
were more similar in meaning. This task has been successfully used in previous studies investigating semantic organization and its impairments (Fisher, 1994; Garrard, Carroll,
Vinson & Vigliocco, in press). Particularly relevant here are
the following facts. First, because all possible combinations
of triads of a relatively small set of items are presented to
the participants, this task allows us to consider semantic
similarity at a very fine-grained level. Second, this task has
been shown to be sensitive to linguistic variables at the interface between meaning and syntax. For example, Fisher
(1994) showed that English speakers’ judgments reflected
differences in the subcategorization requirements of semantically related verbs; Garrard et al (in press) showed that
English speakers’ judgments reflected the distinction between “count” and “mass” nouns for words referring to food
items (for which the semantic divide between entities and
substances is less obvious). Thus, if grammatical gender of
Italian nouns exerts influence upon semantic similarity, we
should observe language-specific effects in this task. If this
effect extends beyond the use of linguistic materials we
should observe it also with pictures.
Because all possible triads within a category are to be presented to the participants, and in order to maximize the opportunity of observing grammatical gender effects, which
could be masked by extreme semantic diversity in the item
set, all participants were presented with words from only
one of two categories (land animals in Experiment 2a, and
tools in Experiment 2b), reported separately below.

Experiment 2a: Animals
Method
Participants
Participants were 24 native speakers of Italian from the
London community, and 24 native English speakers from
the University College London participant pool. The Italian
participants had only rudimentary knowledge of English,
and none of the English speakers reported moderate or better competence in any Romance language.
Materials
Words (and corresponding pictures) referring to 20 animals
were selected for the experiment. Words were translation
equivalents in Italian and English. The words and the pictures used were a subset of those used in Experiment 1.
Triads for the Italian and English conditions were created by
first assembling all possible three-word combinations of the

20 items in the experimental set (for a total of 1,140 triads).
The order of words in each triad was randomized; then the
order of triads was randomized across participants. A separate set of picture triads were then created by replacing each
word with its corresponding picture (this set was identical
for Italian and English participants). Twelve participants
from each language were assigned to the word condition and
twelve to the picture condition. In each modality (word or
picture) and language (Italian or English) condition, the
1,140 triads were divided into three lists, each containing
380 triads of words or pictures.
Procedure
All participants were told that the experiment concerned
participants' judgments of meaning similarity among groups
of words (or pictures), and that their task was to choose the
two words (or pictures) out of the three which were more
similar in meaning and to delete the odd one out. Instructions emphasized that the decision was to be made on the
basis of meaning and not other types of similarity between
the items (e.g., phonological similarity among the words or
visual similarity among the pictures). After completing the
task, participants were asked to describe the strategies they
may have used to perform the task, to list the easiest and
most difficult decisions, etc. For the purpose of the present
study, the most important aspect of these questions was
whether any Italian participants mentioned grammatical
gender as an overt basis for making their decisions.
Design and Analysis
The dependent variable was similarity ratio: the number of
times that a given pair of words/pictures was selected as
“similar”, divided by the number of triads in which those
two items appeared in the experiment. Four participants
completed each list of 380 items; thus each triad (either
words or pictures) was judged by four different speakers of
a language. Results were analyzed using a three-way mixed
ANOVA with item pairs as a random factor. Independent
variables were language (English or Italian, manipulated
within item pairs), modality (words or pictures, manipulated
within item pairs) and Italian gender (same Italian gender;
different Italian gender, manipulated between item pairs).
As in Experiment 1 this latter factor refers to the gender of
the Italian translation or label.

Results and Discussion
No Italian participant indicated that they used grammatical
gender in their similarity judgments in the postexperimental questionnaire. Table 2 reports the average
similarity proportions for items of same vs. different Italian
gender as a functions of language and modality.

1408

Table 2: Average similarity ratios in Experiment 2a
(Standard errors in brackets)

Language
Modality
______________________

Results and Discussion
No Italian participant indicated that they used grammatical
gender in their similarity judgments in the postexperimental questionnaire. Table 3 reports the average
similarity proportions for items of same vs. different (Italian
gender as a functions of language and modality.

Grammatical Gender
Same
Different
_________________

Italian

Words
Pictures

.336 [.022] .331 [.021]
.315 [.026] .351 [.025]

English

Words
Pictures

.311 [.026] .354 [.025]
.315 [.025] .351 [.024]

Table 3: Average similarity ratios in Experiment 2b (Standard errors in brackets).

Language
Modality
______________________

Results were analyzed using a three-way mixed ANOVA
investigating the effect of language, modality and Italian
gender on similarity proportions. Only the three-way interaction (Language x Modality x Gender) reached significance (F(1,188)=6.539, p=.013); no other main effects and
interactions were significant (all Fs < 1). Analysis of simple
interaction effects within each modality revealed that the
similarity proportion for same-gender items was relatively
higher for Italian word judgments than for English word
judgments (with the corresponding difference in the opposite direction for words differing in Italian gender), while
there was no such language difference for picture judgments
by speakers of either language.
Thus, in this experiment we found language-specific effects
of grammatical gender for words referring to animals, but
not for pictures referring to the same animals; Italian speakers’ judgments of meaning similarity seem to be affected by
shared grammatical gender. Experiment 2b assessed
whether such a gender effect is present for tools.

Experiment 2b: Tools

Grammatical Gender
Same
Different
_________________

Italian

Words
Pictures

.318 [.018] .348 [.017]
.314 [.020] .352 [.019]

English

Words
Pictures

.316 [.017] .348 [.017]
.308 [.019] .357 [.018]

Results were analyzed using a three-way mixed ANOVA
investigating the effect of language, modality and Italian
gender on similarity proportions. No main effects or interactions were significant (Fs < 1), with the exception of the
main effect of gender which was marginal (F(1,274) = 2.49,
p = .115). This indicates an underlying tendency for tools
sharing Italian gender to be more similar than items with
different Italian gender. Because no interaction between
language and Italian gender was observed, this main effect
cannot reflect language-specificity. Thus, whereas grammatical gender affected Italian speakers’ judgments of
meaning similarity for words referring to land animals, no
such effect was observed for either words or pictures referring to tools.

Method

General Discussion

Participants
Participants were 48 native speakers of Italian from the
London community, and 48 native English speakers from
the University College London participant pool. The Italian
participants had only rudimentary knowledge of English,
none of the English speakers reported moderate or better
competence in any Romance language. None of them had
participated in Experiment 2a.
Materials
Words (and corresponding pictures) referring to 24 tools
were selected for the experiment. Words were translation
equivalents in Italian and English. The words and the pictures used were a subset of those used in Experiment 1.
Word and picture triads for the Italian and English conditions were created as in Experiment 2a. In this experiment
all possible three-word combinations of the 24 items in the
experimental set yielded a total of 2,024 triads. These triads
were divided into six lists each containing 337 or 338 words
or pictures. This experiment was otherwise the same as in
Experiment 2a.

In the experiments reported above, we explored languagespecific effects of Italian grammatical gender on semantic
representations for the corresponding objects. These experiments combined on-line and off-line methodologies,
assessing effects for two different semantic fields: one for
which associations between grammatical gender and sex can
be plausibly built (animals) and one for which they cannot
(tools). Moreover, we further explored gender effects within
the same task, using both words and pictures as stimuli, in
order to establish the generalizability of any effect.
We found that language-specific effects of Italian grammatical gender are present, but highly limited. They are limited to a semantic field (animals) in which entities have biological gender, and in which the gender of some nouns can
depend on the sex of the referent. However, this effect does
not extend to a field for which distinctions in grammatical
gender have no conceptual foundation (tools). These effects
are further limited to tasks that recruit linguistic knowledge
(picture naming or similarity judgments for words, but not
similarity judgments for pictures).

1409

Our results suggest a far more limited role of grammatical
gender on semantic representations than it has been suggested in previous studies. For example, Sera et al (2002)
showed that grammatical gender of Spanish and French
nouns influenced speakers’ assignment of a male or female
voice to inanimate (and animate) objects, regardless whether
the task was carried out using words or pictures as stimuli.
However, speakers might have used gender in a strategic
manner in this task. Boroditsky, et al. (2003) report studies
suggesting that grammatical gender may have implicit effects. However, these studies are reported without enough
methodological detail to address possible reasons for the
different results.
Our results suggest that these gender effects are linked to
assigning male- or female-like semantic properties to referents in agreement with the gender of the nouns. They provide evidence for a very constrained version of the Sex and
Gender hypothesis described in the introduction. According
to this view, language-specific grammatical gender effects
should be stronger for semantic fields in which there is a
conceptual motivation for establishing a link between gender of words and sex of the referent (such as animals), than
for fields for which there is not such a clear conceptual motivation (such as tools). This hypothesis also predicts that
language-specific effects of gender on meaning should be
stronger for languages such as Italian that have strong transparent links between gender of nouns and sex of referents
(male entities strongly tend to have masculine gender, and
female entities strongly tend to have feminine gender). Although the present experiments do not directly address this
second prediction, some other evidence is relevant here.
Vigliocco, Vinson, Indefrey, Levelt and Hellwig (2004)
investigated gender effects on semantic substitution errors
in German, in a study similar to Experiment 1. Although
German has grammatical gender, in contrast to Italian it has
three genders (masculine, feminine and neuter) and a less
transparent correspondence between the gender of nouns
and sex of referents. No effect of grammatical gender was
found on semantic substitution errors for animals (at least
when speakers were asked to produce bare nouns). These
different lines of investigation converge in suggesting that
language-specific effects of gender do not arise as a consequence of a general mechanism sensitive to similarity.
Finally, the difference we observe in Experiment 2 between
word and picture stimuli suggests that grammatical gender
of Italian nouns (referring to animals) affects “thinking for
speaking”, but does not affect conceptual representations
when language is not required (Slobin, 1996).

Acknowledgments
The work reported here has been supported by a Human
Frontier Science Program grant (HFSP148/2000) and an
Economic and Social Research Council grant
(RES000230038) to Gabriella Vigliocco. We thank Jo Arciuli and Belen Lopez-Cutrin for help in preparing this
manuscript.

References
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L., Phillips, W. (2003). Sex, syntax
and semantics. In D. Gentner and S. Goldin-Meadow
(Eds.), Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of Language and Thought, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Corbett, G.G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dell, G.S., & Reich, P.A. (1981). Stages in sentence production: An analysis of speech error data. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 611-629.
Fisher, C. (1994). Structure and meaning in the verb lexicon: Input for a syntax-aided verb learning procedure.
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 473-517.
Foundalis, H.E. (2002). Evolution of gender in IndoEuropean languages. Proceedings of the 24th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Fairfax, VA.
Garrard, P., Carroll, E., Vinson, D.P., & Vigliocco, G. (in
press). Dissociating lexico-semantics and lexico-syntax in
semantic dementia. Neurocase.
Garrett, M. F. (1984). The organization of processing structure for language production: Application to aphasic
speech. In D. Caplan, A. R. Lecours and A. Smith (Eds.),
Biological perspectives on language. (pp. 172-193).
Cambridge: MA: MIT Press.
Jakobson, R., (1959) On linguistic aspects of translation, in
R.A. Brower (ed.), On translation, (p.232-239). Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press.
Landauer, T. K., Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato's
problem: the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sera, M.D., Elieff, C., Forbes, J., Burch, M.C., Rodriguez,
W. & Dubois, D.P. (2002). When language affects cognition and when it does not: An analysis of grammatical
gender and classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 377-397.
Slobin, D. (1996). From "thought and language" to "thinking for speaking". In J. Gumperz & S. Levinson (Eds.),
Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. (pp. 70-96). Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Snodgrass, J. G. & Vanderwart, M. (1980). A standardized
set of 260 pictures: Norms for name agreement, image
agreement, familiarity, and visual complexity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 6, 174-215.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D., Indefrey, P., Levelt, W., Hellwig,
F. (2004). The interplay between meaning and syntax in
language production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30, 483-497.
Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P, Lewis, W. & Garrett, M.F. (in
press). The meaning of object and action words. Cognitive
Psychology.

1410

