UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Honorifics in Japanese Sentence Interpretation: Clues to the Missing Actor

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hk2k58k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Yoshimura, Yuki
MacWhinney, Brian

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Honorifics in Japanese Sentence Interpretation:
Clues to the Missing Actor
Yuki Yoshimura (yyuki@cmu.edu)
Department of Modern Languages, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

Brian MacWhinney (macw@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh PA 15213 USA

orders such as the doctor met the patient (SVO), the patient
the doctor met (OSV), and the patient met the doctor (OVS).
Each of these sentences yields the same interpretation with
the doctor as the agent. Instead of relying on a word order
cue, Japanese has case markers, such as ga (subject marker),
wa (topic marker), o (object marker), and ni (dative marker)
to mark case roles. The exact grammatical characterization
of these participles has been the subject of dispute for years
among Japanese linguists (Kuno, 1973), but there is little
disagreement regarding the general importance of case role
markings in the language. In general, a noun followed by
the subject marker ga is likely to have an agentive role in
any word order in Japanese. For example, a sentence like
kanja (patient) ni (dative marker) atta (met) isha (doctor) ga
(subject marker), in the order of OVS provides a meaning
the doctor met the patient, although OVS order is not
canonical in Japanese.

Abstract
Cross-linguistic research in the framework of the Competition
Model (MacWhinney & Bates, 1989) has shown that casemarking is the major cue to sentence interpretation in
Japanese, whereas other cues such as animacy and word order
are much weaker. Japanese is a pro-drop language. Many
Japanese sentences are grammatical without subjects and
objects. When subjects are absent, case-markers are also
unavailable to use. However, Japanese honorific and humble
verbs may provide important information to determine the
agent when the case-marking cue is absent. This study
examined the usage of honorific and humble verbs as the
agreement cue in Japanese sentence interpretation by native
speakers in comparison to their usage by second language
learners of Japanese.

Introduction
Japanese uses specific affixes on the verb to mark social
relations of power and solidarity. These markings are called
honorifics. This use of formal grammatical markings is a
unique feature of Japanese that has often been used as
evidence for the operation of links between language,
culture and thought (Whorf, 1967). Apart from these
fascinating links to culture, honorifics can also serve the
more mundane function of helping to distinguish the actor
of the transitive verb. This paper is aimed at discovering the
role of the verbal agreement cue in processing by native
speakers. We are also interested in tracking the acquisition
of this cue by second language learners of Japanese. Our
study is couched within the framework of the Competition
Model (MacWhinney & Bates, 1989) which emphasizes the
relation between statistical regularities in the language and
the strength of these cues for both first (L1) and second (L2)
language speakers.
In order to interpret a transitive sentence, we have to
identify the actor or agent. In the English sentence, the
doctor met the patient, native speakers interpret the doctor
as an agent who was engaged in meeting someone. This is
because nouns placed before verbs are considered to be the
actor in English. On the other hand, Japanese uses a
completely different set of cues to determine the actor or
agent. Although it has a basic SOV word order as in the
doctor the patient met, Japanese also allows other word

Cue Competition
Some theories tend to emphasize the universality of
syntactic types across languages and the importance of a
single “basic” order within languages (Chomsky, 1981).
However, from the viewpoint of processing models, online
sentence interpretation must rely at least initially on surface
cues to role marking, and these cues vary markedly across
languages. As we have already seen, English sentence
interpretation relies heavily on word order (Bates &
MacWhinney, 1989). This reliance would seem to support
the central role of a fixed word order, as conceived in
generative linguistic theories. However, other languages do
not follow this pattern. A series of previous studies in the
framework of the Competition Model have shown that case
marking is the dominant cue in Japanese, Hungarian, and
German, whereas subject-verb agreement cue is important
in Italian, French and Spanish, and animacy distinction is
the crucial determiner of interpretation in Chinese sentences
(MacWhinney & Bates, 1989). English is unique in this
sense in that it is the only well-studied language that
depends so heavily on a word order cue.
Cue usage also varies developmentally within a single
language. Children first focus on conspicuous cues that they
can pick up easily (Slobin & Bever, 1982). Gradually they
shift their cue usage to those that have high availability and

1494

reliability in the language (McDonald, 1989). For example,
Japanese children first focus on animacy distinction,
because they already possess fairly clear ideas about which
nouns are animate and which are inanimate. In contrast,
learning of the case-marking system is a lot more complex
than animacy, although it emerges eventually as the
dominant cue in Japanese. Thus Japanese children rely on
the animacy cue to interpret sentences first and then they
later shift their cue usage to the case-marking cue which has
high availability and reliability, i.e., it is a cue which is
often present and which usually provides a correct
interpretation.
Typically, languages make use of several cues for
marking case roles. In most sentences, these cues agree with
each other to guide a correct interpretation, though cues
sometimes compete against each other. Sentences with
inanimate subjects, such as The study looked at Japanese
children, are quite common in written English. Here, word
order provides a cue indicating that the study is the agent,
whereas the animacy cue suggests that Japanese children
should be the agent, because an animate noun is generally
preferred as agent because of its dynamicity. Despite this
cue competition, word order wins over animacy because
word order has the highest availability and reliability in
English (McDonald, 1987). On the other hand, when word
order and animacy compete in Japanese sentences, animacy
wins over word order because animacy is stronger in
Japanese. Thus, in the parallel Japanese sentence Japanese
children would be the agent (Sasaki & MacWhinney, in
press). Similarly, when all of case marking, word order and
animacy compete, case marking wins over animacy, and
animacy wins over word order (case > animacy > word
order), because case is the strongest cue in Japanese (Sasaki
& MacWhinney, in press). Because Japanese word order is
so flexible, it is the weakest cue in Japanese.
Unlike children’s speech or child first language
acquisition, in adult Japanese language use, in addition to
theses basic cues, new cue emerges to compete with the
other basic cues. This new cue is the honorific cue which is
used along with verbs as morphological markings. Honorific
and humble verbs are not used in children’s speech because
children are not yet expected to fully understand
hierarchical society in Japanese culture that is reflected in
the language use. However, the appropriate use of honorific
and humble verbs becomes crucial in order to survive in
adult Japanese society.

Cultural and Linguistic Interactions
Like Spanish and Italian, Japanese allows frequent omission
of subject and object nominals. In English, pro-drop
sentences, such as ∅ saw the black cat, are considered to be
ungrammatical. However, neko (cat) o (object marker) mita
(saw) in Japanese is completely grammatical. Some
Japanese linguists even claim that it is inappropriate to use
the word “pro-drop” to describe Japanese constructions
because subjects are not dropped but absent from the
beginning (Kaneya, 2002). In Japanese, sentences without

subjects and objects are completely grammatical. For
example, the following short dialogue is very common in
Japanese conversation.
A: “kuroi neko mita?”
[black cat saw?]
B: “un, mita.”
[yeah, saw]
The subject is absent in utterance A, and both the subject
and object are absent in utterance B. Yet, they are both
grammatical (see more of these examples in Kaneya, 2002).
Linguistically, word order cannot be an important cue
because subjects and sometimes objects are both dropped in
Japanese.
Japanese also marks cultural preferences regarding the
status of the grammatical third person through the
morphology of verbs and adjectives. Some verbs and
adjectives carry information identifying the agent. However,
the shape of this information is limited in specific ways,
because Japanese culture inhibits stepping into others’
psychological or physiological territory (Kamio, 1995).
Verbs and adjectives that describe a third person’s mental
state have a special conjugation. Adjectives are usually used
with –garu for third person, and verbs for third person are
used in the –teiru form. For example, adjectives like hoshii
(want, desirable), ureshii (happy), itai (painful) are all used
with the adjectival third person marker –garu as in hoshigaru, ureshi-garu, ita-garu. Verbs like omou (think), and
komaru (have trouble) are used in the –teiru form in omotteiru, and koma-tteiru. It is ungrammatical to say kanja
(patient) ga (subject marker) ureshi (happy-1st person,
dictionary form), because a first person adjective cannot
describe a third person subject. Rather, ureshii here should
be ureshi-garu (3rd person). Therefore, even if subjects are
dropped, sometimes verbs and adjectives will provide
sufficient information to determine the agent.
Similarly, honorific and humble verbs are very useful
cues that can be used for a variety of both transitive and
intransitive verbs in Japanese. Honorific verbs cannot be
used for the first person, but only for the second or the third
person particularly for superiors. Humble verbs can be used
only for the first person or the speaker’s in-group members.
For example, o-hanashi-ninari-mashita (honor + talk +
honor + past tense) may indicate that the agent is someone
superior to the speaker, and cannot be either the speaker or
someone inferior to the speaker. Similarly, o-hanashi-itashimasu (honor + talk + humble + non-past) indicates the
action of the (humble) speaker or the speaker’s (humble) ingroup members. Even without overt mention of the subjects,
these honorific and humble verbs provide evidence that is
sufficient to identify the agent.
Considering the fact that subjects are frequently absent in
Japanese, these verbal markings of honorific status should
be one of the more reliable cues in Japanese. Although these
cues are not always available, they should always be reliable
when they are available particularly in adult speech.

1495

Previous studies (Sasaki & MacWhinney, in press) have
shown that the case-marking cue is the dominant cue in
Japanese. However, when subjects and objects are absent,
case markers are also naturally absent. When the dominant
cue is unavailable, other cues must be used instead. As we
have seen already, other cues such as animacy and word
order have been examined in relation to the case-marking
cue. However, the use of Japanese verb marking for
honorific status has not yet been examined.
This study has two goals. The first is to measure the use
of the honorific agreement cue by native Japanese speakers
in comparison to case-marking cue and word order.
Honorific and humble expressions are used only when there
are social and psychological distances between the speaker
and the listener, or between the speaker and the target
person addressed. The availability of the honorific and
humble verb cue would be high, particularly in adult speech
under a hierarchical pressure, although overall availability
of the honorific verb agreement cue in general speech may
not be higher than that of the case-marking cue. Therefore,
we can hypothesize that honorific verb agreement cue may
not be stronger than the case-marking cue, yet it should be
an important cue when case is absent.
The second goal of the study is to examine how second
language learners acquire this verb agreement cue. Unlike
native speakers, second language learners have not yet
developed an entrenched usage of the case-marking cue.
Moreover, when they first begin to pay attention to
honorific marking, they may at first tend to overestimate
and overgeneralize its importance, because the instruction is
focusing specifically on this structure which learners tend to
master in a short period of time.

Methods
Participants
Twenty native Japanese speakers, 16 advanced level
Japanese learners as a foreign language, and 29 intermediate
level Japanese learners participated in the study. Native
Japanese speakers were recruited in Pittsburgh with a mean
age of 31.6, and with a mean of length of residence in the
United States less than 3 years. L2 learners were recruited
from advanced and intermediate levels of Japanese courses
at Carnegie Mellon University. Both intermediate and
advanced learners have learned honorific and humble verb
systems in class, though advanced learners have been
exposed to them approximately for a year longer than
intermediate learners. Some of advanced learners had an
experience of studying abroad in Japan. No learners have an
experience of studying abroad more than three months.

Stimuli
Three factors controlled in the study were word order, casemarking, and honorific cues with three levels for each.
Word orders consisted of NNV, NVN, and VNN (N=Noun,
V=Verb). Thus there were always two nouns and one verb

used in every condition. The three levels for case-marking
factor were nominative, dative and zero. When the first
noun is marked with a nominative case and the second noun
with a dative case, it is described as Nom_Dat condition,
and Dat_Nom is used for the reversed case marking
condition. Zero indicates the zero case marking condition.
Honorific agreement cues were manipulated using simple
transitive verbs such as call, meet, and talk with three levels
of agreement: agreement-yes, agreement-no, and agreementmissing. Agreement-yes and agreement-no indicate whether
the verb used in each condition agreed grammatically with
the first noun. The agreement-missing condition contains
plain verbs without modification of honorific or humble
styles. Half of agreement-yes and agreement-no conditions
used honorific verbs and the other half used humble verbs
along with noun features differing in positional superiority.
In order to control animacy effects, all nouns were animate.
Each condition consisted of a noun combination differing in
occupational superiority such as teacher-student, generalsoldier, and president-employee.
For example, in the condition of order-NNV, case-zero,
agreement-yes, sentences like, sensei (teacher) gakusei
(student) ohanashi ninari masu (talk-honorific), was used.
In this condition, we can see whether participants used
either the case-marking or the verb agreement cue to
interpret the sentence. Case is zero, so it provides no clues
to determine the agent, whereas the verb agreement cue
suggests that the honorable person should be the agent. In
another condition where case is available, e.g., sensei
(teacher) ga (subject marker) gakusei (student) ni (dative
marker) o hanashi itashimasu (talk-humble), we can see
clear competition between case and verb agreement cue.
Case suggests sensei (teacher) marked with ga (subject
marker) to be the agent whereas verb agreement with
humble verb suggests gakusei (student) to be the agent
although it is marked with a dative marker.
In addition to these three factors, filler sentences were
inserted to guarantee that subjects treated the task in a
natural fashion. The filler sentences excluded honorific
agreement factor and superiority features in nouns. They
controlled only word order and case-marking factors. The
fillers also served the function of breaking up any tendency
to lock into processing for specific verb types.
All three factors were fully crossed with three levels for
three participant groups: native Japanese speakers, advanced
learners, and intermediate learners. The full-factorial design
of 3x3x3 was manipulated with the total of 54 sentences in
addition to 18 filler sentences.
To create each sentence, the total of forty eight words was
used: six base nouns (three superior and three subordinate
nouns) with three case-marking forms (nominative, dative,
and zero), and five base verbs with three agreement forms
(honorific, humble, and plain) for experimental sentences,
and five nouns (no superiority difference) with three casemarking forms for filler sentences. A male native Japanese
speaker recorded the sentence components with a normal
reading speed with no accents, and digitized with 16-bit

1496

monaural .wav format at a 22-kHz sampling rate using
CoolEdit 2000. Each sound file of nouns and verbs was
combined into the appropriate sentence pattern using EPrime 1.1 with complete random orders. The intonation
patterns of combined words for all statements were
indistinguishable, which prevented listeners from using any
prosodic cues.

Case Nom_Dat
1.0

% of N1 Choice

.8

Procedure

Results
ANOVAs were performed using percentage of choice of the
first noun as agent as the dependent variable. The main

GROUP

.4

Native

.2

Advanced
Intermediate

0.0

Agr-Yes

Agr-missing

Agr-No

HONOR

Case Dat_Nom
1.0

% of N1 Choice

.8

.6

GROUP

.4

Native

.2

Advanced
Intermediate

0.0

Agr-Yes

Agr-missing

Agr-No

HONOR

Case Zero
1.0

.8

% of N1 Choice

In this task, all participants sat in front of a computer, and
heard from a headphone a series of sentences that were
composed of two nouns and a simple transitive verb. As the
sentence began, the computer screen displayed pictures
describing two nouns in each sentence. The pictures
remained displayed until participants pressed a key
indicating their choice of one of the pictures as the agent.
Pictures were accompanied by words describing the pictures.
For example, “teacher” (in Japanese) was shown on top of a
picture of “teacher”. This is to decrease non-native
speakers’ processing load. The subject identification task by
itself for non-native speakers may put heavy processing load
on their memory particularly when the cue competition is
high, so they were instructed not to worry about memorizing
words they did not know.
Participants were asked to choose or identify the picture
that performed the action described in each sentence. They
were instructed to choose either of the two nouns as agent,
and to push a button corresponding to either of two pictures
shown on the computer screen. If they thought the person on
the right side did an action, they pushed the right button. If
they thought the person on the left side did an action, they
pushed the left button. They were instructed to press the
button as quickly as possible after they heard a sentence.
The response as a choice of the first noun was measured
after 5 practice sentences.
All participants were tested individually in a small quiet
room and were asked to complete the same task, although
native Japanese speakers and non-native speakers were
given different instructions before the task. Native Japanese
speakers were told that sometimes sentences were culturally
inappropriate or grammatically incorrect, and they were
asked to respond quickly using their intuitions in the case
they found some sentences unnatural. As it was mentioned
earlier, these sentences were set up to test the usage of cue
competition. For non-native Japanese speakers, additional
instructions were given. In order to refresh learners’
memory and make them comfortable about the use of
honorific and humble verbs, each non-native participant
went through a brief review on verb conjugations. They
were also briefly informed about social and hierarchical
differences between roles such as general vs. soldier, and
president vs. employee, which were used in the experiment.

.6

.6

GROUP

.4

Native

.2

Advanced
Intermediate

0.0

Agr-Yes

Agr-missing

Agr-No

HONOR

Figure 1: The percentage choice of the first noun as agent in
the condition of (1) Nom_Dat case (the first noun
is marked with the nominative case, and the
second noun is marked with dative case) crossed
with the agreement cue, (2) Dat_Nom case and (3)
Zero case (neither nouns were marked with case).

1497

effects of case and honorifics were significant (Case: F(2,
61) = 164, p < 0.001; Honor: F(2, 61) = 17.7, p < 0.001),
but word order was not. The non-significance of the word
order effect shows that none of the groups, including L2
learners, relied on the word order cue. The interaction
between case and honorific agreement was also significant
(F(4, 59) = 20, p < 0.001). The use of nominative case for
the first noun and dative case for the second noun is shown
in Figure 1. In the Nom_Dat condition, native speakers
consistently used the case-marking cue, despite the presence
of an agreement cue. L2 learners also made use of the casemarking cue, though they relied much less on case than did
native speakers. Native speakers’ first noun choice for
Nom_Dat was over 95% in all three agreement conditions,
whereas the first noun choice of advanced and intermediate
learners dramatically decreased in the condition where verbs
do not agree with the first noun feature (advanced: 60%;
intermediate: 52%).
Similarly, in the Dat_Nom case condition, native
speakers consistently showed the strong use of the casemarking cue to select the second noun as agent. The second
noun is marked with a nominative case in this condition, so
the lower percentage of the first noun choice indicates the
heavier reliance on using the case-marking cue. The first
noun choice by native speakers was less than 11% in all
agreement conditions, whereas L2 learners’ first noun
choice was higher. When the verb agrees with the honorific
status of the first noun, learners’ first noun choice increased
noticeably (advanced: 46%; intermediate: 54%). This shows
that learners placed heavy reliance on the honorific
agreement cue even when it contradicted the case-marking
cue.
In the zero case-marking condition, the first noun choice
by native speakers showed a clear decline from agreementyes to agreement-no conditions (agreement-yes: 85%;
agreement-missing: 60%; agreement-no: 18%). Because the
case-marking cue was unavailable in this condition, native
speakers relied on the honorific verb agreement cue to
determine the agent. On the other hand, learners’ usage of
verb agreement cue was not as robust as native speakers’.

Discussion
The patterns of Japanese native speakers’ performance in
the experiments showed that the case-marking cue was still
the dominant cue in Japanese. Despite the presence of the
honorific verb agreement cue, native speakers consistently
chose nouns marked with the nominative case as agent.
However, when case was absent, the honorific verb
agreement cue became an important and reliable cue to
determine the agent. Even though Japanese has a canonical
SOV word order, we did not find any effects of the word
order cue in the absence of case. This confirms the results
from the previous studies. Importantly, we demonstrated
within a single experiment both inattention to word order
and attention to honorific agreement. Thus, it appears that

honorific agreement is the second major cue in Japanese
sentence processing, after case-marking.
The second important finding of the study is that cue
availability determined cue strength. Native speakers’ first
noun choices were not entirely controlled by the agreement
cue. There was 85% first noun choice in the agreement-yes
condition and 18% in the agreement-no condition. This
suggests that even native speakers are sometimes unsure
about the correct use of honorific and humble verbs. As we
have already discussed earlier, honorific and humble verbs
are not frequently present in younger people’s daily
linguistic input until they start working in businesses. Some
of the participants of native speakers in the study were
graduate students who have no experience working in
businesses. Therefore, their cue usage of the honorific verb
agreement cue might not have been as strong as we could
find in speakers from the business environment. Further
study of the use of this cue by speakers from the business
community may help us understand the extent to which
increased availability of the cue could lead to an increase in
its relative strength when it is placed in conflict with casemarking.
The third finding of the study relates to the cue usage
patterns by L2 learners. As we predicted, their usage of both
the case-marking cue and the honorific agreement cue was
more variable than that of native speakers. Interestingly,
they overused the honorific agreement cue even when the
case-marking cue was available to use. On the other hand,
they did not use the honorific cue as much as they could,
when case was absent. This suggests that learners’ use of the
case-marking cue has not yet stabilized at native speaker
levels after about two years of learning Japanese. Moreover,
the overuse of the honorific cue indicates that learners tend
to focus on a single cue when this is at the focus of an
instructional module or experiment. This tendency to focus
on individual cues may prevent them from fixing the
relative strength of each cue among all available cues in the
target language. To counteract this tendency, instructors
may need to present learners with input that illustrates
competition between the relevant cues. In particular,
learners need more experience with sets of sentences in
which case marking is either present or absent and in which
honorific agreement is either present or absent.

References
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding.
Cinnaminson, NJ: Foris.
Kamio, A. (1995). Territory of information in English and
Japanese and psychological utterances. Journal of
Pragmatics, 24, 235-264.
Kaneya, T. (2002). Nihongo ni shugo wa iranai. Tokyo:
Kodansha.
Kuno, S. (1973). The structure of the Japanese language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B., & Bates, E. (Eds.). (1989). The
crosslinguistic study of sentence processing. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

1498

McDonald, J. L. (1987). Sentence interpretation in bilingual
speakers of English and Dutch. Applied Psycholinguistics,
8, 379-414.
McDonald, J. L. (1989). The acquisition of cue-category
mappings. In B. MacWhinney & E. Bates (Eds.), The
crosslinguistic study of language processing (pp. 375396). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sasaki, Y., & MacWhinney, B. (in press). Language
acquisition research based on the Competition Model. In
M. Nakayama & R. Mazuka & Y. Shirai (Eds.),
Handbook of Japanese Psycholinguistics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Slobin, D. I., & Bever, T. G. (1982). Children use canonical
sentence schemas: A cross-linguistic study of word order
and inflections. Cognition, 12, 229-265.
Whorf, B. (1967). Language, thought, and reality.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1499

