UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How deep are effects of language on thought? Time estimation in speakers of English,
Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9m92g1s5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Casasanto, Daniel
Boroditsky, Lera
Phillips, Webb
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How deep are effects of language on thought?
Time estimation in speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish
Daniel Casasanto†
Lera Boroditsky
Webb Phillips
Jesse Greene
Shima Goswami
Simon Bocanegra-Thiel
Ilia Santiago-Diaz
MIT Department of Brain & Cognitive Sciences, 77 Massachusetts Avenue NE20-457
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Olga Fotokopoulu

Ria Pita

Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece

David Gil
Max Planck Center for Evolutionary Anthropology
Jakarta Field Station, Indonesia
Abstract

from many previous inquiries into relations between
language and thought: objectively evaluable linguistic data,
and language-independent psychological data. A notorious
fallacy, attributable in part to Whorf, illustrates the need for
methodological rigor. Whorf (1939) argued that Eskimos
must conceive of snow differently than English speakers
because the Eskimo lexicon contains multiple words that
distinguish different types of snow, whereas English has
only one word to describe all types. The exact number of
snow words the Eskimos were purported to have is not
clear. (This number has now been inflated by the popular
press to as many as two-hundred.) According to a Western
Greenlandic Eskimo dictionary published in Whorf’s time,
however, Eskimos may have had as few as two distinct
words for snow (Pullum, 1991).
Setting aside Whorf’s imprecision and the media’s
exaggeration, there remain two problems with Whorf’s
argument, which are evident in much subsequent ‘Language
and Thought’ research, as well. First, although Whorf
asserted an objective difference between Eskimo and
English snow vocabularies, his comparative linguistic data
were subjective and unfalsifiable: it is a matter of opinion
whether any cross-linguistic difference in the number of
snow words existed. As Geoffrey Pullum (1991) points out,
English could also be argued to have multiple terms for
snow in its various manifestations: slush, sleet, powder,
granular, blizzard, drift, etc. The problem of unfalsifiability
would be addressed if cross-linguistic differences could be
demonstrated empirically, and ideally, if the magnitude of
the differences could be quantified.
A second problem with Whorf’s argument (and others
like it in the contemporary Cognitive Linguistics literature)
is that it uses purely linguistic data to motivate inferences
about non-linguistic thinking. Steven Pinker illustrates the
resulting circularity of Whorf’s claim in this parody of his
reasoning: “[Eskimos] speak differently so they must think
differently. How do we know that they think differently?
Just listen to the way they speak!” (Pinker, 1994, pg. 61).
This circularity would be escaped if non-linguistic evidence
could be produced to show that two groups of speakers who
talk differently also think differently in corresponding ways.

Do the languages that we speak affect how we experience the
world? This question was taken up in a linguistic survey and
two non-linguistic psychophysical experiments conducted in
native speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish.
All four of these languages use spatial metaphors to talk about
time, but the particular metaphoric mappings between time
and space vary across languages. A linguistic corpus study
revealed that English and Indonesian tend to map duration
onto linear distance (e.g., a long time), whereas Greek and
Spanish preferentially map duration onto quantity (e.g., much
time). Two psychophysical time estimation experiments were
conducted to determine whether this cross-linguistic
difference has implications for speakers’ temporal thinking.
Performance on the psychophysical tasks reflected the relative
frequencies of the ‘time as distance’ and ‘time as quantity’
metaphors in English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish. This
was true despite the fact that the tasks used entirely nonlinguistic stimuli and responses. Results suggest that: (1.)
The spatial metaphors in our native language may profoundly
influence the way we mentally represent time. (2.) Language
can shape even primitive, low-level mental processes such as
estimating brief durations – an ability we share with babies
and non-human animals.

Introduction
“Are our own concepts of ‘time,’ ‘space,’ and ‘matter’ given
in substantially the same form by experience to all men, or
are they in part conditioned by the structure of particular
languages?” (Whorf, 1939/2000, pg. 138.) This question,
posed by Benjamin Whorf over half a century ago, is
currently the subject of renewed interest and debate. Does
language shape thought? The answer yes would call for a
reexamination of some foundational theories that have
guided Cognitive Science for decades, which assume both
the universality and the primacy of non-linguistic concepts
(Chomsky, 1975; Fodor, 1975). Yet despite unreserved
belief among the general public that people who talk
differently also think differently (ask anyone about the
Eskimos’ words for snow), it has remained widely agreed
among linguists and psychologists that they do not.
Skepticism about some Whorfian claims has been well
founded. Two crucial kinds of evidence have been missing

__________________________________________

†

186

Corresponding author: Daniel Casasanto (djc@mit.edu)

But what counts as ‘non-linguistic’ evidence? Recent
studies have tested predictions derived from cross-linguistic
differences using behavioral measures such as accuracy and
reaction time. Oh (2003) investigated whether Korean and
English speakers would remember motion events
differently, consistent with the way motion is habitually
encoded in their native languages (i.e., in terms of ‘path’ or
‘manner’ of motion). Participants described videos of
motion events, and then took a surprise memory test probing
small details of the videos. Oh found that, as expected,
English speakers used more manner-of-motion verbs in their
video descriptions than Korean speakers. English speakers
also performed better than Koreans on the manner-relevant
portion of the memory test. Oh refers to the memory task as
‘non-linguistic,’ yet the questions were posed using motion
language, and participants may have recalled their own
verbal descriptions of the videos while responding.
Boroditsky (2001) investigated whether speakers of
English and Mandarin think differently about time. English
typically describes time as horizontal, while Mandarin
commonly uses vertical spatiotemporal metaphors.
Boroditsky found that English speakers were faster to judge
sentences about temporal succession (e.g., March comes
earlier than April) when primed with a horizontal spatial
event, but Mandarin speakers were faster to judge the same
sentences when primed with a vertical spatial stimulus.
This was true despite the fact that all of the sentences were
presented in English.
These studies by Oh and Boroditsky support a version
of the Whorfian hypothesis which Slobin (1986) has termed
thinking for speaking: language can affect thought when we
are thinking with the intent to use language, plausibly by
directing attention to elements of our experience that are
ordinarily encoded in the language we speak. For instance,
because English tends to encode information about manner
of motion more often than Korean does, Oh’s English
subjects may have automatically attended to the manner
information in the videos more than her Korean subjects
did. Some researchers have characterized the effects of
thinking for speaking as uninterestingly weak (Pinker, 1994;
Papafragou, Massey, & Gleitman, 2002). Results such as
Oh’s and Boroditsky’s suggest otherwise: at minimum,
thinking for speaking appears to influence ubiquitous
cognitive processes such as attention and memory, and is
capable of changing the nature of our abstract mental
representations. Furthermore, habits formed while thinking
for speaking are likely to be practiced even when people are
not explicitly encoding information for language. We never
know when we might want to talk about an event at some
later point, so it is in our best interest to encode languagerelevant details as a matter of policy.
Can the influence of language on thought go beyond
thinking for speaking? Much of our mental life is
unutterable: what words can capture the sound of a clarinet,
or explain the color r e d to a blind person (Locke,
1689/1995; Wittgenstein, 1953)? Can peculiarities of our
native language shape even the deep, primitive kinds of

representations that we share with pre-linguistic infants and
non-human animals? Previous research suggests that
language can affect our high-level linguistic and symbolic
representations in the abstract domain of time (Boroditsky,
2001). The goal of the present study was to find out
whether language can also shape our low-level, nonlinguistic, non-symbolic temporal representations. A
linguistic study was conducted to investigate a previously
unexplored pattern in spatiotemporal metaphors, and to
quantify cross-linguistic differences in the way these
metaphors are used by speakers of English, Indonesian,
Greek, and Spanish (Experiment 1). To determine whether
these cross-linguistic differences have consequences for
speakers’ non-linguistic time representations, the results of
the linguistic study were used to predict performance on a
pair of psychophysical time estimation tasks, with entirely
non-linguistic stimuli and responses (Experiments 2 and 3).

Experiment 1:
Time in a Bottle or Time on the Line?
Linguists have noted that spatial metaphors are often used to
talk about non-spatial phenomena -- in particular abstract
phenomena such as social rank (e.g., a high position),
mathematics (e.g., a low number), and time (e.g., a long
vacation) (Clark, 1973; Gibbs, 1994; Jackendoff, 1983;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Recently, psychologists have
begun to explore the proposal that these metaphors in
language provide a window on our underlying mental
representations in abstract domains, using the domain of
time as a testbed (Boroditsky, 2000, 2001; Boroditsky &
Ramscar, 2002; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2003; Gentner,
2001). In general, this work has focused on how time can
be expressed (and by hypothesis conceptualized) in terms of
linear space. Linear spatiotemporal metaphors are pervasive
in English, and are used to talk about various aspects of
time, including succession (e.g., Monday comes before
Tuesday), motion through time (e.g., Let’s move the
meeting forward), and duration (e.g., a short intermission).
But is time necessarily conceptualized in terms of unidimensional space? English speakers also talk about oceans
of time, saving time in a bottle, and compare epochs to sand
through the hourglass, apparently mapping time onto
volume.
Experiment 1 compared the use of ‘time as distance’
and ‘time as quantity’ metaphors across languages. Every
language examined so far uses both distance and quantity
metaphors, but their relative prevalence and productivity
appear to vary markedly. In English, it is natural to talk
about a long time, borrowing the structure and vocabulary
of a spatial expression like a long rope. Yet in Spanish, the
direct translation of ‘long time’, largo tiempo, sounds
awkward to speakers of most dialects. Mucho tiempo,
which means ‘much time’, is preferred.
In Greek, the words makris and kontos are the literal
equivalents of the English spatial terms long and short.
They can be used in spatial contexts much the way long and
short are used in English (e.g., ena makry skoini means ‘a

187

% instances of metaphor

long rope’). In temporal contexts, however, makris and
kontos are dispreferred in instances where long and short
would be used naturally in English. It would be unnatural to
translate a long meeting literally as mia makria synantisi.
Rather than using distance terms, Greek speakers typically
indicate that an event lasted a long time using megalos,
which in spatial contexts means physically ‘large’ (e.g., a
big building), or using poli, which in spatial contexts means
‘much’ in physical quantity (e.g., much water). Compare
how English and Greek typically modify the duration of the
following the events (literal translations in parentheses):

Quantity

Indonesian

Greek

Spanish

Figure 1: Corpus search results. Black bars indicate the
percentage of distance metaphors and white bars the
percentage of quantity metaphors found for each language.

Experiments 2 & 3:
Do People Who Talk Differently Think Differently?
How might this difference in the way English, Indonesian,
Greek, and Spanish speakers talk about time affect the way
they think about it? Linguists and psychologists have
argued that our conception of time is intimately dependent
on our knowledge of space, noting that in many languages,
people can hardly avoid using spatial words when they talk
about time (Clark, 1973; Gibbs, 1994; Jackendoff, 1983;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Behavioral studies show that
changing someone’s immediate spatial environment or
frame of reference can dramatically change the way they
interpret temporal language (Boroditsky, 2000; Boroditsky
& Ramscar, 2002). But does space influence our temporal
thinking even when we are not thinking for speaking?
A recent study by Casasanto & Boroditsky (2003)
shows that space influences even our low-level, nonlinguistic, non-symbolic representations of time. English
speakers watched lines ‘growing’ across a computer screen,
one pixel at a time, and estimated either how far they grew
or how much time they remained on the screen. Estimates
were made by clicking the mouse to indicate the beginning
and end of each spatial or temporal interval. Line distances
and durations were varied orthogonally, so there was no
correlation between the spatial and temporal components of
the stimuli. As such, one stimulus dimension served as a
distr actor for the other: an irrelevant piece of information
that could potentially interfere with task performance.
Patterns of cross-dimensional interference were analyzed to
reveal relationships between subjects’ representations of
space and time. Results showed that subjects were unable to
ignore irrelevant spatial information when estimating time
(even when they were encouraged to do so). Line stimuli of
the same average duration were judged to take a longer time
when they grew a longer distance, and a shorter time when
they grew a shorter distance. In contrast, line duration did
not affect subjects’ distance estimates. This asymmetric
relation between space and time was predicted based on
patterns in language: we talk about time in terms of space
more than we talk about space in terms of time (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980).

In examples 1g. and 2g., the literal translations might
surprise an English speaker, for whom big night is likely to
mean ‘an exciting night’, and big relationship ‘an important
relationship’. For Greek speakers, however, these phrases
communicate duration, expressing time not in terms of unidimensional space, but rather in terms of physical quantity
(i.e., three-dimensional space).
For Experiment 1, the most natural phrases expressing
the ideas ‘a long time’ and ‘much time’ were elicited from
native speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish
(see table 1). The frequencies of these expressions were
compared in a very large multilingual text corpus:
www.google.com. Each expression in table 1 was entered
as a search term. Google’s language tools were used to find
exact matches for each expression, and to restrict the search
to web pages written only in the appropriate languages.
Table 1: Distance and quantity metaphors for duration.
Distance
long time
waktu panjang
makry kroniko diatstima
largo tiempo

Distance

English

1e. long night
1g. megali nychta (big night)
2e. long relationship
2g. megali schesi (big relationship)
3e. long party
3g. parti pou kratise poli (party that lasts much)
4e. long meeting
4g. synantisi pou diekese poli (meeting that lasts much)

English
Indonesian
Greek
Spanish

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00

Quantity
much time
waktu banyak
poli ora
mucho tiempo

Results The number of google ‘hits’ for each expression
was tabulated, and the percentage of distance hits and
quantity hits was calculated for each pair of expressions, as
a measure of their relative frequency (see figure 1). Results
showed that in English and Indonesian, distance metaphors
were more frequent than quantity metaphors. The opposite
pattern was found in Greek and Spanish. A Chi-Square test
showed that the relationship between distance and quantity
metaphors varied significantly across languages
(X2=8.5x105,df=3, p<0.0001). These findings corroborate
native speakers’ intuitions for each language. Additional
quantitative studies are in progress to validate these results.

188

These findings suggest that the metaphoric relationship
between time and space is not just linguistic, it is also
conceptual. Not only do people talk about time in terms of
space, they also think about time using spatial
representations. However, the experiments reported in
Casasanto & Boroditsky (2003) leave the Whorfian
question unanswered: do metaphors in language merely
reflect underlying conceptual structures, or might the
metaphors we use also play some role in constructing
concepts, or establishing their interrelations?
In the present study speakers of four different languages
performed the same pair of non-linguistic psychophysical
tasks, which required them to estimate time while
overcoming spatial interference. It was reasoned that if
people’s concepts of time and space are substantially the
same universally, irrespective of the languages they speak,
then performance on these tasks should not differ between
language groups. If, on the other hand, the spatiotemporal
metaphors people use affect how they represent time and
space non-linguistically, then performance should vary in
ways predicted by participants’ language-particular
metaphors.
For Experiment 2, subjects performed a ‘growing line’
task similar to the task described above. It was reasoned
that the English participants in our previous study may have
suffered interference of distance on duration estimation, in
part, because these notions are conflated in the English
language. It is hard to imagine expressing the idea ‘a long
time’ in English without using an adjective that can also
indicate spatial extent. Piaget (1927) made a similar
suggestion when he observed that young French speaking
children often mistook distance for duration, noting that
both of these concepts are commonly described in French
using the adjective longue. We predicted that speakers of
‘Distance Languages’ (i.e., English and Indonesian) would
show a considerable effect of distance on time estimation
when performing the growing line task.
If conflations in language contribute to confusions in
thought, can distinctions in language help speakers
distinguish closely related concepts? We reasoned that
speakers of languages that do not ordinarily express
duration in terms of distance might have an easier time
distinguishing the spatial and temporal information
conveyed in our growing line stimuli. We predicted that
speakers of ‘Quantity Languages’ (i.e., Greek and Spanish)
would show only a mild effect of distance on time
estimation when performing the growing line task.
For Experiment 3, a task complementary to the growing
line task was developed. Subjects watched a schematically
drawn container of water filling up, one row of pixels at a
time, and estimated either how full it became or how much
time it remained on the computer screen, using mouse
clicks. We predicted the converse pattern of behavioral
results for the filling container task as for the growing line
task: speakers of Quantity Languages would show a
considerable influence of ‘fullness’ on time estimation,

whereas speakers of Distance Languages would show a
milder effect.

Methods for Experiment 2: Growing Lines
Subjects A total of 65 subjects participated in exchange for
payment. Native English and Spanish speaking participants
were recruited from the Greater Boston community, and
were tested on MIT campus. Native Indonesian speakers
were recruited from the Jakarta community, and were tested
at the Cognation Outpost in the Jakarta Field Station of the
Max Planck Center for Evolutionary Anthropology. Native
Greek speakers were recruited from the Thessaloniki
community, and tested at the Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki.
Materials Lines of varying lengths were presented on a
computer monitor (resolution=1024x768 pixels, dpi=72),
for varying durations. Durations ranged from 1000
milliseconds to 5000 milliseconds in 500 millisecond
increments. Displacements ranged from 100 to 500 pixels
in 50 pixel increments. Nine durations were fully crossed
with nine displacements to produce 81 distinct line types.
Lines started as a single point and ‘grew’ horizontally across
the screen one pixel at a time, from left to right along the
vertical midline. Each line remained on the screen until its
maximum displacement was reached.
Written instructions were given prior to the start of the
task, in the native language of the participant. Care was
taken to avoid using distance metaphors for time. The task
itself was entirely non-linguistic, consisting of lines
(stimuli) and mouse clicks (responses).
Procedure Participants viewed 162 growing lines, one line
at a time. Immediately before each trial, a prompt appeared
indicating that the subject should attend either to the line’s
duration or to its spatial displacement. Space trials and time
trials were randomly intermixed.
To estimate displacement, subjects clicked the mouse
once on the center of an ‘X’ icon, moved the mouse to the
right in a straight line, and clicked the mouse a second time
to indicate they had moved a distance equal to the maximum
displacement of the stimulus. To estimate duration, subjects
clicked the mouse once on the center of an ‘hourglass’ icon,
waited the appropriate amount of time, and clicked again in
the same spot, to indicate the time it took for the stimulus to
reach its maximum displacement.
All responses were self-paced. Importantly, for a given
trial, subjects reproduced either the displacement or the
duration of the stimulus, never both. Response data were
collected for both the trial-relevant and the trial-irrelevant
stimulus dimension, to ensure that subjects were following
instructions.

Methods for Experiment 3: Filling Containers
Subjects A total of 74 subjects participated in exchange for
payment. Subjects were recruited at the same time as those
who participated in Experiment 2, from the same
populations.

189

Materials and procedure The filling container task was
closely analogous to the growing line task (Experiment 2).
Participants viewed 162 containers, and were asked to
imagine that each was a tank filling with water. Containers
were simple line drawings, 600 pixels high and 500 pixels
wide. Empty containers filled gradually, one row of pixels
at a time, for varying durations and ‘volumes,’ and they
disappeared when they reached their maximum fullness.
Nine durations were fully crossed with nine volumes to
produce 81 distinct trial types. For each trial, participants
estimated either the amount of water in the container (by
clicking the mouse once at the bottom of the container and a
second time at the appropriate ‘water level’), or they
estimated the amount of time that the container took to fill
(by clicking the hourglass icon, waiting the appropriate
time, and clicking it again, as in Experiment 2). Durations
ranged from 1000 milliseconds to 5000 milliseconds in 500
millisecond increments. Water levels ranged from 100 to
500 pixels, in 50 pixel increments.
As before, written instructions were given prior to the
start of the task, in the native language of the participant.
Care was taken to avoid using quantity metaphors for time.
The task itself was entirely non-linguistic, consisting of
containers (stimuli) and mouse clicks (responses).

distance and actual quantity on estimated time), which are
summarized in figure 2.
To investigate the effect of spatial interference on time
estimation, grand averaged time estimates in milliseconds
were plotted as a function of actual stimulus displacement in
pixels (i.e., line length or water level). A line of best fit was
computed, and the slope was used as an index of effect
strength. In our previous experience with similar tasks, we
found the strongest linear effects on the dependent variable
(i.e., estimated time) near the middle of the range of the
independent variable (i.e., actual stimulus displacement),
possibly due to ‘endpoint effects’ commonly observed in
magnitude estimation tasks. For the analyses reported here,
the outer points were removed, and the middle five points of
the correlations were analyzed.
Cross-domain effects varied markedly across language
groups. For the growing line task, English and Indonesian
speakers showed a strong effect of distance on time
estimation (English: Slope=1.49, r2=0.98; t=8.5; df=3;
p<0.001; Indonesian: Slope=1.40, r2=0.80; t=3.4; df=3;
p<0.01). By contrast, Greek and Spanish speakers showed
weak, non-significant effects of distance on time estimation
(Greek: Slope=0.47, r2=0.33; t=1.2; df=3; n s; Spanish:
Slope=0.20, r2=0.13; t=0.7; df=3; ns).
For the filling container task, the opposite pattern of
results was found. English and Indonesian speakers showed
a weak, non-significant effect of volume on time estimation
(English: Slope=0.18, r2=0.12; t=0.6; df=3; ns; Indonesian:
Slope=0.13, r2=0.51; t=1.7; df=3; ns), whereas Greek and
Spanish speakers showed strong effects of volume on time
estimation (Greek: Slope=1.24, r2=0.95; t=6.9; df=3;
p<0.001; Spanish: Slope=1.16, r2=0.97; t=8.5; df=3;
p<0.001).

Results for Experiments 2 and 3
Both time estimates and space estimates were collected for
each subject, but since our present hypothesis concerns
effects of language and space on time estimation, only data
for the time estimation trials are reported here. (See
Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2003 for a discussion of subjects’
space estimation in a related task.)
Time estimation, within-domain effects Overall, for both
Experiments 2 and 3 subjects’ time estimates were highly
accurate across all language groups, as indicated by the
strong correlations between the actual stimulus duration and
subjects’ estimated stimulus duration. These correlations
did not differ significantly between groups or between tasks
(see table 2).

Slope

1.60
1.40
1.20

Table 2: Time estimation results for Experiments 2 and 3.
Slope and r-square values for the correlation between actual
stimulus duration and subjects’ grand averaged estimates of
stimulus duration. (Perfect performance would be indicated
by a slope of 1.00 and r2 of 1.00.)

English
Indonesian
Greek
Spanish

Growing Lines
Slope
r2
0.75
0.999
0.71
0.996
0.74
0.995
0.72
0.996

Distance

Quantity

1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00
English

Indonesian

Greek

Spanish

Figure 2: Effects of distance and quantity interference on
time estimation.

Filling Containers
Slope
r2
0.76
0.999
0.68
0.997
0.77
0.996
0.71
0.995

A 4 x 2 factorial ANOVA with Language and Task as
between-subject factors revealed a highly significant
Language by Task interaction (F (3,139) = 5.25, p<0.002),
with no main effects, signaling a true crossover interaction.
Linear regression analysis revealed a highly significant
positive relation between the frequency of Distance and
Quantity metaphors in each language (as measured in
Experiment 1) and the amount of Distance and Quantity
interference on time estimation (as measured in Experiments
2 and 3) (Slope=1.62, r2=0.84; t=5.6; df=6; p<0.001).

Time estimation, cross-domain effects The withindomain results reported in table 2 are important to establish
that subjects were able to estimate time well, and
importantly, that subjects estimated time about equally well
in all groups, and on both tasks. Of principal interest,
however, are the cross-domain effects (i.e., effects of actual

190

General Discussion and Conclusions

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the citizens of Cognation. Research supported in
part by fellowships from the NSF and the Vivian Smith
Advanced Studies Institute to DC, and an NSF grant to LB.

Do people who talk differently also think differently?
Performance on a pair of psychophysical time estimation
tasks differed dramatically for speakers of different
languages, in ways predicted by their language-particular
spatiotemporal metaphors. The effects of distance
interference and quantity interference on time estimation in
speakers of English, Indonesian, Greek, and Spanish
corresponded strikingly to the relative prevalence of
distance metaphors and quantity metaphors found in these
languages (compare figures 1 and 2). This was true despite
the fact that the behavioral tasks comprised entirely nonlinguistic stimuli and responses.
Returning to the question of Whorf’s posed in the
introduction, it is possible that our concepts of time and
space are “given in substantially the same form by
experience” to all of us, and also that they are “in part
conditioned by the structure of particular languages.”
Perhaps people learn associations between time and space
via physical experience (e.g., by observing moving objects
and changing quantities). Since presumably the laws of
physics are the same in all language communities, prelinguistic children's conceptual mappings between time,
distance, and quantity could be the same universally. When
children acquire language, these mappings could be
adjusted, plausibly by a process analogous to Hebbian
learning: each time we use a linguistic metaphor, we may
invoke the corresponding conceptual mapping. Speakers of
Distance Languages then would invoke the time-distance
mapping frequently, eventually strengthening it at the
expense of the time-quantity mapping (and vice-versa for
speakers of Quantity Languages). Alternatively, experience
may not teach us to map time onto space. It could be
language that causes us to notice structural parallels
between these domains, in the first place. On this
possibility, language would be responsible for establishing
the time-distance and time-quantity conceptual mappings
evident in our adult subjects, not just for modifying these
mappings. Studies are in progress on young learners of
Distance and Quantity languages to explore these
possibilities.
The findings we present here are difficult to reconcile
with a ‘universalist’ view of language-thought relations
according to which language calls upon pre-formed,
antecedently available non-linguistic concepts, which are
presumed to be “universal” (Pinker, 1994, pg. 82) and
“immutable” (Papafragou, Massey, & Gleitman, 2002, pg.
216). Rather, these results support what we might call a
deep version of the linguistic relativity hypothesis (to
distinguish it from the so-called weak version which posits
that language affects ‘thinking for speaking,’ and from
strong linguistic determinism). The particular languages
that we speak can influence not only the representations we
build for the purpose of speaking, but also the non-linguistic
representations we build for remembering, acting on, and
perhaps even perceiving the world around us.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?
Mandarin and English speakers' conceptions of time.
Cognit Psychol, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The Roles of Body
and Mind in Abstract Thought. Psychological Science,
13(2), 185-189.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2003). Do we think about
time in terms of space? Paper presented at the 25th
Annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
Boston, MA.
Chomsky, N. (1975). Reflections on Language. New York:
Pantheon.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, Time, Semantics and the Child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive Development and the
Acquisition of Language. New York: Academic Press.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial Metaphors in Temporal
Reasoning. In M. Gattis (Ed.), Spatial Schemas and
Abstract Thought. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gibbs, R. W., jr. (1994). The poetics of mind: Figurative
thought, language, and understanding. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1983). Semantics and Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Locke, J. (1689/1995). An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding. Amherst: Promethius Books.
Oh, K. (2003). Habitual patterns of language use and
thinking for speaking: a Whorfian effect on motion events.
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley.
Papafragou, A., Massey, C., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Shake,
rattle, 'n' roll: the representation of motion in language
and cognition. Cognition, 84, 189-219.
Piaget, J. (1927/1969). The Child's Conception of Time.
New York: Ballantine Books.
Pinker, S. (1994). The Language Instinct. New York, US:
William Morrow and Company.
Pullum, G. K. (1991). The Great Eskmo Vocabulary Hoax
and other irreverent essays on the study of language.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Slobin, D. (1986). From "THOUGHT AND LANGUAGE"
to "THINKING FOR SPEAKING" in Rethinking
Linguistic Relativity, Grumperz & Levinson, eds.
Whorf, B. (2000). Language, Thought and Reality.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations.
Oxford: Blackwell

191

