UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Identifying the Perceptual Dimensions of Visual Complexity of Scenes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/17s4h6w8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Olivia, Aude
Mack, Michael L.
Shrestha, Mochan
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Identifying the Perceptual Dimensions of Visual Complexity of Scenes
Aude Oliva (oliva@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139

Michael L. Mack (mackmic1@msu.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA

Mochan Shrestha
Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA

Angela Peeper
Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824 USA

Visual complexity
Abstract
Scenes are composed of numerous objects, textures and colors
which are arranged in a variety of spatial layouts. This presents the
question of how visual complexity is represented by a cognitive
system. In this paper, we aim to study the representation of visual
complexity for real-world scene images. Is visual complexity a
perceptual property simple enough so that it can be compressed
along a unique perceptual dimension? Or is visual complexity
better represented by a multi-dimensional space? Thirty-four
participants performed a hierarchical grouping task in which they
divided scenes into successive groups of decreasing complexity,
describing the criteria they used at each stage. Half of the
participants were told that complexity was related to the structure
of the image whereas the instructions in the other half were
unspecified. Results are consistent with a multi-dimensional
representation of visual complexity (quantity of objects, clutter,
openness, symmetry, organization, variety of colors) with task
constraints modulating the shape of the complexity space (e.g. the
weight of a specific dimension).

Introduction
Real-world scenes are composed of numerous objects,
textures and colored regions, which are arranged in a variety
of spatial layouts. Although natural images are visually
complex, we are able to form a coherent percept amid
numerous regions, and identify a complex scene at a glance
(Potter, 1976), even in the face of visually degraded
conditions (Schyns & Oliva, 1994). This presents the
question of how a cognitive system may represent the level
of complexity of a scene. Specifically, the following
question motivated the experiment presented in this paper:
can visual complexity be conceptualized along a single
dimension? Or is visual complexity better represented as a
multi-dimensional space where the axes might correspond
to meaningful perceptual dimensions?

The perception of visual complexity has been studied with
natural texture images (e.g. Heaps & Handel, 1999; Rao &
Lohse, 1993) and simple patterns (see Palmer, 1999 for a
review). Heaps and Handel had participants rank texture
images along several perceptual dimensions including
complexity,
connectedness,
depth,
orientation,
repetitiveness, and structure. The authors defined
complexity as “the degree of difficulty in providing a verbal
description of an image”. They observed that the complexity
of a texture could be estimated along a one dimensional axis
representing the degree of perceivable structure: textures
with repetitive and uniform oriented patterns were judged
less complex than disorganized patterns. This finding
correlates with results in the domain of perceptual grouping
by acknowledging that the presence of regularities (e.g.,
symmetry, repetition, similarity) simplifies a visual pattern
(Feldman, 1997; Palmer, 1999; Van der Helm, 2000).
How can we represent the complexity of a stimulus like a
scene, which has a high variability of parts and spatial
layout organization? According to Heylighen (1997), the
perception of complexity is correlated with the variety in the
visual stimulus. Figure 1 illustrates two instances of variety.
First, the perceived visual complexity can increase as a
function of the quantity and range of objects. Second, the
perceived visual complexity can increase as a function of
the variety of materials and surface styles while the number
of objects and surfaces remain constant. The representation
of a real-world scene is likely to combine both levels of
varieties (parts and surface styles). Intuitively, complex
scenes should contain a larger variety of parts and surfaces
styles, as well as more relationships between these regions
than do simpler scenes.
A visual pattern is also seen complex if its parts are difficult
to identify and separate from each other. Yet, paradoxically,
when the parts are separated or conceptualized as a whole,

1041

the valence of the complexity changes and the pattern
becomes simpler (Heylighen, 1997). This suggests that the
perceived complexity of an image also depends on the
amount of perceptual grouping, a characteristic independent
of the quantity of parts, an observer perceives in the scene.
Additionally, the perception of visual complexity is likely to
be dependent on the scale of observation (e.g. looking at a
bookshelf or the books level), preexisting schemas and
familiarity with the scene.

mechanisms. There is no specific vocabulary that is used for
representing visual complexity.
These three levels of representation are not incompatible:
for a particular task, the visual complexity space could be
skewed towards a line (e.g. one perceptual property is
dominant), but for a different task, the space of visual
complexity might take into account multiple dimensions.
The experiment presented below evaluates the format and
content of the representation of visual complexity with the
aim to tease apart the three levels of representation
suggested above.

Experiment
The goal of the experiment is to study the representation of
visual complexity while two groups of participants are told
different definitions of visual complexity. Both groups
performed a hierarchical grouping task with images of
various levels of visual complexity. A hierarchical grouping
task allows for identifying the explicit criteria participants
used to perform a grouping task (see Oliva & Torralba,
2001) and helps to give a psychological interpretation of the
axes provided by a multi-dimensional scaling algorithm (see
Results section).

Method

Figure 1: Illustration of how visual complexity evolves as a
function of object variety (top) and surface variety (bottom).
If the perception of visual complexity is an interaction
between the information in the image and task constraints,
can we still identify a set of perceptual properties that
participants consistently use to characterize visual
complexity of real world scenes? The shape of the visual
complexity representation could take three forms:
(1) Unique Perceptual Dimension: the properties of
complexity are combined into one principal dimension,
robust to subjectivity and task constraints. This is the case
of the naturalness dimension in real world scenes (e.g.
judging if a scene image is a natural or a man-made
environment, Oliva & Torralba, 2001).
(2) Multi-dimensional Space Representation: most of visual
complexity variability is explained by an identifiable
number of perceptual dimensions. The weight of each
dimension may vary with task constraints, but the principal
dimensional vocabulary remains the same (Gardenfors,
2000). This seems to be the case of the representation of
basic-level scene categories (e.g., beach, street, Oliva &
Torralba, 2001).
(3) Flexible Space Representation: the properties that
human observers use to represent the visual complexity of a
particular scene vary with image characteristics (e.g.,
structure, clusters), tasks constraints, and attentional

Subjects Thirty-four students from an introduction to
psychology course at Michigan State University participated
in the study for course credits. Half were in the control
group and the other half in the structure group.
Materials The present study used 100 pictures of indoor
scenes. This subset was selected at random from a database
of 1000 scenes previously ranked on their subjective visual
complexity. The subset had the constraints to represent all
levels of complexity along a scale from 1 to 100. The
general scene database was originally composed from
sources such as the web, magazines and various image
databases. Since the volume of the space that a scene image
represents is correlated with a given range of clutter
(Torralba & Oliva, 2002), only scenes of a small volume
range (indoors) were kept for this present study. Moreover,
indoor scenes contain a greater variety of colors and objects
in a variety of layouts compared to larger scaled
environments (e.g. natural space, Oliva & Schyns, 2000).
Procedure The hierarchical grouping task was performed as
follows (see Figure 2): starting with 100 pictures shown in a
grid on a 23” Apple monitor, participants were asked to
separate images into two groups on the screen,
corresponding respectively to the most complex vs. the
simplest scenes. In a second step, they were asked to split
each group into two more subdivisions, and in a third step,
split the four groups into two groups each, leading to a total
of eight groups. For each subdivision, they were asked to
follow a criterion corresponding to visual complexity

1042

(simplicity) and give a verbal description of it. Participants
could move each picture across boundaries at any stage, and
see an enlarged version of the image by double clicking on
it. Similarly to Heaps and Handel (1999), our Control group
was told the following instruction: “Visual simplicity is
related to how easy it will be to remember the image after
seeing it for a short time. Visual complexity is related to
how difficult it will be to give a verbal description of the
image and how difficult it will be to remember the scene
after seeing it for a short time.” For the Structure group, the
following instructions were given in addition to the control
instructions: “Visual complexity is related to the structure of
the scene and therefore, is not merely related to color or
brightness. Simplicity is related to how you see that objects
and regions are going well together. Complexity is related to
how difficult it is to make sense of the structure of the
scene”. Both groups were forbidden to use a criterion
related to the semantic class of the scene (e.g. kitchen) or
the presence of a specific object or color.

the quantity and variety of parts, participants referring either
to the quantity of objects per se (19%), or the relationship
between quantity of objects and spatial arrangement (18%,
clutter). The other criteria were mostly concerned with
spatial layout (symmetry, open space and organization {e.g.
grid, centralized, cluster}).

Results

Next, we applied a nonlinear dimensional reduction method
(Isomap, Tenenbaum, de Silva, & Langford, 2000) onto a
dissimilarity matrix constructed from participants’ grouping
for each condition (control and structure). To do so, a
symmetric 100 x 100 matrix was constructed for each
participant. Pairs of images placed in the same group versus
in a different group were given respectively a score of 0 or a
score of 1. Dissimilarity matrices from all participants from
each condition were summed to create two pooled
dissimilarity matrices. The Isomap analysis uses the
dissimilarities of judgments given by human observers and
provides a low dimensional visual representation of the
mapping of proximities (i.e., distances) existing between
images of various levels of complexity.

Table 1 summarizes a taxonomy corresponding to the most
common criteria from the descriptions given by participants
at the primary and secondary divisions. Each verbal
description was recoded as a class of concepts. Some
descriptions were a composition of concepts (e.g. pictures
on the left seemed more cluttered whereas the ones on the
right seemed more open in space), others were unique (e.g.
quantity of objects). The percentage in Table 1 should be
seen as an indicator of the strength of a perceptual property
(most of the time used, often used or almost never used) and
not as a fixed value, as variability among individual
descriptions was high.

Figure 3 shows a two dimensional projection of the 100
images given by Isomap for the Structure group. The
representation corresponds to the number of independent
ways in which visual scenes can be perceived to resemble or
differ in visual complexity. Although the dimensions per se
are difficult to interpret and further experiments will be
needed to assess more accurately the underlying dimensions
of the space shown in Figure 3, it shows indeed a first
principal direction corresponding to increasing “clutter” and
quantity of objects. The second axis, illustrated in Figure 4,
suggests an ordering along mirror symmetry and layout
organization.

Table 1: Criteria of visual complexity used for the primary
and secondary divisions and their % for both groups.
Criteria
Quantity of:
object
detail
color
Quantity total
Clutter
Symmetry
Open Space
Organization
Contrast

Group:Structure
19
8
2
29
18
15
18
13
<1

For each condition, we investigated the consistency of the
complexity ratings for the 100 images across subjects by
computing a Spearman's rank-order correlation for each
possible pairing of subjects (images within each subgroup
were given the same complexity value, from 1 to 8). If
participants were consistent, correlations among
participants’ rankings should be high. In both groups,
Spearman's correlations were all statistically significant (p <
.01) and were moderate to large in magnitude. Mean
correlations of all the pair-wise comparisons were the same
in the control and structure group, respectively, r = 0.62 and
r=0.61; (stdev = 0.15 and 0.14).

Group:control
32
8
19
59
5
2.5
10
7
8

For the control group, where complexity was defined as a
difficulty of verbal and visual recording, the criteria
corresponding to variety and quantity of objects and color
dominated the representation of complexity. In the second
group where complexity was defined as relating to the
structure of the scene, participants evenly used a set of
criteria that the control group mentioned less frequently.
The primary criterion of the structure group still concerns

Albeit the correlation between the two first axes given by
the Isomap representation for the structure and control
group is nearly identical (0.98), the correlation between the
ranks of images along the two second axes drops to 0.33
(see Figure 4), suggesting that participants used a different
combination of criteria beside quantity while ranking the
visual complexity of scenes. In the control group,
participants were told that complexity was related to the
difficulty of verbally describing an image. Consequently,

1043

they estimated complexity almost exclusively based on the
quantity and variety of objects and colors. In the structure
group, participants were sensitive to spatial layout criteria,
such as symmetry and open space.

While the contribution of the dimensions are modulated by
task constraints, visual complexity is principally represented
by the perceptual dimensions of quantity of objects, clutter,
openness, symmetry, organization, and variety of colors.

Acknowledgments
This research was partly funded by a graduate research
assistantship to M.L.M (NSF-IGERT training grant) and
A.O. was partly funded by an NIMH grant. We used the
Isomap code in Matlab provided by J.B. Tenenbaum. The
authors would like to thank Nancy Carlisle, Monica
Castelhano, Zach Hambrick, Antonio Torralba as well as
two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments about the
paper. Correspondence can be addressed to A.O.
(oliva@mit.edu), or M.L.M (mackmic1@msu.edu).
Figure 4: Sample of images projected onto the second
principal dimension of Isomap for the structure group (top)
and the control group (bottom). For the structure group, the
images are organized from the top-left to the bottom-right
following a property that resembles mirror symmetry. For
the control group, the images are organized following a
different combination of properties. These projections
illustrate the differences in the criteria used between the two
groups.

Discussion
The high correlations across participants for both groups
(average of 0.61) suggest that participants used a same (or
similar) set of holistic perceptual dimensions to represent
complexity. The dimensions of visual complexity listed in
Table 1 are not exhaustive: one can imagine that the
perceived complexity of scenes of a larger volume of space
(e.g., urban environments) might require new dimensions
better suited to representing these spaces (e.g., perspective).
However, the fact that there exists a set of defined properties
that most people are sensitive to is appealing for modeling
the visual complexity, where each dimension would be
represented as a combination of low-level (e.g. contours,
junctions) and medium-level features (e.g. connectedness,
symmetry, Mack & Oliva, 2004). Furthermore, finding the
true meaningful axes in the space generated by a multidimensional scaling algorithm, as well as the status of these
dimensions (separable, integral, Garner, 1974; Gardenfors,
2000; Maddox, 1992) will be the subject of a follow-up
study.

Conclusion
The goal of this study was to characterize the representation
of visual complexity and its modulation by task constraints.
The complexity ratings provided by observers on 100
pictures of (indoor) real-world scenes are consistent with a
multi-dimensional representation of visual complexity.

References
Gardenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces: the geometry of
thoughts. Bradford Books MIT Press.
Garner, W.R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.
Feldman, J. (1997) Regularity-based perceptual grouping.
Computational Intelligence, 13(4), 582-623.
Heaps, C., & Handel, C.H. (1999). Similarity and features
of natural textures. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 25, 299-320.
Heylighen F. (1997). The Growth of Structural and
Functional Complexity during Evolution. F. Heylighen &
D. Aerts (eds.).
Mack, M.L., & Oliva, A. (2004). The perceptual dimensions
of visual simplicity. Presentation at the 4th Annual
Meeting of Visual Sciences Society, Sarasota, Florida.
Maddox, W.T. (1992). Perceptual and decisional
separability. In Ashby, G.F., ed. Multidimensional models
of perception and cognition, 147-180. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Oliva, A., & Schyns, P.G. (1997). Coarse blobs or fine
edges? Evidence that information diagnosticity changes
the perception of complex visual stimuli. Cognitive
Psychology, 34, 72-107.
Oliva, A., & Schyns, P.G. (2000). Colored diagnostic blobs
mediate scene recognition. Cognitive Psychology, 41,176210.
Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2001). Modeling the Shape of the
Scene: A Holistic Representation of the Spatial Envelope.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 42,145-175.
Palmer, S.E., (1999). Vision Science: Photons to
Phenomenlogy. MIT Press.
Potter, M.C. (1976). Short-term conceptual memory for
pictures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 2, 509-522.
Rao, A.R., & Lohse, G.L. (1993). Identifying high-level
features of texture perception. Graphical Models and
Image Processing, 55, 218-233.

1044

Schyns, P.G., & Oliva, A. (1994). From blobs to boundary
edges: Evidence for time and spatial scale dependent
scene recognition. Psychological Science, 5, 195-200.
Tenenbaum, J.B., de Silva, V., & Langford, J.C. (2000). A
global geometric framework for nonlinear dimensionality
reduction. Science, 290, 2319-2323.

Torralba, A., & Oliva, A. (2002). Depth Estimation from
Image Structure. IEEE Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 24 (9), 1225-1238
van der Helm, P.A. (2000). Simplicity versus likelihood in
visual perception: From surprisals to precisals.
Psychological Bulletin, 126, 770-800.

Figure 2: Illustration of the hierarchical grouping task after completion (organization made by subject 1 in the Structure
group). Most complex scenes are in the top left corner, and most simple scenes are the bottom right corner.

1045

Figure 3: Representation given by Isomap for the structure group. The space shows on the arrow axis, a principal direction
corresponding to increasing quantity of objects and clutter. The images that are far away from that direction are images that
exhibit the highest amount of variability in how they were grouped in relation to other images. Scenes of medium and low
level of clutter exhibit more variations along a second direction, possibly related to symmetry and spatial arrangement (cf.
Figure 4).
1046

