UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit and Explicit Learning of a Covariation Across Visual Search Displays

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2kx4g9mn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Ray, Colleen A.
Reingold, Eyal M.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit and Explicit Learning of a Covariation Across Visual Search Displays
Colleen A. Ray (caray@u.arizona.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1503 E University Blvd. Building 68
Tucson, AZ 85721 USA

Eyal M. Reingold (reingold@psych.utoronto.ca)
Department of Psychology, 100 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G3 Canada

where they were instructed to look for an object
symmetric around the vertical axis. There were two
display conditions: in the first condition each of the
targets was paired with a distractor set and this pairing
was preserved throughout the experiment, and in the
second condition the pairings of distractor sets and targets
was varied randomly across trials. Chun and Jiang (1999)
reported that search efficiency in the consistent pairing
condition was significantly better than in the randomized
pairing condition.
Importantly, an evaluation of
participants’ awareness of the experimental manipulation
indicated that the benefit participants derived from
consistent pairing reflected implicit rather than explicit
learning. Based on these results Chun and Jiang argued
that following implicit learning of the pairing of targets
and distractor sets, distractor identity information (i.e.,
context information) could cue knowledge of target shape
information, reducing search time.
In the present study we employed eye movement
monitoring as an index of learning in addition to reaction
time. Eye movements have been shown to be a tangible
trace of perceptual and attentional processes, and
represent an ideal indirect measure of processing which
can be recorded unobtrusively, concurrent with direct
discrimination measures of performance. This may allow
for demonstrating dissociations between some aspects of
eye movement behavior, such as saccadic selectivity, and
overt task performance, such as reaction time. Employing
such methodology, this research investigates whether we
can learn to make a more efficient visual search based on
a covariation that across search displays provides target
identity information, as well as addressing how awareness
of this information affects search performance. In
addition, by employing multiple methodologies to
empirically investigate implicit and explicit learning, we
hope to make progress towards the goal of demonstrating
qualitative differences between these processes.
To this end, we exploited a well-established finding in
the eye movement and visual search literature that
demonstrates a bias in the distribution of saccadic
endpoints toward distractors that share stimulus
dimensions and features with the target including color,
shape, contrast polarity, and size (e.g., Findlay, 1997;
Hooge & Erkelens, 1999; Pomplun, Reingold, & Shen,
2001, 2003; Pomplun, Reingold, Shen, & Williams, 2000;
Scialfa & Joffe, 1998; Shen & Reingold, 1999; Shen,

Abstract
The goal of this study was to extend prior reports of
implicit learning in visual search (e.g., Chun & Jiang,
1999) by employing eye movement monitoring and
reaction time measures to contrast implicit and explicit
learning. Towards this end, participants’ eye movements
were monitored as they performed a visual search task in
the ‘change blindness’ flicker paradigm. In each trial,
participants were asked to detect a letter that differed in
shape or color across otherwise identical alternating letter
arrays. In a subset of trials, for some participants the
background luminance covaried with target color (Color
rule condition) and for other participants letter thickness
covaried with target shape (Shape rule condition). In
addition, half of the participants were told of the existence
of a covariation (Informed group) and the other half were
not notified of this regularity and in a post-experimental
interview reported no awareness of this covariation
(Uninformed group). In both groups, reaction time data
indicated that visual search was facilitated for trials that
contained the covariation, and eye movement data showed
that participants guided eye movements to potential targets
based on the covariation information. Further, Informed
participants in the Color rule condition were able to use
covariation information to a greater extent than those in the
Shape rule condition. In contrast, no differential sensitivity
across rule conditions was found for Uninformed
participants. Implications to the study of implicit learning
in visual search are discussed.

Introduction
Cognitive psychologists regularly differentiate cognitive
processing as being either implicit or explicit in nature.
However, there still exists debate in the field over whether
these processes are indeed distinct (e.g., Shanks and St.
John, 1994). One way to strongly support such a
separation would involve demonstrating qualitative
differences between these processes (e.g., Cheesman &
Merikle, 1986; Dienes & Berry, 1997; Dixon, 1981; Neal
& Hesketh, 1997; Reingold & Merikle, 1990; Shevrin &
Dickman, 1980; Stadler & Frensch, 1994). As such, the
present investigation attempts to make progress towards
this goal by extending research demonstrating implicit
learning in visual search (e.g., Chun & Jiang, 1999; Chun
& Nakayama, 2000; Durgin, 1999; Flowers & Smith,
1998; Miller, 1991). For example, in a study by Chun and
Jiang (1999), participants performed a visual search task
1125

Reingold, & Pomplun, 2000, 2003; Shen, Reingold,
Pomplun, & Williams, 2003; Williams & Reingold,
2001). This finding is typically referred to as saccadic
selectivity.
In the present study participants performed a visual
search task in the ‘change blindness’ flicker paradigm
(Rensink, O'Regan, & Clark, 1997). As shown in Figure
1, participants were asked to detect a letter (target) that
differed in color (see Panel A) or shape (see Panel B)
across otherwise identical alternating letter arrays. In a
subset of trials, there was a covariation embedded in the
task that reduced the target to half of the display items.
Reaction times for the trials containing the covariation
(Covariant trials), were compared to the reaction times
obtained for the trials that did not contain covariation
information (Random trials). In addition, half of the
participants were told of the existence of a covariation
(Informed group) and the other half were not notified of
this regularity (Uninformed group). Learning of the
covariation rule would be expressed by faster reaction
times for the Covariant trials than for the Random trials.
In addition, learning of the covariation rule would provide
target identity information and may be manifested as a
bias towards fixating on the letters that have the same
shape or color as the target (i.e., saccadic selectivity).
Finally, we were also interested in determining if there
would be differential search performance across the
Informed and Uninformed groups reflecting qualitative
differences between implicit and explicit learning.

200 ms

80 ms

Panel A

200 ms

Methods
Participants
Forty-eight participants were paid $20 for their
involvement in the two hour experiment: 24 participants
searched for the letter that differed in shape and 24
participants searched for the letter that differed in color.
Half of the participants in each group were informed of
the covariation information (Informed group), while the
other half were not (Uninformed group). Participants
were tested individually, and all had normal or correctedto-normal vision.

Panel B
Figure 1: An illustration of the change blindness
paradigm. Panel A shows a target changing color, and
Panel B shows a target changing shape. The targets are
circled for illustration purposes only.
Stimulus displays were presented on two monitors, one
for the participant (a 17-inch Viewsonic 17PS) and one
for the experimenter. The experimenter monitor was used
to give feedback in real-time about the participant’s
computed gaze position. This feedback was given in the
form of a cursor measuring 1° in diameter which was
overlaid on the same image being viewed by the
participant. This allowed the experimenter to evaluate
system accuracy and to initiate a recalibration if
necessary.
In general, the average error in the
computation of gaze position was less than 0.5° of visual
angle.

Apparatus
The eyetracker employed in this research was the SR
Research Ltd. EyeLink system. This system has high
spatial resolution (0.005°), and a sampling rate of 250 Hz
(4 msec temporal resolution). The EyeLink headband has
three cameras, allowing simultaneous tracking of both
eyes and of head position for head-motion compensation.
By default, only the participant's dominant eye was
tracked in our study. The EyeLink system uses an
Ethernet link between the eyetracker and display
computers for real-time saccade and gaze position data
transfer.
In the present study the configurable
acceleration and velocity thresholds were set to detect
saccades of 0.5° or greater.

Materials and Design
As shown in Figure 1, the change blindness flicker
paradigm was used (Rensink et al., 1997). As can be
seen, in each trial, the screen flickered between the
1126

Table 1: An illustration of the covariation rules for the
Shape and Color conditions.

display and a blank screen (200ms display/80ms blank
screen/200ms display). Displays were composed of 18
letters (1 target, 17 distractors) that were arrayed on three
invisible concentric rings. On all trials there was an equal
number of letters of each color and shape. The radii of
the rings were 2.8, 5.6, and 8.3 degrees of visual angle (at
a distance of 70 cm). The minimum distance between
items was set at 3.5 degrees. Individual letters subtended
0.86 degrees both horizontally and vertically. Colors
were matched in luminance and saturation (CIE
coordinates: x, y, red: 0.578, 0.350, green: 0.327, 0.549,
blue: 0.170, 0.117 and yellow: 0.446, 0.454). The
location of the target and the configuration of the
distractor items were randomized for every trial.
As the screen flickered, the participants’ task was to
detect the letter (target) that differed in color or shape.
For trials where the target changed color, half of the
displays contained an equal number of X’s and O’s (X/O
displays), and half of the displays contained an equal
number of C’s and T’s (C/T displays). In both cases, an
equal number of red, green and blue letters was displayed,
one of which was chosen at random to change color. For
example, Figure 1, Panel A shows an X/O display where
the target (which is circled for illustrative purposes)
changes color from red to blue. In this trial the screen
would alternate between the display with the red target
letter, the blank display, and the display with the blue
target letter, until the participant found the target.
Alternatively, for trials where the target changed shape,
half of the displays contained an equal number of green
and red letters (green/red displays), and half of the
displays contained an equal number of yellow and blue
letters (yellow/blue displays). In both cases, an equal
number of X’s, O’s, and H’s was displayed, one of which
was chosen at random to change shape. For example,
Panel B shows a green/red display where the target
changes shape from an O to an X. In this trial the screens
would alternate between the given displays until the
participant located the target changing shape.
In a subset of each of these types of trials, there was a
covariation embedded in the task that reduced the possible
target locations to half of the display items. Two
covariation rules were used as illustrated in Table 1. In
the Shape rule condition, the displays contained either
thick letters or thin letters. Letter thickness predicted
target shape in the Covariant trials, but not the Random
trials.
In the example in Table 1, X/O displays
correspond to Covariant trials, in which thick letter
displays predicted the target to be an X and thin letter
displays predicted the target to be an O. In contrast, C/T
displays correspond to the Random trials, in which letter
thickness did not predict target shape.
In the Color rule condition, the displays contained
either a light or a dark background. Background
luminance predicted target color in the Covariant trials,
but not the Random trials. In the example in Table 1,

Trials
Rule
Condition

Display type

Covariant

Shape
(Fig. 1
Panel A)

Thick Letter

X -> X

Thin Letter

O -> O

Color
(Fig. 1
Panel B)

Light Background

O -> X

Dark Background

O -> X

Random
C -> C
or T -> T
C -> C
or T -> T
O -> X
or O -> X
O -> X
or O -> X

green/red displays correspond to Covariant trials, in
which a light background predicted the target to be green
and a dark background predicted the target to be red. In
contrast, yellow/blue displays correspond to the Random
trials, in which background luminance did not predict
target color.
Each participant performed 624 trials. The order of the
stimulus displays was random under the restrictions that
there be no more than 4 displays of a given display type
or trial type in a row, and that each 48 trial block
contained an equal number of trials of each display type
and each trial type (Covariant, Random). Mapping of the
display types to conditions was counterbalanced across
participants.

Procedure
The experiment was run in a lighted room with a
luminance of approximately 30 cd/m2. Before beginning
the task, the participants were informed that stimulus
displays would consist of letters that would flash
intermittently, and that their task was to search for and
detect the single letter that was changing shape, for
participants in the Color rule condition, or changing color,
for participants in the Shape rule condition. Participants
were asked to locate the target as quickly as possible and
terminate the trial by maintaining fixation on the target.
Participants then completed 48 practice trials, followed by
2 blocks of 288 experimental trials. Every 48 trials
participants were given a rest break.
At the beginning of each trial, a fixation point was
presented in the center of the computer screen in order to
correct for drift in gaze position. A button press from the
participant initiated the trial and it ended 700 ms after the
participant fixated on the target (gaze-controlled
response). The time between display onset and the
participant’s gaze-controlled response was recorded as the
response time (RT). In addition, the participant’s eye
movements, monitored via the EyeLink tracking system,
were recorded.

1127

In order to compare explicit and implicit covariant rule
learning, following completion of the practice block, half
of the 24 participants in the each rule condition were told
that there was a 100% covariation between the relevant
features in one of the two display types (the Informed
group). However, they were not told which display type
contained the covariation. The other half of participants
were not told anything about this relationship (the
Uninformed group). At the end of the experiment a
structured questionnaire was given to investigate
awareness of the covariation.

6500
Shape-Covariant

Shape-Random

6000

Color-Covariant

Color-Random

Reaction Time (ms)

5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000

Results

2500
Practice

Reaction Time

Block 1

Block 2

Trial Block

For each participant and condition the mean RT was
calculated, excluding those trials that were greater than 3
standard deviations from the mean. This resulted in less
than 3% of trials being omitted. As Figure 2 reveals, RTs
improved over the course of the experiment (F (2, 88) =
101, p <.001) and were faster for Covariant than Random
trials (F (1, 44) = 31.6, p <.001).
Importantly,
participants improved more over time for Covariant trials
than for Random trials, demonstrating a reaction time
benefit for learning the covariation, F (2, 88) = 3.87, p =
.025. Moreover, this RT benefit of Covariant trials over
Random trials was significant for both the Informed (F (1,
22) = 96.9, p < .001) and Uninformed (F (1, 22) = 9.40, p
< .01) groups. There were no RT differences for the
practice block across trial type (t (1, 47) = .82, p > .4).
As can be seen upon further inspection of Figure 2, the
instruction manipulation (Informed, Uninformed) affected
the degree to which participants benefited from the
covariation information. Specifically, there was a greater
benefit for the Covariant trials over the Random trials for
participants in the Informed group (mean difference =
1010 ms) as compared to participants in the Uninformed
group (mean difference = 165 ms), F (1, 44) = 53.1, p <
.001. Further, Informed participants showed significantly
greater RT advantages for Covariant trials than for
Random trials in the Color rule condition (mean
difference: 1520 ms, SE = 180) when compared to the
Shape rule condition (mean difference: 500 ms, SE =
98.0), F (1, 22) = 24.7, p < .001). In contrast, the
Uninformed participants showed no differential RT
benefit across rule conditions (F (1, 22) < 1, mean
difference: 155 ms, SE = 81.2, for the Color rule
condition vs. mean difference: 175 ms, SE = 70.8, for the
Shape rule condition). These differences manifested
themselves as a trial type by instruction by rule condition
interaction, F (1, 44) = 20.1, p < .001.

6500
Shape-Covariant

6000

Shape-Random

5500

Color-Random

Reaction Time (ms)

Color-Covariant

5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
Practice

Block 1

Block 2

Trial Block

Figure 2: Reaction time by trial Block is shown for both the
Covariant and Random trials by rule condition (Shape,
Color). The top panel contains the results for the Informed
group, and the bottom panel contains the results for the
Uninformed group.
in the Color rule condition. Accordingly, chance
performance on the saccadic selectivity measure (i.e.,
when all distractors have an equal probability of being
fixated) was expected to be 47.06%. Consistent with this,
saccadic selectivity was at chance (Mean = 47.06; all t’s
(1, 47) < 1, p’s > .5) for the Random trials over the course
of the experiment. In contrast, as can be seen in Figure 3,
while saccadic selectivity did not significantly differ from
chance for Covariant trials for the practice block (Mean =
47.06; t (1, 47) = 1.24, p > .2), participants’ saccadic
selectivity increased over time, demonstrating a
behavioral consequence for learning of the covariation, F
(2, 88) = 81.3, p < .001. This bias towards fixating on the
letters that had the same shape or color as the target
occurred more strongly for the Informed participants (F
(1, 22) = 27.5, p < .001), than the Uninformed participants
(F (1, 22) = 10.3, p < .005). Further, Informed
participants showed significantly greater saccadic
selectivity in the Color rule condition (mean = 75.3%, SE
= 1.57) as compared to the Shape rule condition (mean =

Saccadic Selectivity
Saccadic selectivity was computed by assigning saccadic
endpoints to the closest display item and calculating the
percentage of saccades directed towards the 7 distractors
out of the total of 17 distractors that shared shape with the
target in the Shape rule condition or color with the target
1128

trials containing the covariant rule condition (165ms in
both the Shape and Color rule conditions), only a slight
saccadic selectivity (1% bias in the Shape rule condition
and 2% bias in the Color rule condition) favoring relevant
distractors was demonstrated. In contrast, participants
who were informed of the covariation rule showed
substantial learning of the covariation in the form of a
reaction time advantage (500ms in the Shape rule
condition and 1520ms in the Color rule condition) and
saccadic selectively (12% bias in the Shape rule condition
and 28% bias in the Color rule condition). Taken
together, saccadic selectivity seems to be one mechanism
by which Informed participants made their search more
efficient, whereas the weak selectivity displayed by the
Uninformed participants suggests that this was not the
primary mechanism employed by this group. Future
investigation into what other means the Uninformed
participants were using to improve search efficiency is
warranted. The different picture portrayed by the RT and
saccadic selectivity results points to the importance of
using multiple concurrent measures of performance in
attempting to more conclusively document implicit
learning and in attempting to better understand the
mechanisms underlying variation in performance
associated with the presence or absence of claimed
awareness pertaining to the learned covariation.
The present finding of implicit learning in visual search
is consistent with previous evidence using other visual
search paradigms (e.g., Chun & Jiang, 1999; Chun &
Nakayama, 2000; Durgin, 1999; Flowers & Smith, 1998;
Miller, 1991). A benefit to our use of the change
blindness paradigm was that it allowed us to create a
methodology whereby no target-absent trials were needed
and where the covariant rule involved a dimension that
was seemingly irrelevant to the search task.
Finally, the rule condition (Color, Shape) differentially
influenced performance in the Informed and Uninformed
groups. Specifically, the Informed participants in the
Color rule condition were able to use the covariation
information to a greater extent than those in the Shape
rule condition, as shown by both the RT and saccadic
selectivity results (see Figure 2 and 3, respectively). In
contrast, no such differential sensitivity across rule
condition was found for the Uninformed participants for
either of these measures.
We believe that the
demonstration of differential search performance across
groups and conditions in the present study constitutes
progress toward the crucial goal of establishing
qualitative differences between implicit and explicit
learning in the context of visual search.

80
Shape-Uninformed

Eye Movement Guidance (%)

75

Color-Uninformed
Shape-Informed

70

Color-Informed
Chance

65
60
55
50
45
40
Practice

Block 1

Block 2

Trial Block

Figure 3: Percent eye-movement guidance by trial Block
for the Covariant trials by group (Informed,
Uninformed) and rule condition (Shape, Color). Chance
guidance is shown by a dashed line at 47.08%. The
practice block contains 48 trials, and Blocks 1 and 2
average 288 trials each.
59.1%, SE = 2.43), F (1, 22) = 31.5, p < .001). In
contrast, the Uninformed participants showed no
differential saccadic selectivity across rule conditions (F
(1, 22) = 3.05, p = .095; mean = 49.3%, SE = .482 for the
Color rule condition, mean = 48.2%, SE = .476 for the
Shape rule condition). These differences manifested
themselves as an instruction by rule condition interaction,
F (1, 44) = 25.71, p < .001.
The effectiveness of the instructions was further
evaluated by a retrospective report in the form of a
structured questionnaire and intensive questioning. It was
found that participants in the Uninformed group reported
being unaware of the covariation, while those in the
Informed group could explain the covariation, consistent
with instructions. In fact, most Uninformed participants
expressed disbelief when they were told of the
covariation, reporting that they thought that letter
thickness (for those in the Shape rule condition), or
background luminance (for those in the Color rule
condition), were irrelevant.

Discussion
In an attempt to make progress towards the goal of
demonstrating qualitative differences between implicit
and explicit processing, the present study employed eye
movement monitoring as an index of learning, in addition
to reaction time, to further explore implicit learning in the
context of visual search. It was found that participants
can enhance visual search efficiency by utilizing a
covariation that provided target identity information, and
that such learning occurs even when participants are
uninformed and claim to be unaware of this information.
Implicit learning was most strongly demonstrated by the
response time measure. Specifically, for the Uninformed
participants, while the RT measure showed savings for

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by an NSERC research grant
to E.M.R. and an NSERC postgraduate scholarship to
C.A.R.

1129

Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To
see or not to see: The need for attention to perceive
changes in scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368-373.
Scialfa, C. T., & Joffe, K. (1998). Response times and eye
movements in feature and conjunction search as a
function of target eccentricity. Perception &
Psychophysics, 60, 1067-1082.
Shanks, D. R., & St. John, M. F. (1994). Characteristics
of dissociable human learning systems. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 17, 367-447.
Shevrin, H., & Dickman, S. (1980). The psychological
unconscious: A necessary assumption for all
psychological theory? American Psychologist, 35, 421434.
Shen, J., & Reingold, E. M. (1999). Saccadic selectivity
during visual search: The effects of shape and stimulus
familiarity. In M. Hahn and S. C. Stoness (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 21st annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 649-652). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Shen, J., Reingold, E. M., & Pomplun, M. (2000).
Distractor ratio influences patterns of eye movements
during visual search. Perception, 29, 241-250.
Shen, J., Reingold, E. M., & Pomplun, M. (2003).
Guidance of eye movements during conjunctive visual
search: The distractor-ratio effect. Canadian Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57, 76-96.
Shen, J., Reingold, E. M., Pomplun, M., & Williams, D.
E. (2003). Saccadic selectivity during visual search:
The influence of central processing difficulty. In J.
Hyönä, R. Radach & H. Deubel (Eds.), The Mind's
eyes: Cognitive and applied aspects of eye movement
research (pp. 65-88). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Stadler, M. A., & Frensch, P. A. (1994). Whither learning
whither memory? Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 17,
423-424.
Williams, D. E., & Reingold, (2001). Preattentive
guidance of eye movements during triple conjunction
search tasks: The effects of feature discriminability and
saccadic amplitude. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8,
476-488.

References
Cheesman, J., & Merikle, P. M. (1986). Distinguishing
conscious from unconscious perceptual processes.
Canadian Journal of Psychology, 40, 343-367.
Chun, M. M., & Jiang, Y. (1999). Top-down attentional
guidance based on implicit learning of visual
covariation. Psychological Science, 10, 360-365.
Chun, M. M., & Nakayama, K. (2000). On the functional
role of implicit visual memory for the adaptive
deployment of attention across scenes. Visual
Cognition, 7, 65-81.
Dienes, Z., & Berry, D. (1997.) Implicit learning: Below
the subjective threshold. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 4, 3-23.
Dixon, N. F. (1981). Preconscious processing.
Chichester: Wiley.
Durgin, F. H. (1999). Supporting the "Grand Illusion" of
direct perception: Implicit learning in eye-movement
control. In S. R. Hameroff, A. W Kaszniak and D. J.
Chalmers (Eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness
III: The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates (pp.
179-188). Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
U.S.A.
Findlay, J. M. (1997). Saccade target selection during
visual search. Vision Research, 37, 617-631.
Flowers, J. H., & Smith, K. L. (1998). What is learned
about nontarget items in simple visual search?
Perception & Psychophysics, 60, 696-704.
Hooge, I. T., & Erkelens, C. J. (1999). Peripheral vision
and oculomotor control during visual search. Vision
Research, 39, 1567-1575.
Miller, J. (1991). The flanker compatibility effect as a
function of visual angle, attentional focus, visual
transients, and perceptual load: A search for boundary
conditions. Perception & Psychophysics, 49, 270-288.
Neal, A., & Hesketh, B. (1997). Episodic knowledge and
implicit learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4,
24-37.
Pomplun, M., Reingold, E. M., & Shen, J. (2001). The
effects of peripheral and parafoveal cueing and masking
on saccadic selectivity in a gaze-contingent window
paradigm. Vision Research, 41, 2757-2769.
Pomplun, M., Reingold, E. M., & Shen, J. (2003). Area
activation: A computational model of saccadic
selectivity in visual search. Cognitive Science, 27, 299312.
Pomplun, M., Reingold, E. M., Shen, J., & Williams, D.
E. (2000). The area activation model of saccadic
selectivity in visual search. In L. R. Gleitman & A. K.
Joshi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 375380). Mahwah, NJ: Elrbaum.
Reingold, E. M., & Merikle, P. M. (1990). On the interrelatedness of theory and measurement in the study of
unconscious processes. Mind & Language, 5, 9-28.

1130

