UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Influencing nonmonotonic reasoning by modifier strength manipulation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kn4t6tw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Dieussaert, Kristien
Ford, Marilyn
Horsten, Leon

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Influencing nonmonotonic reasoning by modifier strength manipulation
Kristien Dieussaert (kristien.dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven,
102 Tiensestraat, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Marilyn Ford (m.ford@griffith.edu.au)
School of Computing and Information Technology, Griffith University,
Nathan, Queensland, Australia, 4111

Leon Horsten (leon.horsten@hiw.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Philosophy, University of Leuven,
2 Kardinaal Mercierplein, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

default reasoning. Since the long-term goal of most AI
researchers is to simulate human reasoning, and since we do
not have an objective theory of what rational default
reasoning is, Pelletier and Elio (1997) argue that a
psychologistic view of default reasoning should be adopted.
Thus, the data that any default system should cover should
be determined by the practices of ordinary people.
We agree with the importance of investigating human
reasoning by controlled experimental research to gain more
insight into the process of human reasoning. However, we
also argue that it is important for AI not to develop a formal
nonmonotonic logic or automated reasoning system on the
basis of flawed reasoning.
Ford and Billington (2000) took the need for AI researchers
to study human reasoning seriously and systematically
investigated human nonmonotonic reasoning with abstract
material. This way, participants could not rely on
background knowledge, as they can do in daily life.
To clarify the discussion, we present an example of one
problem, with a well-known Tweety-bird like structure:

Abstract
Despite the current belief that much common sense reasoning
is nonmonotonic in nature, research indicates that only a
limited percentage of people are good at nonmonotonic
reasoning. Good nonmonotonic reasoners recognize the
logical strengths and weaknesses of some arguments. In the
present study, we focus on differences in the probabilistic
interpretation of the modifiers typically and usually and on the
resulting differences in the strengths and weaknesses of
arguments. We show that these implicit probabilistic strengths
influence the reasoning process of good nonmonotonic
reasoners.

Introduction
Most AI logicians and logic programmers, as well as
philosophical logicians, ground their interest in
nonmonotonic reasoning on the observation that common
sense reasoning is largely nonmonotonic in nature. Ginsberg
(1994, p.2), for example, states that: “… flexibility is
intimately connected with the defeasible nature of
commonsense inference … we are all capable of drawing
conclusions, acting on them, and then retracting them if
necessary in the face of new evidence. If our computer
programs are to act intelligently, they will need to be
similarly flexible”.
Pelletier and Elio (1997) argue that researchers like
Ginsberg are right in grounding their research on human
reasoning, but they also argue that AI researchers should
bear the consequences of it.
As a first consequence, Pelletier and Elio (1997) argue for a
more systematic study of human inferences. They plead
against the use of the intuitions of a small group of AI
researchers to decide on the acceptable answers to some
‘benchmark’ problems (e.g. Lifschitz, 1988). Within the AI
community, at least some researchers are also supportive of
this point of view (e.g. Schurz, 2001; Benferhat, Bonnefon,
& Da Silva Neves, 2002).
The second consequence of grounding default reasoning
research on human common sense reasoning is more severe.
Contrary to deductive reasoning, where classical logic is
considered to be the norm, there is no standard norm for

Hittas are usually not waffs.

Penguins do not fly

All of the hittas are oxers.

All penguins are birds

Oxers are usually waffs.

Birds fly

Jukk is a hitta.

Tweety is a Penguin

Is Jukk a waff?

Does Tweety fly?

H(j)

W

O

W(j)?

Ford and Billington (2000) summed up their main finding
by presenting five negative (N) and three positive (P) factors
315

overrides information from a superclass; Ford and
Billington’s (2000) subjects did not articulate this notion of
specificity as it is used in AI and the three P factors they
identified make no mention of such specificity. The subjects
instead rely on the logical strength of conflicting paths in an
argument.
In this manuscript, we investigate further the nature of the
logical strengths and weaknesses that reasoners who
appreciate P2 and P3 use. We will argue for differences in
the probabilistic interpretation of the modifiers usually and
typically and consequent differences in the logical strengths
and weaknesses of arguments. Given the results of Ford
(2004, In Press), we would thus expect variations in
conclusions given by reasoners who appreciate P2 and P3,
with these reasoners giving more weight to the stronger side
of an argument.
In a pilot experiment, we will extend a former study in
which it was shown that researchers should be careful how
to phrase their ‘default relations’ (Dieussaert, 2003).
Researchers do not seem to make a distinction between
sentences such as ‘birds fly’, ‘birds normally fly’, ‘birds
usually fly’, ‘birds typically fly’ and so on. However,
Dieussaert showed that the interpretation of these sentences,
and the inferences yielded from them, differ greatly.
For the present study, we focus on the difference between
usually and typically. We confirm the finding that typically
is interpreted as indicating more instantiations of a type than
usually. This implies that ‘birds typically fly’ represents a
stronger relation than ‘birds usually fly’ since more
instances of ‘bird’ are supposed to fly in the former case.
In a second experiment, we use this finding to show how the
strengths and weaknesses of arguments can influence
nonmonotonic reasoning. Reasoners who are shown to
appreciate P2 and P3 are given problems with relations
phrased with typically and usually. The data show clearly
that the strength of arguments influences the nonmonotonic
reasoning process for these subjects.

that influenced people’s reasoning about nonmonotonic
problems:
(N1) Most participants were not willing to draw a tentative
conclusion when faced with conflict and with non-strict
rules. (N2) Some participants weighed up the perceived
number of relevant positive and negative paths, though the
perceived paths were not paths. (N3) Some participants
considered path length regardless of the ordering of rule
types. Most participants preferred the shorter path to the
longer path. (N4) Some participants gave weight to the
presence of the universal quantifier, even when this was
inappropriate. (N5) Some participants interpreted ‘usually
not’ as evidence that ‘some are’ and thus gave preference to
a positive conclusion. (See Hewson & Vogel, 1994, and
Vogel & Tonhauser, 1996, for more evidence that many
people have difficulty with nonmonotonic reasoning
problems).
Besides these negative factors, Ford and Billington (2000)
also extracted some positive factors from their experiment.
(P1) Some participants recognized the relevance of the fact
that if all of the Xs are Ys there might be Ys that are not Xs.
(P2) Some participants recognized the relevance of the fact
that if all of the Ys are Zs then any Xs that are Ys are also
Zs. (P3) Some participants recognized that given a sentence
Xs are usually Ys there are potentially many Ys that are not
Xs.
People who recognize these positive points are able to see
differences in the logical strength of arguments. Consider
the following:
X

Y

Z

(a)

Z

(b)

Z

(c)

(all of the Xs are Ys, Ys are usually Zs)

X

Y

(Xs are usually Ys, all of the Ys are Zs)

X

Y

(Xs are usually Ys, Ys are usually Zs)

An appreciation of P2 allows people to recognize the
strength of (b): for (b), it must be the case that Xs are
usually Zs because the Xs that are Ys must also be Zs. In
contrast, an appreciation of P1 and P3 allows people to see
the weakness of (a) and (c), respectively: for (a) and (c), it
might be that none of the Xs are Zs because it could be that
the Ys that are not Xs are not Zs.
Ford (2004, In Press) argues that people who see the
differences in the logical strength of arguments are more
likely to give logically justifiable answers on nonmonotonic
reasoning problems, since they rely on logically valid
principles to form their answers. For example, with
problems such as (1), they answer ‘unlikely’ more
frequently and more strongly than people who do not see
differences in the logical strength of arguments. They give
this answer because of their recognition of the weakness of
(a).
Note that these reasoners are not relying on a notion of
‘specificity’, where information stemming from a subclass

Pilot Experiment
In an earlier experiment (Dieussaert, 2003), the influence of
phrasing on the interpretation of default sentences was
shown. In a within subjects design, participants estimated
the positive outcome of a sequence such as ‘Hilo are
typically waff. Jukk is a hilo. Is Jukk a waff?’ significantly
higher than for sequences like ‘Brant are usually glent.
Kerdo is a brant. Is Kerdo a glent?’
To obtain confirmatory evidence, we extended the earlier
experiment.

Method
Participants
Ninety-nine first year students in Psychology at the
University of Leuven, who had not taken a logic course,
participated as a partial fulfillment of a course requirement.

316

Design
The design was completely within subjects. The dependent
variable was the percentage entered per item.

Overall percentages entered for typically are higher than
percentages entered for usually (91.8 vs. 78.4; t (92) =7.82,
p < .00001). Percentages entered for typically not are higher
than percentages entered for usually not (87.3 vs. 77.4; t
(46) =4.8, p < .00001).
If we take into account only the single choices of
participants (and remove items for which more than one
answer was marked): Feature is the preferred category for
typically, while Number is the preferred category for
usually. A Sign test shows a higher number of Feature
choices for typically (73) than for usually (17; Sign test,
non-ties = 63, Z = 6.3, p < .00001). The same pattern is
found for typically not (59) versus usually not (15; Sign test,
non-ties = 70, Z = 8.3, p < .00001). A Sign test shows a
higher number of Number choices for usually (55) than for
typically (13; Sign test, non-ties = 56, Z = 5.5, p < .00001).
A similar pattern is found for usually not (39) versus
typically not (23; Sign test, non-ties = 33, Z = 2.4, p <
.00005).

Material and Procedure
Each participant received a booklet with written instructions
and 18 items in randomized order. Each participant solved
18 problems: 9 positive items and 9 negative items. They
solved this paper-and-pencil task individually and in a selfpaced manner.
Here, we focus only on the difference between typically and
usually, since these terms form the core of the main
experiment.
The relevant material was:
• Nagdals are usually pirasos.
• Hittas are typically waffs
• Nilo are usually not riza
• Koki are typically not liri
The instructions for the positive items were as follows:
On each of the following pages a sentence will be presented.
We ask you to mark how you interpret the underlined word
within this sentence. To clarify the task, we give you an
example.
The sentence: JY members are normally singers.
The question: Does the word ‘normally’ mean that:
Mark one or more answers:
0 A certain percentage of JY members have features that
characterise singers. If so, given the sentence, what would
you assume would be the approximate % (0-100) of JY
members that have features that characterize singers.
..........%
[further referred to as: Feature]
0 A certain percentage of time JY members are singers. If
so, given the sentence, what would you assume would be
the approximate % (0-100) of time JY members are singers.
..........%
[further referred to as: Time]
0 A certain percentage of JY members are singers. If so,
given the sentence, what would you assume would be the
approximate % (0-100) of JY members that are singers.
..........%
[further referred to as: Number]
For the negative items, the task were rephrased in a negative
form e.g.: ...% (0-100) of JY members that are not singers.

Discussion
This experiment confirms the results of Dieussaert (2003):
typically and usually are interpreted somewhat differently.
Most importantly for our purposes, having typically in a
sentence is associated with higher percentages than having
usually, with the former term thus being considered
stronger.

Main Experiment
The pilot experiment provides confirmatory evidence for the
stronger relation between two propositions A and B when
they are connected in a default sentence with typically than
with usually.
Having established this firmly, we can now investigate how
the strength of this relation influences the nonmonotonic
reasoning process. In this experiment, reasoners who
appreciate Ford and Billington’s (2000) P2 and P3 are
tested.

Method

Results

Participants
Twenty-seven first year students in Psychology from the
University of Leuven, who had not taken a logic course,
participated as a partial fulfillment of a course requirement.

Table 1: Mean percentages given for Feature, Time, and
Number (see Material).a
Problem
Feature
Time
Number Mean
65.0
92.3
91.8
Typically
91.8
(N=85)

Usually
Typically not
Usually not

(N=01)

(N=24)

77.9

74.3

79.6

78.4

(N=31)

(N=17)

(N=70)

[SD=12.5]

Design
The design was completely within subjects. The dependent
variable was the score on a seven-point scale.

[SD=11.7]

87.5

88.3

89.1

87.3

(N=73)

(N=04)

(N=36)

[SD=17.9]

77.2

76.8

76.4

77.4

Material and Procedure
Each participant first received two critical questions (Ford,
2004) to see if they recognized Ford and Billington’s (2000)
P2 and P3.
They were told that there were no time limits. The questions
were:

(N=27)
(N=38)
(N=52)
[SD=14.3]
a
The number of responses (N) do not add up to 99 because participants
were allowed to mark 1-3 answers. Some participants marked only the
answers and did not enter a percentage.

317

1) Given the following two statements:
Mary’s friends are usually Ann’s friends.
All of Ann’s friends are Sue’s friends.
Could it be the case that none of Mary’s friends are Sue’s
friends? (Yes/No)

(3)

[Small size]
A(x)

u/t

Given the following two statements:
Jim’s friends are usually Tom’s friends.
Tom’s friends are usually Fred’s friends.
Could it be the case that none of Jim’s friends are Fred’s
friends? (Yes/No)

(4)

5

6

u/t

(5)

(2)
u/t
C

B
u/t

(6)

[Small size]
A(x)

D

t/u

D(x)?

[Large size]
B
t/u

u/t
C(x)
[Small size]

D

D(x)?

It should perhaps be noted here that of the six structures
studied here, the notion of specificity, if it were used, could
only be applied to Problems 2 and 3, where information
from a subclass (A) conflicts with information from its
superclass (B). The good reasoners we are using, however,
would be expected to use P2 and P3 to compare the strength
of the conflicting arguments in all the problems.
Problems usually requiring ‘Can’t tell’
Problem 1 represents a strong positive versus a strong
negative argument. The expected response when the
modifier phrase is the same for both sides of the argument is
thus around 4, meaning ‘can’t tell’. However, an additional
manipulation was added.

B

C(x)?

B
t/u
C(x)?

t/u

C(x)

t/u
A(x)

D(x)?

t/u

extremely
likely
7

u/t
C

D

A(x)

t/u
A(x)

B

C(x)

Problems in which the modifier typically (t) was used for
the positive arguments and in which the modifier usually (u)
was used for the negative arguments will be referred to as
TU problems. Problems in which the modifier usually (u)
was used for the positive arguments and in which the
modifier typically (t) was used for the negative arguments
will be referred to as UT problems.
Six differently structured problems can be distinguished.
Participants received two examples of each of two versions
of the following 3-argument structures, thus making 12
problems:
(1)

t/u
A(x)

On a scale of 1 to 7, estimate the likelihood of Z(x).

4

C(x)?

Participants also received one example of each of the two
versions of the following 4-argument structures, making a
further 6 problems:

Only participants who answered the critical questions
correctly (No on the first, Yes on the second) proceeded to
the second part of the experiment, leaving 11 subjects.
These participants received a booklet with written
instructions and 18 problems (1 per page). Each participant
gave their answer to each problem verbally and then
indicated a likelihood estimation on a seven point scale.

3

[Large size]
B
t/u

C

The first question contains the strong argument, with P2
relevant:
X
Y
Z
while the second question contains the weak argument, with
P3 relevant:
X
Y
Z

extremely
unlikely
1
2

t/u

318

No difference between the problems was observed (p = .08).
However, an interaction between problem and modifier was
observed (F(2,20) = 4.4, MSE = .4, p <.05). A planned
comparison shows only a significant difference for UT
between Problem 1 and 2 (3.7 vs. 2.7; F(1,10) = 6.9, MSE =
.8, p < .05) and between Problem 1 and 3 (3.7 vs. 2.5;
F(1,10) = 31.0, MSE = .3, p < .0005). This difference is due
to the particularly low ratings of UT Problem 2 and 3.
Notice, too, that relative size information did not influence
the ratings.

In 1a, the positive non-strict relation was phrased with
typically (t; As are typically Bs), while the negative nonstrict relation was phrased with usually (u; As are usually
not Cs). For problem 1b, the phrasing was vice versa
(usually for the positive relation and typically for the
negative one).
Problem 4 represents a similar problem to (1), but with four
propositions involved. The expected response here is also 4,
meaning ‘can’t tell’, when the modifiers are the same, but
again TU and UT versions were given.
Given that typically is stronger than usually, the TU
versions would be expected to result in a higher rating
(more positive) than the UT versions.

4-argument problems.
A similar pattern is found for 4-argument problems. The
mean likelihood rating was higher for TU problems than for
UT problems (4.5 vs. 3.1; F(1,10) = 7.0, MSE = 4.5, p <
.05). Planned comparisons showed that TU ratings are
higher than UT ratings for Problem 4 (5.0 vs. 3.4; F(1,10) =
5.2, MSE = 2.8, p < .05), for Problem 5 (4.2 vs. 2.5; F(1,10)
= 6.8, MSE = 2.4, p < .05), but not for Problem 6 (4.2 vs.
3.4; p =.2).
No difference between the problems was observed (p = 0.5).
No interaction between problem and modifier was observed.

Problems usually indicating ‘unlikely’
Problem 2 represents a weak positive versus a strong
negative argument. The expected response when the
modifier phrase is the same for both sides of the argument is
thus lower than 4, meaning ‘unlikely’. However, the
phrasing manipulation could be expected to have an
additional influence on the final rating.
Problem 5 is similar to Problem 2, with a weak positive
versus a strong negative argument, and with the phrasing
manipulation expected to influence the final rating.
Problems 3 and 6 differ from 2 and 5, respectively, in that
information is given on the relative subset/superset sizes to
which the respective items belong: a small subset for A and
a large one for B. It seems (Ford, In Press) that relative size
information can sometimes help good reasoners in their
reasoning.
For problems 2, 3, 5 and 6, the ratings for the TU versions
would be expected to move higher, becoming more positive
than would otherwise be expected. With the UT versions,
the ratings would be expected to move lower, becoming
even less positive than would otherwise be expected.

Discussion
This study was set up to gain more insight into the role that
modifiers of non-strict relations play in the nonmonotonic
reasoning process. Generally, researchers do not pay much
attention to the specific wording of default expressions. We
showed in a pilot experiment that this neglect is undeserved:
default expressions vary in interpretation. However, only if
this interpretation also affects the nonmonotonic reasoning
process does the topic become particularly noteworthy for
AI researchers and philosophical logicians doing research
on nonmonotonic reasoning.
In the main experiment we showed that the use of different
modifiers in non-strict relations does indeed lead to a
variation in nonmonotonic reasoning, more precisely in
likelihood ratings on nonmonotonic reasoning problems.
We presented reasoners who appreciate P2 and P3, with
problems of two kinds: problems with structures where we
would normally expect them to give a ‘can’t tell’ answer
and problems where we normally expect them to give an
‘unlikely’ answer. So, if participants bore only the structure
of the problem in mind, we would expect a ‘can’t tell’
answer for Problems 1 and 4, and an ‘unlikely’ answer for
Problem 2-3 and 5-6, despite the modifier manipulation.
However, if the reasoning process was influenced by the
modifier used, we would see a shift in answers, depending
on the specific modifier used to express the positive and
negative non-strict relations.
The data show clearly that reasoners who appreciate P2 and
P3 are influenced by the modifier used. Ratings on TU
problems differ significantly from ratings on UT problems.
With the ‘can’t tell’ Problem 1, we observed ratings staying
close to the ‘can’t tell’ rating, although a positive shift was
noted for TU problems, while a slightly negative shift was
noted for UT problems, resulting in an overall difference.

Results
Table 2: The mean likelihood ratings as a function of
modifiers used in the positive and negative arguments.
Standard deviations are given in square brackets.
(N = 11)
Problem TU
UT
3-arg
(1)
4.3 [1.2] 3.7 [0.8]
w/o relative size (2)
3.9 [1.1] 2.7 [0.8]
with relative size (3)
4.2 [1.1] 2.5 [0.9]
4-arg
(4)
5.0 [1.7] 3.4 [1.2]
w/o relative size (5)
4.2 [1.7] 2.5 [0.8]
with relative size (6)
4.2 [1.3] 3.4 [1.4]
3-argument problems.
The mean likelihood rating was higher for TU problems
than for UT problems (4.1 vs. 3.0; F(1,10) = 17.5, MSE =
1.2, p < .005). Planned comparisons showed that TU ratings
are higher than UT ratings for Problem 1 (4.3 vs. 3.7;
F(1,10) = 7.7, MSE = .2, p < .05), for Problem 2 (3.9 vs.
2.7; F(1,10) = 10.1, MSE = .7, p < .01), and for Problem 3
(4.2 vs. 2.5; F(1,10) = 14.4, MSE = 1.1, p < .005).
319

Ford, M. (In Press). Human nonmonotonic rasoning: The
importance of seeing the logical strength of arguments.
Synthese.
Ford, M., & Billington, D. (2000). Strategies in human
nonmonotonic reasoning. Computational Intelligence, 16
(3), 446-468.
Ginsberg, M. L. (1994). AI and nonmonotonic reasoning. In
D. M. Gabbay, C. J. Hogger, & J. A. Robinson (Eds.),
Handbook of logic in artificial intelligence and logic
programming. Vol. 3: Nonmonotonic reasoning and
uncertain reasoning. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hewson, C. and Vogel, C. (1994). Psychological evidence
for assumptions of path-based inheritance reasoning.
Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Atlanta, Georgia.
Lifschitz, V. (1988). Benchmark problems for formal
nonmonotonic reasoning, version 2.00. In J. Siekmann
(Series ed.) & M. Reinfrank, J. de Kleer, M.L. Ginsberg,
& E. Sandewall (Vol. Eds.), Lecture notes in Artificial
Intelligence. Nonmonotonic reasoning. Berlin : SpringerVerlag.
Pelletier, F. J., & Elio, R. (1997). What should default
reasoning be, by default? Computational Intelligence, 13,
165-187.
Schurz, G. (2001). What is 'normal'? An evolution-theoretic
foundation for normic laws and their relation to statistical
normality, Philosophy of Science, 68 (4), 476-497.
Vogel, C. and Tonhauser, J. (1996). Psychological
constraints on plausible default inheritance reasoning. In
Aiello and Shapiro (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Principles and Practice of
Knowledge Representation, KR`96. Cambridge, Mass.:
Morgan Kaufmann. 608-19.

With the ‘can’t tell’ Problem 4, the pattern was more
extremely pronounced, with a large positive shift for TU
problems and a large negative shift for UT problems.
The TU versions of problems 2-3 and 5-6 are lifted up to a
‘can’t tell’ level, while UT versions receive an ‘unlikely’
rating. While adding relative size information has been
shown to sometimes help good nonmonotonic reasoners
(Ford, In Press), it did not affect the reasoning process in
our experiment, possibly because these subjects did not
need this help.
It is clear that although the matching TU and UT versions of
problems have the same structure, they are not considered as
being equivalent. The modifier typically or typically not
makes a non-strict relation stronger compared with its
counterpart usually or usually not.
It is clear that people who show an appreciation of P2 and
P3 and who solve nonmonotonic problems by comparing
the logical strength of conflicting arguments, rather than by
using a notion of specificity, also use the strength of
modifiers to guide their reasoning. Just as it is rational to
take the logical strength of conflicting arguments into
account, rather than using a notion of specificity, so too it is
rational to take into account modifier strength in conflicting
arguments.

Conclusion
Ford (2004, In Press) has shown that good reasoners use the
logical strength of different sides of an argument to guide
their reasoning. The present study adds credence to this
effect of weighing up the strengths of the different sides of
an argument. The study shows that different modifiers can
differentially weaken or strengthen an argument and that
they thereby influence reasoning.

Acknowledgments
This research was made possible by the financial support of
the Fund for Scientific Research Flanders (project
G.0239.02: K. Dieussaert and L. Horsten).

References
Benferhat, S., Bonnefon, J. F., & Da Silva Neves, R. M.
(2002, July). An overview of possibilistic handling of
default reasoning: Applications and empirical studies.
Paper presented at the 1st Salzburg Workshop on
Paradigms of Cognition (SWPC 1/2002), ‘Nonmonotonic
and uncertain reasoning in the focus of competing
paradigms of cognition’, Salzburg, Austria.
Dieussaert, K. (2003). Do typical birds usually fly
normally?. In A. Markman & L. Barsalou (Eds.).
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Boston, MA: Cognitive
Science Society, Inc.
Ford, M. (2004). System LS: A three-tiered nonmonotonic
reasoning system. Computational Intelligence, 20 (1), 89108.

320

