UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Information Visualizations for Supporting Knowledge Acquisition - The Impact of
Dimensionality and Color Coding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7v40k1gt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Keller, Tanja
Gerjets, Peter
Scheiter, Katharina
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Information Visualizations for Supporting Knowledge Acquisition
- The Impact of Dimensionality and Color Coding Tanja Keller (t.keller@iwm-kmrc.de)

Virtual Ph.D. Program “Knowledge Acquisition and Knowledge Exchange with New Media”
University of Tuebingen, Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Peter Gerjets (p.gerjets@iwm-kmrc.de)

Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Katharina Scheiter (k.scheiter@iwm-kmrc.de)

Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology, University of Tuebingen
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany

Bärbel Garsoffky (b.garsoffky@iwm-kmrc.de)

Multimedia and Hypermedia Research Unit, Knowledge Media Research Center
Konrad-Adenauer-Strasse 40, 72072 Tuebingen, Germany
acquire an understanding of the relationships embedded
within this set. Moreover, we were interested in the design
of information visualizations for learning. Particularly, we
investigated experimentally whether information visualizations should be two-dimensional or whether a third spatial
dimension may be helpful for knowledge acquisition.
Finally, the question is addressed whether knowledge
acquisition with spatial information visualizations can be
further enhanced by using color coding to represent
attributes of data.
Figure 1 shows a simplified sketch of the type of spatial
information visualization used in the empirical study
presented in this paper. In this sketch, three attributes of
four information units A, B, C, and D are represented by
means of three spatial dimensions.

Abstract
So far, information visualizations, i.e., graphical representations of huge amounts of abstract data which do not have a
natural visual representation, have mainly been used to
support information-retrieval tasks. In this paper we investigate whether information visualizations are also suitable to
foster tasks that focus on knowledge acquisition or learning.
In addition, we address the issue of how information
visualizations have to be designed to be efficient learning
tools. We conducted an experimental study which provided
evidence that information visualizations can foster knowledge
acquisition and that 2D-information visualizations are better
suited for knowledge acquisition than 3D-ones. In addition,
we found slight performance improvements due to using color
to code information.

Technological innovation allows storing fast growing
quantities of information. Accordingly, it has become
increasingly important to develop efficient methods to
structure large and complex information sets. Recently,
there have been several attempts to tackle this challenge by
using information visualizations, i.e., graphical representations of large amounts of abstract data which do not have a
natural visual representation (Wiss, Carr, & Jonsson, 1998).
For instance, information visualizations have been used to
display abstract data like document collections or text-based
information contents in the WWW. So far, information
visualizations have mainly been investigated with regard to
technical issues and in the context of information-retrieval
tasks – where they proved to be very useful to improve
users’ ability to use information. However, it is not clear
whether information visualizations can also foster knowledge acquisition or learning. Additionally, little is known
about the cognitive processes involved in, and maybe
supported by the use of information visualizations as
learning tools. Therefore, the aim of our empirical study was
to investigate to what extent multidimensional information
visualizations are superior compared to a non-spatial
representation when the task is to memorize a data set and to

attribute 2

attribute 3

A
C

B
D

attribute 1

Figure 1: Simplified sketch of a 3D-information
visualization.
Information units pool those parts of data sets that belong
together. The units can be described by their values on
numerous different attributes. Typically, only a subset of
these attributes can be represented spatially. Thus, other
attributes of the information units may be represented
textually or by other codes (e.g., color coding).

What is the Pedagogical Potential of
Information Visualizations?
There are different cognitive theories arguing that
information visualizations may be efficient tools to enhance
the acquisition of knowledge on large and abstract data sets,

666

should be designed to prevent cognitive overload. More
specifically, the amount of cognitive processing not directly
relevant to learning - and thus causing extraneous cognitive
load - should be reduced. The necessity of avoiding high
levels of extraneous load is especially relevant when the
contents to be learned are complex in relation to learners’
level of prior knowledge. In this case, the representation of
the learning contents imposes a considerable amount of
intrinsic cognitive load so that substantial extraneous load
can lead to overload in that no more capacity for processes
of understanding is left. Cognitive processes directly relevant to understanding and learning are causing germane
cognitive load. There are thus two reasons why information
visualizations might be particularly appropriate to facilitate
learners’ acquisition of complex data structures that consist
of highly interrelated information units. Firstly, distributing
different attributes of information units across different
memory and processing systems might provide additional
processing resources that can be used to increase germane
cognitive load. Secondly, providing learners with a spatial
representation of some attributes of information units might
reduce extraneous cognitive load by reducing search processes as well as making it easier to draw inferences on how
different information units are related to each other with
regard to these attributes.
According to these theoretical considerations it can be
hypothesized that information visualizations might have a
substantial pedagogical potential because they allow to
deploy cognitive resources available for learning in a way
that is more appropriate than it is with conventional
representations of large sets of information units (e.g.,
spreadsheets).

whereby knowledge acquisition refers to understanding and
memorizing abstract data and their interrelations.
- Firstly, theories of computational effectiveness pay
specific attention to the inferences learners have to make in
order to understand a task or a domain. The argument here
is that some representational codes facilitate some
inferential (learning) processes better than others. In their
seminal work, Larkin and Simon (1987) found for example
that search processes in physics are performed much easier
with diagrammatic representations than with textual ones.
This idea that different representations with the same
“content” can still offer different processing opportunities is
called “computational effectiveness” (Larkin & Simon,
1987). Following this idea, spatial information visualizations may allow learners to draw inferences very easily on
how different information units are related to each other
with regard to those attributes that are represented spatially.
In this respect, information visualizations are rather similar
to concept maps because both of them allow arranging
information units spatially in a specific way. Concept maps
are 2D-diagrams that illustrate relationships between concepts in a domain by representing these concepts as nodes.
These nodes are connected by labeled lines in order to
represent their interrelations. It could already be shown that
concept maps foster processes of knowledge acquisition
(Tergan, 2003), as these representations provide learners
with a better understanding of the structures underlying a
domain without imposing high cognitive demands on them
to extract this information. Due to the aforementioned
similarities between information visualizations and concept
maps, these processing advantages should also hold for
information visualizations.
- Secondly, the cognitive theory of multimedia learning
(Mayer, 2001) is based on a dual-channel assumption which
proposes that textual information is processed and encoded
in a verbal system, whereas pictures or graphics are
predominantly processed in a pictorial system. The theory
assumes that a well-designed combination of text and
graphics leads to better memory retention than the use of
only one representation. The reason for this is that using the
capacity of both memory systems should lead to more
information being processed than using only one of the
systems. In addition, dual coding might contribute to the
construction of a stronger mental model, if the information
of both processing systems has to be integrated actively. In
addition, research on spatial cognition differentiates
between a what-system and a where-system for visual
cognition (Landau & Jackendoff, 1993). The where-system
is used to process the location of objects, whereas the whatsystem is dedicated to identify features of an object itself.
Memory studies revealed that the where-system operates
more effectively with respect to speed and accuracy than the
what-system (e.g., Amorim, Trumbore, & Chogyen, 2000).
Representing attributes of information units by means of
two or three spatial dimensions (instead of a purely textual
representation or color coding) might accordingly improve
the processing of these attributes by deploying a more
efficient processing system.
- Thirdly, following the cognitive load theory (Sweller,
van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998), instructional procedures

How to Design Information Visualizations
for Knowledge Acquisition?
Beyond the general claim that information visualizations are
tools that might foster the acquisition of knowledge on large
and abstract data sets, we are also interested in the issue of
designing profitable visualizations. Particularly, the study
reported in this paper addresses how dimensionality of
information visualizations and color coding of attributes
might affect learning.

2D- versus 3D-information visualizations?
Although, there are a few empirical studies investigating the
dimensionality of information representation in general,
nearly none of these studies is related to information
visualization or even learning with information visualization. Furthermore, these findings seem to be rather
inconsistent and depending heavily on the concrete tasks
accomplished with the information representation. For
instance, Park and Woldstad (2000) found that 2D-displays
are superior to 3D-displays for performing telerobotic tasks.
Contrarily, the study of Risden, Czerwinski, Munzer, and
Cook (2000) compared 2D- and 3D-browsers with regard to
the ease of information retrieval and concluded that 3Dvisualizations are preferable. However, only a small number
of studies demonstrated the superiority of 3D-representations. In sum, the existing evidence is by no means

667

sufficient to decide whether information visualizations
should be 2D or 3D in the context of learning tasks.
From a more theoretical point of view, one might assume
that representing three attributes of information units
spatially should be superior to representing only two
attributes in a spatial format because of the abovementioned
advantages of spatial representations in general (i.e.,
distribution of information across processing systems,
superiority of the where-system, computational effectiveness). However, 3D-information representations might at
the same time impose additional extraneous cognitive load
onto learners due to the fact that they are usually associated
with an increased interactivity and with additional orienttation demands. For instance, 3D-visualizations usually
have to be equipped with the option to look at information
units from different viewpoints (e.g., by rotating the
visualization) to counteract the problem that information
units might be concealed by other units. As a result, this
interactivity may impose additional cognitive processing
demands because learners must control the interaction with
the environment and maintain orientation.
We studied the role of the dimensionality of information
visualizations empirically to decide whether the advantages
or the disadvantages of introducing a third spatial dimension
prevail in knowledge acquisition.

Experiment
In this experiment we first investigated whether information
visualizations are more suited to foster knowledge acquisition than text-based information representations. Secondly,
we analyzed whether dimensionality and color coding of
information visualizations influence learning.

Method
Participants Subjects were 100 students (56 female, 44
male) of the University of Tuebingen, Germany. Average
age was 24 years.
Materials and procedure This work is associated with the
European project “Mummy” of the Computer Graphics
Center in Darmstadt (Germany), which focuses on mobile
knowledge management using multimedia-rich portals for
context-aware information processing, e.g., at construction
sites. Therefore, our experimental environment was designed to provide architects with an overview on the details
of their construction projects. Each project is described by
values on six different project attributes, namely “rate of
return”, “construction costs per sqm”, “number of problems”, “construction progress”, “size of construction site”,
and “construction volume”.
With regard to the procedure, first the participants
received a booklet for measuring different control variables
like retentiveness in a paper-pencil test. Afterwards, they
received an introduction to the experimental environment
and its usage. To ensure that all participants saw the same
information, the exploration of the environment during the
subsequent practice phase was standardized. In the learning
phase subjects were given 50 minutes to accomplish five
tasks. In the context of these tasks they had to find 14 of the
42 information units and had to learn the data contained in
these information units. Consecutively, subjects received
another booklet containing 35 test tasks. In this test phase
the learning materials were no longer available. There were
no time limits during testing. Finally, participants had to fill
out a questionnaire asking for difficulties regarding the use
of the learning materials, the strategies used as well as
assessing the cognitive load experienced during learning.

Should information visualizations for knowledge
acquisition be color-coded or not?
The issue whether it might be helpful to enhance
information visualizations by color coding of particular
attributes of information units seems to be less ambiguous
than the role of dimensionality. As color is a basic element
of visual perception (Treisman, 1987), color coding can be
expected to make information more salient. Therefore, color
coding should provide learners with a better understanding
of the structures underlying a domain. It has been shown
that coloring objects increases learners’ ability to retrieve
object information from memory. As the color of objects is
stored in long term memory together with other object
information (e.g., Hanna & Remington, 1996), color
information provides an additional cue for memory retrieval. It can thus be hypothesized that color-coded information visualizations should be superior to those without
color coding. However, it remains an open question whether
color coding and dimensionality will interact when they are
combined with each other. On the one hand, combining
spatial representation and color coding results in multiple
memory traces which should enhance learning; on the other
hand, encoding the same attribute of an information unit by
means of two different representational codes might make it
necessary to map two representational systems onto each
other. This might involve the processing of redundant
information which in turn can result in additional extraneous
cognitive load and learning impairments. Therefore, it is
unclear and subject to experimental investigation whether
introducing a double coding of particular attributes of
information units will support or hinder knowledge acquisition.

Design and dependent measures As an experimental
baseline, the information on the construction projects was
represented by means of a spreadsheet which listed 42
construction projects (i.e., information units) alphabetically
(Figure 2). The first column in Figure 2 represented the
name of the construction projects, whereas the other
columns contained the values of these projects with regard
to the six aforementioned attributes. The last column listed
further project information beyond these attributes.

668

The remaining project attributes (“rate of return”,
“construction costs per sqm”, and “number of problems”) as
well as the further project information could be accessed
through pop-up windows by clicking on the information
units. In Figure 3, one pop-up window is opened. The popup windows could be moved with the mouse by learners in
case the window concealed information of interest. To
facilitate orientation, the project label of the viewed
information unit changed its color from white to red and
position lines from the information unit to the axes appeared
while contacting the unit with the mouse pointer (position
lines, see Figure 4).
Figure 2: Excel spreadsheet representation (baseline).
To reduce complexity, the range of possible attribute values
was restricted to four (i.e., very small, small, big, and very
big). Due to the spreadsheet size it was impossible to see the
data of all projects without scrolling. A pilot study showed
that using this spreadsheet to memorize the abstract data set
and to recognize relations between information units was a
very difficult task for the subjects.
In order to implement our experimental manipulation, we
represented the same data set by means of information
visualizations that were either 2D or 3D and that were either
monochrome or used color to represent one of the attributes.
All of the manipulations (i.e., dimensionality and color
coding) referred to the same specific attribute (“construction
progress”) and the way it was represented. In the 2Dinformation visualizations both “size of construction site”
and “construction volume” were visualized spatially, i.e.,
they were represented by the axis of the 2D-information
space (Figure 3). Information units were arranged in this
information space according to their values on these two
attributes. In Figure 3 the information units are represented
by squares (labeled by their project name). The value of the
attribute “construction progress” was represented by a digit
attached to the project label. This digit was visible in all
four information visualizations.

Figure 4: Three-dimensional color-coded information
visualization with position lines.
In the 3D-information visualizations a third axis was
included to visualize the attribute “construction progress”
spatially (Figure 4). To ensure that all information units
would be visible in the 3D-information visualizations, the
users were allowed to rotate the vertical axis by moving the
visualization with the mouse button pressed. To avoid “lost
in navigation phenomena”, users could push a home-button
to attain the start perspective again at anytime.
The colored conditions differ from the monochrome
information visualizations depending whether “construction
progress” was additionally represented by means of color
coding. In the monochrome conditions the information units
were always presented in blue against a black background.
However, in the colored conditions the information units
were displayed in colors ranging from light yellow to dark
green – indicating the values of “construction progress”.
To sum up, the information visualization conditions
differed in the representation format for the attribute
“construction progress”. In all information visualization
conditions the values on this attribute were represented
symbolically as a digit. In addition, in 3D-information
visualizations the values on “construction progress” were
visualized on the third axis. In 2D-conditions there was no
spatial representation of this attribute. Furthermore, in
polychrome information visualizations the values on the
attribute “construction progress” were represented by means
of the color of the information units. In monochrome
conditions no color was used to visualize this attribute.

Figure 3: Two-dimensional color-coded information
visualization with opened pop-up window.

669

maximum of 105 points was possible for each of the
confidence scores.
As a third dependent variable, we assessed learners’
subjective cognitive load by asking them how much effort
they had to invest into learning and how difficult it had been
to remember the contents. The effort and the difficulty
ratings were given on a five-point scale, ranging from very
low to very high.

Dimensionality and color coding were both varied between
subjects resulting in a 2x2-design (plus the baseline
spreadsheet condition). Subjects were randomly assigned to
the spreadsheet or to one of the four information
visualization conditions.
With regard to the dependent measures, as a first
dependent variable we measured performance with regard to
the different knowledge tasks. Overall performance was
calculated as the sum of both correct answers and partial
correct answers. For 10 of the 35 tasks, partial credits were
assigned to score subjects’ answers. In the remaining tasks
one point was assigned for each correct answer. For each
task a maximum of one point was possible resulting in a
maximum overall score of 35 points. Relational performance referred to tasks that asked for comparative
judgments with regard to attribute values, whereas itemspecific performance focused on specific attribute values.
Both measures consisted of 15 tasks each. Five further tasks
assessed structural performance which was concerned with
the recognition of correlational structures within the data
set. Furthermore, in each case four tasks were used to assess
where-performance, what-performance, and varied-performance. Where-performance assessed knowledge on the
attributes that were visualized spatially in all information
visualizations, whereas tasks on what-performance registered knowledge on information always presented as text.
Finally, varied-performance was concerned with knowledge
on “construction progress”, i.e., on the attribute whose
representation was varied across conditions.
As a second dependent variable we measured learners’
confidence with regard to the correctness of their answers.
Learners rated each answer to a task with regard to whether
they felt low, middle, or high confidence that their answer
had been correct. In the overall confidence measure these
ratings were summed across all tasks, whereby higher rating
indicated higher confidence. This overall measure was
subdivided into confidence for correct answers displaying a
participant’s belief in that a correct answer was correct.
Confidence for wrong answers indicated a participant’s
conviction that a false answer was correct. Because there
were 35 items for which every subject had to rate his or her
confidence and because ratings ranged from one to three a

Results and Discussion
The analysis of the data is divided into two parts: First, we
compared the baseline spreadsheet condition to the overall
means of all information visualization conditions in order to
answer the question whether information visualizations in
general are helpful for acquiring knowledge on large data
sets compared to a purely text-based representation. In the
second analysis, we assessed the effects of dimensionality
and color coding by comparing the four information
visualization conditions in an ANCOVA (dimensionality x
color coding with retentiveness as a covariate, see below).
Do information visualizations foster learning? In a first
step, we tested whether subjects achieved higher
performance with information visualizations than with a
spreadsheet, i.e., here we did not further differentiate
between the different kinds of information visualizations. A
two-tailed t-test for independent samples showed in fact a
higher overall performance for information visualizations
(M=20.80) compared to the spreadsheet (M=17.88;
t(98)=2.18; p<.05). However, which kinds of information
visualizations produced this effect? To answer this question,
each of the four different kinds of information visualizations
was compared to the spreadsheet separately (Table 1).
Whereas the 2D-conditions were both superior to the
baseline (without color coding: t(38)=2.20; p<.05; with
color coding: t(38)=3.53; p<.001), there were no differences
between the 3D-conditions and the spreadsheet condition
(without color coding: t(38)=0.34; p=.74; with color coding:
t(38)=1.28; p=.21).

Table 1: Means for performance, confidence, and cognitive load ratings for the information visualization conditions.
Information visualizations
two-dimensional
three-dimensionalmonochrome
with color
monochrome
with color
Performance

overall performance (35 tasks)
relational performance (15 tasks)
item-specific performance (15 tasks)
structural performance (5 tasks)
where- performance (4 tasks)
what- performance (4 tasks)
varied-performance (4 tasks)

21.80
9.55
10.35
2.40
3.05
1.60
2.40

23.38
10.15
10.98
2.85
3.10
2.25
2.50

18.43
8.10
8.88
1.95
2.70
1.85
1.60

19.60
8.75
9.10
2.05
2.40
1.80
1.75

Confidence

overall confidence (max. 105 points)
confidence correct answers (max. 105 points)
confidence wrong answers (max. 105 points)

72.46
47.48
23.08

75.63
51.66
21.97

67.25
35.80
29.45

64.60
35.65
27.05

Cognitive load

effort (max. 5 points)
difficulty (max. 5 points)

3.65
3.40

3.60
3.35

4.15
3.75

3.95
3.75

670

Which representation format of information visualizations is the most suitable for knowledge acquisition? In
all analyses of variances reported here, we used retentiveness as a covariate because it was strongly associated
with the dependent variables. In a first step we analyzed
subjects’ overall performance by an univariate ANCOVA
(dimensionality x color coding).
Subjects who were presented with a 2D-information
visualization outperformed subjects in the 3D-conditions
(F(1,75) = 15.16; p<.001). Additionally, we obtained a
marginally significant main effect for color coding in favor
of “with color coding” (F(1,75) = 2.87; p<.10). There was
no significant interaction between the two factors. The
superiority of the 2D-information visualizations was not
only confirmed for overall performance but also for the
detailed performance measures - with one exception. There
was no significant difference for the what-performance, but
this was not astonishing because the information necessary
to answer the respective tasks was represented the same way
across all conditions. There were no main effects for color
coding in the detailed performance measures.
Concerning the overall confidence learners felt regarding
the correctness of their answers, we found that subjects
learning with 2D-information visualizations were more
certain that their answers were correct than subjects in the
3D-conditions (F(1,75)=8.71; p<.01). Further analysis
revealed that learners in the 2D-conditions were not only
more convinced that the correct answers they had given
were correct (F(1,75)=18.16; p<.001). Moreover, they also
felt more uncertain that their false answer might be correct
(F(1,76)=5.33; p<.05). This pattern of results suggests that
subjects in the 2D-conditions had a more accurate
assessment of what they really knew. There were no main
effects for color coding nor was there an interaction with
respect to the overall confidence variable.
With regard to the cognitive load ratings registered after
the test phase we found that subjects using 3D-information
visualizations indicated that they had to invest more effort
into learning than did those in the 2D-conditions
(F(1,76)=4.51; p<.05). In addition, they also evaluated
learning as being more difficult than subjects in the 2Dconditions (F(1,76)=3.30; p<.10). There were no main
effects for color coding nor were there interaction effects.

color coding, there were only slight performance increases
when information was displayed in color.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a scholarship of the DFG. We
thank Matthias Grimm of the ZGDV, Darmstadt (Germany)
for programming the information visualizations.

References
Amorim, M.-A., Trumbore, B., & Chogyen, P. L. (2000).
Cognitive repositioning inside a „Desktop“ VE: The
constraints introduced by first- vs. third-person imagery
and mental representation richness. Presence, 9, 165186.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory
and the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction,
8, 293-332.
Hanna, A., & Remington, R. (1996). The representation of
color and form in long-term memory. Memory and
Cognition, 24, 322-330.
Jonassen, D. H., Beissner, K., & Yacci, M. (1993).
Structural knowledge: Techniques for representing,
conveying, and acquiring structural knowledge.
London: Erlbaum.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, B. (1993). “What” and “where”
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral
and Brian Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Mulimedia learning. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Park, S. H., & Woldstad, J. C. (2000). Multiple 2Ddisplays as an alternative to 3D-displays in telerobotic
tasks. Human Factors, 42, 592-603.
Risden, K., Czerwinski, M. P., Munzer, T., & Cook, D. B.
(2000). An initial examination of ease of use for 2D and
3D information visualizations of web content.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 53,
695-714.
Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Paas, F. W.C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Tergan, S.-O. (2003). Managing knowledge with
computer-based mapping tools. In D. Lassner & C.
McNaught (Eds.), Proceedings of the ED-Media 2003
(pp. 2514-2517). Honolulu, HI: University of Honolulu.
Treisman, A. (1987). Properties, parts, and objects. In K.
R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & F. P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook
of perception and human performance. Oxford:
Clarendon.
Wiss, U., Carr, D., & Jonsson, H. (1998). Evaluating
three-dimensional information visualization designs: A
case study of three designs. Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Information Visualization (pp.137-144).
London, England.

Summary and Conclusions
In our experiment we provided evidence for the suitability
of information visualizations for knowledge acquisition.
Moreover, we demonstrated that in general 2D-information
visualizations are more suitable to foster knowledge
acquisition than 3D-ones. This could be due to the fact that
learners had to invest more effort and experienced more
difficulties during learning in the latter conditions. The
question of whether these demands resulted from the
necessity to rotate the 3D- information visualization will be
addressed in further studies. With regard to the influence of

671

