UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning relations between concepts: classification and conceptual combination

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mc842m6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Devereux, Barry
Costello, Fintan

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning relations between concepts: classification and conceptual combination
Barry Devereux (Barry.Devereux@ucd.ie), Fintan Costello (Fintan.Costello@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Abstract
People interpret noun-noun compounds like “wind power” by
inferring a relational link between the compound’s two
constituent concepts. Various studies have examined how
people select the best relation for a compound from a set of
candidate relations. However, few studies have investigated
how people learn such relations in the first place. This paper
describes an experiment examining how people learn which
relations are possible between concepts. Participants in this
experiment learned artificial, laboratory controlled relations
between pairs of items and then judged how likely those
relations were for new pairs of items. The results showed that
people’s judgement of relation likelihood was reliably
influenced by the presence of facilitating features for relations
and by the diagnosticity of features for relations. A simple
exemplar-based model of classification, using both diagnostic
and facilitating features, was applied to people’s judgements of
relation likelihood. This model accurately predicted people’s
judgements of relation likelihood in the experiment, using no
free parameters to fit the data.

Introduction
When, in everyday discourse, people encounter noun-noun
compounds such as “mountain stream” or “lake boat”, they
interpret those compounds by inferring a relation that can be
used to combine the two constituent concepts (inferring that a
“mountain stream” is a stream that flows down a mountain,
that a “lake boat” is a boat that sails on a lake). In theoretical
accounts of conceptual combination, this process involves
selecting the best relation for a compound from a set of
candidate relations. Some theories give a standard set of
candidate relations to be used in all compounds (Gagné &
Shoben, 1997), while others derive candidate relations from
the internal structure of the concepts being combined
(Costello & Keane, 2000; Wisniewski, 1997). Many studies
have investigated how people select the best relation for a
given compound (e.g. Costello & Keane, 2001, Wisniewski,
1996). However, there have been very few studies
investigating how people learn and form these relations in the
first place. In this paper we aim to fill this gap.
The paper describes an experiment investigating how
people learn relations between two sets of novel concepts. In
the experiment we designed four different relations that could
hold between artificial, laboratory-generated ‘beetle’ and
‘plant’ concepts. Participants learned these relations from sets
of examples, with each example showing one sort of relation
holding between one type of plant and one type of beetle.
After learning, participants were shown new pairs of plants
and beetles, and asked to say which of the four learned
relations could hold between those two items.
This experiment was designed to examine two different
possible factors in people’s learning of relations between

303

concepts: the presence of diagnostic features for those
relations, and the presence of facilitating features. By
diagnostic features for a relation we mean features of a
constituent concept that are strongly associated with a
particular relation. Diagnostic features are most familiar in
the case of single concepts: for example “has four legs” and
“is made of wood” are diagnostic features for the single
concept chair: most things that are chairs have those features,
and most things that are not chairs do not. Similarly, the
feature “has a flat surface raised off the ground” might be
diagnostic for the relation is-sat-on-by: most instances of the
is-sat-on-by relation have that feature; most instances of other
relations do not. In the experiment we asked whether people
would use the diagnostic features for relations when selecting
likely relations for beetle-plant pairs.
By facilitating features we mean the features of a pair of
concepts that are necessary for a given relation to be possible,
and without which that relation cannot hold. For example,
while the compound “steel chair” can easily be interpreted
using the made-of relation, the compound “kitchen chair”
cannot possibly be interpreted as “a chair made of kitchens”
simply because kitchens are not a type of substance. Being a
substance is a necessary facilitating feature for an item to take
part in the made-of relation. Again, in the experiment we
asked how people would use such facilitating features when
selecting likely relations for beetle-plant pairs.
This paper is organised as follows. In the next section we
discuss the representation of relations in terms of sets of
examples, as used in our experiment. We then describe the
experiment in detail. To foreshadow the results, we found that
both diagnostic and facilitating features had a reliable
influence on people’s selection of likely relations for pairs of
items. We then describe how an exemplar-based model of
concept conjunction (Costello, 2000, 2001) can be applied to
the results of this experiment, giving a close fit to people’s
judgements of relation likelihood. Finally, we conclude by
discussing the implications of our findings for theories of
conceptual combination.

Learning Relations from Exemplars
Our primary assumption is that the relations selected during
conceptual combination are essentially categories, just as the
concepts that they link are essentially categories. We use an
exemplar representation to describe these relational
categories. Exemplar theories of classification, which propose
that a category is represented as the set of remembered
instances of that category and that new items are classified on
the basis of their similarity to those instances (e.g. Medin &
Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1984), have successfully accounted
for a number of patterns seen in people’s learning of single
categories. We extend the exemplar approach to allow both
relations and the concepts that they link to be represented by
sets of instances.

In a category representing a single concept, each exemplar
consists simply of a single set of features. For a category
representing a relation, however, each exemplar consists of
two sets of features: the features of the two single-category
exemplars that are being linked by that relation. For example,
suppose we have two categories A and B consisting of the set
of exemplars {a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6} and {b1, b2, b3, b4, b5}
respectively. Each category represents a single concept, and
each exemplar contains features describing one example of
that concept. We can compute the membership of a given
item in category A, for example, by comparing that item to
the set of stored exemplars of category A. Then a relation R
linking the concepts A and B might be represented as the set
of exemplars of that relation, for example {(a1, b1), (a1, b2),
(a3, b3), (a4, b4), (a4, b5)}. Regarding R as a category, we can
compute the membership of any pair of items (x, y) in the
relation R by comparing that pair to the set of exemplars of
that relation. If more than one relation is defined, we can
compute membership in each of the relations and make
assertions about which relation the given pair of items is most
likely to belong to.
This representation of relations in terms of a collection of
pairs of category exemplars is motivated by how
mathematical relations are defined in set theory. In set theory,
binary relations are defined as sets of ordered pairs. To take a
well-known example, the “is equal to” relation is a set
denoted by =, and is defined on the integers to be the set {…,
(-1, -1), (0, 0), (1, 1), (2, 2), …}. Thus the “is equal to”
relation holds between two integers x and y if and only if the
ordered pair (x, y) is a member of the set denoted =. We
extend this set-theoretic idea of relations and propose that a
relation between two concepts can be represented as a set of
relation exemplars, where each of these relation exemplars is
an ordered pair of category exemplars. Membership of a pair
of items in a relational category is then computed by
comparing that pair of items to the stored exemplars of that
relational category, as is precisely the case for exemplar
models of simple categories.
This approach assumes that when people are selecting the
correct relation for a pair of items they may be performing a
classification task in which they compare that pair of items to
various sets of relation exemplars. What factors would we
expect people to be influenced by in such a classification
task? First, we would expect people pay attention to the
features in items that are diagnostic for particular relations
(that is, features that are present in most of the items that take
part in the relation, and absent in most items that do not take
part in the relation). If a particular feature is diagnostic for a
relation, people should use that feature to identify new items
likely to take part in that relation. Such a result would be
consistent with other results in the classification literature,
which reveal that people are attentive to diagnostic features
when making determinations of category membership.
Second, we would expect people to pay attention to
whether or not a given item has the facilitating features
required for a given relation (as in our “kitchen chair”
example). If a particular feature is present in every item that
takes part in a certain relation, then we can assume that that
feature may be necessary for that relation to take place: the
feature may facilitate that relation. When confronted with a

304

new pair of items which do not possess that facilitating
feature, we would expect people not to select that relation for
that pair of items. Note that a facilitating feature for a given
relation may also be a diagnostic feature for that relation (if it
occurs in every item that takes part in that relation and in no
items that do not take part in that relation). However, a
facilitating feature for a relation may also be non-diagnostic
for that relation (if the feature occurs in every item that takes
part in that relation, but also occurs in many items that do not
take part in that relation). Next we describe an experiment
examining the influence that facilitating and diagnostic
features have on people’s selection of relations for pairs of
items.

A Categorisation Experiment
This experiment aims to test three hypotheses: that people can
learn relations from sets of examples of those relations; that
diagnostic features are important in people’s selection of
relations for pairs of items; and that facilitating features are
also important in relation selection. The design of the
experiment is essentially the same as other experiments in the
category learning literature: a preliminary training phase
where participants are exposed to exemplars of different
artificial, laboratory controlled categories is followed by a test
phase where participants are presented with new items and
are asked to make judgements of category membership. The
categories in this experiment are four different relations that
can hold between pairs of objects. Each of the training items
consists of two objects linked by one of these relations. The
test items also consist of two objects; however these objects
are not linked by any relation, and participants are asked to
judge the likelihood of different relations holding between
these items.
To examine the role of facilitating features in relation
selection, the training items were designed so that two of the
learned relations had facilitating features: we called these two
relations the facilitated relations. Every time one of these
relations occurred in the set of training items, a particular
beetle or plant feature (the facilitating feature) was also
present in that item. The other two relations did not have
facilitating features: we called these two relations the
independent relations. Similarly, the training items were
designed so that some beetle and plant features were
particularly diagnostic for some relations, and some features
were not. In the training items, the diagnostic features for a
particular relation occurred most frequently in beetle or plants
taking part in that relation, and occurred rarely in other
relations. The pairs of objects used in the test phase of the
experiment consisted of various combinations of facilitating
and diagnostic features for different relations. By examining
participants’ choice of relations to link the objects in these
test items, we can then assess the influence of facilitating and
diagnostic features in relation selection.

Method
Participants. 16 postgraduate students or recent college
graduates volunteered to take part in the experiment. All were
native speakers of English.
Materials. The materials for the training phase consisted of
18 visual stimuli on an A5-sized card depicting a cartoon

Table 1: The abstract relational category structures used in
the training phase.

Figure 1: Two training phase stimuli.
beetle eating a plant. The beetles varied on three quaternaryvalued feature dimensions: color of the shell, pattern on the
shell, and facial expression. The plants varied on four feature
dimensions: color of the leaves (quaternary-valued), shape of
the leaves (quaternary-valued), droop of the branches (binaryvalued), and whether there were buds or thorns on the trunk
(binary-valued). There were four possible ways in which a
beetle could eat a plant, corresponding to the four relational
categories: the beetle could land on a leaf of a plant and eat
the leaf (an independent relation), the beetle could eat from
the top of the trunk of the plant (an independent relation), the
beetle could eat from the trunk of the plant if there were buds
rather than thorns on the trunk (a facilitated relation), or the
beetle could stand on the ground and eat the leaf of a plant
that had drooping branches (a facilitated relation). Underneath
each picture was a sentence describing the eating behaviour
that was talking place. Examples of the training phase’s
stimuli are presented in Figure 1.
These 18 items described a category structure for four
relations, each relation being one of the different ways in
which a beetle could eat a plant. The distribution of beetle and
plant features was controlled so that some features would be
facilitating for relations and so that some features would be
diagnostic for relations. The distribution of beetle and plant
features across the four different relation categories is shown
in abstract form in Table 1. The numerical values in columns
B1, B2 and B3 represent the different possible features that
beetles could have; the values in columns P1, P2, P3, and P4
similarly represent the different possible features of plants.
Each row in this table represents a different particular
exemplar of one of the four relations R1, R2, R3 and R4.
In this experiment, we were interested in the influence
which the distribution of features across items would have on
people’s selection of relations between items. We were not
concerned with any effect which the physical properties of
stimuli (e.g. the salience of different colours, the
distinctiveness of different shapes) would have on people’s

305

Item

Relation

Insect Features

Plant Features

1
2
3
4
5

R1
R1
R1
R1
R1

B1
1
4
2
3
3

B2
1
1
2
4
3

B3
1
1
2
2
3

P1
1
1
4
1
1

P2
1
1
1
4
1

P3
1
1
1
2
1

P4
2
1
2
1
1

6
7
8
9

R2
R2
R2
R2

1
2
2
3

1
2
3
4

2
2
4
3

3
3
1
2

2
2
1
3

1
1
1
2

2
1
1
2

10
11
12
13
14

R3
R3
R3
R3
R3

1
1
2
3
2

4
1
2
2
2

1
4
2
4
3

4
2
2
2
3

2
2
3
3
2

2
2
2
2
2

1
1
2
1
1

15
16
17
18

R4
R4
R4
R4

1
2
3
3

3
3
2
3

1
3
3
3

4
2
3
3

3
2
3
3

2
1
1
1

2
2
2
2

relation selection. Thus, while each participant’s set of
training items had the abstract structure shown in Table 1,
each participant saw a unique set of physical stimuli. The
abstract-to-physical mappings for the category dimensions
and values for the two independent relations and for the two
facilitated relations were balanced across participants. This
was done so that the physical dimensions, values and relations
would not be confounded with their abstract counterparts.
Facilitating and Diagnostic Features. The four relations in
Table 1 were designed so that two relations had facilitating
features (R3 and R4) and two did not (R1 and R2), and two
relations had highly diagnostic features (R1 and R3) and two
had less diagnostic features (R2 and R4). Relations R1 and
R2 were the independent relations, while relations R3 and R4
were the facilitated ones. P3 is the facilitating dimension for
relation R3: every exemplar of R3 involves an item with a
value of 2 on dimension P3. Similarly P4 is the facilitating
dimension for relation R4: every exemplar of R4 involves an
item with a value of 2 on dimension P4. (In the experimental
materials, the facilitating features were instantiated in a
causally meaningful way. For example, the physical relation
“the beetle stands on the ground and eats the leaf” had the
facilitating feature “drooping branches on the plant”).
Of the two independent relations, R1 has highly diagnostic
features while R2 has less diagnostic features. Relation R1
has two highly diagnostic features: a 1 on P1 and a 1 on P2.
Relation R2, however, has no particularly diagnostic features.
(R2 is therefore a very vague category, not well distinguished
by either diagnosticity or facilitating features). Of the two
facilitated relations, R3 has highly diagnostic features while
R4 has less diagnostic features. For relation R3, a 2 on

dimension P3 is a highly diagnostic feature for that relation,
occurring five out of five times in examples of that relation
and only three times outside it. (Note that this feature, a 2 on
P3, is also the facilitating feature for relation R3). Relation
R4, however, has no such highly diagnostic feature, although
a 3 on B2 and a 3 on B3 are both moderately diagnostic for
that relation. (R4’s facilitating feature is not very diagnostic,
occurring four times within the category and five times
outside it.)
The materials for the test phase consisted of more visual
stimuli depicting beetles and plants; however in these pictures
the beetles and plants were shown separately, without any
eating or any other interaction taking place. Underneath each
test picture was the question “How likely are the different
types of eating behavior?”, followed by the four relation
description sentences, each of which was accompanied by a
7-point scale ranging from -3 (labelled “not at all likely”) to
+3 (“extremely likely”). The order in which the four scales
were presented was balanced across participants.
The test phase consisted of 29 beetle-plant pairs. Of these,
nine pairs were selected from the 18 beetle-plant pairs that
had been presented in the training phase, but now without the
eating behaviour shown. These nine previously-seen pairs
were used to assess how accurately participants learned the
training items they had studied. The remaining 20 test items
(beetle-plant pairs) had not been seen previously by
participants. For these items the properties of interest are
whether or not the facilitating feature of relation R3 or of
relation R4 is present, and whether or not the item had
features diagnostic for particular relations.
Procedure. The experiment consisted of two sections: a
training phase where participants studied the training items
(pairs of beetles and plants taking part in particular relations),
and a test phase where they had to rate the likelihood of the
different possible relations for a sequence of beetle-plant
pairs. Participants were asked to pretend to be biologists
interested in learning about imaginary plants and beetles and
the relationship between them. The seven dimensions on
which the beetles and plants could vary were explicitly
pointed out to participants. It was pointed out to participants
that they might find it useful to try to learn about the eating
behaviour by looking for relationships between features and
types of eating, or by learning the features of individual
examples and remembering the type of eating occurring with
them. Participants spent about five minutes reading the
instructions, during which time the experimenter answered
any questions they had. After reading the instructions
participants were presented with the 18 training items at a
large desk area. Participants were given 12 to 15 minutes to
study the training items.
After the training phase, the 18 training items were removed
and participants were given the 29 test items. Participants
were first shown the nine test items corresponding to items
they had studied in the first part of the experiment.
Participants were told to mark an integer value on each of the
four scales describing how likely they felt the four possible
types of eating behaviour were. Following these nine items 20
new test items were presented to the participants. The order in
which the items were presented was randomized for each
participant, and participants were allowed to rate the items at
their own pace.

306

Results
Participants’ learning of the training items. For these nine
items there was a “correct” relation (each item was a member
of one category during the learning phase) and three
“incorrect” relations (corresponding to the other three
categories). The responses for each relation and each
experimental item were classified as either positive ( > 0) or
non-positive ( ≤ 0), depending on how the participant
responded on each scale. On average, participants gave a
positive rating to correct relations 71% of the time and a
positive rating to incorrect relations 33% of the time. Two
participants gave a positive score to only four correct
relations; these two participants were excluded from the
analysis. The remaining 14 participants gave a positive rating
to correct relations 75% of the time and a positive rating to
incorrect relations only 25% of the time. These results
indicate that participants learned to distinguish between the
categories in the training phase.
Participants’ sensitivity to facilitating features. One-tailed
binomial tests with α = 0.05 were used to identify whether the
presence or absence of the facilitating features for a relation
had an effect on how participants responded when grading the
likelihood of that relation. The proportion of positive
responses for each of the four relations was the statistic of
interest.
First we considered the items in which the facilitating
features for a given relation were absent. Of the 29 test items,
16 were items for which the facilitating feature for relation R3
was absent and 16 were items for which the facilitating
feature for relation R4 was absent. For relation R3, the
binomial test was significant for 13 of the 14 participants; in
other words, 13 of the 14 participants were significantly more
likely to produce a non-positive rather than a positive
response to relation R3 when the facilitating feature for
relation R3 was absent. (Indeed, 10 participants never
produced a positive response). For relation R4, 10 of the 14
participants were significantly more likely to produce a nonpositive rather than a positive response. (Here, five
participants never produced a positive response).
A similar analysis was performed looking at the items
where the facilitating feature was present. Of the 29 test
items, 13 were items for which the facilitating feature for
relation R3 was present and 13 were items for which the
facilitating feature for relation R4 was present. For relation
R3, 8 of the 14 participants were significantly more likely to
produce a positive rather than a non-positive response. For
relation R4, 7 of the 14 participants were significantly more
likely to produce a positive rather than a non-positive
response. These results are sensible considering that in many
cases participants will rate a relation as having low likelihood
for a given item, even when that relation’s facilitating feature
is present in the item: the facilitating feature doesn’t mean
that the relation must be selected for this item, only that it is a
possibility. The difference in these results between items that
had and items that had not the facilitating feature for a
relation indicate that participants were highly sensitive to the
presence and absence of those features.
Participants’ sensitivity to diagnostic features.
The
diagnosticity of a feature for a category is a measure of how

good that feature is at identifying membership of that
category. If a feature appears in many items in a category and
few items outside a category then that feature will have high
diagnosticity. More formally, we can define the diagnosticity
of a feature f for a category C to be

D ( f ,C ) =

C ∩ Ef
C ∪ Ef

(Eq. 1)

.

where Ef denotes the set of exemplars that have feature f.
Using this formula we calculated the average diagnosticity of
the features of each of the 29 test items for each of the four
relational categories and compared this to the observed data.
For two of the four relations, the amount of diagnosticity for
items had a high correlation with the observed membership
ratings for the items (for R1, r = 0.83, p < 0.01, %var = 69%;
for R4, r = 0.81, p < 0.01, %var = 65%). For the other two
relations, the correlation was less strong though still
significant (for R2, r = 0.66, p < 0.01, %var = 43%; for R3, r
= 0.70, p < 0.01, %var = 49%). These results indicate that
participants were sensitive to diagnostic features when
making their category judgements.
Diagnostic and facilitating features. Relations R1 and R2
were the independent relations: membership in these relations
did not depend on facilitating features. Diagnosticity was very
important for identifying members of R1 but was not very
important for identifying members of R2. We would therefore
expect the correlation of diagnosticity to the observed
memberships to be higher for relation R1 than relation R2;
this is the case in the above analysis of the effect of diagnostic
features.
Relations R3 and R4 were the facilitated relations:
membership in these relations depended on both diagnostic
features and facilitating features. R3 was designed to have
highly diagnostic features, while R4 was designed to have
less diagnostic features. The diagnosticity analysis above,
however, shows that the correlation of the observed
memberships with diagnosticity was lower for R3 than for
R4. The divergence between diagnosticity and membership
ratings for these relations suggests an interaction between
diagnosticity and facilitating features.
As a way of examining this interaction we looked at the
total number of positive and non-positive responses across all
participants for relations R3 and R4; they are presented in
Table 2. For cases where the facilitating feature is present,
there are less positive responses for R4 than for R3 and more
non-positive responses for R4 than R3. Conversely, for cases
where the facilitating feature is absent, there are less positive
responses for R3 than for R4 and more non-positive responses
for R3 than R4. These data suggest that participants are more
sensitive to the presence or absence of the facilitating feature
for R3 than they are for R4. This is consistent with the fact
that the facilitating feature for R3 is more diagnostic for R3
than the facilitating feature for R4 is diagnostic for R4. In
other words, people seem to be using both the facilitating
nature and the diagnosticity of features together in deciding
relation likelihood for these relations. In the next section we
investigate this interaction between diagnosticity and
facilitating features in more detail by applying a model of
classification to our data.

307

Table 2: Total number of positive and non-positive
responses across all participants
Facilitating Feature
Present
R3
R4

Facilitating Feature
Absent

Positive

Non-positive

Positive

Non-positive

130
123

52
59

14
30

210
194

Modelling Relation Selection
We are interested in how people used facilitating and
diagnostic features when making judgements of relation
likelihood in our experiment. As we have seen, our results
indicate an interaction between diagnosticity and facilitating
features. We are also interested in whether or not our view of
relations in terms of exemplar-represented categories can
successfully account for the results of the above experiment.
To explore these issues, we examined whether an exemplar
model of categorization could be used to model participants’
responses of how likely each relation is for each item in the
experiment. We used as our starting point Costello’s (2000,
2001) Diagnostic Evidence Model (DEM) which uses
diagnostic features to model classification in concept
combination. This model calculates an evidence score for an
item x in a category C using the diagnosticity of each feature
of the item for that category according to the formula

E ( x, C ) = 1 − ∏ (1 − D ( f , C ) )

(Eq. 2)

f ∈Fx

where Fx is the set of features of x and D( f, C) is computed as
in Equation 1. (Equation 2 essentially sees category
membership as a disjunction of the feature diagnosticities and
is not dissimilar to simply averaging the diagnosticities as we
did in the previous section). As a preliminary step we applied
this model to the experimental data without using any
information about facilitating features: the model is only
sensitive to features’ diagnosticity. In this form the model still
produces a reasonable fit to the data (for R1, r = 0.88, p <
0.01, %var = 78%; for R2, r = 0.63, p < 0.01, %var = 40%;
for R3, r = 0.73, p < 0.01, %var = 53%; for R4, r = 0.72, p <
0.01, %var = 52%), with no free parameters.
The model in this form uses diagnostic information alone.
However, the results of our experiment indicate that people
make use of both diagnosticity and facilitating features in
determining the relations. One possible account of how
people use both these types of information is that people are
applying diagnosticity information after they have been
constrained by the presence or absence of the facilitating
features. Perhaps people check if an item has the necessary
facilitating features for a particular relation and then, if it
does, use the diagnostic evidence of the features. In
modifying the model we therefore assume that participants’
do not use known exemplars which depict a relation that is
impossible for the test item at hand: facilitating features
restrict the universe of discourse so that membership of an
item in a relational category is a calculation across the subset
of the learned exemplars that belong to relational categories
that are possible for the current item. Our formula for

diagnosticity then becomes

D ( f , x, C ) =

C ∩ E f ∩ Rx

(C ∪ E ) ∩ R
f

(Eq. 3)

.

x

where Rx is the set of known exemplars that belong to
relations that are not impossible given the features of x. This
modified model gives a much closer fit to the observed
relation selection ratings (for R1, r = 0.89, p < 0.01, %var =
79%; for R2, r = 0.78, p < 0.01, %var = 61%; for R3, r =
0.98, p < 0.01, %var = 0.96; for R4, r = 0.96, p < 0.01, %var
= 0.92), again with no free parameters. Clearly, both
information about the diagnosticity of features and
information about the presence or absence of facilitating
features are required to accurately model the experimental
data.
Though this modified DEM model may not be the best way
of modelling the data, it does suggest that using information
about both the facilitating features and diagnosticity of
features of an item are important in selecting relations. The
fact that an exemplar model of classification can predict how
people rate the likelihood of different relations linking pairs
of items is also evidence in support of the hypothesis that
relations can be represented as categories. This suggests that
relation selection can be thought of as a kind of classification
task.

Conclusions and Discussion
Our study yields three findings. First, people can learn which
relations are possible between concepts from sets of examples
of those relations. Second, people pay attention to facilitating
features for those relations and use those features when
judging relation likelihood for new examples. Third, people
also pay attention to, and use, diagnostic features for those
relations. Such findings are consistent with our hypothesis
that relations can be represented with an exemplar category
structure, and that the selection of a relation between two
constituents can be seen as a categorisation task. These
findings have implications for current theories of how
relational links are used in conceptual combination. In
particular, these findings may be problematic for Gagné &
Shoben’s (1997) CARIN model, which proposes that in
conceptual combination people select the correct relational
link between two concepts from a fixed set of 16 relational
links called thematic relations. First, the thematic relations
used in the CARIN model have no internal structure: there is
no way, in that model, in which facilitating or diagnostic
features could be associated with those relations (for
example, the MADE-OF relation in the CARIN model how has
no way of requiring that a concept taking part in it is type of
substance). Furthermore, the four different relations we used
in our experiment do not occur in the CARIN model’s fixed set
of thematic relations: it would be hard for that model to
explain how people used these relations in our experiment.
Our findings are consistent with other theories of
conceptual combination (e.g. Costello and Keane, 2000;
Murphy, 1988; Wisniewski, 1997) which do allow internal
conceptual structure to influence relation selection. These
theories use some variation of the idea that a concept
representation can contain ‘slots’ such as MADE-OF or
LOCATED and that conceptual combination involves one
concept filling a slot in another concept (so that “kitchen

308

chair”, for example, would involve the “kitchen” concept
filling the LOCATED slot in “chair”). The exemplar-based
model of relation selection described in this paper provides an
alternative to this slot-based representation of relations,
showing that relations can be represented as sets of paireditem exemplars, rather than as slots in concepts. This
exemplar-based model has the advantage of giving a simple
account of how people learn which facilitating and diagnostic
properties are associated with each relation.
As for future work: in our experiment, participants learned
relational categories only, and did not learn conceptual
categories (they did not learn different categories of beetle or
plant, for example). A possible extension of this work would
be to have participants learn, from sets of exemplars, both
conceptual categories and the relational categories that link
them. This experiment could reveal more both about how
relations are learned and used, and about how exemplar-level
and conceptual-level information interact in conceptual
combination.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from the Irish
Research Council for Science, Engineering and Technology,
funded by the National Development Plan.

References
Costello, F. J. (2000). An exemplar model of classification in
simple and combined categories. Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp
95-100). Mahwah, N. J.: Erlbaum.
Costello, F. J. (2001) A computational model of
categorisation and category combination: Identifying
diseases and new disease combinations, Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
(pp. 238-243). University of Edinburgh: Erlbaum.
Costello, F., & Keane, M.T. (2000). Efficient Creativity:
Constraints on conceptual combination. Cognitive Science,
24, 299-349.
Costello, F. J., and Keane, M. T. (2001) Testing two theories
of conceptual combination: Alignment versus diagnosticity
in the comprehension and production of combined
concepts, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory & Cognition, 27, 255-271.
Gagné, C. L., & Shoben, E. J. (1997). Influence of thematic
relations on the comprehension of modifier-noun
combinations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23 (1), 71-87.
Medin, D. L. & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85 (3), 207238.
Murphy, G. L. (1988). Comprehending complex concepts.
Cognitive Science, 12, 529-562.
Nosofsky, R. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, (1),
104 114.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1996). Construal and similarity in
conceptual combination. Journal of Memory and Language,
35, 434-453.
Wisniewski, E. J. (1997). When concepts combine.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(2), 167-183.

