UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning from collaborative problem solving: An analysis of three hypothesized Mechanisms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2ts2g2j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Hausmann, Robert G.M.
Chi, Michelene T.H.
Roy, Marguerite

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning from collaborative problem solving: An analysis of three hypothesized
mechanisms
Robert G.M. Hausmann (bobhaus@pitt.edu), Michelene T.H. Chi (chi@pitt.edu),
and Marguerite Roy (mar982@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology and the Learning Research and Development Center
University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260

Abstract

conceivable that other-directed explaining is a mechanism
that accounts for learning during collaboration.
The second hypothesized mechanism for successful
learning from collaborative problem solving is coconstruction. Co-construction is defined as the joint
construction of knowledge. The process of constructing
knowledge may proceed in a variety of ways, but the most
natural is for peers to either elaborate or critically evaluate
their partners’ contributions.
Elaborative co-construction is the generation of
knowledge by extending the ideas of one’s partner (Tao &
Gunstone, 1999) and has been shown to be an effective
dialog pattern (Hogan, Nastasi, & Pressley, 1999; van
Boxtel, van der Linden, & Kanselaar, 2000). Similarly,
knowledge might be constructed through the critical
discussion of ideas. Critical co-construction occurs when
interacting peers critically evaluate each other’s ideas.
Support for this particular type of interaction comes from
the literature on argumentation. Schwartz, Neuman, and
Biezuner (2000) found dyads that successfully solved
fraction problems were most likely to engage in
argumentation.
Co-construction and other-directed explaining are likely
candidates to explain the potential successes of learning
from collaborative problem solving. However, there is
another potentially overlooked mechanism, which is to learn
from listening to someone self-explain (i.e., self-directed
explaining). Learning from another person’s explaining is
analogous to learning from a worked-out example; however,
in a collaborative problem-solving context, the source of the
worked-out example is not a textbook, but a peer. When a
dyad is faced with solving a problem, it is natural for one
person to begin solving, while the other listens to the
ensuing solution attempt (Shirouzu, Miyake, & Masukawa,
2002). The speaker may be talking out loud while solving a
problem while her partner listens. This is a form of selfdirected explaining. As has been shown in prior research,
self-explaining is an effective learning strategy (Chi et al.,
1989). What is unclear, however, is if a partner can benefit
from listening to self-directed explaining. One goal of the
present study is to provide initial evidence for the utility of
self-directed explaining (or self-explaining with an
audience).
The structure for the remainder of the paper is as follows.
First, we will provide a brief description of the study, which

It has been well established that collaborative learning is more
effective in producing learning gains than individuals working
alone. The present study investigates three potential
mechanisms responsible for learning from collaborative
problem solving: other-directed explaining, co-construction,
and self-directed explaining. College undergraduates were
trained to criterion on the first four chapters of a popular
physics textbook. They were then asked to collaboratively
solve three physics problems. Preliminary evidence suggests
that other-directed explaining was effective in half of the
cases, whereas co-construction led to proportionally more
generated knowledge. Self-directed explaining was
particularly effective for the individual generating the
solution; however, there was only a modest gain for the
partner who listened to the explanations. The relative impact
of these three mechanisms is compared.

Introduction
Collaboration is a ubiquitous part of life and can be found in
scientists’ laboratories, the business world, the military, and
the classroom. Given its usefulness in the real world, peer
collaboration has become an important instructional
intervention. The literature evaluating the effectiveness of
peer collaboration has generally produced positive results
(Dillenbourg, Baker, Blaye, & O'Malley, 1995); however, it
is far from being an educational panacea (Barron, 2003).
The open question remains, “Why is collaboration
effective?” Prior research implicates three potential
mechanisms responsible for learning during collaboration:
other-directed explaining (Ploetzner, Dillenbourg, Praier, &
Traum, 1999; Roscoe, 2003), co-construction (Damon,
1984; Rafal, 1996), and self-directed explaining (Chi,
Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989; Chi, DeLeeuw,
Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994). The goal of the present study is
to investigate the relative contributions of all three
mechanisms to individual learning.
The first mechanism, other-directed explaining, occurs
when one peer instructs or explains to another partner how
to solve a problem. Other-directed explaining may benefit
only the speaker, but not the listener because the speaker is
the one actively engaged in conveying the to-be-learned
material (Chi, Siler, Jeong, Yamauchi, & Hausmann, 2001;
Webb, Troper, & Fall, 1995). However, because both
partners have opportunities to explain to their partners, it is

547

of the 30 problems were analyzed.1 Nine groups solved the
first problem, which contained 4 different concepts; 5
groups solved the second problem, which contained 3
different concepts; and 4 groups solved the third problem,
which was composed of 2 different concepts. Henceforth,
there were 59 concepts assessed across the three problems
and ten groups.
Finally, a posttest measured the amount of material
learned during the instructional phase (administered M=5.0;
SD=3.6 days after the collaboration session). The posttest
contained three problems, which were isomorphic to the
pretest and collaborative problems (i.e., the same nine
concepts were tested on the posttest).

will then be followed by evidence for the three hypothesized
mechanisms discussed above: other-directed explaining, coconstruction, and self-directed explaining. The final section
will compare the relative impact on learning from the three
mechanisms.

Method
Participants
Students were recruited via advertisements placed in a
university newspaper. The study used a between-subjects
design with a total of ten undergraduate pairs (n= 2 0 )
participating in the experimental group (i.e., Collaboration
condition) and a total of ten (n=10) undergraduates in the
control group (i.e., Text-only condition). Upon completion
of the experiment, participants were paid for their time. To
control for prior knowledge, eligible participants were
required to have taken only one high school physics course.

Procedure
All of the participants were asked to study each of the first
four chapters individually in the way that they found
natural. Participants solved the problems on the mastery
tests either while they read the text or after they were
finished. When the participants were confident in their
solutions, they submitted their answers to the experimenter,
who then immediately scored their performance. If the
student correctly answered 80% or more of the questions,
then he or she was permitted to advance to the next chapter.
If the criterion was not met, then the student was shown
which problems were incorrect and encouraged to read the
text and correct the mistakes. This cycle of reading and
testing continued for the first four chapters until criterion
performance was met. On average, students spent a total of
6.5 hours to reach mastery of the four chapters.
The pretest was administered after the students read
chapter five. Once they were finished with the pretest, an
instructional phase was scheduled. For the Collaborative
condition, the pretest was not scored immediately, so that
the participants were not paired on the basis of their pretest
scores. Dyads were formed under the constraints that they
finished the background material relatively close in time,
and they were the same gender.
During collaboration, the dyads solved three force
problems. They were encouraged to use their partners as a
resource and to work together to understand and solve the
problems. The entire text (chapters 1-5) was available to the
dyads during the collaboration session. The Text-only group
solved the same problems, but did so individually with the
text available. After the instructional phase, the posttest was
individually administered.
The sessions were recorded (both audio and video) and
later transcribed. The transcription was based on the
audiotapes of the dialogues, using information from the
video for interpretations when necessary.

Materials
The domain chosen for the present study was kinematics.
Some of the topics covered were vector addition and
subtraction, average and instantaneous velocity and
acceleration, and an emphasis on Newton’s second and third
laws. The material was taken from the first five chapters of
a popular physics textbook (Halliday & Resnick, 1981).
Measures Four mastery tests were developed to assess
participants’ understanding of each of the first four chapters.
Participants were required to solve 80% of the problems
correctly before advancing to the next chapter. After the
first four chapters were learned to mastery, participants read
the fifth chapter on force. The test administered after the
participants had read the fifth chapter served as the pretest
to the learning intervention.
The pretest consisted of three problems. The three
problems were decomposed into a total of nine solution
steps. Each solution step was then labeled with a concept
from physics. For example, Problem 1 asks the individual to
find the acceleration of two boxes in contact. To correctly
solve the problem, the two boxes should be conceptualized
as a compound body. To demonstrate an understanding of
the compound body concept, the solver is required to sum
the masses. The labeled solution steps will henceforth be
called “concepts” (see Appendix for the mapping between
problems, concepts, and the groups that were assigned to
each problem). There were a total of nine different physics
concepts across all three problems.
The text was available to the participants during the
mastery tests, the pretest, and during the instructional phase,
but it was not available during the posttest. The reason for
making the text available during the pretest, but not the
posttest, was to provide the most stringent test for learning,
in the sense that we did not want our participants’ inability
to remember details of formulas to hinder their performance.
During the collaboration session, each pair was asked to
solve three physics problems. For the present paper, only 18

1

A subset was used because the performance data for the present study
comes from a larger study in which all of the items were relevant.

548

Analyses and Results

was an average net gain of 26% (while controlling for
pretest knowledge), which was significantly different from
zero (p=0.002).
Evidence that individuals learned from collaborative
problem solving can also be found in the analysis of the
control (Text-only) group. The gain from pre- to posttest for
the Collaboration group was significantly greater than zero,
while the gain for the Text-only group was not
(F(1,9)=0.756, p=0.41) even through the two groups did not
differ at pretest.2 This suggests that the learning gains are
due to the activities the dyads engaged in during
collaborative problem solving, which is presented in the
next three sections.

Coding scheme
The first coding step was to segment the transcribed
protocols. The segments were taken at the level of problemsolving episodes (i.e., several turns dedicated to a single
concept). The boundaries of a problem-solving episode
began with a proposed equation, and ended with either the
final solution of the equation or the abandonment of a
solution path altogether. Across all groups and problems,
there were a total of 87 problem-solving episodes.
Episodes were then coded as other-directed explaining
(ODE), self-directed explaining (SDE), or co-construction.
Other-directed explaining occurred when a moreknowledgeable partner explained a concept to a lessknowledgeable partner. Pretest performance for each
participant determined his or her knowledgeability status for
each concept. Because each problem was composed of
several concepts, the individual’s status could change from
one problem-solving episode to the next, depending on his
or her pretest performance.
When the less-knowledgeable peer explained a concept
during a problem-solving episode, either to a moreknowledgeable or equally knowledgeable partner, then the
episode was coded as self-directed explaining. Again,
pretest performance was used to determine
knowledgeability.
Finally, when both partners were being generative in the
conversation by adding significant and relevant
contributions, the episode was coded as co-constructed. Coconstructed episodes were further decomposed into
elaborative and critical co-construction, which will be
defined shortly.
Once the problem-solving episodes were coded in terms
of the conversational elements, the content (i.e., the physics
concepts) was also coded. The content was then linked to
the episode analysis, which allowed us to track the impact of
dialog on posttest performance. For example, if a moreknowledgeable peer explains how to solve the compound
body concept to her less-knowledgeable partner, then that
episode was coded as “other-directed explaining about the
compound body.” To measure the learning effect of otherdirected explaining on the listener, we then looked at her
posttest performance on the compound body concept.
Because some problems involved multiple solution
attempts, only the final problem-solving episode was linked
to the posttest concepts (N=59).

Other-directed explaining during collaborative
problem solving
As stated in the Coding Scheme section, both the content
and episode were coded together to give us a sense of the
impact of other-directed explaining on learning. Table 1
contains an excerpt of one student explaining her reasoning
to another. The example begins with Beth asking Abby3 to
elaborate on a previous line of reasoning. There are two
features to note in this example. First, Abby’s style is
definitely instructional. Her intent is to explain, as clearly as
she can, how to solve the problem (see Appendix problem
1.ii.). Second, Beth does not contribute much to the
conversation, but merely indicates that she is attending to
Abby’s explanation with her use of continuers.
Table 1: Example of other-directed explaining
Beth: So like 14 newtons would be the net force
acting on B?
Abby: No, this-the overall force is ten,
Beth: Mm-hmm.
Abby: but if you split it, if-if-both of the
blocks, as we know, are accelerating at two
meters per second. If they’re in contact
then they have to be accelerating at the
same, rate.
Beth: Mm-hmm.
Abby And, because, by Newton’s second law F-F
[pause] equals mass times acceleration. And
we know the acceleration,
Beth: Mm-hmm.
Abby: of each block and we know the mass of each
block. So you can calculate the force-the
force of each block. Or the force acting on
each block.

Of the 59 final problem-solving episodes, there were a
total of 11 other-directed explaining episodes (11/59=19%).
On posttest, the listener (i.e., the less-knowledgeable peer)
correctly used 5 concepts that they had previously used
incorrectly on pretest. The data are summarized in the left
segment of Figure 1. The black bars represent the

Collaborative problem solving resulted in learning
gains
Did the individuals learn from the collaborative problemsolving session? To answer this question, we calculated gain
scores for each individual, which controlled for pretest
knowledge: g = (post – pre)/(100% - pre) (Crouch & Mazur,
2001). Thus, the gain scores reflect the increase (or
decrease) in learning per concept, per person. Overall, there

2

The data for the Text-only and Collaboration comparisons is taken from
the full pretest and posttest (see footnote 1).
3
All names are pseudonyms.

549

percentage of the corpus dedicated to a particular dialog
type, while the grey bars represent the gain scores of the
listeners (controlling for pretest knowledge). While a gain of
5 concepts is encouraging, especially given that the text was
unavailable during the posttest, the probability of learning
from listening to other-directed explaining is low
(5/11=45%). This is not entirely surprising, given the
finding that receiving elaborated help does not always lead
to learning gains (Webb, 1989).
It is also informative to measure the performance of the
more-knowledgeable speaker. Figure 2 suggests that the
speaker (ODE), who knew the concepts on pretest,
maintained 82% of her knowledge by correctly
demonstrating her knowledge of the concepts on the posttest
(see white bars in Fig. 2).

Episodes were coded as critical co-construction when
they contained conflicts between the two partners (Druyan,
2001). The difference between partners’ solutions led to a
discussion where each attempted to convince the other how
to solve the problem.
The following protocol excerpt is taken from Jill and Sara
solving the compound body problem (see Appendix,
Problem 1.i.). The question is difficult because it requires
the solvers to represent the blocks as a single body; neither
student demonstrated an understanding of this on the
pretest. Sara believes the question implies that the
acceleration should be found separately for each block, but
Jill makes a case for the compound body. The conflict is
between treating the blocks separately or jointly. Here is
their argument:
Table 2: Example of critical co-construction

100%
Percentage

80%

67%

60%

45%

40%
20%
0%

Sara: Yeah. It’s just-it didn’t say? I thought it
said each of them. [Reads: Find the
acceleration of the blocks.] To me that says
find the acceleration of each block. You
know like, since they’re two different
kilograms.
Jill: It’s going to be, the same though.
Jill: Because like, if we, go like this [pushes a
book and pencil], and I do this, they’re both
moving at the same acceleration.
Sara: [Talks to Experimenter: 4 turns]
Sara: Because if you-well you can get a different
acceleration by breaking it up though.
Jill: Oh wait. You know what? The acceleration will
be the same for both of them. Acceleration
is the same for both of them. Force acting on
block B, is different from force acting on
block A.
Sara: Ok. Because their mass, is different.

64%

29%
19%

20%

Other-directed
CoSelf-directed
Explaining Construction Explaining

% Corpus

% Gain

Figure 1: Gain scores associated with the absolute frequency
for each dialog pattern.

Partners co-construct answers during collaboration

Jill: Yeah. Because-yeah.

As stated in the introduction, co-construction is a
hypothesized mechanism that has been proposed to account
for learning from collaborative problem solving. A problemsolving episode was coded as co-construction when both
partners were actively constructing new knowledge. The coconstructed solutions were further categorized as elaborative
and critical co-construction. Elaborative co-construction
was defined as one partner adding a significant contribution
to the discourse that develops another person’s idea. Here is
an example of elaborative co-construction (Problem 2.ii.):

The frequency of co-constructive episodes is summarized
in Figure 1 (see the middle bars). Two results are of
particular interest. First, the amount of co-construction is
similar to the frequency of the other-directed explaining
episodes. More importantly, however, is the proportion of
co-construction episodes that led to learning. Of the 12
episodes where the solution was jointly constructed, 8 of
them led to the correct application on posttest (8/12=67%).
Although co-construction was a relatively rare
conversational pattern (12/59=20%), the reported frequency
replicates prior estimates from a different domain
(McGregor & Chi, 2002). Furthermore, the knowledge
produced during collaboration was useful to both the
individuals, which suggests the viability of group-toindividual transfer. That co-construction lead to a high
proportion of learned concepts further supports the
constructivist perspective that being active, as opposed to
merely listening to a didactic explanation, is important for
learning (Chi et al., 2001; Webb et al., 1995).
Co-construction was further decomposed into elaborative
and critical co-constructive episodes. Of the 12 instances of
co-construction, 5 were elaborative (5/12=42%) and 7 were

Table 3: Example of elaborative co-construction
Ron: It’s the weight of the crate,
times
gravity
right?
10kg(9.8m/s2)=”] So it’s, 98N,
[R writes “98N+5”]-oh no, cause
what it is yet, really. Well I
Ben: Mg-Mg is the force exerted by
the Earth.
Ron: Mg, that’s,
Ben: Weight.
Ron: Mass times gravity, right?
Ben: Mm-hmm.

which is ten,
[R
writes
plus the five
we don’t know
mean, it’sthe block, on

550

critical (7/12=58%). Elaborative led to a gain of 3 concepts
(3/5=60%), whereas critical co-construction led to the
correct application of 5 concepts on posttest (5/7=71%).
Because of the small numbers, it is difficult to tell if
elaborative or critical co-construction was more effective in
subsequent learning. Follow-up research needs to be done to
gain a better understanding of what drives learning from coconstruction.

100%
Percentage

80%
60%

82%
71%
45%

40%

29%

20%

Learning occurs from self-directed explaining for
speakers and listeners

0%

Prior research has shown that good students spontaneously
self-explain while learning from worked-out examples (Chi
et al., 1989). Subsequent research has shown that prompting
students to self-explain can lead to learning gains, above
and beyond those who spontaneously self-explain (Chi et
al., 1994).
Figure 1 suggests that self-directed explaining (SDE) also
operates in a collaborative problem-solving context. The
frequency of self-directed explaining is high relative to the
other conversational patterns (i.e., other-directed explaining
and co-construction). We observed 17 episodes of selfdirected explaining, which accounts for 29% of the corpus.
In terms of the average gain, self-directed explaining
episodes lead to a 64% increase (see Fig. 1).
The effects of self-directed explaining can be further
differentiated into the gain observed by the speaker and
listener. In the present context, the listener is also trying to
learn the material; therefore, she has a stake in the problemsolving process. Instead of being a passive recipient, the
collaborative partner listens to and could potentially monitor
the ensuing self-explanation.
As expected, the gain was proportionally high for the
speaker (71%; see Fig. 2). While self-explaining is effective
for the explainer, the question becomes, does listening to a
self-explanation benefit the listener? The answer to this
question seems to be mixed. To a certain extent, listening to
another person self-explain can produce learning.
Specifically, there was a net gain of 5 concepts for the
listeners (5/17=29%; see Fig. 2). Therefore, it appears that
observing reasoning in action (i.e., being the listener) is
about as effective as listening to other-directed explaining
(ODE). Further coding is needed to gain a better
understanding of what the listener is doing while listening to
a partner self-explain. One might hypothesize that the
listeners benefit only when engaged in a constructive
activity, which has received some empirical support (Webb
et al., 1995).

ODE
ODE
SDE
SDE
Speaker Listener Speaker Listener

Maintained Knowledge

% Gain

Figure 2: Gain scores as a function of dialog pattern and
dominant speaker or listener.

Discussion
The primary goal of the present study was to demonstrate
that several different mechanisms contribute to learning
from collaborative problem solving. These three
mechanisms were other-directed explaining, coconstruction, and self-directed explaining. All of these
mechanisms were associated with learning, but did so to
different degrees. In terms of the overall proportion, selfdirected explaining produced the strongest learning gains,
with the caveat that the learning gains were greatest for the
speakers. Other-directed explaining also lead to learning
gains for the listener, but only to a limited extent. Several
explanations given by the speaker during other-directed
explaining did not translate into increased problem solving
behaviors on posttest. Finally, co-construction, although
relatively infrequent, led to increased problem-solving
performance. Two-thirds of the co-constructed concepts
were correctly used on the posttest.
A secondary goal of the present study was to demonstrate
that multiple mechanisms operate within dyads. That is, one
group may engage in other-directed explaining on a problem
that one person understands (whereas the other does not).
Then on the next problem, the same dyad may have to coconstruct the solution because each individual has a
different solution, and they must resolve their differences.
Most research on collaborative problem solving measures
the influence of one mechanism on learning in isolation of
other potential explanations. The results from this study
suggest that the pattern of communication is largely shaped
by the background knowledge of the participants.
Finally, we attempted to show that self-explaining can
take place in a collaborative context. While effective for the
speaker, there was marginal utility for the listener. The
effect was strongest when the speaker was engaging a
partner with low pretest knowledge, but this effect needs to
be substantiated by further research. The results from this
study agree well with the idea that being constructive while
solving problems leads to better learning and understanding.

551

Acknowledgements

others. In P. Dillenbourg (Ed.), Collaborative
learning: Cognitive and computational approaches
(pp. 103-121). Oxford: Elsevier.
Rafal, C. T. (1996). From co-construction to takeovers:
Science talk in a group of four girls. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 5, 279-293.
Roscoe, R. D. (2003). Learning from self-directed versus
other-directed explaining. Paper presented at the
84th Annual Meeting of the American Education
Research Association, Chicago, IL.
Schwartz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two
wrongs may make a right...if they argue! Cognition
and Instruction, 18(4), 461-494.
Shirouzu, H., Miyake, N., & Masukawa, H. (2002).
Cognitively active externalization for situated
reflection. Cognitive Science, 26, 469-501.
Tao, P.-K., & Gunstone, R. F. (1999). Conceptual change in
science through collaborative learning at the
computer. International Journal of Science
Education, 21(1), 39-57.
van Boxtel, C., van der Linden, J., & Kanselaar, G. (2000).
Collaborative leraning tasks and the elaboration of
conceptual knowledge. Learning and Instruction,
10, 311-330.
Webb, N. M. (1989). Peer interaction and learning in small
groups. International Journal of Educational
Research, 13, 21-39.
Webb, N. M., Troper, J. D., & Fall, R. (1995). Constructive
activity and learning in collaborative small groups.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(3), 406423.

Funding for this research is provided by the National
Science Foundation, Grant Number NSF (LIS): 9720359, to
the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Constructive
Learning
Environments
(CIRCLE,
http://www.pitt.edu/~circle). The authors are indebted to
Mark U. McGregor and Randi A. Engle for their data
collection assistance, Stacy Setterberg for transcription, and
Rod D. Roscoe, Kwangsu Cho, and 4 anonymous reviewers
for their critical comments on an earlier draft.

References
Barron, B. (2003). When smart groups fail. The Journal of
the Learning Sciences, 12(3), 307-359.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
study and use examples in learning to solve
problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M. T. H., DeLeeuw, N., Chiu, M.-H., & LaVancher, C.
(1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Chi, M. T. H., Siler, S. A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., &
Hausmann, R. G. (2001). Learning from human
tutoring. Cognitive Science, 25(4), 471-533.
Crouch, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer instruction: Ten
years of experience and results. American
Association of Physics Teachers, 69(9), 970-977.
Damon, W. (1984). Peer education: The untapped potential.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 5,
331-343.
Dillenbourg, P., Baker, M., Blaye, A., & O'Malley, C. J.
(1995). The evolution of research on collaborative
learning. In P. Reinman & H. Spada (Eds.),
Learning in humans and machine: Towards an
interdisciplinary learning science. New York:
Elsevier Science Inc.
Druyan, S. (2001). A comparison of four types of cognitive
conflict and their effect on cognitive development.
International Journal of Behavioral Development,
25(3), 226-236.
Halliday, D., & Resnick, R. (1981). Fundamentals of
physics. New York: Wiley.
Hogan, K., Nastasi, B. K., & Pressley, M. (1999). Discourse
patterns and collaborative scientific reasoning in
peer and teacher-guided discussions. Cognition and
Instruction, 17(4), 379-432.
McGregor, M., & Chi, M. T. H. (2002). Collaborative
interactions: The process of joint production and
individual reuse of novel ideas. In W. D. Gray &
C. D. Schunn (Eds.), 24nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawerence Erlbaum.
Ploetzner, R., Dillenbourg, P., Praier, M., & Traum, D.
(1999). Learning by explaining to oneself and to

Appendix
Collaboration Problem
1. Two blocks A and B are in
contact with each other on a
smooth floor. A force of 10N is
applied to the blocks as shown in
the figure. Masses of the blocks
are 2 Kg and 3 Kg respectively.
(i) Find acceleration of the
blocks. (ii) Find net force acting
on block B. (iii) Find force
exerted by block B on block A.

Concepts
N2Law

2. A person pushes a crate on a
smooth floor. He is applying force
at an angle q with the horizontal
as in the figure. If the mass of
the crate is 10 Kg, magnitude of
the force is 5N and q=30 degrees,
what will be the acceleration of
the crate?
3. Block A is attached to a string
which is tied to a wall. The block
is resting on a smooth plane
inclined at an angle q with the
horizontal as shown in the figure.
Mass of the block is MA. What is
the tension in the sting?

VD

5,6

W

8,9

CB

Groups
1,2
3,4
5,6

N2Law

7,9
10

N3Law

T

10

VD

1,2

N2Law

4,7

Note. N2Law=Newton’ second law; N3Law=Newton’s third Law;
CB=compound body; VD=vector decomposition; W=weight;
T=tension.

552

