UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lies in Conversation: An Examination of Deception Using Automated Linguistic Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2dg6q7wq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Hancock, Jeffrey T.
Curry, Lauren E.
Goorha, Saurabh
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lies in Conversation:
An Examination of Deception Using Automated Linguistic Analysis
Jeffrey T. Hancock (jeff.hancock@cornell.edu)
Department of Communication, Cornell University
320 Kennedy Hall, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA

Lauren E. Curry (lec26@cornell.edu)
Department of Communication, Cornell University
320 Kennedy Hall, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA

Saurabh Goorha (sg278@cornell.edu)
Department of Communication, Cornell University
320 Kennedy Hall, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA

Michael T. Woodworth (mwoodwor@dal.ca)
Department of Psychology, Dalhousie University
Life Sciences Center, Halifax, NS, B3K 1L4, Canada

suggests that liars tend to make less sense and tell less
plausible stories (e.g., making discrepant and ambivalent
statements), among other verbal characteristics (for review,
see DePaulo, Lindsay, Malone, Mulenbruck, Charlton, &
Cooper, 2003).
The present study employs automated linguistic analysis,
in which a computer program is used to analyze the
linguistic properties of texts, to examine the verbal content
of deceptive and truthful conversations. As Pennebaker,
Mehl, and Niederhoffer (2003) note, words used in daily
interactions reveal both psychological and social aspects of
peoples’ worlds. Certain words and parts of speech can be
markers of emotional, psychological, and cognitive states.
Given that deceiving others likely involves changes in
emotional or psychological states, linguistic cues detected
using automated techniques may indicate lying in
conversation.

Abstract
The present study investigated changes in both the sender’s
and the receiver’s linguistic style across truthful and deceptive
dyadic communication. A computer-based analysis of 242
transcripts revealed that senders used more words overall,
increased references to others, and used more sense-based
descriptions (e.g., seeing, touching) when lying as compared
to telling the truth. Receivers naïve to the deception
manipulation produced more words and sense terms, and
asked more questions with shorter sentences when they were
being lied to than when they were being told the truth. These
findings are discussed in terms of their implications for
linguistic style matching.

Introduction
Maxims such as “honesty is the best policy” and “let the
truth be told” reinforce the notion that telling the truth is the
best way to communicate. When telling everyday lies, then,
deceivers must be careful to assume a position of sincerity
in order to make their partners believe them and avoid being
viewed in a negative light. In fact, this feat might not be
very difficult to accomplish. Previous research suggests that
it is quite difficult to catch a liar as deception detection rates
in many experiments are not much better than chance (Vrij,
2000).
In general, there are three methods for trying to detect
deceit. The first method focuses on vocalic and physical
nonverbal behaviors (e.g., movements, smiles, voice pitch,
speech rate, stuttering, and eye gaze) (Vrij, 2000). The
second method involves measuring physiological responses
with various technologies, such as polygraph machines
(Vrij, Edward, Roberts, & Bull, 2000).
The third method is concerned with the content of what is
said (e.g., verbal behavior, as well as a study of linguistic
properties of liars’ texts). For example, previous research

Linguistic Indicators of Deception
A review of the relatively small literature concerned with
automated linguistic analyses of deception indicates that, to
date, at least four main types of linguistic cues have been
associated with deception: 1) word counts 2) pronoun
usage, 3) words pertaining to feelings and the senses, and 4)
exclusive terms (Burgoon, Buller, Floyd, & Grandpre, 1996;
Burgoon, Bliar, Qin, & Nunamaker, 2003; Newman,
Pennebaker, Berry, & Richards, 2003; Pennebaker et al.,
2003).
Consider first differences in word counts across deceitful
and truthful messages. Previous studies have found that
senders offer fewer details when lying than when telling the
truth (Burgoon et al., 2003; DePaulo et al., 2003; Vrij,
2000). Senders may offer fewer details because they are less
familiar with what they are discussing, or because they are
trying to avoid providing details that may be inconsistent
535

with their fabrication. As such, senders may be expected
that deceptive interactions would be characterized by fewer
words on the part of the sender.
With regard to pronoun usage, Newman et al. (2003)
observed that individuals consistently used first person
singular pronouns less frequently when lying than when
telling the truth. Using first person pronoun words such as
“I,” “me,”or “my” involves taking ownership of a statement,
and deceivers may refrain from using these first person
pronouns due to either a lack of personal experience or a
desire to dissociate themselves from the lie being told. The
findings regarding the use of second and third person
pronouns are less consistent. Some studies have found that
liars are less likely to use second and third person pronouns
(Newman et al., 2003) while other studies have found that
liars in fact use more second and third person pronouns
(Ickes, Reidhead, & Patterson, 1986). According to Ickes et
al. (1986), senders who are careful about constructing
deceptive messages will exhibit an increased other-focus
and therefore a higher use of second and third person
pronouns. Finally, DePaulo et al. (2003) also found that
liars are more likely to use third person pronouns in their
deceptive interactions.
Research examining verbal cues associated with feelings
and sense terms (e.g., see, touch, listen, etc.) suggests that
deceivers tended to use more expressiveness, which
includes both negative and positive forms of emotion,
compared to truth-tellers (Burgoon et al., 2003). In addition,
senders may be more likely to use sense words in an effort
to create a detailed story to avoid eliciting skepticism from
the deceiver (Burgoon et al., 2000).
Finally, previous research also suggests that liars use
fewer exclusive words than truth-tellers (Newman et al.,
2003).
Exclusive words include prepositions and
conjunctions such as “but,” “except,” “without,” and
“exclude.” These words require a deceiver to discuss what
is in a category and what is not. As such, deceivers may
find it a more complex task to invent what was done versus
what was not done (Newman et al., 2003).

1996; Schober & Clark, 1989), the focus of previous
research on monologue-based deception may limit its
applicability to everyday conversation.
A second, and related, weakness is that previous research
on linguistic predictors of deception has focused almost
exclusively on the sender (i.e., the teller of the deception or
the truth). For example, Newman et al. (2003) examined
only a sender’s handwriting, videotapes, and typed
transcripts. In no case were the reactions of receivers (i.e.,
the targets of deceptive messages) studied. However, in
conversations there is a reciprocal exchange between
senders and receivers that can have important effects on
deceptive behavior (Burgoon et al., 1996; Burgoon, Buller,
& Floyd, 2001). As such, it may be important to look at
both parties when examining interactions. If senders alter
their behavior in systematic ways when lying versus when
they are telling the truth, as previous research suggests, then
an important question that remains to be addressed is
whether receivers will also behave differently when lied to
than when they are told the truth.
One possible outcome is that receivers will engage in
linguistic style matching, which refers to the degree to
which two people in conversation adjust their own speaking
behavior, or style, to match their partners’ behavior
(Niederhoffer & Pennebaker, 2002). The observation that
people vary their words on a turn-by-turn level when in
conversations with others is assumed to reflect the
coordination processes inherent in natural conversations
(Grice, 1989; Niederhoffer & Pennebaker, 2002). Indeed,
participants in conversations have been known to exhibit
similar types of concurrent behaviors (both vocal and
nonvocal), kinesics, proxemics, facial expressions, and word
usage, regardless of topic content (Niederhoffer &
Pennebaker, 2002).
If, as linguistic style matching suggests, people in
conversation adjust their linguistic behavior to that of their
partners, then any differences in linguistic behavior by
senders across deceptive and truthful communication should
also be observed in the receiver’s behavior. That is,
receiver’s behavior should mirror the behavior of the sender
in terms of word usage and linguistic variables across
deceptive and truthful communication. If receivers engage
in linguistic style matching during deceptive interactions,
then receivers, like senders, should produce fewer words,
fewer first person pronouns, more second and third
pronouns, more exclusive words and negations, and more
words pertaining to the senses.
Finally, there may also be receiver activities that do not
simply match those of the sender. For example, if a receiver
becomes suspicious of the sender’s truthfulness, the receiver
may probe their partner more frequently, perhaps by asking
additional questions.
The present study examined the linguistic styles of
senders and received engaged in truthful and deceitful
conversations. The conversations were conducted in a textbased, computer-mediated setting, in which participants
exchanged synchronous messages. A computer-mediated

Deception, Conversation and the Receiver
Although the literature on automated approaches to
linguistic analysis of deception suggests that word counts,
pronouns, feeling words, and exclusion words may predict
deception, previous research is limited in two important
ways. First, previous research has been limited primarily to
analyses of deception in the context of monologues rather
than in conversational contexts. For example, Newman et al.
(2003) conducted five studies in which participants
discussed a given topic by writing about it, talking about it
to a video camera, or by typing their views on it. In these
cases, only the liar’s behavior was analyzed because there
was no target of those lies present during the studies. Given
that most lies tend to occur during conversations with others
(DePaulo, Kashy, Kirkendol, & Epstein, 1996), and given
the fact that language use in conversation differs in
important ways from language use in monologues (Clark,
536

order was given to the receivers but without any asterisks
marking topics.
The sequence in which the topics were discussed, and the
order in which the sender lied, was counterbalanced across
16 orders. After the initial ice-breaking topics, senders were
instructed to lie on either the next two topics or on the last
two topics. Half of the senders followed a truth-first,
deception-second order. The remainder followed a reverse
order. Because topics followed a diagram-balanced Latin
square order within truth and within deception, all topics
appeared within a given time period.
Participants discussed the topics in a text-based,
computer-mediated setting and performed the task at
isolated computer terminals. Participants used one of two
desktop computer stations while the experimenter monitored
and recorded the interaction from a third station. Once
participants were seated at their terminals, the experimenter
briefly demonstrated the use of the computer interface,
Netmeeting, in which participants typed their message in a
private composition window and hit enter to send their
message to a shared chat window (see Figure 1). Message
transmission was virtually instantaneous.
Once participants finished the discussion task, they were
asked to complete a series of questionnaires based on their
conversation. The data from these questionnaires are not
reported here. After completing the post-interaction
questionnaires, each member of the dyad was brought to a
common room, and introduced to his or her partner and they
were fully debriefed.

communication setting was used in the present study for
several reasons. The first is that the transcripts were created
automatically as the participants interacted. The second is
that, because the interaction was entirely text-based, all of
the information exchanged by the participants during their
interaction was captured in the transcripts (Hancock, in
press).

Methods
Participants (n = 66) were upper-level students at a
northeastern American university, and they participated for
credit in various courses. Participants were randomly paired
to form 33 same-sex, unacquainted dyads (15 male and 18
female).
Participants were recruited for a “study of how
unacquainted individuals communicate about various
conversation topics.” Upon reporting to the laboratory,
participants were led separately to remote rooms where they
completed an initial set of forms, including informed
consent.
The general procedure was adapted from Burgoon et al.
(2001). All participants were told that they would be having
a conversation with an unknown partner. They were
instructed that they would discuss 5 topics, which were then
provided to the participants on a sheet of paper. The first
topic was always “When I am in a large group, I…” This
initial topic was designed to allow the participants to
become comfortable interacting with their partner, and was
not included in any analyses. After this topic, participants
began a discussion of the four experimental topics which
included: “Discuss the most significant person in your life”,
“Talk about a mistake you made recently”, “Describe the
most unpleasant job you have ever had to do” and “Talk
about responsibility.” There was no time limit and
participants were asked to discuss each topic until they had
exhausted it and understood each other’s responses.
One of the two participants was randomly assigned to the
role of sender, and the other to the role of receiver. Senders
were asked to sometimes deceive their partners. In
particular, they were instructed “to NOT tell ‘the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth’” (Burgoon et al.,
2001) on two topics, and to be truthful on the other two
topics. The two topics in which the whole truth was not to
be told were marked with an asterisk on the sheet of paper
given to the sender.
Examples of lies were given to the senders, and it was
emphasized that the senders should try to produce lies that
were fairly substantial (e.g., saying that they went on a
vacation when in fact they did not) rather than small lies
(e.g., saying that they went on a vacation from August 4th to
the 10th when they actually went from August 5th to the
11th). Senders had approximately five minutes to plan their
stories. Receivers were blind to the deception manipulation
and were told that they were going to have a conversation
with another person and that their role was to keep the
conversation going. The same list of topics in the same

Figure 1. Screenshot of the Netmeeting Interface
(A= Sender, B= Receiver)

Automated Linguistic Analyses
Both sender and receiver transcripts were converted into
separate text files separated by topic. Each dyad produced
eight different transcript files: two deception discussions
and two truthful discussions for each sender, and two
deception discussions and two truthful discussions for each
receiver, which produced a total of 264 transcripts.
All transcripts were analyzed using the Linguistic Inquiry
and Word Count (LIWC) program (Pennebaker, Francis, &
Booth, 2001). This text analysis program was used to create
empirically derived statistical profiles of deceptive and
truthful communications (Pennebaker et al., 2003), and it
537

Table 1. Means and (Standard Errors) of the linguistic output variables by role and truth condition.
Sender
Lie
M (SE)

Receiver
Lie
M (SE)

Truth
M (SE)

Truth
M (SE)

Word Count
156.11 (17.07)
125.08 (11.20)
157.36 (16.56)
119.61 (10.96)
Words / sentence
10.20 (.97)
9.03 (.53)
8.21 (.42)
9.07 (.59)
1st Person Pronouns
8.01 (.35)
8.52 (.34)
8.08 (.45)
8.92 (.41)
nd
2 Person Pronouns
2.41 (.31)
2.82 (.32)
2.64 (.32)
2.25 (.22)
3rd Person Pronouns
3.30 (.33)
2.46 (.18)
2.57 (.31)
2.43 (.27)
Negations
2.19 (.21)
1.77 (.16)
2.27 (.19)
2.20 (.21)
Senses
2.47 (.16)
2.09 (.19)
2.49 (.18)
2.18 (.22)
Exclusive Words
4.01 (.27)
4.18 (.32)
3.63 (.22)
3.86 (.31)
Questions
15.88 (2.27)
16.39 (2.32)
15.33 (1.53)
10.84 (1.34)
Note: all statistics represent the percentage of total words in the transcript, with the exception of Word Count,
Word per Sentence and Questions variables, which represent absolute totals.

type and role was observed, F (1,32) = 4.07, p < .05.
Simple effects analyses conducted at each level of
discussion type revealed that during truthful discussion
senders and receivers produced the same number of words
per sentence, F (1,32) < 1, ns. In contrast, during deceitful
discussion, receivers used marginally fewer words per
sentence than senders, F (1,32) = 3.81, p = .06.
Considered together, these data suggest that receivers
used shorter utterances when being lied to than when they
were being told the truth, while senders used the same
number of words per sentence regardless of discussion
type.
The next set of analyses examined pronoun usage. No
significant effects were observed for first person pronouns
(e.g., “I,” “we,” “self”). Similarly, no effects were
observed for the usage of second person pronouns (e.g.,
“you”). An analysis of third person pronouns referring to
others (e.g., “he,” “she,” “they”), however, revealed a
main effect of role, F (1,32) = 4.68, p < .05. Senders used
third person pronouns more frequently than receivers. In
addition, senders were significantly more likely to discuss
others when lying as compared to when they were telling
the truth, F (1,32) = 4.57, p < .05.
With regard to the production of exclusive words and
negations, no reliable effects were observed. Regardless
of discussion type, senders and receivers produced the
same number of exclusive words and negations.
The next analyses examined the use of words that
pertained to the senses (e.g., “see,” “touch,” “listen”).
Participants used significantly more sense words during
deceptive conversations than during truthful ones, F(1,32)
= 5.34, p < .05. No effect of role was observed, F(1,32) <
1, n.s., nor did role interact with discussion type, F(1,32)
< 1, n.s.

has been used in studies to predict outcome measures like
social judgments, personality, psychological adjustment,
and health. LIWC analyzes transcripts on a word-byword basis, including punctuation, and compares words
against a file of words divided into 74 linguistic
dimensions. For the purposes of this study, only variables
relevant to the hypotheses or of potential interest to
deception were included, which left 8 variables within the
four categories mentioned above: word counts; pronouns;
emotion words and words pertaining to the senses; and
exclusive words and negations. In addition, question
frequency was also analyzed.
LIWC produces the percentage of each variable type by
dividing the frequency of the observed variable by the
total number of words in the sample. Word counts were
not reported as percentages, but as frequency totals.

Results
A 2 (discussion type: truthful vs. deceptive) x 2 (role:
sender vs. receiver) repeated measure type General Linear
Model (GLM) procedure was conducted on each
dependent variable. Table 1 contains the descriptive
statistics for each variable.
Overall, more words were produced during deceptive
discussions than during truthful discussions F (1,32) =
7.11, p < .05. The increase in word count for deception
was equivalent for both senders and receivers, F (1,32) <
1, ns, and no interaction was observed, F (1,32) < 1, ns,
suggesting that both senders and receivers used more
words when the sender was lying than when the sender
was telling the truth.
An analysis of the number of words used per sentence
revealed no main effect of discussion type or role.
However, a significant interaction between discussion
538

2001). Indeed, receivers in the present study asked more
questions when they were being lied to than when they
were telling the truth (see below), which may have
required senders to use more words to address the
additional questions.
Similarly, previous linguistic analyses of deception
suggest that senders use more negative emotion terms
(e.g., Newman et al., 2003; Vrij, 2003). This difference is
perhaps not surprising given the differences in discussion
topics between the present study and the Newman et al.
(2003) study. As noted above, Newman et al. asked
participants to lie or tell the truth about highly emotional
topics, such as abortion, which may have been more
likely to elicit strong emotional verbal content than the
more mundane topics employed in the present study (e.g.,
“Talk about a mistake you made recently.”).
The second question of interest was whether the
linguistic style of the receivers changed systematically
according to whether or not their partners were lying. The
data suggest that, in fact, receivers’ linguistic profile
changed across deceptive and truthful discussion topics.
In particular, when being lied to, receivers 1) used more
words, in shorter sentences, 2) used more sense words,
and 3) asked more questions than when they were being
lied to. These observations are particularly striking given
the fact that receivers were blind to the deception
manipulation.
These data provide relatively robust support for the
linguistic style matching model (Niederhoffer &
Pennebaker, 2002). First, receivers matched changes in
the sender’s total word production and use of sense
words. Second, like the senders, receivers’ use of emotion
words and exclusion words did not change across
deceptive and truthful conditions. Considered together,
the present data suggest that receivers engaged in
linguistic style matching.
There were, however, a number of linguistic variables
on which receivers and senders diverged. While senders
used more other pronouns when lying than when telling
the truth, the receivers’ use of other pronouns did not
differ across discussion types. This observation may
reveal the unique motivation of senders to distance
themselves from their deception. Perhaps more
importantly is the observation that receivers asked more
questions and used fewer words per sentence when they
were being lied to than when they were being told the
truth. These surprising data suggest that the receivers
were skeptical of the senders during deceptive
conversations. Because senders did not produce more
questions when they were being deceptive, the change in
the receivers’ question-asking behavior does not simply
reflect linguistic style-matching. Instead, these data
suggest that although receivers were not explicitly aware
that their partner was lying to them (i.e., they were blind
to the deception manipulation), they were implicitly
aware that they were being lied to.

The last analysis was concerned with the number of
questions asked during the interactions. A main effect of
discussion type was observed, F(1,32) = 4.02, p < .05.
More questions were observed during deceptive
discussions than during truthful discussions. This main
effect, however, was qualified by a marginally reliable
interaction between discussion type and role, F(1,32) =
3.24, p = .08. Simple effects analyses conducted at each
level of role revealed that while senders asked the same
number of questions across deceptive and truthful
discussion types, F(1,32) < 1, ns. , receivers asked more
questions during deceptive discussions than truthful ones,
F (1,15) = 9.58, p < .01. Considered together, these data
suggest that receivers were more likely to ask questions
when they were being lied to than when they were being
told the truth

Discussion
The primary objective of the present study was to
examine the linguistic behaviors of both senders and
receivers during dyadic communication that involved both
deceptive and truthful discussions. The first question of
interest was determining whether the senders’ linguistic
behavior changed when the sender was being deceptive
relative to when the sender was being truthful. The data
suggest that, overall, when senders were lying to their
partners, they 1) produced more words, 2) used more
“other” pronouns (e.g., “he,” “she,” “they”), and 3) used
more terms that described the senses (e.g., “see,” “hear,”
“feel”) than when they were telling the truth.
In general, this linguistic profile is consistent with
previous research suggesting that senders attempt to
construct a more cohesive and detailed story in order to
seem believable (Burgoon et al., 1996). For example, the
increased number of words observed in the deceptive
discussions may reflect the senders’ attempts to convey a
more complete story when attempting to deceive.
Similarly, senders may have increased their use of sense
words to enhance the believability of the deception (e.g.,
“He saw her do it.”). Finally, the use of other-focused
pronouns during deceptive discussions reveals the
senders’ attempts to shift the focus away from themselves
(DePaulo et al., 2003; Ickes, 1986).
The present data, however, differs with previous
research in several important respects. For example,
previous research suggests that liars tend to use fewer
words than truth tellers (Burgoon et al., 2003; DePaulo et
al., 2003; Vrij, 2000). Why, then, did senders in the
present study produce more words during deceptive
discussions than during truthful discussions? One
possibility is that the senders in the present study were
engaged in conversation with a partner, whereas previous
research has focused primarily on deception in
monologue formats (e.g., Newman et al., 2003). It is
possible, for instance, that senders engaged in
conversation used more words in an effort to convince
suspicious or skeptical receivers (e.g., Burgoon et al.,
539

An important limitation of the present study, however, is
that participants interacted in a text-based computermediated environment. An important question is how
these verbal behaviors we observed in text-based
conversations will be altered when nonverbal channels of
communication are available. While additional research
will be required to address this question, communication
via the Internet is becoming increasingly ubiquitous.
Indeed, millions of people use text-based forms of
communication on a daily basis, and previous research
suggests that people do tell lies during computer-mediated
interactions, such as Email and Instant Messaging,
although not as frequently as they do over the phone or in
face-to-face contexts (Hancock, Thom-Santelli, &
Ritchie, 2004). As such, the present data provide
important insights into interpersonal deception in this new
communication domain.
Finally, there may not necessarily be a classification of
specific words to predict deception, as previous research
by Pennebaker et al. (2003) and Newman et al. (2003)
may suggest, but deception may be more reliably
predicted by looking at the methods of constructing lies.
The present research advances our understanding of how
linguistic behavior changes according to the truthfulness
of the discussion.
Lies that take place during
conversation tend to include more words, more otherdirected pronouns, and more sense words than truths.
Equally important, if a receiver is being lied to by
someone who fits this linguistic profile, he or she may be
more likely to use more overall words and sense terms,
and to ask more questions.

Cambridge University Press.
DePaulo, B.M., Kashy, D.A., Kirkendol, S.E., & Epstein,
J.A. (1996). Lying in everyday life. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 979-995.
DePaulo, B. M., Lindsay, J. J., Malone, B. E.,
Muhlenbruck, L., Charlton, K., & Cooper, H. (2003).
Cues to deception. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 74118.
Friedman, H.S., & Tucker, J.S. (1990). Language and
deception. In H. Giles & W.P. Robinson (Eds.),
Handbook of language and social psychology. New
York: Wiley & Sons.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Hancock, J.T. (in press). Verbal irony use in computermediated and face-to-face conversations. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology.
Hancock, J.T., Thom-Santelli, J., & Ritchie, T. (2004).
Deception and design: Effects of communication
technology on lying behavior. In Proceedings of CHI
2004.
Ickes, W., Reidhead, S., Patterson, M. (1986).
Machiavellianism and self-monitoring: As different as
“me” and “you.” Social Cognition, 4, 58-74.
Niederhoffer, K.G. & Pennebaker, J.W. (2002).
Linguistic style matching in social interaction. Journal
of Language and Social Psychology, 21, 337-360.
Newman, M.L., Pennebaker, J.W., Berry, D.S., &
Richards, J.M. (2003). Lying words: Predicting
deception from linguistic styles. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 29, 665-675.
Pennebaker, J.W., Mehl, M.R., & Niederhoffer, K.
(2003). Psychological aspects of natural language use:
Our words, our selves. Annual Review of Psychology,
54, 547-577.
Schober, M. F., & Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding by
addressees and overhearers. Cognitive Psychology, 21,
211-232.
Vrij, A. (2000). Detecting lies and deceit: The psychology
of lying and the implications for professional practice.
Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Vrij, A., Edward, K., Roberts, K.P, & Bull, R. (2000).
Detecting deceit via analysis of verbal and nonverbal
behavior. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 24, 239-263.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Yufen Chen and Judith Yellin
for their assistance in data collection, and to Joseph
Walther and Geri Gay for their comments on earlier drafts
of the manuscripts.

References
Burgoon, J.K., Bliar, J.P., Qin, T., Nunamaker, J.F.
(2003). Detecting deception through linguistic analysis.
Intelligence and Security Informatics, 2665, 91-101.
Burgoon, J.K., Bonito, J.A., Bjorn, B., Ramirez, A.,
Dunbar, N.E., Miczo, N. (2000). Testing the
interactivity model: Communication processes, partner
assessments, and the quality of collaborative work.
Journal of Management Information Systems, 16 (3),
33-56.
Burgoon, J. K., Buller, D. B., & Floyd, K. (2001). Does
participation affect deception success? A test of the
interactivity
principle.
Human
Communication
Research, 27, 503-534.
Burgoon, J.K., Buller, D.B., Floyd, K., & Grandpre, J.
(1996). Deceptive realities: Sender, receiver, and
observer perspectives in deceptive conversations.
Communication Research, 23), 724-748.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK:
540

