UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic diversity and the bilingual lexicon: The Belgian Story

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8f4262qb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Ameel, Eef
Storms, Gert
Malt, Barbara
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic diversity and the bilingual lexicon:
The Belgian Story
Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Gert Storms (gert.storms@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium

Barbara Malt (bcm0@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, 17 Memorial Drive East
Bethlehem, PA 18015 USA

Steven Sloman (Steven_Sloman@brown.edu)
Cognitive & Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, Box 1978
Providence, RI 02912 USA

languages find substantial differences in naming objects, but
only small differences in perceived similarity among the
objects. For example, Kronenfeld, Armstrong and Wilmoth
(1985) looked at the names given to various drinking
vessels and the similarity among them judged by American,
Japanese and Israeli participants. They found a dissociation
between naming and similarity. However, the sample of
objects used by Kronenfeld et al. (1985) was small and they
did not attempt to assess whether the observed differences in
naming paralleled the differences in perceived similarity.
Malt et al. (1999) carried out a larger-scale evaluation of
the relation of perceived similarity among objects to the
names they are given. They presented data from speakers of
three different language groups: American, Chinese and
Argentinean participants, speaking respectively English,
Chinese and Spanish. The participants performed two tasks:
they named 60 common containers (all mostly called
‘bottle’ or ‘jar’ in English) and they provided similarity
ratings, by sorting the objects into piles based on three types
of similarity: physical, functional or overall similarity.
Speakers of the three languages showed substantially
different patterns of naming for the set of containers, but
they saw the similarities among the objects in much the
same way. Malt et al. claim that the linguistic differences
arise from differences in language-specific conventions and
differences in language history.
The imperfect relation between naming patterns of a
language and non-linguistic knowledge of objects and
between the naming patterns of two different languages
raises questions about how bilingually-raised individuals
build and maintain their two lexicons. Do they maintain two
distinct and native-like naming patterns, each with its own
language-specific conventions or do the two competing

Abstract
Analogous to Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi and Wang (1999)
we examined the relation between linguistic categorization
and similarity of artifacts by Dutch-speaking and Frenchspeaking monolingual Belgians. We replicated the
dissociation between naming and sorting found by Malt et al.
(1999) for speakers of English, Chinese and Spanish. We also
investigated the relation between the two naming patterns of
bilingual Belgians, raised simultaneously in French and in
Dutch, and how these naming patterns can be linked to the
naming of the monolinguals. The results showed that the
French and Dutch naming pattern of the bilinguals didn’t
parallel the respective naming patterns of the monolinguals,
but rather merged into a common naming pattern.

Introduction
Research from several different traditions concerns the
coupling of similarity and naming. However, different
studies have resulted in contradicting conclusions. Some
studies found that categorization judgments paralleled
similarity judgments, for example the study of Smith and
Sloman (1994). Other studies have shown a clear
dissociation between similarity judgments and preferred
category labels for novel objects. Keil (1989) and Rips
(1989) presented participants with artifacts described as
physically resembling one type of object, but having been
made to be used as another type, or with animals looking
like one type of animal but said to have internal parts of a
different species. They both found that although objects
were rated as more similar to the former, they tended to be
categorized as the latter (see also Rips & Collins, 1993).
Also studies that look at well-established lexical categories
and make comparisons across speakers of different
49

Dutch and French, the objects are likely to be called
respectively ‘fles’ or ‘bus’ and ‘bouteille’ or ‘flacon’.1 For
the second set, the ‘dishes set’, objects had been selected to
be likely to be called ‘dish’, ‘plate’ or ‘bowl’ in American
English. In Dutch, the objects are mostly called ‘bord’,
‘schaal’ or ‘kom’, in French ‘assiette’, ‘plat’ or ‘bol’.2
The objects were all found at home, work, or in stores
frequented by the researchers. For both sets, we made an
effort to include objects that would represent a wide range
of respectively bottles, jars and other similar containers (Set
1) and of dishes, plates, bowls and other similar housewares
(Set 2). The wide range of objects allows a sensitive
comparison of the naming patterns of the Dutch-speaking
monolinguals, the French-speaking monolinguals and the
bilinguals.
All objects were photographed in color against a neutral
background with a constant camera distance to preserve
relative size. In front of each object a ruler was included to
provide additional size information. Because the labels on
the objects were mostly both in Dutch and in French, no
additional information about the nature of the content (e.g.
ketchup) was necessary.
Language history questionnaire. A questionnaire was
used to determine the language background of the bilingual
participants. Questions were asked about age and sex; where
the participant was raised; what language her mother and
father speaks; what language she speaks with her mother
and father and whether she systematically speaks the same
language (Dutch or French) with her mother and the same
other language (French or Dutch) with her father; what
language was used at primary and secondary school, during
leasure activities; which language she currently uses most
and estimated proficiency for both languages. Proficiency
estimates were obtained by asking the participants for each
language to encircle a number between 1 (‘not at all fluent:
you can barely speak the language’) and 7 (‘very fluent: you
can speak the language like a native speaker’).

patterns merge into a single pattern that may not be fully
native-like for either language. The latter might be due to
individual cognitive constraints on memory capacity. One
way to address this issue is to examine the two naming
patterns of bilinguals to see how they relate to one another
and to the naming patterns of corresponding monolinguals.
Belgium, a bilingual country where French- and Dutchspeaking monolinguals live alongside bilinguals, who are
brought up simultaneously in French and Dutch, live
together, provides us with a laboratory to investigate this
issue.
Two hypotheses are suggested concerning the naming
patterns of bilingual Belgians: First, the French and Dutch
naming patterns are kept separate and thus parallel the
naming patterns of respectively the French-speaking
monolinguals and the Dutch-speaking monolinguals.
Second, the two naming patterns merge into one naming
pattern and the bilinguals use just one single naming pattern
both for the French and the Dutch naming.

Method
Participants
Thirty-two native speakers of Dutch, all students or research
assistants at the Psychology Department of the Leuven
University, and 29 native speakers of French, students at the
Faculty of Law of the University of Liège, participated both
in a naming and a sorting task (to be described below). Five
participants of the Dutch-speaking group were retested for
the naming, to check for within subject reliability. The time
span between the test and the retest was approximately six
months. The bilingual subjects consisted of 25 people
whose father is Dutch-speaking and whose mother is
French-speaking (14 out of 25) or vice versa (11 out of 25)
and who have been raised in both languages. All of them
were students (except one research assistant) at the
university of Leuven, Brussels or Louvain-la-Neuve. The
bilingual subjects performed the naming task twice (once in
French and once in Dutch) and the sorting task once. They
also completed a language history questionnaire, used to
determine the participants’ language background. Five
bilinguals renamed the objects in French and five other
bilinguals renamed the objects in Dutch after a time span of
about six months.
The Dutch- and French-speaking monolingual subjects
received course credit or participated as unpaid volunteers.
The bilinguals were systematically paid for their
participation.

Procedure
Naming task. In the naming task, participants were asked to
name each object of two sets of pictures (the bottles and
dishes sets), after looking through all the pictures of the set
to be named to familiarize themselves with the variety of
objects in the set. The instructions were the same as in the
naming task of Malt et al. (1999): They were asked to give
whatever name seemed like the best or most natural name,
and they were told that they could give either a single-word
name or a name with more than one word. The instructions
emphasized that participants should name the object itself

Materials
Objects. There were 2 sets of stimuli, one consisting of 73
pictures of storage containers (as in Malt et al.’s study
(1999)), the other consisting of 67 pictures of housewares
for preparing food and serving food and drink. The objects
of the first set were selected to be likely to receive the name
‘bottle’ or ‘jar’ in American English, or else to share one or
more salient properties with bottles and jars. Translated into

1

It should be noted that we do not claim ‘jar’, ‘bus’ and ‘flacon’ to
be translation equivalents or to cover the same group of referents.
Referring to a dictionary, ‘bus’ is translated as ‘can’, ‘flacon’ as
‘bottle’. ‘Fles’ and ‘bouteille’ are however translated
unambiguously as ‘bottle’.
2
As for the bottles set, the corresponding names (‘dish’, ‘bord’ and
‘assiette’; ‘plate’, ‘schaal’ and ‘plat’; ‘bowl’, ‘kom’ and ‘bol’) ‘are
not assumed to be perfect translation equivalents.

50

and not what it contained. Each participant named first all
the objects of one set (bottles set or dishes set) and then all
the objects of the other set (dishes set or bottles set). The
order of the two sets was counterbalanced. The bilingual
participants named both sets in French and in Dutch. Hence,
besides the order of sets also the order of languages was
counterbalanced. Between the Dutch and the French version
of the naming task, the pictures were shuffled.
After participants completed the naming task (once for the
Dutch- and French-speaking participants, twice for the
bilinguals), the pictures were again shuffled. The second
task to be performed was the sorting task.
Sorting task. The large number of objects prevented us
from collecting direct pairwise similarity judgments. Instead
we asked the participants to sort the objects into piles. Based
on these sorting data, we can calculate a derived measure of
similarity for each pair of objects. Sorting was based on
overall similarity. First, participants were asked to look
through the pictures. The instructions for the sorting were as
follows: ‘I would like you to focus on the overall qualities
of each container. This means that you focus on any feature
of the container including what it looks like, what it’s made
of, how it contains the substance that is in it (in a stack, in
separate pieces, as a single solid, as a liquid, with pouring
capability, etc.3) or any other aspect of the container that
seems important or natural to you. I would like you to put
together into piles all the containers that you think are very
similar to each other OVERALL. Note that we are
interested in how similar the containers themselves are
overall, not what is in the containers. Only put two pictures
together if the containers are like each other in an overall
way. DO NOT put pictures together just because the
containers hold things that tend to be found together. For
instance, if several containers contain health products,
DON’T put them together unless you really think the
containers themselves are alike in an overall way.’
Further, the participants were instructed to use as many piles
as they wanted, but at least two different ones. They were
not allowed to make a pile of only one picture, unless they
really could not classify the object in one of the existing
piles. They could take as much time as they wanted to
complete the sort. In general, the sorting task took about 30
minutes.
Due to space restrictions, we will focus on the results of the
bottles set only. However, the results with the dishes set
were perfectly parallel to those of the bottles set.

head noun of the response was considered as the name given
to the object. Diminutive forms of names and additional
adjectives were disregarded. The first analysis is restricted
to the dominant category names for each object: i.e. the
most frequently produced name for each object.
Table 1 shows the Dutch and French dominant category
names for the bottles set together with the number of objects
out of 73 for which each name was dominant. To gain an
insight into the similarities and differences between the
Dutch and French categories, the French categories are
described in terms of their Dutch composition.
Table 1: Linguistic categories for the bottles set of the
Dutch- and French-speaking monolinguals.
French bottles
N
Dutch Composition
(monolinguals)
(monolinguals)
bouteille
16 13 flessen, 3 bussen
10 flessen, 3 bussen, 2
flacon
16
potten, 1 roller
pot
10 9 potten, 1 fles
3 dozen, 2 brikken, 1 blik, 1
boîte
7
pot
tube
6
4 tubes, 1 pot, 1 stick
spray
5
5 bussen, 1 spray
bidon
3
3 bussen
brique
2
1 bus, 1 doos
berlingo
2
2 brikken
biberon
1
1 fles
bombe
1
1 bus
canette
1
1 blik
pannier
1
1 mand
poivrier
1
1 molen
salière
1
1 vat
For Dutch-speaking monolinguals, there were three main
categories: ‘fles’, ‘bus’ and ‘pot’4. The three categories
together encompassed 74 per cent of the stimulus set. The
remaining names were given to only a few objects. The
French-speaking monolinguals used a total of 15 categories.
Three category names were dominant for at least 10 objects
out of 73: ‘bouteille’, ‘flacon’, ‘pot’5. The other names were
restricted to a smaller number of objects.
When we look at the Dutch composition of the French
categories, we find some resemblance in how the two
languages classify the objects into linguistic categories: the
largest part of the objects called ‘pot’ in Dutch (9/13) are
put into one single French category ‘pot’. All Dutch ‘tubes’
are put together into the French category of objects called
‘tube’. On the other hand, there are also prominent
differences between the naming patterns of both languages:
The objects called ‘fles’ (# 25) in Dutch are mainly split up

Results
Replication of Malt et al.’s study
Comparison of linguistic category boundaries. For each
name produced for each object, we first calculated its
frequency separately for each language group. Only the

4
‘Fles’ is translated as ‘bottle’, ‘bus’ as ‘can’ and ‘pot’ as ‘pot’ or
‘jar’.
5
‘Bouteille’ is translated as ‘bottle’, ‘flacon’ as well, ‘pot’ as ‘pot’
or ‘jar’.

3

This information is only provided for the sorting of the bottles,
since it is not applicable to the dishes.

51

in sorting. These results replicate the findings of Malt et al.
(1999) for speakers of three different languages.

into two different categories in French: ‘bouteille’ (# 13)
and ‘flacon’ (# 10). The Dutch category ‘bus’ is not
represented in a corresponding French category, but the
objects are spread over 6 different categories (‘bouteille’,
‘flacon’, ‘spray’, ‘bidon’, ‘brique’ and ‘bombe’).
By looking at the dominant names, a lot of information in
the data is lost. For the bottles set, only 5 objects were
called by the same name by every Dutch monolingual and
the same was true for the French monolinguals. Hence, it
would be more useful to include all the names used for each
object in the analysis. Therefore, in a second analysis, we
calculated for each object the name distribution which can
be described as the number of times each name was
allocated to each object. Our intention was to compare the
linguistic categories of the different language groups by
comparing the naming distributions across the language
groups. However, the naming distributions cannot be
compared directly across the language groups since different
language groups use different sets of names (Dutchmonolingual
versus Frenchmonolingual). As an alternative, for each language
group we compared the similarity of each object’s name
distribution to every other object’s name distribution by
using a Pearson correlation. The similarity in name
distribution between two objects was calculated as follows:
for each pair of objects within a language group, the
correlation was computed across all the names between the
name frequencies for both objects. For each language group,
this resulted in 2628 correlations (for 73*72/2 pairs of
objects). These correlations indicated the name distribution
similarity between each possible pairing of the objects. The
next step consists in correlating the 2628 name similarity
values for the Dutch-speaking monolinguals with the
corresponding 2628 name similarity values for the Frenchspeaking monolinguals. This correlation mirrors the extent
to which the two language groups correspond in the pairs of
objects that have similar name distributions. The correlation
between both monolingual language groups is 0.63: a
substantial correlation, but far from perfect. Both the
analysis of the dominant names and the correlation between
the name distribution similarities confirm that the Frenchand Dutch-speaking monolinguals named the objects
differently.
Comparison of the perceived similarity. The data from the
sorting task were used to obtain a measure of similarity for
each pair of objects. Pairwise similarity was recovered by
counting for each pair of objects how many participants of a
language group placed that pair of objects in the same pile.
For each of both language groups, these calculations gave us
2628 pairwise similarity judgments. The similarity
judgments of both groups were correlated. The resulting
correlation of 0.87 -comparable to the mean estimated
reliability of .92- indicates that the French- and Dutchspeaking monolinguals agree to a considerable extent on
their perception of similarities among the objects.
Conclusion. For the two monolingual language groups, we
found substantial differences in naming and no differences

Naming in bilinguals: Two hypotheses
How did the French and Dutch naming patterns of the
bilinguals interrelate and how are they linked to the naming
patterns of the respective monolingual language groups?
One possibility is that the naming of the bilinguals follows
that of the corresponding monolinguals, i.e. the French
bilingual naming pattern equals the naming pattern of the
French-speaking monolinguals and the Dutch bilingual
naming pattern equals that of the Dutch-speaking
monolinguals. Another alternative possibility is that the
bilinguals use just one naming pattern, or in other words,
that their naming patterns of their two languages converge
into a single naming pattern. To decide between these
hypotheses, we analyzed the data both on a group level and
on an individual level.
Group-level analysis. Correlations were calculated among
all the language groups (Dutchmonolingual, Dutchbilingual ,
Frenchmonolingual, Frenchbilingual) between measures of name
similarity (i.e. name distribution similarities). Figure 1
shows the pattern of correlations.

Dutch monolingual

0.63
0.69
0.72
0.78

0.86
0.92

French
monolingual

0.82
0.89
0.74
0.79

Dutch bilingual

French bilingual

0.88
0.95

Figure 1: Pattern of correlations between the name
distribution similarities of the language groups.6
When we compare the observed pattern of correlations
with the patterns of correlations predicted by the two
hypotheses (see Figure 2), we can conclude that the data are
inconsistent with the two-pattern-hypothesis, since the
correlation between the two naming patterns of the
bilinguals (0.88) was significantly larger than the correlation
between the naming patterns of both monolingual language
groups (0.63), Z = 21.82 > 1.96. The data favor the onepattern-hypothesis. Note however that some deviations from
a single common naming pattern were observed. For
example, it happens that a group of objects, with a single
6

The upper rXY’s are the Pearson correlations, the lower
rXY’s (in bold) are correlations corrected for unreliability of
rXY
the data ( r * =
with rXX the reliability of X and
XY
rXX * rYY
rYY the reliability of Y).
52

name in Dutch (‘fles’) is subdivided into more than one
category in French (e.g., ‘bouteille’ and ‘flacon’).7
2 separate naming patterns:
a<1

Dutch

monolingual

French

monolingual

a
1

1

Dutch

a

bilingual

a

1 common naming pattern:
Dutch

a<1

monolingual

French
a≤x≤1

a≤x≤1

French
bilingual

claims that the Dutch and French naming task of a (same)
bilingual correspond equally well as the naming of that
bilingual and the renaming (retesting) of the same bilingual
in the same language. We found that C1 was significant,
F(1,7866) = 299.94, p < .0001, and hence Hypothesis 1 is
rejected. C2 was not significant, which means that
Hypothesis 2 is retained.

monolingual

a≤x≤1
a≤x≤1

Dutch
bilingual

language

French

person

linguistic
statute

bilingual

mono
mono

1

Figure 2: Patterns of correlations between the name
distribution similarities of the language groups, predicted by
the first and second hypothesis, respectively.

PERSON
=

Individual-level analysis. On the individual level,
object*object-matrices for each individual task, containing
0’s and 1’s with 0 indicating equal naming of both objects
by the person performing the task and 1 indicating different
naming of both objects- were correlated with each other.
This resulted in 126*125/28 different correlations between
all possible pairs of individual tasks. Next, the correlations
were Z’-transformed to normalize the sampling distribution
of the correlations. Then, the Z’-transformations of the
correlations were analyzed in a randomized block factorial
ANOVA design, with three factors: language (two levels:
the subjects of the pair perform the naming task in the same
language or in a different language), person (two levels:
correlation between naming data of the same subject or of
different subjects) and linguistic statute (three levels: both
subjects are monolingual, one subject is monolingual, the
other bilingual and both subjects are bilingual), resulting in
a 2*2*3 design with unequal cell frequencies and three
(structurally) empty cells (see Figure 3).
The results of the ANOVA confirmed the conclusions that
were derived from the correlational group-level analysis.
The three main effects –language, person, linguistic statutewere all significant, respectively F(1,7866) = 23.29, p <
.0001, F(1,7866) = 42.61, p < .0001, F(2,7866) = 8.15, p <
.0005)
as
was
the
interaction
effect
language*person*linguistic statute, F(4,7866) = 25.05, p <
.0001. We tested the following crucial contrasts: µ221 versus
µ223 (C1) and µ113 versus µ213 (C2). If C1 is significant,
Hypothesis 1 is rejected, since according to the two-pattern
hypothesis, the mean correlation between the naming of a
French-speaking monolingual and the naming of a Dutchspeaking monolingual must be equal to the mean correlation
between the French naming of a bilingual and the Dutch
naming of a(-nother) bilingual. If C2 is significant,
Hypothesis 2 is rejected, because the one-pattern hypothesis

LANGUAGE
=

PERSON
≠

111

mono
bilingual
bilingual
bilingual

113

mono
mono

121

mono
bilingual

122

bilingual
bilingual

123

C2

mono
mono
PERSON
=

LANGUAGE
≠

PERSON
≠

mono
bilingual
bilingual
bilingual

213

mono
mono

221

mono
bilingual

222

bilingual
bilingual

223

C1

Figure 3: 2*2*3-factorial design with unequal cell
frequencies and three empty cells.

General Discussion
The dissociation between naming and sorting, found by
Malt et al. (1999) for three different language groups was
replicated for the French-speaking and Dutch-speaking
monolinguals: The analyses of the dominant names and of
similarities among naming distributions revealed substantial
differences in French-speaking and Dutch-speaking
monolingual linguistic categories for the bottles set, while in
contrast, no differences were found in their perceptions of
the similarity among the objects, as revealed by the high
correlation between the sorting data of both monolingual
language groups. Hence, similarity cannot fully account for
the observed naming patterns. Other factors must contribute
to linguistic categorization. Malt et al. (1999) proposed that
besides the contribution of similarity to naming choices,

7

Remark that this kind of subdivisions occurs much more
frequently between the monolingual naming patterns than between
the bilingual naming patterns.
8
126 individual tasks: = 32 Dutch-speaking monolinguals + 5
retested Dutch-speaking monolinguals + 29 French-speaking
monolinguals + 25 bilinguals (Dutch naming) + 5 retested
bilinguals (Dutch) + 25 bilinguals (French naming) + 5 retested
bilinguals (French).

53

mechanisms such as chaining, convention and pre-emption
influence naming patterns.
Concerning the bilingual naming patterns, the data (at
group and individual levels) reject the two-pattern
hypothesis. So, we can conclude that the French and Dutch
naming patterns of the bilinguals are not kept separate and
hence don’t parallel the naming patterns of the French and
Dutch monolinguals, respectively. The data are more
consistent with the one-pattern hypothesis, suggesting that
the two naming patterns of the bilinguals merge into one.
However, the data also show that the assumption of a
perfect match between the naming patterns is too strong and
that is should be attenuated, since bilinguals did not use the
French and Dutch category names as perfect translation
equivalents. Apparently, even if the two naming patterns of
bilinguals deviate from the corresponding monolingual
naming patterns, naming in each of both languages is still
influenced by culture- and language-specific factors:
bilinguals name the objects in a way that is consistent with
the language in which they name the object. This is not so
surprising, since language and culture can’t be considered
separately. On the other hand, the convergence of the two
naming patterns on one naming pattern suggests that
bilinguals do not only satisfy cultural and linguistic
constraints, but also individual cognitive constraints: it is
less demanding on the limited sources of memory to store
only one set of mappings between objects and names. So, in
a way, bilinguals do find a set of mappings between words
and objects that meet linguistic, cultural and individual
memory constraints.

References
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kronenfeld, D. B., Armstrong, J. D., & Wilmoth, S. (1985).
Exploring the internal structure of linguistic categories:
An extensionist semantic view. In J. W. D. Dougherty
(Ed.). Directions in cognitive anthropology (pp. 91-113).
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic Categorization of Artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Rips, L. J. (1989). Similarity, typicality, and categorization.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.). Similarity and
analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Rips, L. J., & Collins, A. (1993). Categories and
resemblance. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 122, 468-496.
Smith, E. E., & Sloman, S. A. (1994). Similarity- versus
Rule-based categorization. Memory and Cognition, 22,
377-386.

54

