UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linking Rhetoric and Methodology in Formal Scientific Writing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4r78b33x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Argamon, Shlomo
Dodick, Jeff

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linking Rhetoric and Methodology in Formal Scientific Writing
Shlomo Argamon (argamon@iit.edu)
Illinois Institute of Technology
Dept. of Computer Science, 10 W 31st Street
Chicago, IL 60616, USA

Jeff Dodick (jdodick@vms.huji.ac.il)
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Department of Science Teaching, Givat Ram
Jerusalem 91904, ISRAEL

Abstract

causes to possible effects characteristic of experimental
science (Gould 1986; Diamond 1999).
In this paper, we take some first steps towards analyzing the linguistic features of scientific writing in
experimental and historical science, using several types of
linguistically-motivated document features together with
machine learning methods. Our goal is to examine if linguistic features that are indicative of different classes of
scientific articles may be usefully correlated with the rhetorical and methodological needs of historical and
experimental sciences. This paper describes a corpusbased study of genre variation between articles in a historical science (paleontology) and an experimental
science (physical chemistry), with methodological differences as mentioned above.
We hypothesize that
corresponding rhetorical differences between articles in
the respective fields will also be found. Standard methods of computational stylistics were used, confirming this
hypothesis. Further, we defined a set of linguisticallymotivated features for use in genre classification, based
on systemic functional principles. These features enable a
more nuanced examination of the rhetorical differences,
allowing us to correlate these linguistic differences with
the methodological differences posited by philosophers of
science.
We note that the work reported here is only a first step,
and more extensive studies of larger and more varied corpora of scientific papers will need to be undertaken in
order to more firmly determine the links between scientific rhetoric, methodology, and cognition.

Studying the communication patterns of scientists can give
us insight into how science actually works. We argue that
methodological differences between different scientific
fields should lead to recognizable differences in how scientists in these fields use language to communicate with
one another. This paper reports on a corpus-based study
of peer-reviewed journal articles in paleontology and
physical chemistry which used techniques of computational stylistics to compare the rhetorical styles used in the
two fields. We found that indeed the two fields are readily
distinguishable based on the stylistic character of their articles. As well, the most significant linguistic features of
these distinctive styles can be connected directly to differences posited by philosophers of science between
‘historical’ (such as paleontology) and ‘experimental’
(such as physical chemistry) sciences.

Introduction

It has become clear in recent years that communication
among different scientists working in a laboratory is critical for scientific success (Dunbar 1995). The particular
uses of language by scientists serve to create a “collaborative space”, whose worldview makes possible
communication about complex observations and hypotheses (Goodwin 1994). Linguistic analysis has also been
shown to elucidate features of scientific problem solving,
as in Ochs et al.’s (1994) study of physicists’ metaphoric
talk of travel in a variety of graphical spaces.
At the same time, philosophers of science are increasingly recognizing that the classical model of a single
“Scientific Method” (usually based on that of experimental sciences such as physics) does a disservice to sciences
such as geology and paleontology, which are no less scientific by virtue of being historically oriented. Instead, it
is claimed, differences in method may stem directly from
the types of phenomena under study (Cleland, 2002).
Experimental science (such as physics) attempts to formulate general predictive laws, and so relies heavily on
repeatable series of controlled experiments which test
hypotheses (Latour & Woolgar 1986). Historical science,
on the other hand, deals with contingent phenomena,
studying specific phenomena in the past in an attempt to
find unifying explanations for effects caused by those
phenomena (Mayr 1976). Because of this, reasoning in
historical sciences consists largely of reconstructive reasoning, as compared to the predictive reasoning from

Hypotheses
Based on prior work in the philosophy and history of science we thus formulate our main hypothesis:
H1: Stylistic features will distinguish more strongly
between articles from different kinds (historical or
experimental) of science than between articles from
different journals in the same kind of science.
We also formulate more detailed hypotheses regarding
what sorts of rhetorical features we expect to be most
significant in distinguishing articles in the different fields,
based on posited methodological differences between
historical and experimental sciences, as follows. First, a
key element of historical reasoning is the need to differentially weight the evidence. Since any given trace of a

61

past event is typically ambiguous as to its possible causes,
many pieces of evidence must be combined in complex
ways in order to form a confirming or disconfirming argument for a hypothesis (termed synthetic thinking by
Baker (1996)). Such thinking is, as Cleland (2002) argues, a necessary commitment of historical science (as
opposed to experimental science), due to the fundamental
asymmetry of causation. A single cause will often have a
great many disparate effects, which if taken together
would specify the cause with virtual certainty. Since all
the effects cannot actually be known (as some are lost in
the historical/geological record), evidence must be carefully weighed to decide between competing hypotheses
(the methodology sometimes known as “multiple working
hypotheses”). Experimental sciences tend, on the other
hand, to adhere more or less to a “predict and test” methodology, in which manipulative experiments are used to
confirm or disconfirm specific hypotheses (Cleland
2002). We therefore hypothesize:
H2a: Writing in historical science has more features
expressing the weight, validity, likelihood, or typicality of different assertions or pieces of evidence
H2b: Writing in experimental science has more features typical of explicit reasoning about predictions
and expectations.
Note that the presence or absence of linguistic features
that can be linked to reasoning of a particular type is
not by itself evidence of such reasoning. However, a
consistent pattern of many of these features (as shown
below) together aligned with the dichotomy proposed
in H2 strongly argues for such differences, which future
research will attempt to elucidate in greater detail.

Study 1: Distinctiveness
Methodology
We first test hypothesis H1 by testing on our corpus
whether paleontological and physical chemistry articles
are stylistically distinctive from each other. The method
was to represent each document as a numerical vector,
each of whose elements is the frequency of a particular
lexical feature of the text. We then applied the SMO
learning algorithm (Platt 1998) as implemented in the
Weka system (Witten & Frank 1999), using a linear kernel, no feature normalization, and the default parameters.
(Other options did not appear to improve classification
accuracy, so we used the simplest option.) SMO is a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm; SVMs have been
previously applied successfully to text categorization
problems (Joachims 1998). Generalization accuracy was
measured using 20-fold cross-validation1.
Features
For this first study, we used a set of 546 functions words
taken en masse from the stop-word list of the popular
research information retrieval system AIRE (Grossman &
Frieder 1998); this procedure ensured task and theory
neutrality. The set of function words used are similar to
those used in many previous studies, such as Mosteller
and Wallace’s (1964) seminal stylometric work2. Each
document was thus represented as a vector of 546 numbers between 0 and 1, each the relative frequency of one
of the function words.
Results and Discussion
Table 2 shows results for binary classification between
each pair of journals in our corpus, giving the percentage
of test articles erroneously classified (in 20-fold crossvalidation) using linear SMO learning and function-word
frequencies as features. We first note that average accuracy on test documents from different fields (historical vs.
experimental) was at least 97%, indicating excellent discriminability (far above chance). At the same time, the
two physical chemistry journals are quite indistinguishable, as 34% is slightly greater than the error of always
choosing the majority class (since 69/238=29% of those

The Corpus
The study reported here was performed using a corpus of
recent (2003) articles drawn arbitrarily from four peerreviewed journals in two fields: Palaios and Quaternary
Research in paleontology, and Journal of Physical Chemistry A and Journal of Physical Chemistry B in physical
chemistry (chosen in part for ease of electronic access).
Palaios is a general paleontological journal, covering all
areas of the field, whereas Quaternary Research focuses
on work dealing with the quaternary period (from roughly
1.6 million years ago to the present). The two physical
chemistry journals are published in tandem but have separate editorial boards and cover different subfields of
physical chemistry, specifically: studies on molecules (J.
Phys Chem A) and studies of materials, surfaces, and interfaces (J. Phys Chem B). The numbers of articles used
from each journal and their average (preprocessed)
lengths in words are given in Table 1.

In k-fold cross-validation (Mitchell 1997) the data is divided
into k subsets of equal size. Training is performed k times, each
time leaving out one of the subsets, and then using the omitted
subset for testing, to estimate the classification error rate; the
average error rate over all k runs is reported. This gives quite a
stable estimate of the expected error rate of the learning method
for the given training size (Goutte 1997).
2

Relative frequencies of function words, such as prepositions,
determiners, and auxiliary verbs, have been shown in a number
of studies to be useful for stylistic discrimination, since they act
as easily extracted proxies for the frequencies of different syntactic constructs, and also tend not to covary strongly with
document topic.

Table 1. Journals used in the studies with number of articles
and average words per article.
Journal
# Art.
Avg. Words
Palaios
116
4584
Quaternary Res.
106
3136
J. Phys. Chem. A
169
2734
J. Phys. Chem. B
69
3301

62

By viewing language as a complex of choices between
mutually exclusive options, the systemic approach is particularly appropriate to examining variation in language
use. A systemic specification allows us to ask the following type of question: In places where a meaning of
general type A is to be expressed in a text (e.g., “a message about action”), what sorts of more specific meanings
(e.g., “standalone action” or “action on a thing”) are most
likely to be expressed by different types of people or in
different contexts? A general preference for one or another option, when not dictated by specific content, is
indicative of individual or social/contextual factors. Such
preferences can be measured by evaluating the relative
probabilities of different options by tagging their realizations in a corpus of texts (Halliday 1991).
As features, then, in the absence of a reliable systemic
parser, we use keywords and phrases as proxy indicators
for various systems. For example, an occurrence of the
word “certainly” usually indicates that the author is making a high-probability modal assessment of an assertion.
The drawback of this approach is lexical ambiguity, since
the meaning of such keywords can depend on context.
We reduce the effect of ambiguity, however, by using as
complete a set of such systemic indicator keywords/phrases as possible for each system we represent,
and also by using only measures of comparative frequency between the aggregated features. In addition,
since we use very large sets of indicators for each system,
it is unlikely that such ambiguity would introduce a systematic bias, and so such noise is more likely to just
reduce the significance of our results instead of biasing
them. Preprocessed articles in our corpus were each converted into a vector of 101 feature values (relative
frequencies of system options) and the same learning protocol (using SMO) was used as in Study 1.

Table 2. Error rates for linear SMO using function word features for pairs of journals using 20-fold cross-validation.
Historical
Experimental
P
QR
PCA
PCB
-10% 0.4%
Palaios
1%
10%
-Quat Res
2%
3%
-34%
Ph Ch A
0.4%
2%
34%
-Ph Ch B
1%
3%

articles are from Phys. Chem. B). In the case of Palaios
vs. Quat. Res. we get an average error rate of 10%, an
order of magnitude higher than any error rate in the crossdisciplinary case. Hence these results support H1, in that
articles across disciplines are more easily distinguished
than articles within a single discipline (from different
journals). Of course, the 10% error rate obtained for distinguishing the two paleontology journals is far less than
the 48% we would get by majority class classification,
which points to a subsidiary distinction between these two
journals. This is not unreasonable, given that Quat. Res.
deals with a specific subset of the topics in Palaios3. We
leave this question, however, for future research.
Study 2: Systemic Variation
Methodology
In order to more precisely analyze the rhetorical differences between articles in the two fields a follow-up study
used as features the relative frequencies of sets of keywords and phrases derived from consideration of notions
of systemic functional linguistics (Halliday 1994).
Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) construes language as a set of interlocking choices for expressing
meanings: “either this, that, or the other”, with more general choices constraining the possible specific choices.
For example: “A message is either about doing, thinking,
or being; if about doing, it is either standalone action or
action on something; if action on something it is either
creating something or affecting something pre-existent,”
and so on. A system is a set of options for meanings to be
expressed, with entry conditions denoting when that
choice is possible – for example, if a message is not about
doing, then there is no choice possible between expressing standalone action or action on something. Each
option has also a realization specification, giving constraints (lexical, featural, or structural) on statements
expressing the option. Options serve as entry conditions
for more specific subsystems.

Features
The systemic features we used are based on options
within three main systems, following Matthiessen’s
(1995) grammar of English, a standard SFL reference.
Indicator lists were constructed by starting with the lists
of typical words and phrases given by Matthiessen, and
expanding them to related words and phrases taken from
Roget’s Interactive Thesaurus4 (manually filtered for
relevance). Keyword lists were constructed entirely independently of the target corpus. We used systems and
subsystems within: CONJUNCTION, linking clauses together (either within or across sentences); MODALITY,
giving judgments regarding probability, usuality, inclination, and the like; and COMMENT, expressing modal
assessments of attitude or applicability. MODALITY and
COMMENT relate directly to how propositions are assessed in evidential reasoning (e.g., for likelihood,
typicality, consistency with predictions, etc.), while
CONJUNCTION is a primary system by which texts are
constructed out of smaller pieces, and so may be expected

3

This may be related to the fact that Quat. Res. contains more
articles than Palaios using chemical and radiochemical assaying,
since such techniques are only applicable to younger remains
from the Quaternary Period; such tools in fact are similar to the
experimental techniques seen in physical chemistry. Indeed this
is corroborated by the fact that the error rate between Quat Res
and the PC journals was higher than Palaios and the same PC
journals. More detailed study of the specific articles will be
needed to test and refine this hypothesis.

4

63

http://www.thesaurus.com

Table 3. Average error rates for linear SMO using systemic
features for pairs of journals using 20-fold cross-validation.

Palaios
Quat Res
Ph Ch A
Ph Ch B

Historical
P
QR
-26%
26%
-9%
17%
9%
14%

First, in COMMENT, we see a preference for Validative
comments by paleontologists and one for Predictive
comments by physical chemists. This linguistic opposition directly supports both hypotheses H2a and H2b,
related to methodological differences between historical
and experimental sciences. As noted, the historicallyoriented paleontologist has a rhetorical need to explicitly
delineate the scope of validity of different assertions, as
part of synthetic thinking (Baker 1996) about complex
and ambiguous webs of past causation (Cleland 2002).
This is not a primary concern, however, of the experimentally-oriented physical chemist; her main focus is
prediction: the predictive strength of a theory and its predictive consistency with the evidence.
Next, we consider the (complicated) system of
MODALITY. At the coarse level represented by the simple features, we see a primary opposition in Type. The
preference of the (experimental) physical chemist for
Modulation (assessing what ‘ought’ or ‘is able’ to happen) is consistent with a focus on prediction and
manipulation of nature, and supportive of hypothesis
H2b. The (historical) paleontologist’s preference for Modalization (assessing ‘likelihood’ or ‘usuality’) is
consistent with the outlook of a “neutral observer” who
cannot directly manipulate or replicate outcomes, and is
thus supportive of hypothesis H2a.
This same pattern is also seen within the complex
paired features combining values for modality Type and
Manifestation. Implicit variants are more likely to be
used for options that are well-integrated into the expected
rhetoric, while Explicit realizations are more likely to be
used for less characteristic types of modal assessment, as
more attention is drawn to them in the text. Keeping this
in mind, note that Modalization is preferably Implicit in
paleontology but Explicit in physical chemistry; just the
reverse holds for Modulation. This shows that Modalization is integrated smoothly into the overall environment
of paleontological rhetoric, and similarly Modulation is a
part of the rhetorical environment of physical chemistry.
Finally, in the textual system of CONJUNCTION, we
see a clear opposition between Extension, indicating paleontology, and Enhancement, indicating physical
chemistry. This implies that paleontological text has a
higher density of discrete informational items, linked together by extensive conjunctions, whereas in physical
chemistry, while there may be fewer information items,
each is more likely to have its meaning deepened or qualified by related clauses. This may be indicative that
paleontological articles are more likely to be primarily
descriptive in nature, requiring a higher information density, while physical chemists focus their attention more
deeply on a single phenomenon at a time. At the same
time, this linguistic opposition may also reflect differing
principles of rhetorical organization: perhaps physical
chemists prefer a single coherent ‘story line’ focused on
enhancements of a small number of focal propositions,
whereas paleontologists may prefer a multifocal ‘landscape’ of connected propositions. Future work will

Experimental
PCA
PCB
9%
9%
17%
14%
-32%
32%
--

Table 4. Strong features (see text) for Paleontology or
Physical Chemistry, using SMO.

System
CONJUNCTION
COMMENT
MODALITY/Type
Modalization:
Manifestation
Modulation:
Manifestation

Hist.

Exper.

Extension
Validative
Modalization
Implicit

Enhancement
Predictive
Modulation
Explicit

Explicit

Implicit

to reflect possible differences in overall rhetorical structure5. These systems and the indicators we used are
described more fully in the Appendix.
Results and Discussion
We first check inter-class discriminability (H1), testing
the results of Study 1 above. Table 3 presents classification error rates averaged over 20-fold cross-validation. In
all four cross-disciplinary cases, error rates are 17% or
less, while in the two intra-disciplinary cases, accuracy is
noticeably lower; Palaios and Quat. Res. are significantly less distinguishable at 26% error, while J. Phys.
Chem. A and J. Phys. Chem. B are entirely undistinguishable6. This further supports hypothesis H1, as above.
Moreover, consistency with Study 1 results helps to validate the approach taken in this study.
We now consider what consistent picture, if any,
emerges of the rhetorical difference between the two
classes of scientific articles (paleontology and physical
chemistry) from the patterns of feature weights in the
learned models. To do this, we ran SMO on the entire
corpus (without reserving test data) for each of the four
pairs of a paleontology with a physical chemistry journal,
and ranked the features according to their weight for one
or the other journal in the weight vector. We call a feature strong, if it was among the 30 with the highest
absolute weights out of 101 features for the same class in
models learned for all journal pairs. Among strong features, some striking patterns emerge, shown in Table 4.
5

Other textual/cohesive systems, such as PROJECTION, TAXIS, THEME,
and INFORMATION cannot be easily addressed, if at all, using a keyword-based approach.
6
Error rates are higher for this feature set than for the function words
due to the smaller number of features—clearly there are some stylistic
differences that our systemic features do not capture.

64

include interviews and surveys of the two types of scientists to investigate these hypotheses.

features such as the subjectivity collocations of Wiebe et
al. (2001) may also be helpful. Further, the current study
treats each article as an indivisible whole. However, as
noted by Lewin et al. (2001) in their analysis of social
science texts, the rhetorical organization of an article varies in different sections of the text—future work will
include studying rhetorical variation across different sections of individual texts, by incorporating techniques such
as those of Teufel and Moens (1998).

Related Work
Previous work has investigated the relationship between
choice probabilities and contextual factors. For example,
Plum & Cowling (1987) demonstrate a relation between
speaker social class and choice of verb tense
(past/present) in face-to-face interviews.
Similarly,
Hasan (1998) has shown, in mother-child interactions,
that the sex of the child and the family’s social class together have a strong influence on several kinds of
semantic choice in speech. These previous studies involved hand-coding a corpus for systemic-functional and
contextual variables and then comparing how systemic
choice probabilities vary with contextual factors via multivariate analysis. By contrast, this study uses large
numbers of neutral features and machine learning to
automatically build accurate classification models.
Further, by examining differences between systemic
preferences across scientific genres, we are quantitatively
analyzing differences in register. Register denotes functional distinctions in language use related to the context
of language use (Eggins & Martin 1997), and may be
considered to comprise: mode, the communication channel of the discourse; tenor, the effect of the social relation
between the producer and the audience; and field, the
domain of discourse. We focus in this paper on the fieldrelated distinction between historical and experimental
science, with mode and tenor held relatively constant, by
using articles written by working scientists drawn from
peer-reviewed journals. Our results indicate that the difference in the types of reasoning needed by historical and
experimental sciences leads to correlated differences in
rhetorical preferences (perhaps best understood as ‘functional tenor’ (Gregory 1967)).

References

Baker, V.R. (1996). The pragmatic routes of American Quaternary geology and geomorphology. Geomorphology 16, pp.
197-215.
Cleland, C.E. (2002). Methodological and epistemic differences between historical science and experimental science.
Philosophy of Science.
Diamond, J. (1999). Guns, Germs, & Steel. (New York: W. W.
Norton and Company).
Dodick, J. T., & N. Orion. (2003). Geology as an Historical
Science: Its Perception within Science and the Education System. Science and Education, 12(2).
Dunbar, K. (1995). How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In R.J. Sternberg, & J.
Davidson (Eds.). Mechanisms of Insight. (Cambridge MA:
MIT Press). pp. 365-395.
Eggins, S. & J. R. Martin, (1997). Genres and registers of discourse. In T. A. van Dijk, Discourse as structure and process.
A multidisciplinary introduction. Discourse studies 1 (London:
Sage), pp. 230–256.
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional Vision. American Anthropologist, 96(3), pp. 606-633.
Gould, S. J. (1986). Evolution and the Triumph of Homology,
or, Why History Matters, American Scientist (Jan.-Feb. 1986):
pp. 60-69.
Goutte, C. (1997) Note on free lunches and cross-validation,
Neural Computation, 9(6):1246-9.
Gregory M., (1967). Aspects of varieties differentiation, Journal of Linguistics 3, pp. 177-198.
Grossman, D. and O. Frieder (1998). Information Retrieval:
Algorithms and Heuristics , Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1991). Corpus linguistics and probabilistic
grammar. In Karin Aijmer & Bengt Altenberg (ed.), English
Corpus Linguistics: Studies in honour of Jan Svartvik. (London: Longman), pp. 30-44.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994). An Introduction to Functional Grammar. (London: Edward Arnold).
Hasan, R. (1988). Language in the process of socialisation:
Home and school. In J. Oldenburg, Th. v Leeuwen, & L. Gerot
(ed.), Language and socialisation: Home and school. North
Ryde, N.S.W.: Macquarie University.
Joachims, T. (1998). Text categorization with Support Vector
Machines: Learning with many relevant features. In Machine
Learning: ECML-98, Tenth European Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 137-142.
Latour, B. & S. Woolgar, (1986). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts (Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press).
Lewin, B.A., J. Fine, & L. Young (2001). Expository Discourse: A Genre-Based Approach to Social Science Research
Texts (Continuum).
Marcu, D. (2000). The Rhetorical Parsing of Unrestricted Texts:
A Surface-Based Approach. Comp. Ling., 26(3), pp. 395-448.

Conclusions
We have shown how machine learning techniques together with linguistically-motivated features can be used
to provide empirical evidence for rhetorical differences
between writing in different scientific fields. Further, by
analyzing the models output by the learning procedure,
we can see what features realize the differences in register
that are correlated with different fields. This provides
indirect evidence for methodological variation between
the sciences, insofar as rhetorical preferences can be identified which are linked with particular modes of
reasoning. This study thus provides empirical evidence
for those philosophers of science who argue against a
monolithic “scientific method”.
Future work will include validating these results
against a larger corpus of articles including more scientific fields, as well as incorporating more involved
linguistic processing—the rhetorical parsing methods
developed by Marcu (2000) are an important step in this
direction. Methods for discovering rhetorically important

65

Martin, J. R. (1992). English Text: System and Structure. (Amsterdam: Benjamins).
Matthiessen, C. (1995). Lexicogrammatical Cartography: English Systems. (Tokyo, Taipei & Dallas: International Language
Sciences Publishers).
Mayr, E. (1976). Evolution and the Diversity of Life. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
Mitchell, T. (1997) Machine Learning. (McGraw Hill).
Mosteller, F. and Wallace, D. L. (1964). Inference and Disputed
Authorship: The Federalist Papers, (Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley).
Ochs, E., S. Jacoby, & P. Gonzales, (1994). Interpretive journeys: How physicists talk and travel through graphic space,
Configurations 1:151-171.
Platt, J. (1998), Sequential Minimal Optimization: A Fast Algorithm for Training Support Vector Machines, Microsoft
Research Technical Report MSR-TR-98-14.
Plum, G. A. & A. Cowling. (1987). Social constraints on grammatical variables: Tense choice in English. In Ross Steele &
Terry Threadgold (ed.), Language topics. Essays in honour of
Michael Halliday. (Amsterdam: Benjamins).
Teufel, S., and Moens, M. (1998). Sentence extraction and rhetorical classification for flexible abstracts. In Proc. AAAI
Spring Symposium on Intelligent Text Summarization.
Wiebe, J., T. Wilson and M. Bell. (2001). Identifying Collocations for Recognizing Opinions. In Proc. ACL/EACL ’01
Workshop on Collocation, Toulouse, France, July 200.
Witten, I.H. and Frank E. (1999). Weka 3: Machine Learning
Software in Java: http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/~ml/weka.

COMMENT

The system of Comment is one of modal assessment, comprising a variety of types of “comment” on a message, assessing the
writer’s attitude towards it, or its validity or evidentiality.
Comments are generally realized as adjuncts in a clause (and
may appear initially, medially, or finally). Matthiessen (1995),
following Halliday (1994), lists eight types of Comment, which
we give here along with representative indicators for each such
subsystem.
Admissive: Message is assessed as an admission
Assertive: Emphasizing the reliability of the message
Presumptive: Dependence on other assumptions
Desiderative: Desirability of some content
Tentative: Assessing the message as tentative
Validative: Assessing scope of validity
Evaluative: Judgment of actors behind the content
Predictive: Coherence with predictions

MODALITY

The features for interpersonal modal assessment that we consider here are based on Halliday’s (1994) analysis of the
Modality system, as formulated by Matthiessen (1995). In this
scheme, modal assessment is realized by a simultaneous choice
of options within four systems7:
Type: What kind of modality?
Modalization: How ‘typical’ is it?
Probability: How likely is it?
Usuality: How frequent/common is it?
Modulation: Will someone do it?
Readiness: How ready are they (am I)?
Obligation: Must I (they)?
Value: What degree of the relevant modality scale?
Median: In the middle of the normal range.
High: More than normal
Low: Less than normal
Orientation: Is the modality expressed as an Objective attribute of the clause or as Subjective to the writer?
Manifestation: Is the assessment Implicitly realized by an adjunct or finite verb, or Explicitly by a projective clause?
The cross-product of these subsystems gives many modality
assessment types, each realized through a subset of indicators.
Simple features are each option in each system above (e.g., Modalization/Probability opposed to
Modalization/Usuality),
while complex features are pairwise combinations of such simple features. The indicator set for each such feature is the
intersection of the indicator sets for the two component features.
Frequencies were normalized by the total set of occurrences of
both primary systems (Modalization and Value in the previous
example).

Appendix: Systems and Features
CONJUNCTION

On the discourse level, the system of Conjunction serves to link
a clause with its textual context, by denoting how the given
clause expands on some aspect of its preceding context. Similar
systems also operate at the lower levels of noun and verbal
groups, while denoting similar logico-semantic relationships,
e.g., “and” usually denotes “additive extension”. Options
within Conjunction are as follows:
Elaboration: Deepening the content of the context
Appositive: Restatement or exemplification
Clarifying: Correcting, summarizing, or refocusing
Extension: Adding new related information
Additive: Adding new content to the context
Adversative: Contrasting new information with old
Verifying: Adjusting content by new information
Enhancement: Qualifying the context
Matter: What are we talking about
Spatiotemporal: Relating context to space/time
Simple: Direct spatiotemporal sequencing
Complex: More complex relations
Manner: How did something occur
Causal/Conditional:
Causal: Relations of cause and effect
Conditional: Logical conditional relations
Note that the actual features by which we represent an article are
the frequencies of each subsystem’s indicator features, each
measured relative to its siblings. So, for example, one feature is
Elaboration/Appositive, whose value is the total number of occurrences of Appositive indicators divided by the total number
of occurrences of Elaboration indicators (Appositive + Clarifying). The relative frequencies of Elaboration, Extension, and
Enhancement within Conjunction are also used as features.

7

Note that we did not consider the system of POLARITY, since it cannot
be properly addressed without more sophisticated parsing.

66

