UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making Graphical Inferences: A Hierarchical Framework

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64f5v7xk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Ratwani, Raj M.
Trafton, J. Gregory

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making Graphical Inferences: A Hierarchical Framework
Raj M. Ratwani (rratwani@gmu.edu)

J. Gregory Trafton (trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)

George Mason University

Naval Research Laboratory

Abstract
A hierarchical framework suggesting how graph readers go
beyond explicitly represented data to make inferences is
presented. According to our hierarchical framework, graph
readers use read-offs, integration and pattern extrapolation to
make inferences. Verbal protocol data demonstrates highlevel differences in the way inferences are made and eye track
data examines these processes at the perceptual level.

Introduction
Imagine a scientist examining Figure 1 in order to infer
which county in California is going to be hit next by the flu
epidemic. How would the scientist go about making this
prediction?

Figure 1. Cases of the flu in California.
Making inferences from graphs is considered one of the
more complex skills graph readers should possess.
According to the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics (NCTM) the simplest type of question
involves the extraction or comparison of a few explicitly
represented data points (read-offs) (NCTM: Standards for
Mathematics, 2003). A more difficult question is an
integration question where multiple data points need to be
extracted and integrated by some mental operation. The
most difficult type of question requires the graph reader to
make inferences from the graph. Because the information is
not explicitly represented in the data, the graph reader is
forced to extrapolate from the current data to make a
prediction (Trickett, Ratwani, & Trafton, under review).
How do graph readers go beyond the explicitly
represented data to make inferences from graphs? Less is
known about how inferences are made from graphical
representations, despite the importance of having this skill.
Most of the classical theories of graph comprehension
(Kosslyn, 1989; Lohse, 1993; Pinker, 1990) do not go into
detail about how integration and inferences are made, but
instead focus on read-offs from fairly simple graph types.
One of the reasons that current theories of graph

comprehension do not have much to say about making
inferences from graphs is the paucity of data. There are, in
fact, very few empirical papers that have systematically
investigated how graph readers make inferences from
graphs.
We propose a hierarchical framework of graph
comprehension for how these different types of questions
(read-off, integration, inference) are answered. The most
basic type of information extraction is the read-off of
explicitly represented data. The more difficult integration of
information requires the use of read-off’s and spatial
transformations (Trafton, Marshall, Mintz, & Trickett, 2002;
Trickett & Trafton, in press). For example, in order to
integrate information in choropleth graphs (see figures 1 and
2), graph readers read-off specific data points and use
spatial transformations by forming clusters of proximate
same colored counties and then reason with and compare
those clusters (Ratwani, Trafton, & Boehm-Davis, 2003).
Finally, in order to make inferences from graphs, we believe
graph readers use the same processes used to integrate
information (read-off’s and spatial transformations) and in
addition use pattern extrapolation and mental models
(Trafton et al., 2002).
Going beyond the limits of the current data in order to
make an inference requires the use of extrapolation (Bott &
Heit, 2004); when graph reader’s go beyond the limits of
visible data, pattern extrapolation may be used. Pattern
extrapolation is a process by which graph readers examine
known data points and then, based on the pattern of these
data points, make an inference.
While the hierarchical framework suggests what cognitive
processes graph readers will use when extracting different
types of information from graphs, graph readers are likely to
use the simplest process to extract the information they
desire. For example, when integrating information, if
possible, graph readers will use mostly read-offs because
read-offs are a simple way of extracting information from
graphs and require very little cognitive effort in comparison
to spatial transformations or mental model building.
Similarly, if a graph reader needs to integrate information
from a graph, they are not likely to need to build mental
models and extrapolate patterns.
In this paper, we examine which processes are used to
make inferences from graphs. We focus on inferences
because read-offs are quite well understood (Kosslyn, 1989;
Lohse, 1993; Pinker, 1990), there is a preliminary
framework for integration of graphical information
(Ratwani, Trafton, & Boehm-Davis, 2003), but there are no
theories that can adequately describe how inferences are
made. Previous research examining graphical inferences has
focused on the use of mental models, spatial transformations

1119

and the role of domain knowledge (Hegarty, Shimozawa, &
Canham, under review; Trafton et al., 2000). We are
interested in how all of these processes are combined in
order to make inferences from graphs. In this paper, we
focus on read-offs, integration and pattern extrapolation
because it is relatively straightforward to identify read-offs,
integration, and pattern extrapolation and much more
difficult to identify spatial transformations or mental model
building.
If the hierarchical framework of graph comprehension is
correct, graph readers will make inferences by reading-off
explicit information, using pattern extrapolation and
integrating information. Experiment 1 serves to explore
higher-level thinking about how graph readers make
inferences from graphs by using the protocol analysis
methodology. Experiment 2 further investigates the
processes used to make inferences by using an eye tracker to
examine graph readers’ eye movements.

Experiment 1
The first experiment was designed to explore the types of
processes graph readers use to make inferences from
multiple choropleth graphs. Choropleth graphs depicting
population densities were selected for use in this
experiment; these graphs use different colors, shades of
gray, or patterns to represent different quantities.
Choropleth graphs were chosen for multiple reasons. First,
they are more complex than the graph types used in more
traditional studies of graph comprehension and better reflect
how graphs are used in the real-world. Second, these
particular graphs do not require a great deal of domain
knowledge and can be presented to undergraduates without
much training. Finally, choropleth graphs represent a class
of graphs that are commonly used by scientists in such
domains as meteorology, geology and oceanography.

Method
Participants
Three George Mason University undergraduate psychology
students served as participants for course credit. Informed
consent was received from all participants.
Materials
Twenty sets of choropleth graphs were created; each set
consisted of three conceptually related graphs. The graphs in
each set displayed the population densities of fifty fictitious
counties. The first graph in each set displayed the
population from the year 1990, the second graph displayed
1995 and the third graph displayed the population from the
year 2000 (See Figure 2 for an example). Only one county
in each set of graphs was labeled with a county name
(referred to as the target county) in order to reduce search
time. Previous studies found that graph readers spent a great
deal of time searching for the county of interest when every
county was labeled (Ratwani et al 2003). One inference
question was asked of each set of graphs: What will the
population of the target county be in the year 2005?

Design
Five sets of graphs showed a clear decrease in the overall
population densities from 1990 to 2000 while the population
of the target county did not change in any of these graphs.
These counties surrounding the target county had a powerful
contextual indication that the population was decreasing.
Five sets of graphs showed a clear increase in the overall
population densities from 1990 to 2000 while the population
of the target county did not change. These counties
surrounding the target county had a powerful contextual
indication that the population was increasing. Ten of the sets
of graphs served as fillers and were removed from all
analyses; the populations were jumbled and had increasing,
decreasing or no clear pattern to the population movement
across the graphs. The purpose of these sets was to
randomize the patterns of increasing and decreasing
population in the ten sets of interest. The order in which the
twenty sets of graphs were presented was randomized for
each participant. The increasing and decreasing sets were
combined in the analyses below.
Procedure
All participants first read the question for the set of graphs
they were about to view and then examined the graphs. For
example, the participant would read the question, “What
will the population of county x be in the year 2005?” After
reading the question the participant would then view the
graphs from the three time periods and make their
prediction. This process continued for each of the twenty
sets of graphs.
The participants could view each of the graphs for as long
as they desired, and the participants were permitted to look
back to any of the graphs within a particular set as needed.
Each graph was presented on a single sheet of paper. After
answering each question, the participant went on to the next
set of graphs. Each participant provided a talk-aloud
protocol (Ericsson & Simon, 1993) as they examined the
graphs and answered the questions. The participants’ verbal
protocols and the graphs they were examining were
videotaped.
Coding Scheme
Transcriptions of the verbal protocols were made prior to
data analysis. The first step was to segment the protocols
into individual utterances. Utterances were defined as a
single thought and utterances that were not germane to the
task at hand were coded as “off task” and eliminated from
further analysis. Each remaining utterance was then coded
according to our hierarchical framework. The utterances
were coded as either being a target read-off (extracting
information regarding the target county of interest only) or
integrative (extracting general trend information from the
graph). All the answers were, by definition, inferences.
There were no non-target read-off’s in any of the utterances
made by the participants. Table 1 shows examples of each
utterance type.

1120

Figure 2. Graphs depicting population growth from 1990, 1995, and 2000 (left to right).
Example
In 1990 Stow County was 20,000 to
30,000

Integrative

All the other areas are increasing in
population

the fact that the powerful overall context of the three graphs
suggested that the population was increasing (for example),
the graph reader inferred that the population of the target
county would not change in the future. However, when
graph readers looked beyond the target and used the global
context of the graphs the graph readers used context to infer
that the growth would continue to the target county and that
the target county would change in the future.

Table 1: Examples of each extraction type.

Results and Discussion
Our main goal was to explore how graph readers made
inferences from graphs. We first examined the types of
extractions made by each graph reader and then compared
these extractions to the answer given to the inference
questions. The participants gave a numerical answer
indicating that the population of the target county would
either change or not change. Of the three participants, one
participant made change responses the majority of the time,
one participant made non-change responses the majority of
the time and one participant had mixed responses. Thus,
graph readers were not always using the same strategy to
make these inferences. When participants made a change
response, their inference was in the direction consistent with
the surrounding counties. For example, when the participant
made a change response and inferred that the population of
the target county would grow in the future, the surrounding
counties were also growing.
As figure 3 suggests, when graph readers said the
population of the target county would not change in the
future all of their extractions were target read-offs. When
graph readers said that the target county would change in
the future, the graph readers made some target read-offs but
made a significantly greater number of integrative
extractions, χ2(1) = 4.9, p < .05. In addition, when a nonchange response was given, graph readers made a
significantly greater number of target read-offs than when a
change response was made, χ2(1) = 8.02, p < .01.
The verbal protocol data indicates that when graph
readers performed mostly target read-off’s they made a nonchange response to the inference questions. That is, despite

Extractions by Response
35
Number of extractions

Code
Target read-off

30

Target read-off

25

Integrative

20
15
10
5
0
Non-change Response
Change Response
Response Type

Figure 3: Number of extractions by response.
These data suggest there are differences in the way people
think about making inferences. Based on the type of
extractions the graph reader made, their response could be
categorized as either inferring a change or not inferring a
change in the future population. There appear to be two
general ways in which graph readers made inferences from
these graphs. One way was to focus only on the target
county in each of the three time periods and, based on how
the population changed in the target county, an inference
was made as to the future population. For example, if the
target county did not change population in any of the three
time periods then it would not change in the future. This no
change response appears to be based solely on pattern
extrapolation of the target county. Alternatively, when
making change responses, graph readers appeared to be
making read-off’s for pattern extrapolation and taking into

1121

consideration the contextual influences of the graph. Some
aspects of the global context of the graph were being
integrated with the population of the target county in order
to make the inference. When participants made change
responses, their verbal protocol data is consistent with an
interpretation of them creating a dynamic mental model:
participants were imagining the growth in the counties
extending to nearby counties, eventually “hitting” the target
county. While we are not directly measuring mental model
formation in this paper, we are interested in what
information is needed to form those mental models.
Based on our hierarchical framework, we would expect
graph readers to make inferences by both reading-off
information for pattern extrapolation and integrating
information. It appeared that when graph readers made a
non-change response, they extracted target information
only, noticed it did not change, and extrapolated that it
would not change in the future. They did not seem to
explicitly extract information from nearby counties. Graph
readers who made a change response appeared to be using
read-offs, pattern extrapolation and integration as our
hierarchical framework suggests.
Experiment 1 showed that people had different strategies
when answering inference questions: a change strategy and
a non-change strategy. It could be that at the perceptual
level these strategies are identical. For example, it could be
that participants who made a no-change answer did, in fact,
look all over the graph but decided to simply ignore that
information, or assume that the target county was the most
important determinant of future change. Additionally, the
protocol data did not show how or what types of
information was extracted by change-response participants.
Experiment 2 investigates these issues.

Experiment 2
How, then, did participants make inferences from these
graphs? By performing a small task analysis, it is obvious
that when information needs to be integrated, it can be
integrated in at least two ways: within a specific graph and
between related graphs.
If a participant integrates
information within a specific graph, the participant would
presumably examine nearby counties to see how their
population was different from the target county. If a
participant integrates information between related graphs,
the participant would probably examine graphs that had
changed over time.
Experiment 2 will explore three main issues. First, do
participants who answer change and non-change have
different perceptual strategies? Second, what types of
integration do change participants engage in (within graphs,
between graphs, or both)? Third, what is the proportion of
read-offs and integration used in order to answer inference
questions and how do those proportions relate to the
answers that participants gave?

Method
Participants
Thirteen George Mason University undergraduate
psychology students served as participants for course credit.
Informed consent was received from all participants.
Materials
The same sets of graphs used in the first experiment were
used in the second experiment. In this experiment the
materials (graphs and questions) were displayed on a
computer screen. Eye track data was collected using an LC
Technologies Eye gaze System eye tracker operating at
60Hz (16.7 samples/second).
Design
The design was the same as Experiment 1.
Procedure
The procedure was very similar to that used in Experiment
1; however, the use of the computer and eye tracker did
necessitate some changes. The participants were seated at a
comfortable distance from the monitor and used a chin rest.
Participants first were calibrated on the eye tracker.
Participants were then shown the question at the top of a
blank screen and read the question out loud. Previous
studies (Ratwani et al., 2003) have shown that the process of
collecting eye track data was not hindered by the participant
talking. After reading the question the participant proceeded
to the first graph. The interface allowed the participants to
progress from graph to graph within a set with a buttonclick. The participants were instructed to say their answer
out loud when they made their inference. After answering
the question, the participant could progress to the next
question and set of graphs.
Coding Scheme
A gaze was defined from each sample being no more that 10
pixels in Euclidian distance from the center of gravity of the
previous point for at least 100 milliseconds. Frequencies
were created by counting the number of gazes to different
areas of the graph. The areas of the graph that were coded
were: the legend, the title of the graph, and the main part of
the graph itself.
Participant’s gazes to the main part of the graph were
coded to examine how much reading-off and how much
integrating the participants were doing. Gazes to the target
county were coded to examine how often participants were
making read-offs. Gazes to locations other than the target
were coded in order to examine whether graph readers were
integrating information within the graph. In order to capture
how far away from the target county participants were
gazing the location of the gaze relative to the target county
was coded for. For example, if a participant gazed at a
county that was three counties away from the target this
distance was coded.
Integration of information between graphs was coded by
examining areas of change relative to the previously viewed

1122

Results and Discussion
Experiment 2 was designed to examine what processes
occurred at the perceptual level when graph readers made
inferences from graphs. Specifically, we wanted to further
investigate the process differences when graph readers made
a change response as compared to when they made a nonchange response.
The responses made by graph readers were mixed, but
mostly (76%) change responses were made. The raw
frequencies of gazes were normalized by dividing the
frequency of gazes by the number of responses in either the
non-change or change category.
There were no significant differences in the number of
target gazes when participants made a non-change response
as compared to a change response as figure 4 suggests, χ2(1)
= .34, p = .56. Participants appeared to be reading off the
same amount of target information regardless of what type
of response they made. Thus, participants were reading off
information nearly equally when making inferences.
However, participants who made change responses did
more integration within the graph than participants who did
not make change responses. As figure 4 suggests, those who
made change responses on average made a greater number
of gazes to counties other than the target, χ2(1) = 4.52, p <
.05.

significantly different, χ2(8) = 22.82, p < .01, suggesting
that when graph readers made a change response, they
frequently looked at the target and counties away from the
target, whereas graph readers who made a non-change
response focused primarily on the target. Consistent with
this interpretation, the proportion of change gazes to nontargets (68%) was far greater than the proportion of nonchange gazes to non-targets (37%), χ2(1) = 9.2, p < .005.
Graph readers who made a change response were frequently
looking at counties as far as 6 away from the target county.
Did graph readers integrate information between graphs
when they were making inferences? Integration between
graphs was examined by looking at the number of gazes to
areas of change from one graph relative to another. As
figure 4 suggests, participants who made change responses
made a significantly greater number of gazes to areas of
change as compared to participants who made non-change
responses, χ2(1) = 4.88, p < .05. This suggests participants
who made change responses were integrating information
between graphs by comparing the areas that changed in
population.
Distance of Gazes from Target

Average Frequency

graphs. If a gaze to the graph was to a county where the
population value changed from a previously viewed graph
this was coded for. For example, if the participant gazed to a
county in 1995 that had changed in population relative to
the map from 1990 then this was coded as a change gaze.
Thus, the first map viewed by each participant in every set
did not have any change gazes.

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Non-change Response
Change Response

0

1

2

3

4
5
Distance

6

7

8

Figures 5. Histogram of distance by response.
40

Number of gazes

35

Non-change response

30

Change response

25
20
15
10
5
0
Change

Non-target
Target
Gaze Type

Total

Figure 4. Number of coded gazes.
How far away from the target did participants look? In
order to examine this issue, we created histograms showing
the location of the counties that were gazed at based on the
participants response. Figures 5 shows the frequency of
gazes participants made to the target and to counties other
that the target. The x-axis shows how far away the county
gazed at was from the target. Zero represents the target and
one through eight represent how far away the county gazed
at was from the target. The patterns in these histograms are

The process of integrating information between graphs is
further supported be examining the number of times graph
readers examined each of the three graphs. For example,
some participants viewed each graph once; the sequence of
graphs they looked at was 1→2→3. Whereas other graph
readers examined each graph more than once and had a
sequence such as 1→2→1→2→3→2→3. Participants who
made change responses looked at the three graphs in each
set more often in order to compare the counties that changed
population between graphs, χ2(2) = 5.24, p < .05. Thus,
graph readers who made change responses integrated
information between graphs by paying attention to areas that
changed in the graphs and looking at the graphs frequently
in order to make these comparisons.
When participants made non-change responses, their eye
movements suggest they are primarily examining the target
county. These participants generally looked at each map
only once. Furthermore, they appeared to be reading-off
target county information in each graph, noticing the pattern
does not change, and then using pattern extrapolation to
infer that the pattern will not change in the future.

1123

Graph readers making change responses appeared to read
off target county information and also focused a great deal
of attention on non-target counties. These gazes to nontarget counties appeared to be a way to integrate the
information from the other counties with the information
about the target county. These graph readers also integrated
information between graphs by paying attention to areas of
change between the graphs. Finally, they compared areas of
change to infer the future population by looking back and
forth at the graphs in each set. This is suggestive evidence
of the formation of dynamic mental models which may be
used to understand how the contextual growth or decay is
influencing the target county.

models and pattern extrapolation are combined in the
process of making inferences. In addition the processes
outlined by our hierarchal framework are likely to be
dependent on many factors such as knowledge of the
graphical display and domain knowledge (Hegarty et al.,
under review).

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by grant 55-7850-00 to
the second author from the Office of Naval Research and by
George Mason University. We thank Mike Schoelles for
designing the interface of the eye tracker.

References

General Discussion
How do people make inferences from graphs? Most classic
theories do not provide any mechanisms for making
graphical inferences. These studies examined inferences at
a high-level by focusing on graph reader’s thought
processes with the verbal protocol data and also at the
perceptual level by examining graph reader’s eye
movements. These studies demonstrate that people certainly
can make inferences, and that people make inferences in
different ways. One way that people make inferences is to
examine the specific object that will change over time
(target county in our case). Depending on the type of
change that is observed, a pattern is extracted and then
extrapolated. In our studies, approximately a quarter of the
answers conformed to this strategy. The remainder took
context into account. That is, they observed the surrounding
counties (especially the ones that changed from graph to
graph) and presumably imagined the change affecting the
target county.
Our hierarchical framework of graph comprehension is
consistent with both views, though it is supported more
strongly by the participants who made change answers. In
order to make inferences, the hierarchical view framework
suggests that people need to extract specific information
from graphs (well described by most theories of graph
comprehension), integrate information into a reasonable
whole (in this case by combining information between and
within graphs), use that information to extrapolate beyond
the given data, mentally manipulate the graphical
information by spatial transformations and build mental
models. It is interesting that when non-change answers
were made, only a subset of this framework was used: the
evidence for integration in particular was quite weak. It
seems that when non-change answers were given,
participants simply took in the specific information for the
target county, performed simple extrapolation, and then
gave an answer. Using the surrounding counties was just
not a priority for these participants.
Finally, how inferences are made from graphs is more
complex than we have described here. Our hierarchical
framework identifies the processes used to make inferences;
however, further empirical data is needed to understand how
read-offs, integration, spatial transformations, mental

Bott, L., & Heit, E. (2004). Nonmonotonic Extrapolation in
Function Learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory & Cognition, 30(1), 38-50.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Hegarty, M., Shimozawa, N., & Canham, M. (under
review). Inferences from Graphics: Do you need a
Weatherman to Tell which Way the Wind Blows?
Kosslyn, S. M. (1989). Understanding charts and graphs.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 3, 185-225.
Lohse, G. L. (1993). A cognitive model for understanding
graphical perception. Human Computer Interaction, 8,
353-388.
NCTM: Standards for Mathematics. (2003, 2003).
Pinker, S. (1990). A theory of graph comprehension. In R.
Freedle (Ed.), Artificial intelligence and the future of
testing (pp. 73-126). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Ratwani, R. M., Trafton, J. G., & Boehm-Davis, D. A.
(2003). Thinking graphically: Extracting local and global
information. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsch (Eds.), 25th.
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Boston, MA: Erlbaum.
Trafton, J. G., Kirschenbaum, S. S., Tsui, T. L., Miyamoto,
R. T., Ballas, J. A., & Raymond, P. D. (2000). Turning
pictures into numbers: Extracting and generating
information from complex visualizations. International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, 53(5), 827-850.
Trafton, J. G., Marshall, S., Mintz, F., & Trickett, S. B.
(2002). Extracting explicit and implicit information from
complex visualizations. In M. Hegarty, B. Meyer, & H.
Narayanan (Eds.), Diagrammatic Representation and
Inference (pp. 206-220). Berlin Heidelberg: SpringerVerlag.
Trickett, S. B., & Trafton, J. G. (in press). Spatial
Transformations
in
Graph
Comprehension.
Diagrammatic Representation and Inference, 3rd
International Conference, Cambridge, U.K.
Trickett, S. B., Ratwani, R. M., & Trafton, J. G. (under
review). Real World Graph Comprehension: High-Level
Questions, Complex Graphs, and Spatial Cognition.

1124

