UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making Sense of Embodiment: Simulation Theories and the Sharing of Neural Circuitry
Between Sensorimotor and Cognitive Processes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2th0p4m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Svensson, Henrik
Ziemke, Tom

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making Sense of Embodiment:
Simulation Theories and the Sharing of Neural Circuitry
Between Sensorimotor and Cognitive Processes
Henrik Svensson (svensson@ida.his.se)

University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Tom Ziemke (tom@ida.his.se)

University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Abstract
Although an increasing number of cognitive scientists are
convinced that cognition is embodied, there still is relatively
little agreement on what exactly that means. Notions of what
it actually means for a cognizer to be embodied range from
simplistic ones such as ‘being physical’ or ‘interacting with
an environment’ to more demanding ones that consider a
particular morphology or a living body prerequisites for
embodied cognition. Based on experimental evidence from a
range of disciplines, we argue that one of the keys to
understanding the embodiment of cognition is the sharing of
neural mechanisms between sensorimotor processes and
higher-level cognitive processes. The latter are argued to be
embodied in the sense that they make use of (partial)
simulations or emulations of sensorimotor processes through
the re-activation of neural circuitry also active in bodily
perception and action.

Introduction
Although an increasing number of cognitive scientists are
convinced that cognition is embodied (e.g. Varela et al.,
1991; Clancey, 1997; Clark, 1997; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999;
Ziemke, 2002), there still is relatively little agreement on
what exactly that means. Notions of what it actually means
for a cognizer to be embodied range from simplistic ones
such as ‘being physical’ or ‘interacting with an
environment’ to more demanding ones that consider a
particular morphology or a living body prerequisites for
embodied cognition (cf., e.g., Chrisley & Ziemke, 2002;
Wilson, 2002; Anderson, 2003; Ziemke, 2003).
This lack of agreement or coherence, after more than a
decade of research on embodied cognition, has unfortunate
consequences. Firstly, critics commonly argue that the only
thing that embodied cognitive theories have in common is in
fact the rejection of traditional, computationalist and
supposedly disembodied cognitive science. Secondly, there
is a certain trivialization of embodiment, not least among
many AI researchers who consider as embodied any
physical system, or in fact any agent that interacts with
some environment, such that the distinction between
computationalist and embodied cognitive theories
disappears since, in some sense, all systems are embodied,
and thus cognitive science has always been about embodied

cognition (Chrisley & Ziemke, 2002). Thirdly, there is the
‘misunderstanding’ that perhaps embodiment is only
relevant to sensorimotor processes directly involving the
body in perception and action, while higher-level cognition
might very well be computational in the traditional sense
and only dependent on the body in the sense that mental
representations ultimately need to be grounded in
sensorimotor interaction with the physical environment.
This paper, on the other hand, argues that one of the keys
to understanding the embodiment of cognition, in an
important, non-trivial sense, is to understand the sharing of
neural mechanisms between sensorimotor processes and
higher-level cognitive processes. Based on experimental
evidence from a range of disciplines, we argue that many, if
not all, higher-level cognitive processes are body-based in
the sense that they make use of (partial) simulations or
emulations of sensorimotor processes through the reactivation of neural circuitry that is also active in bodily
perception and action (cf. Clark & Grush, 1999; Grush, in
press; Hesslow, 2002). As Barsalou et al. (2003) put it, the
main point is that “simulations of bodily states in modality
specific brain areas may often be the extent to which
embodiment is realized”.
The next section elaborates the key idea of this paper, i.e.,
cognition as body- and simulation-based in the above sense,
in more detail. In the following sections then supporting
empirical evidence from a range of disciplines is presented.
The final section then presents a brief summary as well as
some open questions and directions for future work.

Cognition as body-based simulation
The idea that even higher-level cognitive processes are in a
strong sense grounded in bodily activity and experience is,
of course, hardly new, but was developed already in the
1980s, most influentially by Maturana and Varela (1980,
1987) from a neurobiological perspective, and by Lakoff
and Johnson (1980, 1999) from a linguistic perspective.
Lakoff (1988) summarized the basic idea as follows:

1309

Meaningful conceptual structures arise from two sources: (1)
from the structured nature of bodily and social experience and
(2) from our innate capacity to imaginatively project from
certain well-structured aspects of bodily and interactional
experience to abstract conceptual structures.

Back in the 1980s, however, relatively little was known
about exactly how such an imaginative projection from
bodily experience to abstract concepts might work. In recent
years more detailed accounts of how the sensorimotor
structures of the brain are involved in cognition have been
developed in several disciplines, often taking into account
data from neurophysiological and neuroimaging studies.
These accounts show that the traditional strong division
between perception and action, as well as between
sensorimotor and cognitive processes, needs to be revised.
A particular kind of “embodiment” theory that has
emerged in different contexts are so-called emulation or
simulation theories1 (e.g., Barsalou et al., 2003: Decety,
1996; Frith & Dolan, 1996; Grush, in press; Hesslow, 2002;
Jeannerod, 1994, 2001). The basic idea is that neural
structures that are responsible for action and/or perception
are also used in the performance of various cognitive tasks.
As Hesslow (2002) pointed out, this idea is not entirely
new; e.g. Alexander Bain suggested in 1896 that thinking is
basically a covert form of behavior that does not activate the
body and thus remains invisible to external observers.
Today simulation theories, based partly on data from
neuroscience, can further clarify the possible role of
simulation in cognition, thus explaining in a more concrete
way than before the embodiment of cognition.
One of the more comprehensive descriptions of the idea
has been presented by Grush (in press; see also Clark &
Grush, 1999). Based on the control theoretic concept of
forward models (emulators), previously used to account for
motor control (e.g., Wolpert & Kawato, 1998), Grush
developed an emulation theory for several types of cognitive
processes, including perception, imagery, reasoning and
language. In a nutshell, he argued that emulation circuits are
able to calculate a forward mapping from control signals to
the (anticipated) consequences of executing the control
command. For example, in goal-directed hand movements
the brain has to plan parts of the movement before it starts.
To achieve a smooth and accurate movement
proprioceptive/kinesthetic (and sometimes visual) feedback
is necessary, but sensory feedback per se is too slow to
affect control appropriately (Desmurget & Grafton, 2000).
The ‘solution’ is an emulator/forward model that can predict
the sensory feedback resulting from executing a particular
motor command.2
The following section summarizes a number of the many
empirical studies that support the idea that cognition is
body-based, especially as predicted by simulation theories.

1

The terms simulation and emulation are used somewhat
interchangeably in this paper, as in much of the literature, but it
should be noted that they are sometimes used differently (e.g.,
Grush, in press).
2
According to Blakemore, Frith and Wolpert (1999), this is also
why it is not so easy to tickle oneself: the forward model produces
predicted sensory feedback that ‘prepares’ the agent.

Empirical Evidence
Several sources of evidence support the basic tenet of the
simulation account, viz., that perceptual and motor areas of
the brain can be covertly activated either separately or in
sequence for use in cognitive processes. In particular,
several studies have indicated that there are extensive
similarities between the neural structures activated during
preparation (and execution) of an action and mentally
simulating an action (i.e., motor imagery), as well as
between visual perception and visual imagery. The
similarities are so striking that some have argued that
internally activated actions and perceptions are the same as
overt ones, except that the overt execution or sensory input
is missing (e.g., Hesslow, 2002; Jeannerod, 2001).
The following subsections review some of the empirical
evidence that suggest that sensorimotor structures of the
brain are deeply involved in the generation of cognitive
phenomena, such as imagery and problem solving.

Motor imagery
There is an extensive literature on the neural and behavioral
similarities between actions and motor imagery (e.g.,
Decety, Jeannerod, & Prablanc, 1989; Jeannerod & Decety,
1995; Jeannerod & Frak, 1999; for reviews see Decety,
1996, 2002; Jeannerod, 1994, 2001).3
Motor imagery is the recreation of an experience of
actually performing an action, e.g., the person should feel as
if he/she was actually walking (Decety, 1996; Jeannerod,
1994). The evidence cited in support for the equivalence of
performing an action and simulating an action comes mainly
from three different sources: mental chronometry,
autonomic responses, and measurements of brain activity. 4
In mental chronometry experiments, it has been found
that the time to mentally execute actions closely
corresponds to the time it takes to actually perform them
(Jeannerod & Frak, 1999). For example, Decety and
Jeannerod (1996) found that Fitt’s law (i.e., the finding that
execution times increase with task difficulty) also holds for
motor imagery. Decety et al. (1989) compared the durations
of walking towards targets (with blindfolds) placed at
different distances and mental simulation of walking to the
same targets. In both conditions times were found to
increase with the distance covered.
Autonomic responses, such as the adaptation of heart and
respiratory rates, which are beyond voluntary control have
been shown to be activated by motor imagery to an extent
proportional to that of actually performing the action, and as
a function of mental and actual effort (Decety, 1996;
Jeannerod, 1994; Jeannerod & Decety, 1995).
3

There are also similarities between actions and other cognitive
tasks, such as observing an action and prospective action
judgments, which differ from motor imagery in that they do not
produce a conscious motor image of performing an action and the
brain activation is not as similar to overt actions as in motor
imagery (cf., Jeannerod, 2001).
4
Further evidence comes from effects on action performance after
mental training using motor imagery and also from lesion studies.

1310

Since the first study that investigated motor imagery using
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) to indicate active brain
areas (Ingvar & Philipson, 1977) there have been many
neuroimaging experiments that confirm the first study’s
indication that similar brain areas are activated during action
and motor imagery. The general conclusion is that there is a
functional equivalence between performing an action and
mentally simulating it (Decety, 2002; Jeannerod, 2001).
Together, these three types of evidence point to an
explanation of motor imagery that implicates sensorimotor
structures.5 Although the focus above has been on actions, it
should not be forgotten that the motor system also integrates
sensory information when planning and executing an action
(e.g., Grush, in press; cf. Desmurget & Grafton, 2000;
Jeannerod, 1997). Thus, simulating an action might also
involve an emulator mechanism that predicts the sensory
feedback that would have resulted from the executed action
(Decety, 2002; Grush, in press; Jeannerod, 1997, 2001).

Mental visual imagery
The discussion of motor imagery can be extended to the
visual modality in that the same type of studies report that
perceptual structures can and are internally reactivated
when, e.g., visually recreating a previous perception. Many
studies in cognitive psychology have found similarities
between visual perception and visual imagery (Farah, 1988;
Finke, 1989). For example, Shepard and Metzler (1971)
performed a number of mental chronometry type
experiments, where they compared the concrete
manipulation of physical objects and corresponding
manipulations performed mentally. In their experiments, the
time between the two conditions was closely correlated,
which suggests that mental imagery uses the same
mechanisms as the visual system. Although alternative
explanations are difficult to rule out, neuropsychological
and neuroimaging studies offer more conclusive evidence of
the involvement of sensorimotor areas of the brain in mental
visual imagery (Farah, 1988; Hesslow, 2002).
Note that these findings do not necessarily influence
debates on representational format, since both perception
and imagery may be said to use the same format (Block,
1983). On the other hand, explaining cognition as
reactivation of sensorimotor structures does not (at least in
some cases) rely on the computer metaphor of symbol
manipulation, and thus may offer a novel view that does not
see the vehicle and the content of representations as separate
entities but as constitutive of each other (Gallese, 2003; cf.
5

There are a number of unanswered questions concerning motor
imagery worth mentioning here, which, however, do not affect the
paper’s main point concerning the embodiment of cognition. To
what degree do actions and mental simulations of actions engage
executive motor structures (such as, the primary motor cortex) (cf.,
e.g., Decety, 2002; Jeannerod & Frak, 1999), and how is the overt
movement hindered (Jeannerod, 2001; Hesslow, 2002)? Although
there may not be a complete overlap between the neural structures
involved in real and mentally simulated action, the evidence
suggests that they are not different in nature, but only in degree.

Dreyfus, 2002; Thomas, 1999). Gallese argued that
canonical neurons in the monkey brain illustrate how the
interaction between an agent and its environment provides
an example of such representations.

Canonical neurons
In the macaque monkey, neurons located in the rostral part
of the inferior premotor cortex (area F5) of the monkey
brain discharge during goal directed movements, such as
grasping, holding, or tearing. However, they do not respond
to similar movements, but only actions that have the same
“meaning” (di Pellegrino et al. 1992; Rizollatti et al., 1996;
Rizzolatti et al., 2002), which is why they are often
interpreted as internal representations of actions, rather than
motor or movement commands (Jeannerod, 1994; Rizollatti
et al. 1996; Rizzolatti et al., 2002). Gallese (2003)
emphasized seeing them as coding not physical parameters
of movement, but a relationship between agent and object.
Some of the neurons in area F5, so-called canonical
neurons, also have sensory properties and discharge both
during the action they code and when an object that affords
that action in the Gibsonian sense is perceived. Canonical
neurons have a strict congruence between the type of
grasping action and the size or shape of the object they
respond to (Gallese, 2003). This implies that they
implement affordances, e.g. code things that are graspablein-a-certain-way, specifying not only perceptual and action
aspects but a particular relationship between agent and
environment (cf. Gallese, 2003, cf. also Dreyfus, 2002).

Problem solving using covert perception and action
Instead of adverting to symbol manipulation, a flexible
inner world, in which an agent might try out possible action
sequences, can be explained by internal activation of
perceptions and actions (Clark & Grush, 1999, Grush, in
press; Hesslow, 2002). That means, an agent can sustain
such an inner world by letting an internally activated action
elicit through an anticipatory mechanism internally
generated perceptions that would be the likely result of
executing that action in the particular external situation. As
discussed above, the internal activation of sensorimotor
structures is well supported, but the neural underpinnings of
the anticipation mechanism are still an open issue. Some
suggest the involvement of the cerebellum (e.g., Hesslow,
2002).
Some support for the involvement of this type of
simulation of behavioral chains comes from the problem
solving and planning involved in the Tower of London
(ToL) problem (Shallice, 1982). Dagher et al. (1999) found
that planning and problem solving activated higher motor
areas (premotor cortex, prefrontal cortex) and the basal
ganglia, and that they seemed to interact with visual and
posterior parietal areas (cf. Schall et al., 2003). This gives
some support to the idea that the subjects solved the
problem by simulating the action of moving one ball to
another location through the use of reactivated perceptions
and actions (Hesslow, 2002).

1311

Social cognition and language
The use of internally reactivated sensorimotor structures has
also been suggested to play a crucial role in social cognition,
especially emotive states (cf. Barsalou et al., 2003; Nielsen,
2002). The evidence that is reported in this subsection
emphasizes that perceptual and motor processes are not
different in nature at the neural and behavioral level, but
seem to be intimately linked in social cognition possibly
through simulation mechanisms.
Embodiment effects Barsalou et al. (2003) argued that
there are at least four types of well known phenomena in
social cognition which can be explained by simulation of
bodily states. The types of effects they mention are: a)
perceived social stimuli produce bodily states, b) perceiving
bodily states produce bodily mimicry, c) bodily states can
produce and affect emotion states, and d) compatibility
between bodily states and emotional states increases
performance (see also Nielsen, 2002). These effects seem to
arise automatically without any conscious mediating
knowledge structures (Barsalou et al., 2003; Nielsen, 2002).
Firstly, social stimuli do not only produce cognitive
responses, but at the same time automatically and
unconsciously cause bodily responses (e.g., movement
patterns, facial expressions). For example, subjects induced
with an elderly stereotype (e.g., by watching elderly people)
perform in a manner more similar to the elderly stereotype
than control subjects (Barsalou et al., 2003).
Secondly, bodily responses sometimes are the same or
similar to the eliciting social stimuli as in the many cases of
facial mimicry. For example, watching somebody yawning
often causes oneself to yawn too (cf. Barsalou et al., 2003).
Thirdly, bodily states can directly induce effects on
affective states (Barsalou et al., 2003). One such effect is the
facial feedback hypothesis, which states that a person’s own
facial expressions can (either directly from the brain areas
responsible for the facial expression or through processing
of proprioceptive feedback) produce or modify his/her
experience of the emotional state (Nielsen, 2002).
Finally, when there is a mismatch between bodily state
and affective state cognitive performance is degraded.
Barsalou et al. (2003) argued that this is perhaps the most
important effect because it indicates that embodied states
are directly involved in higher cognition. That is, the
affective states are thought to involve sensorimotor states
and when there is an incompatible bodily state co-present it
produces a competing sensorimotor state, which reduces
performance. For example, Wells and Petty (1980) showed
that head movements were faster when compatible with the
message (e.g., nodding vertically to an agreeable message)
than when incompatible (cf. Barsalou et al., 2003).
The findings discussed in this section suggest that bodily
states are involved in social cognition and that they might
constitute the very foundations of the particular social
cognitive phenomena in question. An example of how
perception, action, and social cognition come together at the

level of single neurons is so-called mirror neurons in
macaque monkeys (Decety & Sommerville, 2003).
Observation execution matching system Besides
canonical neurons, area F5 of the monkey brain contains so
called mirror neurons, which are neurons with sensory
properties that become activated both when performing a
specific action and when observing the same goal-directed
hand (and mouth) movements of an experimenter (di
Pellegrino et al., 1992; Rizzolatti et al., 1996). Mirror
neurons provide a key example of sensorimotor brain
structures also involved in (social) cognitive processes.
Although different hypotheses exist, many of the theories
of the function of mirror neurons emphasize their role in
social cognition (e.g., Decety & Chaminade, 2003; Gallese
& Goldman, 1998; Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998; Rizzolatti et
al. 2002). These researchers acknowledge that area F5 and
mirror neurons can be interpreted as a kind of observationexecution mechanism or resonance mechanism, which links
the observed actions to actual actions of the subject’s own
behavioral repertoire. That is, it enables the monkey to
understand the meaning of the observed action. Thus, mirror
neurons can be interpreted as representations of actions,
used both for performing and understanding actions (e.g.,
Rizzolatti et al., 1996; Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998). 6
Gallese and Goldman (1998) hypothesized that mirror
neurons might be a basic mechanism necessary for “mindreading”, i.e., attributing mental states in others. They
further argued that such mechanisms can explain how an
agent determines what mental states of another agent have
already occurred. When mirror neurons are externally
activated by observing a target agent executing an action
(allowing the subject to evaluate the meaning of the other’s
action), the subject knows (visually) that the observed target
is currently performing this very action and thereby “tags”
the “experienced” action as belonging to the target.
However, how the subject can distinguish its own actions
from those performed by others is relatively unknown (cf.
Blakemore, Wolpert & Frith, 2002).
Language Some researchers have argued that
conceptualization and language understanding cannot be
achieved through the manipulation of amodal, arbitrary
symbols alone, but has to be grounded in bodily interaction
with the environment. In particular, Glenberg and Kaschak
(2003) have outlined an explanation of language in line with
the idea of cognition as body-based simulation as expressed
in this paper, suggesting that language is partly achieved
through the same neural structures used to plan and guide
action.

6

For practical and ethical reasons it is so far not possible to
investigate the existence of mirror neurons (and canonical neurons)
at the single neuron level in humans. However, many researchers
have presented strong arguments for the existence of a similar
system in humans (e.g., Fadiga et al., 1995; Grafton et al., 1996;
Rizzolatti, & Arbib, 1998; Rizzolatti et al., 1996).

1312

Under the heading of the indexical hypothesis they
developed an account of language comprehension partly
based on simulation of action. They argued that the meaning
of a sentence is achieved by a process that indexes words to
perceptual symbols which in turn retrieves the available
affordances in the situation and determines their relevance
through the particular sentence construction. Thus, the
understanding of a sentence is essentially achieved through
a simulation of action using the same neural systems active
in overt behavior.
An empirical result that supports the close coupling
between language and action is the “action-sentence
compatibility effect” (Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002). It was
found that the sensibility of a sentence is modified by
physical actions. Reaction times increased when subjects
read “toward sentences” that implied action toward the
reader, such as “Open the drawer” and had to give the
answer through an incongruent action, i.e., moving the hand
away from the body. Conversely, when subjects answered
through an action congruent with the sentence, reaction
times decreased. Glenberg and Kaschak interpreted the
result as indicating that understanding a sentence is
dependent on structures usually used for action. Readers
interested in more comprehensive reviews of the coupling
between language and action/perception are referred to
Glenberg and Kaschak (2003) or Zwaan (2004).

Summary and conclusions
This paper has presented an emerging framework of
simulation based on terminology and ideas from control
theory and data from neurophysiological and neuroimaging
studies that explain higher-level cognitive processes as at
least partly based on reactivations of sensorimotor structures
of the brain. By reactivating mechanisms used in perception
and action together with a predictive mechanism a flexible
inner world emerges that can be used for many different
higher-level cognitive tasks (cf. Grush, in press; Hesslow,
2002). Crucial to the embodiment of cognition, according to
this account, is perhaps not so much the physical nature of a
cognizer’s body, or its interaction with the environment as
such, but the relation between sensorimotor and higher-level
cognitive processes, more specifically, the way that the
latter are fundamentally based on and rooted in the former.
Although corroborating evidence comes from several
disciplines, the simulation account is not yet a well
established or coherent theory of cognition in general, and
there are many questions still to be answered. For example,
in current accounts it is unclear exactly what constitutes the
difference between an executed, overt action and a
simulated/imagined, covert one. Can this be accounted for
in terms of simulation theories or are other, presumably
higher-level, mechanisms required after all to selectively
trigger one or the other?
Moreover, there is a level of granularity problem (cf.
Meltzoff & Prinz, 2002) that seems to apply to many
simulation accounts. That is, at what level of abstraction
does the simulation occur? During imagery it seems that the

simulation occurs on a low-level including very many of the
aspects of actually perceiving or acting, as indicated by
neuroimaging studies (e.g., Jeannerod, 2001), whereas in
problem solving, as in the ToL task, more abstract aspects
of actions may be employed, which might be supported by
the finding that problem solving activity in the ToL seem to
activate only higher motor centers, such as prefrontal and
premotor cortex (Dagher et al., 1999). However, this is a
speculative interpretation of the neuroimaging results.
The level of granularity is also an important issue in
robotic models of simulation theories (e.g. Ziemke, Jirenhed
& Hesslow, in press). Previous work in our lab has dealt
with internal simulations at the lowest level, but current
work also addresses simulation at more abstract levels of
granularity. We believe that robotic models offer a fruitful
approach to further investigating this and other open
questions that need to be answered in the future
development of simulation theories.

References
Anderson, M. L. (2003). Embodied cognition: a field guide.
Artificial Intelligence, 149, 91-130.
Barsalou, L. W., Niedenthal, P. M., Barbey, A. K., &
Ruppert, J. M. (2003). Social embodiment. In B. H. Ross
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol.
43). San Diego: Academic Press.
Blakemore, S.-J., Frith, C. D. & Wolpert, D. M. (1999).
Spatio-temporal prediction modulates the perception of
self-produced stimuli. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
11, 551-559.
Blakemore, S.-J., Wolpert, D. M., & Frith, C. D. (2002).
Abnormalities in the awareness of action. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 237-242.
Block, N. (1983). Mental pictures and cognitive science.
Philosophical Review, 93, 499-542.
Chrisley, R., & Ziemke, T. (2003). Embodiment. In:
Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. London: Macmillan.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated Cognition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. & Grush, R. (1999). Towards a cognitive robotics.
Adaptive Behavior, 7(1), 5-16.
Dagher, A., Owen, A. M., Boecker, H. & Brooks, D. J.
(1999). Mapping the network for planning. Brain, 122,
1973-1987.
Decety, J. (1996). Do imagined and executed actions share
the same neural substrate? Cognitive Brain Res., 3, 87-93.
Decety, J. (2002). Is there such a thing as functional
equivalence between imagined, observed, and executed
action. In M. A. Meltzoff & W. Prinz (Eds.), The
Imitative Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Decety, J, and Chaminade, T. 2003. Neural correlates of
feeling sympathy. Neuropsychologia, 41, 127-138.
Decety, J., & Jeannerod, M. (1996). Mentally simulated
movements in virtual reality. Behavioral Brain Research,
72, 127-134.
Decety, J., Jeannerod, M., Prablanc, C. (1989). The timing
of mentally represented actions. Behavioral Brain
Research, 34, 35-42.

1313

Decety, J., & Sommerville, J. A. (2003). Shared
representations between self and other. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 527-533.
Desmurget, M., & Grafton, S. (2000). Forward modeling
allows feedback control for fast reaching movements.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 423-431.
di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V. &
Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor events.
Experimental Brain Research, 91, 176-180.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2002). Intelligence without representation.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1, 367-383.
Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G. & Rizzolatti, G (1995)
Motor facilitation during action observation. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 73, 2608-2611.
Farah, M. J. (1988). Is visual imagery really visual?
Psychological Review, 95(3), 307-317
Finke, R. A. (1989). Principles of mental imagery.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frith, C. & Dolan, R. (1996). The role of the prefrontal
cortex in higher cognitive functions. Cognitive Brain
Research, 5, 175-181.
Gallese, V. (2003) A neuroscientific grasp of concepts. Phil.
Trans. Royal Soc. London, B., 358, 1231-1240.
Gallese, V., & Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of mind reading. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 2, 493-501.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9,
558-565.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2003) The body’s
contribution to language. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), The
psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 43). San
Diego: Academic Press.
Grafton, S. T., Arbib, M. A., Fadiga, L. & Rizzolatti, G.
(1996). Localization of grasp representations in humans
by positron emission tomography - 2. Observation
compared with imagination. Experimental Brain
Research, 112, 103-111.
Grush, R. (in press). The emulation theory of representation.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, to appear.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious thought as simulation of
behaviour and perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
6, 242-24.
Ingvar, D. H. & Philipsson, L. (1977). Distribution of the
cerebral blood flow in the dominant hemisphere during
motor ideation and motor performance. Annals of
Neurology, 2, 230-237.
Jeannerod, M. (1994). The representing brain. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 17(2), 187-245.
Jeannerod, M. (1997). The cognitive neuroscience of action.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
Jeannerod, M. (2001). Neural simulation of action.
NeuroImage, 14, S103-S109.
Jeannerod, M. & Decety, J. (1995). Mental motor imagery.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 5, 727-732.
Jeannerod, M. & Frak, V. (1999). Mental imagining of
motor activity in humans. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 9, 735-739.

Lakoff, G. (1988). Cognitive Semantics. In U. Eco et al.
(Eds.),
Meaning
and
Mental
Representations.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Maturana, H. R. & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and
Cognition. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing.
Maturana, H. R. & Varela, F. J. (1987). The Tree of
Knowledge. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Prinz, W. (2002). An introduction to the
imitative mind and brain. In M. A. Meltzoff & W. Prinz
(Eds.), The Imitative Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Nielsen, L. (2002). The simulation of emotion experience.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1, 255-286.
Rizzolatti, G. & Arbib, M. A. (1998). Language within our
grasp. Trends in Neurosciences, 21, 188-194.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (2002).
From mirror neurons to imitation. In M. A. Meltzoff &
W. Prinz (Eds.), The imitative mind. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Gallese, V. & Fogassi, L. (1996).
Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research, 3, 131-141.
Schall, U., Johnston, P., Lagopoulos, J., Jüptner, M.,
Jentzen, W., Thienel, Dittmann-Balcar, A., Bender, S., &
Ward, P. B. (2003). Functional brain maps of tower of
London performance. NeuroImage, 20, 1154-1161.
Shallice T. (1982). Specific impairments of planning. Phil.
Trans. Royal Soc. London, B, 298, 199-209.
Shepard, R. N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.
Thomas, N. J. T. (1999). Are theories of imagery theories of
imagination? Cognitive Science, 23, 207-245.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. & Rosch, E. (1991). The
embodied mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wells, G. L. & Petty, R. E. (1980). The effects of overt head
movements
on
persuasion:
Compatibility
and
incompatibility responses. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 1, 219-230.
Wilson, M. (2002) Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9(4), 625-636.
Wolpert, D. M., & Kawato, M. (1998). Multiple paired
forward and inverse models for motor control. Neural
Networks, 11, 1317-1329.
Ziemke, T. (Ed.) (2002). Situated and embodied cognition
(special issue). Cognitive Systems Research, 3(3).
Ziemke, T. (2003). What's that thing called embodiment?
In: Proc. of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ziemke, T., Jirenhed, D.-A. & Hesslow, G. (in press)
Internal simulation of perception: A minimal neurorobotic model. Neurocomputing, to appear.
Zwaan, R.A. (2004). The immersed experiencer: toward an
embodied theory of language comprehension. In: B.H.
Ross (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Vol. 44. New York: Academic Press.

1314

