UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making the Implausible Plausible

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1017s268

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Connell, Louise

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making the Implausible Plausible
Louise Connell (louise.connell@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland

Abstract
Whenever we must evaluate a theory, consider an
excuse, or appraise a situation, we must judge how
plausible things appear to us. In short, plausibility
judgement occupies a central position in human
cognitive life. Recently, it has been shown that the
plausibility of a scenario depends on how its events can
be connected (Connell & Keane, in press). In this paper,
two experiments examine how a normally implausible
scenario can be made to seem plausible by forcing a
connection between its events. Results show that
people’s perceptions of a scenario’s plausibility can be
manipulated by encouraging them to represent events in
a causal chain or temporal sequence.

Introduction
Every day, in many different situations, we judge
plausibility. Whether evaluating a theory, considering
the plot quality of a movie, or listening to child explain
how a dish came to be broken, we are assessing how
plausible a scenario seems to us.
Across the cognitive science and cognitive
psychology literature, plausibility judgement has been
shown to be useful in a diverse range of cognitive tasks.
People often use plausibility judgements in place of
costly retrieval from long-term memory, especially
when verbatim memory has faded (Lemaire & Fayol,
1995; Reder, 1982; Reder, Wible & Martin, 1986).
Plausibility is also used as a kind of cognitive shortcut
in reading, to speed parsing and resolve ambiguities
(Pickering & Traxler, 1998; Speer & Clifton, 1998). In
everyday thinking, plausible reasoning that uses prior
knowledge appears to be commonplace (Collins &
Michalski, 1989), and can even aid people in making
inductive inferences about familiar topics (Smith, Shafir
& Osherson, 1993). It has also been argued that
plausibility plays a fundamental role in understanding
novel word combinations by helping to constrain the
interpretations produced (Costello & Keane, 2000;
Lynott, Tagalakis & Keane, in press). Yet, despite its
apparent usefulness in cognitive life, the study of
plausibility judgement in its own right has been
neglected in cognitive science until recently.

The Knowledge-Fitting Theory of Plausibility
Recently, Connell and Keane have proposed the
Knowledge-Fitting Theory of Plausibility (2003a,

244

2003b, in prep; Connell, 2004) to rectify this oversight.
According to the Knowledge-Fitting Theory, a plausible
scenario is one that fits well with our knowledge of the
world. In other words, a plausible scenario has good
concept-coherence. A concept-coherence view of
plausibility suggests that when people make a
plausibility judgement, they relate the current scenario
to their prior experience, and in some way assess
whether it fits in with what they have experienced in the
past. For example, take the scenario “The bottle rolled
off the shelf and smashed on the floor.” People might
understand this scenario by drawing a causal inference
between the events – that is, the bottle falling caused it
to smash on the floor. This might lead them to judge
this scenario as being highly plausible because prior
experience tells them that fragile things often break
when they fall on hard surfaces. Put simply, the
scenario has a certain concept-coherence. In contrast, if
the scenario was “The bottle rolled off the shelf and
melted on the floor”, people might consider it less
plausible because they cannot connect the events, as
their past experience has few examples of falling fragile
objects melting on contact with floors. In other words,
this scenario lacks a certain concept-coherence.
The Knowledge-Fitting Theory is supported by a
number of empirical findings. For example, Black,
Freeman and Johnson-Laird (1986) disrupted the
sequence of events in short stories and found that
people’s plausibility ratings were sensitive to the degree
to which the overall concept-coherence of the story had
been altered; when people could no longer infer
connections between events, they no longer considered
the stories plausible. Connell and Keane (in press;
Connell, 2004) investigated this issue further, and found
that the plausibility of a scenario is not only affected by
whether the events can be connected, but also by how
the events are connected. For example, events linked
by causal inferences (i.e., X was caused by Y) were
judged to be more plausible than events linked by
temporal inferences (i.e., X happens after Y). These
types of scenario were both considered more plausible
than scenarios where the events could not be connected
at all (i.e., unrelated events). Connell and Keane
(2003a, 2003b, in prep.) suggest that causal connections
have better concept-coherence than temporal
connections because they fit more closely with prior
experience, and this makes causal scenarios seem more
plausible.

The Current Study
When we judge the plausibility of some scenario in
everyday life, it is often with the objective of accepting
or rejecting the presented scenario. For example, we
may choose to accept or reject an excuse based on
whether we find it plausible or not. However,
plausibility is not always a binary variable (i.e., a
choice between plausible and implausible) (e.g., Black
et al., 1986; Connell & Keane, in press). Rather, it may
sometimes be considered as a sliding scale between
plausibility and implausibility, and we may judge a
particular scenario as lying somewhere along this scale.
In addition, the plausibility of a particular scenario may
not have a constant value: for example, temporal
scenarios can be made to seem less plausible when
attention is drawn to their non-causal nature (Keane,
Connell & O’Donoghue, in prep.).
This paper investigates whether an implausible
scenario can be made seem plausible by forcing a
particular connection between its events. The
Knowledge-Fitting Theory holds that if we cannot
connect the events in scenario, we will find it
implausible. However, it is possible that if we manage
to connect unrelated events in some way, then the
plausibility of the scenario might increase. For
example, the scenario “The bottle rolled off the shelf
and melted on the floor” seems generally implausible,
but it is possible to construct some set of circumstances
that makes it appear more plausible (e.g., the bottle
melted because the floor was very hot, because the
house was on fire). This suggests that the conceptcoherence and plausibility of a normally implausible
scenario could be manipulated by encouraging people
to make particular connections between events.
Therefore, the first experiment asks people to make
specific causal or temporal connections between
unrelated events, and examines how this influences
their decision to accept or reject the scenario. In the
second experiment, the same manipulation is used to
show how different connections also influence people’s
plausibility ratings. These results are then related back
to the Knowledge-Fitting Theory, and are used to
examine what kind of relationship exists between
binary and scale plausibility judgements.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, participants are presented with
implausible scenarios and are asked to judge whether
each scenario is plausible or not. Connell and Keane
(in press) show that scenarios with no connection
between events are considered implausible, while those
with causal and temporal connections are considered
plausible. This experiment leads people to think about
how the events in a scenario may be causally or
temporally connected, and examines how these
different connections can make people accept as

245

plausible a scenario that would normally be rejected as
implausible. For example, take this scenario: “The
teacher misspelled a word. The vase smashed.” If
people are encouraged to represent this normally
implausible scenario with a causal or temporal
connection between events, then this may lead them to
perceive the scenario as plausible. For example, if this
scenario was represented within a specific temporal
frame (e.g., the vase smashed a second or two after the
teacher misspelled a word), then it may have sufficient
concept-coherence to appear plausible to some people.
Alternatively, if this scenario was represented with a
causal chain between events (e.g., the vase smashed
because the teacher bumped against it when taking a
step back to examine the misspelled word), then it may
have sufficient concept-coherence to appear plausible to
many people.
This experiment uses different types of question to
encourage people to make particular connections
between events. In the no-connection control condition,
participants judged the plausibility of the scenario
directly after reading it, and were not asked to connect
the events in any particular way. In the other
conditions, participants had to answer a question that
encouraged them to represent the scenario in a
particular way before judging its plausibility; the causal
condition required participants to connect the events as
cause and effect, while the temporal condition required
participants to connect the events as a temporal
sequence. In short, people are expected to find few
scenarios plausible in the no-connection condition (poor
concept-coherence), more scenarios plausible in the
temporal condition (better concept-coherence), and
most scenarios plausible in the causal condition (best
concept-coherence).

Method
Materials & Design. Materials consisted of twenty
“implausible” scenarios, each consisting of two
sentences describing unrelated events. The materials
were constructed by creating twenty causal scenarios
(e.g., “The surgeon performed the operation. The
patient recovered.”) and then randomizing the
combinations of first and second sentences (e.g., “The
surgeon performed the operation. The candle
flickered.”). Thus, each scenario contained two events
where the cause (Event A) was followed by a different,
unrelated effect (Event B). The experimental design
was a single between-participants factor (connection
type), with three conditions (causal, temporal, noconnection). A between-participants design was chosen
to avoid possible confounds (e.g., participants forming
a causal connections in all presented scenarios).
Participants. Thirty-six student volunteers from
University College Dublin participated in this
experiment.

Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned, in
equal numbers, to one of the conditions in the
experiment.
Instructions stated that each scenario was taken from
a story and consisted of two events: Event A and Event
B. An example not used in the materials was given:
Event A: The boy kicked the football.
Event B: The branch snapped.
In the causal condition, participants were asked to write
down their answer to the question “Why do you think
Event B happened?” and were presented with a sample
answer “The branch snapped because the football hit it
hard, because the boy was aiming at the tree.” In the
temporal condition, participants were asked to write
down their answer to the question “How long after
Event A do you think Event B happened?” and were
presented with a sample answer “The branch snapped 2
or 3 seconds later.” In all conditions, participants were
then given a forced-choice plausibility judgement “Do
you find this scenario plausible?” and asked to circle
“Yes” if they would accept the scenario as plausible,
and to circle “No’ if they would reject the scenario as
implausible. The scenarios were presented on separate
pages in random order, resampled for each participant.

Figure 1: Percentage of scenarios accepted as plausible
for each connection type in Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
The results were in line with predictions, and are shown
in Figure 1. Three scenarios were considered plausible
by more than 80% of participants in the no-connection
control condition, and these were excluded from the
analysis in all conditions. While this paper lacks
sufficient space to discuss participants’ answers in

246

detail, people reported little difficulty in making the
connections in the temporal condition, and only
occasional difficulty in the causal condition.
People’s willingness to accept the scenarios as
plausible was influenced by how they had been
encouraged to represent the connections between
events, as shown by chi-squared analysis, χ2 = 47.74, df
= 2, p < 0.0001. When asked to represent the events as
a specific temporal sequence, people accepted
significantly more scenarios as plausible (42%,
compared to 31% control), χ 2 = 5.31, df = 1, p < 0.05.
However, the greatest change occurred when people
were asked to represent a causal chain between the
events, with over twice the number of scenarios being
perceived as plausible (65%, compared to 31%
control), χ2 = 45.77, df = 1, p < 0.0001. In this way,
causal connections were reliably better than temporal
connections at making scenarios appear plausible (65%
compared to 42%), χ2 = 20.71, df = 1, p < 0.0001.
So what makes implausible scenarios suddenly
appear plausible? Why do people perceive the
plausibility of a scenario differently when they are
asked why or when events happened? After all, the
actual connection made between unrelated events is
arbitrary: people are free to come up with any
explanation or time frame they choose to connect the
events. There is nothing stopping people from causally
connecting the events in the no-connection control
condition, nor is anything stopping them from causally
representing the scenario when answering the temporal
question. Indeed, it could be argued that the 31%
plausible responses in the no-connection control
condition result from the times that people managed to
make a causal connection between events without any
guidance. In effect, the pattern of results suggests that a
kind of “cognitive laziness” is at play, and that people
do not put any more effort into representing the
scenarios than is absolutely necessary. In the noconnection control condition, most scenarios are judged
as implausible because no obvious connection between
the events comes to mind. However, in order to be able
to answer the temporal question, a certain amount of
extra effort must go into connecting the events. If the
resulting representation has sufficient conceptcoherence, the scenario then seems plausible. Lastly,
answering the causal question requires quite a lot of
effort, as people must explicitly lay out the
circumstances that brought about the second event. The
resulting causal representation is likely to have good
concept-coherence, and so the scenario is likely to
appear plausible. This “cognitive laziness” view is
consistent with other studies that have demonstrated
people’s reluctance to infer causal relations unless
prompted to do so (e.g., Keane, 1997; McKoon &
Ratcliff, 1992).

This experiment shows that people will accept an
implausible scenario as plausible if they are encouraged
to connect events in a certain way. However, it is also
possible to elicit a more fine-grained judgement of
plausibility. When people accept a scenario, is it
because they judge it to be very plausible or just
moderately plausible? This question is addressed in the
next experiment.

judgement. In all conditions, participants were asked
“How plausible do you find this scenario?” and asked to
circle a rating on a scale from 0 – 10. A rating of 0 was
described as meaning the scenario was “not at all
plausible”, while 5 meant “moderately plausible” and
10 meant “completely plausible”.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 is identical to Experiment 1, except
participants are asked to rate the plausibility of
scenarios on a scale from 0-10 instead of simply
choosing whether the scenario seems plausible or
implausible. In other words, participants are presented
with implausible scenarios and are asked to judge how
plausible they find each scenario. As with Experiment
1, scenarios in the causal and temporal conditions are
expected to be rated as more plausible than those in the
no-connection control condition because of their greater
concept-coherence.
However, there are two
possibilities for how the causal and temporal conditions
may be distinguished.
The first possibility is that when people in the causal
condition accept a scenario as plausible, they actually
consider it to be highly plausible. This means that
causal connections between unrelated events would be
considered to have very good concept-coherence;
indeed, just as good as for more straightforward causal
scenarios. If this were the case, the results would
mirror those of Connell and Keane (in press,
experiment 1), where causal scenarios were rated as
highly plausible (7.8 out of 10) and temporal scenarios
were rated as only moderately plausible (4.2 out of 10).
The second possibility is that, although implausible
scenarios may become acceptably plausible in the
causal condition, they will never seem highly plausible.
This means that people will perceive causal connections
between unrelated events to be of a lower quality (i.e.,
have poorer concept-coherence) than more
straightforward causal scenarios (as in Connell and
Keane’s study). If this were the case, then ratings in the
causal and temporal conditions would be expected to be
capped at a level of moderate plausibility.

Method
Materials & Design. The materials and design were
the same as in Experiment 1.
Participants. Thirty-six student volunteers from
University College Dublin, who had not taken part in
Experiment 1, participated in this experiment.
P r o c e d u r e . The procedure was the same as in
Experiment 1, except that participants were asked for a
plausibility rating rather than a forced choice

247

Figure 2: Mean scenario plausibility ratings for each
connection type in Experiment 2.

Results & Discussion
The results were in line with predictions, and are shown
in Figure 2. As before, three scenarios that were
considered plausible by more than 80% of participants
in Experiment 1’s no-connection control condition were
excluded from the analysis in all conditions. Analyses
of variance are performed by-participants (F1) and byitems (F2), treating participants and items as random
factors, respectively.
People’s plausibility ratings were influenced by how
they had been encouraged to represent the connections
between events, as shown by the main effect of
connection type, F1(2, 33) = 6.30, p < 0.005; F2(2, 32) =
31.36, p < 0.0001. Planned comparisons showed that,
when asked to represent the events as a specific
temporal sequence, people judged the scenarios to be
significantly more plausible (5.0, compared to 3.5
control), F1(1, 22) = 9.53, p < 0.005; F2(1, 16) = 50.58,
p < 0.0001. Similarly, when people were asked to
represent a causal chain between the events, they
perceived the scenarios as being significantly more
plausible (5.2, compared to 3.5 control), F 1(1, 22) =
11.74, p < 0.005; F2(1, 16) = 53.23, p < 0.0001.
However, there was no difference between the temporal
and causal conditions; people did not consider causal

248

10
9

Mean Plausibility Ratings

connections between events to be any more plausible
than temporal connections, F1 < 1; F 2(1, 16) = 1.30, p >
0.25.
This experiment shows that, although implausible
scenarios may become acceptably plausible in the
causal condition, they can never seem highly plausible.
In other words, while unrelated events can be causally
connected, they do not fit with prior knowledge quite as
well as more obvious causal connections. For example,
we may causally connect the events in the scenario
“The teacher misspelled a word. The vase smashed.”
by assuming that the vase smashed because the teacher
bumped against it when taking a step back to examine
the misspelled word. While this scenario may just
about seem acceptably plausible, it does not seem
highly plausible. It certainly does not seem as plausible
as a more straightforward causal scenario like “The cat
knocked over a vase. The vase smashed.” Similarly,
for the temporal condition, the results show that
connecting events in a specific time frame (e.g., the
vase smashed seconds after the teacher misspelled a
word) makes a scenario seem somewhat plausible.
However, temporal scenarios are considered only
moderately plausible at best (Connell & Keane, in
press), which suggests that a temporal connection
between unrelated events fits with prior knowledge
about as well as any other temporal connection. In
short, the concept-coherence and plausibility of a
normally implausible scenario can be manipulated by
encouraging people to make particular connections
between events, but the scenario will generally not be
judged more than moderately plausible.
So what is the relationship between judging whether
a scenario is plausible and judging how plausible it is?
In Experiment 1, we saw that 65% of scenarios in the
causal condition were considered acceptably plausible,
but yet in Experiment 2, these same scenarios received
a plausibility rating of only 5.2 / 10. Similarly, 42% of
scenarios in the temporal condition were considered
acceptably plausible, and yet were also rated at 5.0 / 10.
Analysis of the percentage of plausible responses in
Experiments 1 and the mean plausibility ratings in
Experiment 2, for each scenario in each condition,
shows a direct linear relationship between a scenario’s
plausibility rating and its acceptability (see Figure 3).
This relationship has a significant correlation of r =
0.88, N = 60, p < 0.0001. In short, scenarios with a
high plausibility rating will be accepted by most people,
while scenarios with a low plausibility rating will be
rejected by most people. This suggests that there is no
absolute plausibility threshold, above which a scenario
will be accepted by everyone as completely plausible.
Rather, it depends on what level of acceptability is
desired. For example, if we wish 90% of people to
accept a scenario, then it should have a mean
plausibility rating of approximately 7 out of 10.

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

% Plausible Responses

Figure 3: Relationship between scenarios’ plausibility
ratings and their frequency of acceptance.

General Discussion
This paper shows that an implausible scenario can be
made seem plausible by forcing a particular connection
between its events. Encouraging people to represent
events in a causal chain or temporal sequence, without
specifying what the connection should be, alters their
perceptions of a scenario’s plausibility. In Experiment
1, people are shown to accept 65% of scenarios as
plausible once they had explicitly noted a possible
causal chain, and 42% of scenarios once they had
explicitly noted a possible temporal frame for the
events. This compares to a low rate of acceptance for
the same scenarios when people are free to make any
connections they choose. In Experiment 2, people are
shown to consider scenarios as moderately plausible
when they are guided into connecting events causally or
temporally. In contrast, the same scenarios receive low
plausibility ratings when people are free to make any
connections they choose. Thus, the novel empirical
work reported here demonstrates how people’s
perceptions of plausibility can be influenced by the
circumstances surrounding the task. These findings
have implications for any research making use of
plausibility judgements, in fields including memory,
discourse comprehension, reasoning and conceptual
combination.
According to the Knowledge-Fitting Theory of
Plausibility (Connell & Keane, 2003a, 2003b, in prep;
Connell, 2004), plausibility judgement is about
assessing concept-coherence. This view holds that
when people make a plausibility judgement, they relate
the current scenario to their prior experience, and in
some way assess whether it fits in with what they have
experienced in the past. Depending on how we

represent a scenario in the first place (i.e., how we
connect its events) will therefore determine how well it
fits with our prior knowledge. What this paper
demonstrates is that the representation of a scenario
varies according to how we are encouraged to connect
the events. In other words, the concept-coherence and
plausibility of a scenario can be manipulated by guiding
people towards certain kinds of representation.
The results reported here suggest that people judge
plausibility with a certain “cognitive laziness”. This
means that they do not put any more effort into
representing the scenarios than is absolutely necessary.
When presented with a scenario, if a possible
connection between events does not immediately leap
out, then people do not take the trouble to connect the
events and instead dismiss the scenario as implausible.
However, if circumstances require, people are perfectly
capable of connecting even the most disparate events in
a coherent manner. For example, the scenario “The
teacher misspelled a word. The vase smashed.”
contains events that are quite difficult to connect.
However, people were well able to connect these
unrelated events in the causal condition of both
experiments, as evinced by the wide and creative
variety of causal chains given – e.g., the vase smashed
because the teacher bumped against it when stepping
back from the blackboard, or because the teacher
smashed it in a temper after realising the mistake, or
because it was knocked over by a student eager to
correct the teacher’s error.
It is only when
circumstances demand it that people overcome their
cognitive laziness and take the trouble to reason out a
possible connection between events. Indeed, this
“cognitive laziness” view is not without its advantages.
As well as allowing people to judge plausibility with
the least amount of computational expense, it is also
tends towards false negatives rather than false positives.
This makes it quite a sound approach, as it is safer to
reject a scenario that later proves viable than to accept
one that later proves unviable.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by funding from the Irish
Research Council for Science, Engineering and
Technology, under the Embark Initiative. Thanks also
to Dermot Lynott for valuable comments, and to Amy
Bohan and Fergus Toolan for experimental assistance.

References
Black, A., Freeman, P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1986).
Plausibility and the comprehension of text. British
Journal of Psychology, 77, 51-60.
Collins, A., & Michalski, R. (1989). The logic of
plausible reasoning: A core theory. Cognitive
Science, 13, 1-49.

249

Connell, L. & Keane, M. T. (2003a). PAM: A cognitive
model of plausibility. Proceedings of the TwentyFifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Connell, L., & Keane, M. T. (2003b). The knowledgefitting theory of plausibility. Proceedings of the
Fourteenth Irish Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Cognitive Science (pp. 40-45). Ireland: Trinity
College Dublin.
Connell, L. (2004). A cognitive theory and model of
plausibility. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer
Science, University College Dublin, Ireland.
Connell, L., & Keane, M. T. (in press). What Plausibly
Affects Plausibility? Concept-Coherence &
Distributional Word-Coherence As Factors
Influencing Plausibility Judgements. To appear in
Memory and Cognition.
Connell, L., & Keane, M. T. (in prep.). The knowledgefitting theory of plausibility. Manuscript in
preparation.
Costello, F., & Keane, M. T. (2000). Efficient
Creativity: Constraints on conceptual combination.
Cognitive Science, 24, 299-349.
Keane, M. T. (1997). What makes an analogy difficult?:
The effects of order and causal structure in analogical
mapping. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 23, 946-967.
Keane, M. T., Connell, L., & O’Donoghue, N. (in
prep.). Questioning plausibility judgements: how
questions and inferences affect plausibility.
Manuscript in preparation.
Lemaire, P. & Fayol, M. (1995). When plausibility
judgments supersede fact retrieval: The example of
the odd-even rule effect in simple arithmetic. Memory
and Cognition, 23, 34-48.
Lynott, D., Tagalakis, G., & Keane, M. T. (in press).
Conceptual combination with PUNC. To appear in AI
Review.
McKoon, G. & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Inference during
reading. Psychological Review, 99, 440-466.
Pickering, M. J., & Traxler, M. J. (1998). Plausibility
and recovery from garden paths: An eye-tracking
study. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 24, 940-961.
Reder, L. M. (1982). Plausibility judgments vs. fact
retrieval: Alternative strategies for sentence
verification. Psychological Review, 89(3), 250-280.
Reder, L. M., Wible, C., & Martin, J. (1986).
Differential memory changes with age: Exact
retrieval versus plausible inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 12(1), 72-81.
Smith, E. E., Shafir, E., & Osherson, D. (1993).
Similarity, plausibility, and judgments of probability.
Cognition, 49, 67-96.
Speer, S. R., & Clifton, C. (1998). Plausibility and
argument structure in sentence comprehension.
Memory and Cognition, 26, 965-978.

