UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mapping Written Input onto Orthographic Representations: The Case of Bilinguals With
Partially Overlapping Orthographies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rd4b29d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Marian, Viorica
Kaushanskaya, Margarita

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mapping Written Input onto Orthographic Representations:
The Case of Bilinguals With Partially Overlapping Orthographies
Viorica Marian (v-marian@northwestern.edu)
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Margarita Kaushanskaya (m-kaushanskaya@northwestern.edu)
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract

bilinguals were presented with a visual display containing
four objects (actual objects or toy replicas, as applicable),
such as a shark, a balloon (sharik in Russian), a horse, and a
napkin, and were instructed in English to “pick up the
shark,” they frequently made eye movements to the crosslinguistic phonological competitor sharik. In this case, the
Russian word sharik was a cross-linguistic cohort (cf.
Marslen-Wilson, 1987; see also Cutler, 1995; MarslenWilson & Welsch, 1978) of the English target word shark,
i.e., the beginning portion of the name of the target object
carried phonetic similarity to the name of one of the other
objects in the other language. Eye movements to the crosslinguistic cohort, even when the other language is not being
used overtly, supports the hypothesis that phonemic input
initially activates both languages during bilingual spoken
language processing.
For written word recognition, studies examining whether
or not both languages are activated in parallel used code
switching (e.g., Doctor & Klein, 1992; Grainger, 1993;
Grainger & Dijkstra, 1992; Li, 1996; Nas, 1983; Soares &
Grosjean, 1984), phoneme monitoring (e.g., Colome, 2001),
lexical decision (e.g., Brysbaert, Van Dyck, & Van de Poel,
1999; DeGroot, Delmaar, & Lupker, 2000; Dijkstra,
Grainger, & van Heuven, 1999), and priming tasks (e.g.,
Beauvillain & Grainger, 1987). Results indicate that
orthographic input simultaneously activates lexical items
across the two lexicons in the very early stages of
processing, that bilingual visual word recognition is based
on a stimulus-driven analysis indifferent to language, and
that lexical representation in bilingual visual word
recognition is governed by orthography rather than by
language. For example, Bijeljac-Babic, Biardeau, and
Grainger (1997) investigated activation of orthographic
representations in bilingual visual word recognition by
using a masked priming paradigm. Orthographic priming
was observed in both monolingual and bilingual conditions,
suggesting that printed strings of letters can simultaneously
activate lexical representations in both languages, insofar as
these share the same alphabet.
In another study on visual word recognition, Van Heuven,
Dijkstra, and Grainger (1998) used the interlingual
neighbors paradigm (an orthographic neighbor is any word
differing by a single letter from the target word). Cross-

Mapping of written input onto orthographic representations
was examined in bilingual speakers whose two languages
have partially overlapping orthographies. Russian-English
bilinguals and English monolinguals were tested with a
modified version of the picture-word interference paradigm,
adapted for use with eye-tracking. Compared to English
monolinguals, Russian-English bilinguals (tested in English)
made more eye movements to written stimuli that, if mapped
onto two orthographic systems simultaneously, constituted
Russian words. Results suggest parallel activation of both
languages during visual processing of written input, even
when the orthography is associated with different
phonological representations in the two languages. We
suggest that decoding of written input in languages with
partial orthographic overlap is not limited to one language
only, but that the mapping of visual stimuli takes place onto
the orthographic systems of both languages and that lexical
representations in the non-target language become activated.

Introduction
Recent studies of bilingual language processing challenge
earlier accounts of the language switch hypothesis (e.g.,
MacNamara & Kushnir, 1971), according to which
bilinguals are able to selectively activate and deactivate
their two languages. Instead, data support interactive
parallel processing accounts, according to which linguistic
input activates both languages simultaneously. For spoken
word recognition, evidence supporting activation of both
lexicons comes from research investigating spoken language
processing in bilinguals using eye-tracking (Marian &
Spivey, 2003a,b; Spivey & Marian, 1999). In the eyetracking paradigm, participants are given spoken
instructions to move objects on a table while their eye
movements are recorded. Although participants rarely pick
up incorrect objects, it is often observed that they fixate
objects that have similar phonology to the spoken word
(e.g., Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 1998;
Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995).
The eye-tracking technique, merging input from both the
visual and auditory modalities, was adapted for use with
bilinguals to index activation of a second language nonlinguistically. For example, when Russian-English

891

language interference on target word recognition was
examined with a comprehensive corpus of Dutch and
English words by varying the number of orthographic
neighbors of the target word in the non-target language. The
results showed that words in the non-target language with a
greater number of orthographic neighbors in the target
language had slower response times than words that had
fewer orthographic neighbors in the target language. An
increase in orthographic neighbors within the same language
consistently produced inhibitory effects for the non-target
language and facilitatory effects for the target language.
Because this work is based on bilinguals whose languages
share orthography and where orthography-to-phonology
mappings largely overlap across the two languages, the
extent of parallel activation for languages that do not share
orthography, or share it only partially, remains unclear.
Studies with bilinguals that speak languages that do not
overlap orthographically are limited (e.g., Tzelgov, Henik,
Sneg, & Baruch, 1996). Languages that do not share visual
representation make it possible to examine phonological and
semantic activation of the non-target language during
bilingual reading (Besner & Hildebrandt, 1987; Bowers,
Mimouni, & Arguin, 2000; Brown, Sharma, & Kirsner,
1984; Chen & Tsoi, 1990; Smith & Kirsner, 1982), but not
activation of the written form of both languages. Testing
Russian-English bilinguals whose two languages share
some, but not all, orthographic and phonological forms,
provides precisely this advantage--it becomes possible to
dissociate the activation of phonology and orthography
during language processing by manipulating stimulus makeup.
The two languages of a Russian-English bilingual include
some graphemes that share both visual and auditory form
(e.g., K), other graphemes that share visual, but not auditory
form (e.g., P, which in Russian reads R), yet others that
share auditory, but not visual form (letters specific to the
Latin vs. Cyrillic alphabets). Of particular interest in
designing the present study are the 12 letters that overlap
orthographically across English and Russian. Of these, 6
share both orthography and phonology—A, E, K, M, O, T.
The remaining six, although identical orthographically,
carry no phonological overlap—B, C, H, P, Y, X (the
corresponding phonological representations in Russian are,
following the Library of Congress Transliteration Schemes
for Non-Roman Scripts (1991): B-v, C-s, H-n, P-r, Y-u, Xh). Testing Russian-English bilinguals makes it possible to
examine the mapping of the visual stimulus onto
orthographic and phonological representations in the two
languages during bilingual lexical access in circumstances
where phonemic overlap across two languages is possible
without orthographic overlap and where orthographic
overlap between the two languages is possible without
phonemic overlap. By manipulating orthographic form and
the associated phonological representations, the present
experiment tests activation of the other language when the
written input shares orthographic, but does not share
phonological, representation across languages. The stated

relationship between Russian and English in terms of
phonological and orthographic structure of the two
languages can provide valuable insights into orthographic
and phonological processing and contribute to
understanding the extent to which constraints imposed by
language structure modulate cross-language interactions.
The only other similar work exploring processing of Latin
and Cyrillic alphabets comes from studies of monolingual
speakers of Serbo-Croatian (e.g., Feldman & Turvey, 1983;
Lukatela, Savic, Gligorijevic, Ognjenovic, & Turvey, 1978).
Serbo-Croatian as a language is unique in that it uses two
alphabets, Latin and Cyrillic. Serbo-Croatian speakers are
slower in lexical decision tasks when two phonological
interpretations could be assigned to the same letter string, an
effect sensitive to the number and distribution of ambiguous
characters. The major difference between studying RussianEnglish bilinguals and studying Serbo-Croatian speakers is
that Serbo-Croatian speakers are monolingual and therefore,
by definition, have an integrated lexicon.
In the present experiment, a modified version of the
Picture-Word Interference (PWI) paradigm, adapted for use
with an eye-tracker, was used. The PWI paradigm consists
of presenting participants with a picture that also contains a
written word. Participants have to name the picture while
ignoring the word; reaction times are recorded. Multiple
studies suggest that picture naming latencies vary as a
function of the relation between a picture and a distracter
word (e.g., Caramazza & Costa, 2000, 2001; Deschneiak &
Schriefers, 2001; LaHeij & van den Hof, 1995; Rayner &
Springer, 1986; Schriefers & Meyer, 1990). For example,
semantically related words interfere more than semantically
unrelated words (e.g., Levelt, Schriefers, Vorberg, Meyer,
Pechmann, & Havinga, 1991; Starreveld & LaHeij, 1996,
1995). The surface form of the distractor word also
influences picture naming (e.g., Meyer & Schriefers, 1991),
with phonological similarities facilitating picture naming
(e.g., Descheniak & Schriefers, 2001). Performance on the
bilingual PWI task has been examined both for semantically
and phonologically related items (e.g., Costa & Caramazza,
1999; Costa, Miozzo, & Caramazza, 1999) and was found to
be vulnerable to semantic interference from a non-target
language (e.g., Ehri & Buchard-Ryan, 1980; Hermans,
Bongaerts, de Bot, & Schreuder, 1998), but the effect was
mediated by degree of proficiency (e.g., Goodman, Haith,
Guttentag, & Rao, 1985), by similarity of the two
languages, and by response language (for a review, see
Smith, 1997). The modification of the PWI task for use
with eye-tracking consists of presenting the written word in
a different quadrant of the visual display (as opposed to
within the picture). The technique was piloted with
monolingual English and bilingual Russian-English
speakers and confirmed that interference effects persisted.
In sum, the present experiment examined parallel
activation of both languages during bilingual written word
recognition in monolingual settings and extended the study
of parallel activation during bilingual written word
recognition to languages with partial overlap in orthography

892

and orthography-to-phonology mappings. We predicted that,
compared to English monolinguals, Russian-English
bilinguals naming pictures in English would make more eye
movements to written stimuli that are semantically unrelated
to the picture in English, but are related to it in Russian, thus
suggesting that processing of written input is not limited to
the target language, but that the visual stimulus is also
mapped onto non-target language orthography, even when
orthographic representations are associated with different
phonological forms in the two languages.

length and bigram frequency. For English frequencies, the
CELEX database was used (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Van
Rijn, 1993). For Russian frequencies, the new Frequency
Dictionary at the Russian Research Institute of Artificial
Intelligence (www.artint.ru/projects/frqlist/frqlist-en.asp;
Sharoff, 2002) was used. Stimuli consisted of black line
drawings and were generated using the IMSI Masterclips
database and original artwork, and were altered in Adobe
Photoshop. In order to meaningfully monitor eye
movements, the locations of the target picture and the
written word on the display were varied across four possible
quadrants (top left, top right, bottom left, bottom right).

Methods

Procedure
All participants were tested in English. The bilingual
speakers were tested in one language only so as to prevent
overt activation of the other language during the experiment.
Participants were asked to label pictures presented on a Mac
computer display (G4 dual-processor computer) using
Superlab software. Their verbal responses were recorded
using a microphone. Eye movements during the experiment
were recorded using an ISCAN head-mounted eye-tracker.
The head-mounted eye-tracker consisted of a baseball-like
cap, with two small cameras attached to the visor. One
camera recorded the participant’s field of view, and the
other camera recorded the participant’s eye movements; the
outputs from the two cameras were superimposed and
recorded using a digital recorder and were later analyzed
using FinalCutPro software with frame-by-frame
audio/video playback.

Design
The study followed a 2 x 2 mixed factorial design, with
group (bilingual vs. monolingual) as the between-subject
factor and condition (control vs. Russian words) as the
within-subject factor. All participants were tested in English
only. In the first condition, the picture and the distracter
word were semantically unrelated if the written stimulus
was mapped onto either language (e.g., picture of a
palmtree, written stimulus HOCTA). In the second
condition, the picture and the distracter were unrelated if the
written word was mapped onto English orthography only,
but semantically related if it was also mapped onto Russian
orthography (e.g., picture of a palmtree, word stimulus is
COCHA. In English COCHA is a non-word, while in
Russian it is the orthographic representation of the word
pinetree and is pronounced sasna.) In the second condition,
semantic interference is present if the written stimulus is
mapped in parallel not only onto English orthography, but
also onto Russian orthography, therefore activating the other
language in a bottom-up manner. Proportion of eye
movements to distracter words and reaction times for
picture naming were measured.

Results
The proportions of eye movements to distracter words
during picture naming were analyzed with a 2 x 2 Analysis
of Covariance, with group (monolingual or bilingual) and
condition (control or Russian word) as the two independent
variables and language preference when reading as
covariate. Results revealed a main effect of group, F (1,
27)=5.06, p<0.05 and a significant interaction between
condition and group, F (1, 27)=4.78, p<0.05. Overall,
bilinguals made more eye movements to distracter words
than monolinguals, 56% vs 34%. However, post-hoc
analyses suggest that this difference was larger in the
Russian words condition (61% for bilinguals vs 32% for
monolinguals), where the two groups were significantly
different from each other (F (1,27)=7.77, p<0.01), than in
the control condition (50% for bilinguals vs 37% for
monolinguals), where the two groups did not differ
significantly (F (1,27)=1.92, p>0.1). A similar 2x2 Ancova
on reaction time data did not reveal any significant effect of
condition (F=1.16, p>0.1), group (F=1.33, p>0.1), or
interaction between the two (F=0.21, p>0.1).
Based on self-reports collected with the LEABS
Questionnaire, Russian-English bilinguals were grouped
into 2 types, one consisting of bilinguals who preferred to
read in English and one consisting of bilinguals who
preferred to read in Russian. The proportion of looks made

Participants
Fifteen Russian-English bilinguals (mean age=25 years) and
15 English monolinguals (mean age=21 years) were tested.
Russian-English bilinguals and monolingual English
speakers were recruited among undergraduate and graduate
students at Northwestern University and via personal
contacts. All participants were paid for their participation.
In addition to picture naming, all participants were
administered the Language Experience and Bilingual Status
(LEABS) Questionnaire (Marian, Blumenfeld, &
Kaushanskaya, 2003) for self–reported measures of
language preference, proficiency, acquisition history, and
current exposure. All bilinguals were fluent in both
languages and were not enrolled in ESL classes. Measures
of language experience collected via self-reports were
included in analyses of covariance.
Stimuli
Twenty-four stimulus sets were generated for the two
conditions. Across conditions, stimuli were controlled for

893

by the two types of bilinguals to Russian competitor words
and to control stimuli were compared in two ways. First,
we examined whether or not the two types of bilinguals
looked at the written stimuli at all (individual trials were
coded with a 0 if participants did not look at the written
stimulus and with a 1 if they did). Next, we examined the
number of times the participants looked at a written
stimulus (individual trials were coded with a 0 if
participants did not look at the written stimulus, with a 1 if
they looked at it once, with a 2 if they looked at it twice,
with a 3 if they looked at it three times, and so on). Results
of the first comparison did not reveal any significant
differences, suggesting that the two types of bilinguals were
just as likely to fixate distracter Russian words. Results of
the second comparison revealed a marginally significant
interaction between condition and type of bilinguals, F(1,
13)=4.43, p<0.06. Bilinguals who preferred to read in
English (N=9) looked at Russian words more often (60%)
than at control stimuli (48%); this pattern was not observed
for bilinguals (N=6) who preferred to read in Russian (47%
to Russian words and 52% to control stimuli).

study, bilinguals who preferred reading in their second
language (English) were just as likely to fixate Russian
words as their peers who preferred reading in Russian, but
once a written stimulus drew their eye movements,
bilinguals who preferred to read in English were more likely
to look at the Russian word again, fixating it repeatedly.
These results suggest that, while the non-target language
was activated in both types of bilinguals, processing the
written input and possibly accessing its lexical
representation was more effortful for those bilinguals whose
preferred reading language was English.
It is notable that activation of the non-target language
occurred in spite of the differential orthography-tophonology mappings associated with the two languages.
Although these results suggest simultaneous mapping onto
the orthography and lexicon of the non-target language, they
do not provide information about activation of the nontarget language phonology, since lexical activation of the
non-target language during orthographic processing may or
may not have included phonological activation (i.e.,
mapping to the lexicon may have been directly from
orthographic representations, bypassing phonology). To
examine activation of non-target language phonology during
written language processing, a mirror image of the present
experiment is required. Namely, while the present
experiment tested activation of non-target language
orthography by examining processing of input that
overlapped orthographically, but not phonologically, a
separate experiment tested activation of non-target language
p h o n o l o g y by examining processing of input that
overlapped phonologically, but not orthographically
(Kaushanskaya & Marian, 2004).
Moreover, for a more comprehensive understanding of
parallel activation of both languages in Russian-English
bilinguals during written language processing, a closer look
at semantic processing is necessary. In the present study,
stimuli consisted of English non-words, so as to avoid word
frequency confounds across languages. Future work needs
to expand this paradigm to processing written stimuli that
constitute words in both languages. Whether the written
stimuli are English words or nonsense strings is likely to
influence the strength of competition from Russian
semantically-related words. Furthermore, when the written
stimulus is a word in each language, word frequencies in the
two languages are likely to influence the effect, with higherfrequency mappings resulting in faster activation. Finally,
future efforts will also focus on examining input properties
that are likely to influence the relative activation of the nontarget language during written word recognition, such as
amount of orthographic and phonemic overlap across the
two languages.
The proposed project has implications for understanding
language development and processing in bilinguals, and
reading and acquisition of literacy in bilinguals, with
potential implications for bilingual education and for
assessment of bilinguals. For instance, understanding
written word recognition in bilinguals who are in

Discussion
The present experiment examined mapping of visual input
onto orthographic representations and lexical forms in
bilinguals whose two languages share partial orthographic
overlap. Results suggest that Russian-English bilinguals,
when presented with written language input in a
monolingual English setting, map the visual stimulus onto
orthographic representations in both languages. As a result,
lexical representations in the non-target language become
activated, as evidenced by more eye movements to Russian
distracter words relative to bigram-matched control stimuli
in bilinguals, but not in monolinguals. These findings
contribute to the existing body of literature suggesting
simultaneous activation of a bilingual’s two languages
during written language processing and extend them to
speakers whose two languages overlap orthographically
only partially.
Absence of differences in picture-naming reaction times
suggests that the simultaneous activation of non-target
language orthography and lexicon (as demonstrated by eye
movement data) did not minimize the efficiency with which
bilinguals accomplished a language production task in the
target language. This finding is consistent with recent
accounts of optimal speed/accuracy outcomes achieved by
parallel interactive models of language processing.
The finding that preferred reading language influenced
the degree of activation of a bilingual’s other language (as
indicated by number of times bilinguals looked at Russian
words) points to the importance of carefully assessing
bilinguals’ experience and proficiency in the two languages.
Proficiency understanding, speaking, reading, and writing in
the two languages, as well as factors pertaining to
acquisition and current use of the two languages are just
some of the variables to be taken into account when testing
language processing in bilinguals (Marian, to appear). In our

894

monolingual contexts may have implications for bilingual
children entering mainstream (not ESOL) classrooms. The
results of the 2000 Census indicate that 18% of American
households speak a language other than English at home and
that this proportion is increasing. Understanding how
bilingual status influences cognitive and linguistic
functioning may have direct implications for this
linguistically diverse and severely under-served segment of
the population. Beyond bilingual language processing, this
research will contribute to advancing the understanding of
language processing in general, including written word
recognition and spoken word production.

Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 25, 1,
137-148.
Caramazza, A., & Costa, A. (2000). The semantic
interference effect in the picture-word interference
paradigm: Does response set matter? Cognition, 75, B51B64.
Caramazza, A., & Costa, A. (2001). Set size and repetition
in the picture-word interference paradigm: Implications
for models of naming. Cognition, 80, 291-298.
Chen, H. C., & Tsoi, K. C. (1990). Symbol-word
interference in Chinese and English. Acta Psycholigica,
75, 123-138.
Colome, A. (2001). Lexical activation in bilinguals’ speech
production: Language-specific or language independent?
Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 4, 721-736.
Costa, A., & Caramazza, A. (1999). Is lexical selection in
bilingual speech production language-specific? Further
evidence from Spanish-English and English-Spanish
bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 2,
231-244.
Costa, A., Miozzo, M., & Caramazza, A. (1999). Lexical
selection in bilinguals: Do words in the bilingual's two
lexicons compete for selection. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 365-397.
Cutler, A. (1995). Spoken word recognition and production.
In J. Miller & P. Eimas (eds.), Handbook of cognition and
perception (pp. 97-136). New York: Academic Press.
DeGroot, A. M. B., Delmaar, P., & Lupker, S.J. (2000). The
processing of interlexical homographs in translation
recognition and lexical decision: Support for nonselective access to bilingual memory. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53A, 397-428.
Descheniak, J. D., & Schriefers, H. (2001). Priming effects
from phonologically related distractors in picture-word
interference. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54A, 371-382.
Dijkstra, T., Grainger, J., & van Heuven, W. (1999).
Recognition of cognates and interlingual homographs:
The neglected role of phonology. Journal of Memory and
Language, 41, 496-518.
Doctor, E. A., & Klein, D. (1992). Phonological processing
in bilingual word recognition. In R. J. Harris (Ed.),
Cognitive Processing in Bilinguals (pp. 237-252).
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ehri, L. C., & Bouchard Ryan, E. (1980). Performance of
bilinguals on a picture-word interference task. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 9, 3, 285-302.
Feldman, L. B., & Turvey, M. T. (1983). Word recognition
in Serbo-Croation is a phonologically analytic. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 9, 288-298.
Goodman, G. S., Haith, M. M., Guttentag, R. E., & Rao, S.
(1985). Automatic processing of word meaning;
intralingual and interlingual interference. Child
Development, 56, 103-118.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by Northwestern University junior
faculty start-up funds to the first author and by a Graduate
Research Grant to the second author. We thank Karla
McGregor, Doris Johnson, Henrike Blumenfeld, Caitlin
Fausey, and the members of the Bilingualism and
Psycholinguistics Research lab for helpful discussions
during the course of this work.

References
Allopenna, P., Magnuson, J., & Tanenhaus, M. (1998).
Tracking the time course of spoken word recognition
using eye movements: Evidence for continuous mapping
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 419-439.
American Library Association and the Library of Congress.
(1991). ALA-LC Romanization tables: Transliteration
schemes for non-Roman scripts. Library of Congress,
Washington D. C.
Baayen, H., Piepenbrock, R., & van Rijn, H. (1993). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania, Linguistic Data Consortium.
Beauvillain, C., & Grainger, J. (1987). Accessing
interlexical homographs: Some limitations of a languageselective access. Journal of Memory and Language, 26,
658-672.
Besner, D., & Hildebrandt, N. (1987). Othographic and
phonological codes in the oral reading of Japanese Kana.
Journal of Expiremental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 13, 335-343.
Bijeljac-Babic, R., Biardeau, A., & Grainger, J. (1997).
Masked orthographic priming in bilingual word
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 25, 447-457.
Bowers, J. S., Mimouni, Z., & Arguin, M. (2000).
Orthography plays a critical role in cognate priming:
Evidence from French/English and Arabic/French
cognates. Memory and Cognition, 28, 1289-1296.
Brown, H., Sharma, N. K., & Kirsner, K. (1984). The role f
script and phonology in lexical representation. T h e
Quarterly Journal of Expiremental Psychology. 36A, 491505.
Brysbaert, M., Van Dyck, G., & Van de Poel, M. (1999).
Visual word recognition in bilinguals: Evidence from
masked phonological priming. Journal of Experimental

895

Grainger, J. (1993). Visual word recognition in bilinguals.
In R. Schreuder & B. Weltens (eds.), The Bilingual
Lexicon (pp. 11-26). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Grainger, J., & Dijkstra, A. (1992). On the representation
and use of language information in bilinguals. In R. J.
Harris (ed.), Cognitive Processing in Bilinguals (pp. 207220). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hermans, D., Bongaerts, T., de Bot, K., & Schreuder, R.
(1998). Producing words in a foreign language: Can
speakers prevent interference from their first language?
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1, 213-229.
Kaushanskaya, M. & Marian, V. (2004). Activation of nontarget language phonology during bilingual visual word
recognition: Evidence from eye-tracking. Proceedings of
the 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
La Heij, W., & van den Hof, E. (1995). Picture-word
interference increases with target-set size. Journal of
Psychological Research, 58, 119-133.
Levelt, W. J. M., Schriefers, H., Vorberg, D., Meyer, A. S.,
Pechmann,T. H., & Havinga, J. (1991). The time course
of lexical access in speech production: A study of picture
naming. Psychological Review, 98, 122-142.
Li, P. (1996). Spoken word recognition of code-switched
words by Chinese-English bilinguals. Journal of Memory
and Language, 35, 757-774.
Lukatela, G., Savic, M., Gligorijevic, B., Ognjenovic, P., &
Turvey, M.. T. (1978). Bi-alphabetical lexical decision.
Language and Speech,21, 142-165.
MacNamara, J., & Kushnir, S. (1971). Linguistic
independence of bilinguals: The input switch. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 10, 480-487.
Marian, V. (to appear). Bilingual research methods. In J.
Altarriba, & R. R. Heredia (Eds.), An Introduction to
Bilingualism: Principles and Processes. Mahwah, NJ:
Laurence Erlbaum.
Marian, V., Blumenfeld, H., Garstecki, D., Kaushanskaya,
M., Fausey, C., & Lu, D. (2003, May). Developing a tool
for assessing Language Experience and Bilingual Status
(LEABS). Poster presented at the annual meeting of the
Midwestern Psychological Association, Chicago, IL.
Manuscript in preparation.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003a). Comparing Bilingual
and Monolingual Processing of Competing Lexical Items.
Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 2, 173-193.
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003b). Competing activation in
bilingual language processing: Within- and betweenlanguage competition. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 6, 1-19.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1987). Functional parallelism in
spoken word-recognition. Cognition, 25, 71-102.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Welsh, A. (1978). Processing
interactions and lexical access during word recognition in
continuous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 29-63.
Nas, G. (1983). Visual word recognition in bilinguals:
Evidence for a cooperation between visual and sound
based codes during access to a common lexical store.

896

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22,
526-534.
Rayner, K., & Springer, C. J. (1986). Graphemic and
semantic similarity effects in the picture-word
interference task. British Journal of Psychology, 77, 207222.
Schriefers, H. & Meyer, A. S. (1990). Experimental note:
Cross-modal, visual-auditory picture-word interference.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 28, (5), 418-420.
Sharoff, S. (2002). Meaning as use: Exploitation of aligned
corpora for the contrastive study of lexical semantics.
Proceedings of Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference (LREC02). May, 2002. Las Palmas, Spain.
Smith, M.. C. (1997). How do bilinguals access lexical
information. In DeGroot, A. M. B., & Kroll, J. F. (Eds.),
Tutorials in Bilingualism: Psycholinguistic Perspectives
(pp. 145-168). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Smith, M.C., & Kirsner, K. (1982). Language and
orthography as irrelevant features in colour-word and
picture-word stroop interference. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 34A, 153-170.
Soares, C., & Grosjean, F. (1984). Bilinguals in a
monolingual and a bilingual speech mode: The effect on
lexical access. Memory and Cognition, 12, 380-386.
Spivey, M., & Marian, V. (1999). Crosstalk between native
and second languages: Partial activation of an irrelevant
lexicon. Psychological Science, 10, 3, 281-284.
Starreveld, P. A., & LaHeij, W. (1995). Semantic
interference, orthographic facilitation, and their
interaction in naming task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 21, 686698.
Starreveld, P. A., & LaHeij, W. (1996). Time-course
analysis of semantic and orthographic context effects in
picture naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 22, 896-918.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information during spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632-1634.
Tzelgov, J., Henik, A., Sneg, R., & Baruch, O. (1996).
Unintentional word reading via the phonological route:
The Stroop effect with cross-script homophones. Journal
of Expiremental Pschology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 336-349.
Van Heuven, W. J. B., Dijkstra, T., & Grainger, J. (1998).
Orthographic neighborhood effects in bilingual word
recognition. Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 458483.
Wong, K.F.E., & Chen, H-C. (1999). Orthographic and
phonological processing in reading Chinese text:
Evidence from eye fixations. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14, 461-480.
www.census.gov
www.artint.ru/projects/frqlist/frqlist-en.asp

