UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multiple Session Masked Priming: Individual differences in orthographic neighbourhood
effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g68939f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Byrne, Claire J.
Yelland, Gregory W.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multiple Session Masked Priming: Individual differences in orthographic
neighbourhood effects
Claire J. Byrne (Claire.Byrne@med.monash.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, School of Psychology, Psychiatry and Psychological Medicine
Building 17, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia

Gregory W. Yelland (Greg.Yelland@med.monash.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, School of Psychology, Psychiatry and Psychological Medicine
Building 17, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia
relative to a control condition, this relationship is taken to
reflect the properties of written words important for lexical
access. Masked priming has been argued to enable the
investigation of lexical access processes free from any
influence of more central and strategic processes (e.g.
Forster, 1998). This is achieved in the way the prime is
presented, making it typically unavailable for conscious
report by participants. Critically, while the masked prime is
not available for conscious report, a variety of priming
effects are consistently observed. Such facilitatory priming
effects include repetition-priming (e.g. Forster & Davis,
1984) where prime and target are the same word (e.g. farm –
FARM) and form-priming (e.g. Forster, Davis, Schocknect
& Carter, 1987; Forster & Veres, 1998) where the prime is
of similar orthographic form (e.g. firm – FARM). The
absence of both expectancy effects (e.g. Forster, 1998) and
priming for nonwords (e.g. Forster & Davis, 1984; Forster
et al., 1987; cf. Bodner & Masson, 1997), in addition to the
existence of semantic- (e.g. Perea & Gotor, 1997) and crosslanguage translation-priming (e.g. Kim & Davis, 2003)
indicate that masked priming effects reflect lexical level
processing.
While the masked priming task provides a means of
examining the automatic processes of lexical access, a new
variant of this task was required to enable the collection of
sufficient data from each participant that they could stand as
an experiment in their own right. The Multiple Session
Masked Priming paradigm (e.g. Byrne, Yelland, Johnston &
Pratt, 2000; Yelland & Byrne, 2001) achieves this by
repeatedly testing each participant on the same experiment.
Since participants are unaware of the primes, the primetarget relationship cannot be realised, even over repeated
test sessions. Thus, in the Multiple Session Masked
Priming paradigm, the participant’s experience is simply
one of repeated exposure to the target items.
Used previously to reveal marked individual variation in
the use of orthographic and phonological input codes for
lexical access (e.g. Byrne, Yelland, Johnston & Pratt, 2000;
Yelland & Byrne, 2001), the Multiple Session Masked
Priming paradigm has proved useful for investigating
individual differences in lexical processing. This study
aims to look at the use of this new technique in other areas
of the word recognition literature, namely orthographic
neighbourhood effects.

Abstract
Multiple Session Masked Priming was used to investigate
differences between individuals in the fine-tuning of their
lexical representations. The form-priming effects were
determined separately for each of the 50 participants, from
the patterning of masked priming effects over three
neighbourhood (N) levels. At each N level, primes varied
in their orthographic similarity to the target - Identity, OneLetter-Different and All-Letters-Different. An analysis of
the pooled data showed patterns of masked priming
consistent with other group studies, but considered
separately, an array of individual differences in the tuning
of lexical representations was observed.

Inconsistent findings and conflicting evidence characterise
much of the word recognition literature, and have lead to a
plethora of theories on many aspects of word recognition.
One explanation for the conflicting evidence regarding
theories of word recognition, is the possibility that it reflects
individual differences. The problem here lies in the fact that
support for one model or another has generally been drawn
from standard group studies, where outcomes are averaged
over the sample of participants. Averaged outcomes may
show what is generally true for that sample, but fail to
capture the critical variations between individuals.
In order to study individual differences a task must be
found that will provide reliable data concerning the
processing capacities of each participant. There are two
issues here. First, the task used must reflect the automatic
processes of lexical access, and second, the task must
generate sufficient data on each participant to enable stable
conclusions to be drawn about their individual performance;
that is, we need to be able to generate reliable individual
profiles of lexical processing.
Although there is some debate (e.g. Bodner & Masson,
1997; Bodner & Masson, 2001), Forster and Davis’ (1984)
Masked Priming paradigm is widely considered to be an
ideal tool for examining automatic lexical processing. In
masked priming, a prime word/nonword is presented very
briefly (50-60ms), forward masked (for 500ms) by a row of
hash marks (######) and backward masked by an upper
case target (500ms), to which a timed lexical decision
response is made. The relationship between prime and
target is manipulated in some way and if performance on the
target is enhanced by a particular prime-target relationship,
174

The neighbourhood effect was first investigated by
Coltheart, Davelaar, Jonasson and Besner (1977), who
coined the term neighbourhood (N) density. A word’s N
density is simply the number of words that can be made
from it by changing one letter. For instance, a high N word
like torn has many neighbours – corn, born, turn, town, tore
etc. In this way, N provides a rough index of a word’s
similarity to other words. The effects of such orthographic
similarity have been used by researchers to model
constraints on, and organisation of, the internal wordrecognition system. Previous experiments looking at the
effects of N density have shown form-priming effects when
using word or nonword primes that are one-letter-different
from their word targets, however, such effects are present
for low N density words only, not high N (e.g. Forster et al.,
1987). The form-priming effects seen at the low N density
are reported consistently, albeit are smaller in magnitude
than those observed in repetition-priming (e.g. Andrews,
1997). The lack of form-priming effects in high N words is
usually described as an increased tuning of these lexical
representations. Forster et al. (1987) first proposed a now
commonly used explanation for this change in tuning,
whereby a word’s lexical representation becomes more
finely tuned in response to increasing N density. A word
with many neighbours needs to ensure only exact matches
can activate its representation, otherwise a large number of
these neighbours will need to be considered and errors in
activation are more likely. In contrast, a word with only
few neighbours can afford to be less stringent (i.e. it can be
activated by a one-letter-different neighbour) as there are
only a small number of possible lexical candidates. A range
of word recognition theories and models have been provided
for these results. Such accounts, however, will only prove
useful if either, all readers show the same pattern of priming
effects as a function of N density, or they are able to account
for individual variation in sensitivity to N levels . The
question addressed in this study is whether there are
individual differences in the priming effects for similar
form, indicating differences in the fine-tuning of lexical
representations.

Materials and Design
One hundred and eight 4-letter words were used as targets.
All were monosyllabic content words with a mean
frequency of occurrence of 85.2 (SD=162.9) tokens per
million in text (Kucera & Francis, 1967). The target words
were selected from three (n=36) N levels (i.e. Low, Medium
and High), with written frequency matched across these
conditions. In addition, targets were chosen to ensure they
did not belong in another target’s neighbourhood. For each
target word, primes of three types were constructed: (a) an
All-Letters-Different (ALD) prime, a nonword which
differed at each letter position from the target, to be used as
a baseline control; (b) an Identity (ID) prime, which was the
exact same word as the target, to measure the maximum
priming effect; and (c) a One-Letter-Different (1-LD) prime,
a nonword which differed from the target in one letter
position, to examine any form-priming effects. The letter
position at which the 1-LD prime differed from the target
was varied evenly within the three N levels. Primes were
matched to targets on N and consonant-vowel patterns
within neighbourhood conditions.
An equivalent set of nonword items was constructed to
act as foils in the lexical decision task. All matching
procedures undertaken for the selection of word targets and
primes was repeated for the nonword items, with the
exception of written frequency matching.
Some
characteristics of the target items are shown in Table 1,
while example items are shown in Table 2.
Table 1: Characteristics of the Masked Priming Target Items

Words
Low N
Med N
High N
Nonwords
Low N
Med N
High N

Method

Range

N
Mean (SD)

Frequency
Mean (SD)

1- 3
6- 7
12 -15

2.1 (0.8)
6.5 (0.5)
13.9 (1.1)

84.3 (153.7)
85.3 (173.0)
85.9 (165.9)

1- 3
6- 7
10 -15

2.3 (0.8)
6.5 (0.5)
11.9 (1.5)

N/A
N/A
N/A

Note. N = Neighbourhood size

Participants

Table 2: Example Targets and Primes

Seventy-one undergraduates, graduates and staff from
Monash University, Australia, volunteered to complete the
experiment. All were aged between 18 and 33 years with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and were paid a token
amount for their participation.
Seventeen participants chose not to complete all 12
sessions, and were therefore excluded from the analyses. In
addition, a further four participants were excluded (three on
the basis of overall error rates exceeding 20%, and one who
was found to be a non-native speaker of English). In all, 50
participants contribute to the final analyses.

Words
Low N
Med N
High N
Nonwords
Low N
Med N
High N

Target

ID
Prime

1-LD
Prime

ALD
Prime

FREE
HELP
WIDE

Free
Help
Wide

frue
hulp
kide

merp
vand
barp

NORL
PALD
BAFE

Norl
Pald
Bafe

norf
peld
bape

vube
bist
fook

Note. N = Neighbourhood size; ID = Identity; 1-LD = One-LetterDifferent; ALD = All-Letters-Different

175

50 participants. Analyses of the data from word targets
comprised three planned comparison ANOVAs at each of
the three N levels, conducted over both participant (F1) and
item (F2) based data. The first compared the ID and ALD
prime conditions, to confirm the existence of a repetitionpriming effect.
The subsequent analyses looked for
orthographic form-priming (1-LD vs ALD) and whether
form-priming was equal in magnitude to the repetitionpriming effect (ID vs 1-LD)1. In the interests of brevity,
only the significance level of F1 and F2 will be reported.
The group mean RTs and error data obtained from
participant-based data for word targets are shown in Table
3.

All targets were presented as UPPER CASE letter
strings, while primes were presented in lower case. This
reduced the possibility that any observed priming effects
could be the result of priming by virtue of visual features
rather than orthographic form.
Three different,
counterbalanced versions of the experiment were
constructed so that all targets appeared with each of their
primes, but only once in each version. Practice items (one
exemplar of each word and nonword condition) were
constructed and placed at the beginning of each version.

Procedure
For each of the 12 masked priming sessions, participants
were seated in a sound attenuated booth where items were
displayed on a 15" flat screen, fast decay monitor,
controlled by an IBM compatible computer operating
DMDX presentation software (developed at Monash
University and at the University of Arizona by K.I. Forster
and J.C. Forster). Participants began the experiment by
pressing a foot pedal, which initiated the presentation of the
instructions in the centre of the screen. The practice items
were then shown, followed by the experimental items.
Progress through the experiment was self-paced with a press
of the foot pedal initiating each item. Participants took
approximately 10 minutes to complete each session.
Each item was presented in the centre of the screen in
the following sequence. First, the forward mask, a row of
six hash marks (e.g. ######) was presented for 500ms.
This was replaced by the 54ms presentation of the lower
case prime, which was in turn replaced by the upper case
target for 500ms. Participants made a timed lexical decision
response to each target, pressing a blue button with their
preferred hand if the target was a word of English and a red
button with their other hand if it was not. Participants
received response time (RT) and accuracy feedback after
each response. RT was measured from the onset of the
target display to the button-press response. Both response
latencies and errors were recorded for each item by the
computer.
Participants were asked to complete 12 masked priming
sessions to ensure that each prime-target pair were tested
enough to gain sufficient data for every item. Therefore, the
three counterbalanced versions were completed four times
each. The participants completed the sessions on a roughly
daily basis, according to their availability.

Table 3: Group mean response time (RT), percentage error
rate (+/- SE) and priming effects (∆), as a function of prime
type and neighbourhood (N) level for word targets.
N level
Low

Prime
ID
1-LD
ALD
Medium ID
1-LD
ALD
High
ID
1-LD
ALD

RT (ms)
418 (7.1)
448 (8.1)
474 (7.3)
419 (7.5)
449 (8.3)
471 (7.8)
432 (7.4)
469 (8.9)
473 (7.6)

∆
56
26
52
22
41
4
-

% Error
3.0 (0.02)
7.4 (0.52)
9.8 (0.40)
3.9 (0.35)
7.7 (0.46)
9.5 (0.55)
6.2 (0.66)
12.6 (1.02)
11.9 (1.00)

∆
6.8
2.4
5.6
1.8
5.7
-0.7
-

Note. ID = Identity; 1-LD = One-Letter-Different; ALD = AllLetters-Different

As can be seen in the summary of RT data (Table 3),
participants responded more rapidly to word targets
preceded by their ID prime than their ALD prime, yielding
significant repetition-priming effects at each of the N levels
[F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. Repetition effects were found in the
error data also [F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. These results indicate
that the ID primes facilitate faster and more accurate lexical
access for their targets at each N level.
A comparison between the mean RT for the 1-LD and
ALD prime conditions showed significant orthographic
form-priming effects at the Low and Medium N levels [F1 &
F2, p < 0.01], while at the High N level this comparison was
not significant [F1 & F2, p > 0.05]. This pattern was
mirrored in the error data, with a significant decrease in
errors for 1-LD primes over ALD primes for Low and
Medium N targets [F1 & F2, p < 0.01], but not for High N
targets [F1 & F2, p > 0.05].
As expected for masked priming studies with group data,
the orthographic form-priming effects, seen in the Medium
and Low N conditions, were significantly reduced in
magnitude relative to those seen with repetition-priming, for
both RT [F1 & F2, p < 0.01] and accuracy [F1 & F2, p <
0.01] (i.e. ID vs 1-LD). For the High N targets, this

Results and Discussion
In order to determine whether the group study approach was
masking quite disparate patterns of individual difference
amongst participants, analysis of the patterning of the group
data was needed to provide a baseline against which the
individual differences could be examined.

Group Analyses
1

While not orthogonal, these comparisons are meaningful, an
attribute Keppel (1991) believes is more important than a set of
purely orthogonal comparisons without such meaning.

The data entered into the group analyses were the condition
means for both session and item based data for each of the
176

comparison was also significant [F1 & F2, p < 0.01],
however, this was in the absence of a 1-LD prime
advantage.
Overall, the group analyses for the word targets provide
results which are comparable with other masked priming
studies in this area. It would seem from these results that,
on average, only words with High N density become finely
tuned, while words without such neighbourhoods (i.e. Low
and Medium) are open to activation by close relatives.
In order to complete the traditional group analyses, an
investigation of nonword effects was undertaken. An
omnibus analysis of the group nonword data revealed
significant main effects of N Level [F1 & F2, p < 0.01] and
Prime Type [F1 & F2, p < 0.01] but no interaction between
them [F1 & F2, p > 0.05]. Subanalyses were then conducted
to examine the within factor effects, separately for N level
and Prime Type. The group mean RTs and error data,
obtained from participant-based analyses of the nonwords,
are shown in Table 4 for the three N levels (collapsed over
prime type) and the three prime types (collapsed over N
level).

LD over ALD primes [F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. Indeed, the 3ms
advantage ID primes have over 1-LD primes proved to be
significant [F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. Nonword effects of these
magnitudes are not uncommon in group studies; however,
they rarely prove significant (Forster, 1998). They do so
here due to the power afforded the group analyses with
7,200 data points per condition. Although the absence of
nonword effects is usually taken to indicate that masked
priming effects for words are showing lexical level
processes, the nonword priming effects found here do not
contradict this conclusion. As only a lexical representation
can be tuned by its N density, the modulation of priming
effects by N density shown for words, but not nonwords,
would indicate that the word priming effects are lexical in
nature. In additon, the large reduction in magnitude of the
nonword priming, compared to the word priming, would
also indicate different mechanisms were involved in
priming for these targets. Taken together, these findings
suggest that the priming effects seen for word targets can
still be considered lexical in nature, but may contain a small
pre-lexical, graphemic priming component.
The critical issue, however, is whether these patterns of
outcomes for the group data are an accurate characterisation
of the lexical processes of all skilled readers, or the average
of individual differences in the nature of lexical tuning
across skilled readers.

Table 4: Group mean response time (RT) and percentage
error rate (+/- SE) by prime type and neighbourhood (N)
level for nonword targets.
RT (ms)

% Error

471 ( 8.4)
493 (10.1)
500 (11.7)

4.2 (0.42)
9.5 (0.52)
9.7 (0.78)

483 (10.9)
486 (10.4)
495 (10.7)

7.9 (0.95)
7.5 (0.93)
8.0 (1.00)

Individual Analyses

N Level
Low
Medium
High
Prime Type
ID
1-LD
ALD

The Multiple Session Masked Priming procedure yields
sufficient data for each participant to be considered an
experiment in their own right. That is, each of the 50
participants were the equivalent of an experiment, where
test sessions replace participants. This gives a fully
repeated measures design that provides 2,592 points of data
for every individual (12 sessions over 18 conditions of 12
items each). Critically, this provides sufficient data for any
one person, that the analyses of the type performed on the
group data can be carried out for each participant separately.
From this, reliable statements can be made for each
participant about changes in orthographic form-priming as a
function of N level.

Note. ID = Identity; 1-LD = One-Letter-Different; ALD = AllLetters-Different

As seen in Table 4, the Low N nonword targets were
responded to significantly faster and more accurately than
both the High N [RT: F1 & F2, p < 0.01; % Error: F1 & F2, p
< 0.01] and Medium N targets [RT: F1 & F2, p < 0.01; %
Error: F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. This difference was also evident
between the Low and Medium N targets [RT F1 & F2, p <
0.01; % Error: F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. However, no such
differences were found between the Medium and High N
targets [RT: F1, p < 0.05, F2, p > 0.05; % Error: F1 & F2, p >
0.05]. These results show that only the Low N words had
an RT and accuracy advantage, an expected effect in
nonwords, as a nonword with more neighbours has a larger
number of words to eliminate before concluding that the
target is in fact not a word.
Somewhat surprising were nonword priming effects in
the group RT data. From Table 4 it can be seen that the ID
primed target has a small, but secure, 12ms facilitation
relative to the ALD baseline [F1 & F2, p < 0.01]. A similar
sized (9ms) significant facilitation effect was afforded the 1-

Words
Each participant’s data were analysed in the same way as
the group data. A true appreciation of the subtleties of
individual differences found within the data would require
consideration of the priming outcomes at each N level,
separately for each of the 50 participants. Unfortunately,
space does not permit this. Instead, participants were
classified according to their pattern of significant priming
effects, as a function of N level. Priming effects fell into
four categories. Three represent different patterns of
priming effects between the ID, 1-LD and ALD conditions
that are statistically distinguishable, (a) ALD>1-LD=ID,
significant orthographic form-priming of the same
magnitude as the repetition-priming effect; (b) ALD>1LD>ID, orthographic form-priming which was significantly
177

For Medium N level words there was a small shift
towards increased specificity of lexical tuning, with an
increase in the number of participants showing the highest
level of tuning (i.e. ALD=1-LD>ID). More importantly
though, there were still considerable differences between
participants in the specificity of their lexical processes. This
changed for High N words, with almost all the participants
displaying finely tuned lexical entries for these targets (i.e.
ALD=1-LD>ID).
Overall, the results shown in Table 5 indicate a general
shift towards more finely tuned lexical processing with
increasing N densities; a result which ties in with previous
research (e.g. Forster, 1987). More importantly, however,
these results demonstrate the variability between subjects in
their tuning level, especially at the Low and Medium N
densities; illustrated by the variation in priming patterns at
these levels.
In addition to demonstrating an overall shift to fine
tuning as N increases, the data obtained in this study
allowed for investigation into the nature of this shift within
each participant, by looking at their individual patterns of
effects across N levels. Although space does not permit a
full account of this data, three groups accounted for the
majority of participants. The largest of these (n=16)
followed the priming pattern shown in the overall group
analyses. That is, these participants showed finely tuned
entries for High N level targets (i.e. ALD=1-LD>ID) but
slightly less tuned entries for Medium and Low N words
(i.e. ALD>1-LD>ID). The second largest group (n=10)
showed fine tuning (i.e. ALD=1-LD>ID) which was
unaffected by changes in N level, while the third (n=6)
differed from this only by having less tuning for entries at
Low N densities (i.e. ALD>1-LD>ID). The remaining
participants showed variations upon these themes.

greater than the baseline, but significantly less than the
repetition-priming effect; and (c) ALD=1-LD>ID, no
orthographic form-priming, in the presence of secure
repetition-priming. These patterns of secure priming effects
are illustrated in Figure 1. The fourth category contained
cases where the pattern of priming effects was not secure.
Each was of the form of (a), (b) or (c) but variability in the
participants was such that the pattern of effects could not be
statistically distinguished. This fourth group will not be
reported on any further here.
ALD>1-LD=ID
Low
RT

1-LD

ALD>1-LD>ID

ALD=1-LD>ID
ID

ID

ID
1-LD

High
RT

ALD

ALD

ALD 1-LD

Figure 1: Depiction of the three secure priming patterns
found within the data. Dashed lines indicate significant
differences in response time (RT) between prime conditions.
Table 5 reports the number of participants displaying
each particular priming pattern as a function of N level. The
obvious feature of this data is that at Low and Medium N,
participants are showing distinctly different patterns of
performance; that is, the individual data differs from the
grouped data.
Table 5: Number of participants as a function of priming
pattern and neighbourhood (N) level.
Priming Pattern
ALD>1-LD=ID
ALD>1-LD>ID
ALD=1-LD>ID

Low N
3
28
14

Med N
4
21
22

High N
0
1
39

Nonwords
Each participant’s nonword data was analysed in the same
manner as the group data, beginning with a single omnibus
analysis. As with the group analyses; none of the 50
participants showed an interaction between the N Level and
Prime Type factors, which was expected given that N
density only tunes lexical representations.
Forty-six
participants showed a main effect of N Level and 30 showed
a main effect of Prime Type. Again these effects were
investigated with separate subsequent analyses.
Forty of the participants’ N level effects followed the
same pattern as seen in the group analyses, that is, RTs to
Low N targets were significantly faster than those of the
Medium or High N targets. However, there seemed to be at
least some variation being masked by the group study
approach. One participant’s Low and Medium N nonword
targets showed a response time advantage over High N
targets, while two further participants showed RT
differences between each N level (i.e. RTs increasing with
N level). In addition, two participants had non-secure N
level effects. Each of these variations of N level effects
could be explained by the fact that with increasing N
density, lexical processes have more competing entries to

Note. ID = Identity; 1-LD = One-Letter-Different; ALD = AllLetters-different

At Low N, a small number of participants displayed a
pattern of priming that would indicate their lexical entries
for these words were poorly tuned (i.e. ALD>1-LD=ID).
For these participants, the priming effects of the 1-LD and
ID primes were of the same magnitude, indicating that these
words were able to be accessed equally as well by a
neighbour as the word itself. The majority of participants
showed the priming pattern commonly found in group
studies at similar N densities (i.e. ALD>1-LD>ID) (e.g.
Andrews, 1997). These participants have slightly better
lexical tuning than the former group, with lexical entries
showing sharper but not perfect tuning for the target word.
In contrast, 14 of the participants at this N level showed a
finely tuned processor, which would only activate entries
for an exact word match. Here the pattern shows no formpriming, even though repetition-priming was still present
(i.e. ALD=1-LD>ID).
178

eliminate before concluding a nonword. Perhaps the
individual pattern variation could be accounted for by
variations in sensitivity to these competitors.
Half of the participants with Prime Type effects showed
a similar pattern to that seen with the group analyses; that is,
an equivalent RT advantage for both the 1-LD and ID
conditions. Three participants showed an RT advantage for
the ID condition only, while a further 12 had non-secure
effects. For these 30 participants, differences between the
repetition-priming effects for nonwords overall and words at
each N level were calculated (Low: M=41, SE=3.3;
Medium: M=36, SE=3.2; High: M=27, SE=3.4). Consistent
with the group analyses, these mean differences indicate
large reductions in the magnitude of nonword priming
effects, compared to word priming, for these participants. It
would seem that individual differences in performance are
not restricted to lexical processing, but also extend to the
level of graphemic priming induced by orthographically
related prime-target pairs.

References
Andrews, S. (1997). The effect of orthographic similarity on
lexical retrieval – Resolving neighbourhood conflicts.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 4, 439-461.
Bodner, G. E., & Masson, M. E. J. (1997). Masked
repetition priming of words and nonwords: Evidence for
a nonlexical basis for priming. Journal of Memory and
Language, 37, 268-293.
Bodner, G. E., & Masson, M. E. J. (2001). Prime validity
affects masked repetition priming: Evidence for an
episodic resource account for priming. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 616-647.
Byrne, C., Yelland, G. W., Johnston, M. B., & Pratt, C.
(2000). Individual variation in the reliance on
orthographic and phonological processes in the word
recognition of skilled adult readers. 27th Australian
Experimental Psychology Conference, Queensland.
Australian Journal of Psychology, 49 (Suppl.).
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic
(Ed.), Attention and Performance VI. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Forster, K. I. (1987). Form-priming with masked primes:
The best match hypothesis. In M. Coltheart (Ed.),
Attention and Performance XII. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Forster, K. I. (1998). The pros and cons of masked priming.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 27, 203-233.
Forster, K. I., & Davis, C. (1984). Masked priming and
frequency attenuation in lexical access. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 10, 680-698.
Forster, K. I., Davis, C., Schoknecht, C., & Carter, R.
(1987). Masked priming with graphemically related
forms: Repetition or partial activation? Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 39, 211-251.
Forster, K. I., & Veres, C. (1998). The prime lexicality
effect: Form-priming as a function of prime awareness.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 24, 498-314.
Keppel, G. (1991). Design and Analysis: A researchers
handbook. NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kim, J., & Davis, C. (2003). Task effects in masked crossscript translation and phonological priming. Journal of
Memory and Language, 49, 484-499.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Frequency analysis of
English useage. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Perea, M., & Gotor, A. (1997). Associative and semantic
priming effects occur at very short SOAs in lexical
decision and naming. Cognition, 17, 459-477.
Yelland, G. W., & Byrne, C. (2001, April). Multiple session
masked priming and individual differences in lexical
processing. Paper presented at the Inaugural Masked
Priming Symposium, “Masked Priming: State of the
Art”. Maquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

Conclusions
Although space constraints precluded the reporting and
interpretation of the full data from this study, one major
conclusion can be drawn. Although the group data were
consistent with previous studies of neighbourhood density,
the Multiple Session Masked Priming results revealed the
group approach was masking an array of individual
differences in lexical tuning. Indeed, individual variation
was also evident in the existence of pre-lexical, graphemic
processing.
A simple explanation of the source of such variation
may be that the internal coding of representations are
handled differently between the lexical processors of
individuals. This may be due to some predisposition and/or
individualised set of experiences, but at this stage far more
would need to be known about individual differences in
other aspects of written word recognition in order to make a
more specific claim.
The results of this study suggest that future research
should consider the Multiple Session Masked Priming
paradigm and look more carefully at other fundamental
claims about lexical processing drawing solely on group
outcomes, in the hope of developing more sensitive models
of lexical access and written word recognition.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the reviewers of this paper for
their comments. Special thanks also to Ken Forster for his
invaluable suggestions.

179

