UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Nature of Cognitive Representations and on the Cognitive Role of Manipulations.
A Case Study: Surgery

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9np6h0pj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Gatti, Alberto

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Nature of Cognitive Representations and on the Cognitive Role of
Manipulations. A Case Study: Surgery
Alberto Gatti (gatti3@unisi.it)

Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences, University of Siena
Via Roma 47, 53100 Siena, Italy
Abstract
The main point of discussion of the present article is the nature of representations, their formal structure and their origin
and the cognitive role that manipulations of the environment
can have. After having briefly reviewed the perspective expressed by the physical symbol system hypothesis, I take into
account surgery as a case study that points out how many manipulative actions performed upon the environment have a
cognitive relevance and the importance that the interaction
with the environment can have in generating the representations used in cognitive processes and in giving them a formal
structure. In the last part of the article I propose a model, that
I call Double Representation Approach, which tries to give an
explanation of the nature itself of representations, of the way
they work in the cognitive processes and of certain important
human cognitive behaviors.

Physical Symbol System Hypothesis
When first attempts were made to understand human cognition, one of the concepts that emerged as central was that of
representation. A classical paradigm in which the notion of
representation grew up was the hypothesis that an agent capable of intelligent action must be a physical symbol system
(Newell, 1980; Newell & Simon, 1976).
A physical symbol system is a sort of device that contains
symbols and symbol structures in memory and can perform
processes upon these symbol structures. In more detail, according to the physical symbol system hypothesis, a physical symbol system and, thus, cognition performs three functional processes that occur sequentially and that are controlled by a central information processor. The three functional processes are the following: 1) a symbolic representation of the environment is constructed by means of a perceptual process performed by a perception subsystem; 2) the
symbolic representation that has been constructed is delivered to the central processor, which processes it in order to
extract information and to be able to select a symbolic expression that stands for an action; 3) an action subsystem
decodes the symbolic description of the action and converts
it into a concrete action in the environment.
It is important to understand what the terms “symbol”
and “physical” mean. According to the classical definition
given by Newell (1980), a symbol is an entity that stands for
another entity. This kind of relation is called designation
and its definition, with Newell’s words, is:
Designation: An entity X designates an entity Y relative to a
process P, if, when P takes X as input, its behavior depends
on Y. (Newell, 1980, p. 156).

440

Thus, a symbol is a syntactic element of a code and can be
connected to other symbols to form symbol structures.
The term “physical” refers to the need for a physical implementation of a symbolic system in order for it to actually
function and to actually operates upon and affect or be affected by the environment.
Following these definitions, we can distinguish three levels of organization in which a cognitive system can be divided: the semantic level, the symbol level and the physical
level (Pylyshyn, 1989). At the semantic level, we have the
content of knowledge and the goals that a system entertains.
At the symbol level, the semantic content of the previous
level is encoded by symbolic expressions. Finally, the
physical level is constituted by the physical realization of
the entire symbol system; in the case of humans, this level is
represented by the biological level.
The postulation of a cognitive mechanism that works by
means of symbols and symbol structures strictly implies the
assumption that cognition takes place by means of internal
representations and Newell (1980) considers “representation” as “simply another term to refer to a structure that designates” (Newell, 1980, p. 176):
X represents Y if X designates aspects of Y, i.e., if there exist
symbol processes that can take X as input and behave as if
they had access to some aspects of Y. (Newell, 1980, p. 176).

Thus, according to the classical symbolic perspective, the
central notion is that of representation. Now what we have
to pay attention to and to focus on are two characteristics
that Fodor and Pylyshyn (1988) indicate as the ones that
identify classical symbolic models. Such characteristics are
the combinatorial syntax and semantics of mental representations and the structure sensitivity of processes.
Let us begin with the first concept. Classical symbolic
theories distinguish between structurally atomic and structurally molecular representations; structurally molecular
representations are constituted by other representations that
can be either atomic or molecular and the semantic content
of a molecular representation is a function of the semantic
contents of its syntactic constituents. According to this perspective, a Language of Thought (Fodor, 1975) is postulated, with syntactic components and structural relations between these components.
The second point is the structure sensitivity of processes.
What this assumption means is that the principles by which
mental representations are manipulated rely only on the
structural properties of symbolic representations. More precisely, the formal, syntactic structure of a representation
specifies the role of the representation within an inference
and can cause the inferential process without reference to

the semantic content. Hence, the mental operations upon
symbolic representations are activated only by the form of
the representations.
So far, I have tried to delineate the main features of the
classical physical symbol system hypothesis. In the following section, by means of a case study applied to the field of
surgery, I want to question some aspects that emerge from
the physical symbol system hypothesis.

A Case Study: Surgery
The arguments and claims that will be presented in the following two subsections emerge from a case study on surgery that I am conducting in the field in order to analyze the
cognitive processes that go on in the work of surgeon. In
particular, this study is devoted to analyze which kinds of
representations are used in surgery, what the role of physical
manipulations is, whether they have a cognitive relevance
and how the distribution is of the cognitive processes involved in surgery.
In the following two subsections I want to point out two
important cognitive elements: 1) the physical gestures involved in the processes of perception of data from the environment and 2) the formal structure and the origin of the
representations used in cognitive processes. I will use surgery as a reference case and I will try to point out some
relevant differences with respect to the classical physical
symbol system hypothesis. In the first subsection I will take
into account the case of a generic objective examination of
the abdomen. In the second subsection, I will consider a
specific surgical operation: inguinal hernia.

as a whole
2

3

4

Inspection of
the abdomen
after having
asked the patient to profoundly
breathe
Auscultation
of the abdominal wall
before stimulating it with
palpation
Superficial
palpation of
the abdomen

Eyes

Stethoscope

To evaluate if
there exists
an intestinal
peristalsis
and how it is

Hands

To evaluate if
there are
signs of resistance to the
abdominal
wall that are
linked to
pathological
situations
To catch the
aspects that
the various
parts of the
abdomen can
exhibit and
that are
linked to the
contained
bowels:
-Consistence
-Tension
-Existence of
masses
-To evaluate
whether, after
having
touched and
moved the
abdominal
wall, an increase or decrease of the
intestinal
peristalsis
has occurred
-To evaluate
if there is
liquid out of
the intestinal
loops

5

Deep palpation of the
abdomen

Hands

6

Auscultation
of the abdominal wall
after the
stimulation
by means of
palpation

Stethoscope

Objective Examination
The first step in the process that brings to a surgical operation is the examination that the surgeon conducts on the patient who feels specific symptoms. After a brief discussion
to reconstruct the history of the patient, the surgeon begins
what is called objective examination. Objective examination
is a process of gathering of diagnostic data from the patient’s body which is guided by the four evaluation principles of medical semeiology: inspection, auscultation, palpation, percussion (DeGowin & DeGowin, 1976; Swartz,
2002). In this subsection I take into account the case of a
generic abdominal examination. This kind of examination is
constituted by a series of evaluation acts that the surgeon
accomplishes on the patient’s abdomen by means either of
external instruments or of parts of the body of the surgeon
herself. In addition, this examination involves the cooperation of the patient, who is sometimes asked to make specific
actions in interaction with the examination acts of the surgeon.
A generic abdominal examination can be schematized as
in the following table 1.
Table 1: Abdominal objective examination.

1

Evaluation
action
Inspection of
the abdomen
as a whole

Means
Eyes

End

pect and the
shape of the
abdomen are
To evaluate
whether the
abdomen
moves

The most important element that we can observe in the
objective examination and that emerges from the scheme
above is the following one: the surgeon uses specific per-

To evaluate
how the aspect and the

441

ceptive actions in order to catch and gather specific diagnostic data from the body of the patient. The data that the surgeon gathers are diagnostic signs that suggest a particular
diagnosis or several different diagnoses and that help the
surgeon in her abductive inference toward a final diagnostic
hypothesis (Magnani, 2001). As diagnostic clues, the signs
collected by the surgeon can be viewed, from a cognitive
point of view, as representations that carry information.
The main feature of these representations is that they are
constituted by structured sensations that the surgeon receives in response to her own structured perceptive actions.
Therefore, two important aspects emerge: 1) the representations which are the diagnostic signs collected by the surgeon
are sensations that the surgeon receives from the environment (the patient’s body); 2) such representations are elicited and constructed by perceptive actions by means of
which the surgeon interacts with the patient’s body. These
two points are important because they open the possibility to
think of representations and cognitive processes in a new
way which is different from the classical symbolic perspective.
According to the physical symbol system perspective, the
representations that are used in cognitive processes are
symbolic configurations that are inside the head of the cognitive agent. These representations are completely internal
and are constituted by the symbols of a single language with
a specific syntax. The case of medical examination seen
above seems to lead to a more embodied perspective. It
seems plausible to state that the representations on which
the surgeon relies during an objective examination have, as
formal structure, the one constituted by the sensations themselves that the surgeon receives. This formal structure can
vary across a great range and, hence, is not the single one of
the symbols of a single symbolic language.
Embodiment is also present at the level of cognitive processes. The physical symbol system perspective does not
seem to give importance to the perceptive process as a moment in which not only data are simply perceived from the
environment, but the environment is inspected and manipulated in specific ways in order to elicit more information.
The perceptive actions that the surgeon performs during an
objective examination have a strong epistemic value (Kirsh
& Maglio, 1994), because they are devoted to examine the
patient’s body in specific ways so as to obtain specific information. These structured actions structure the sensations
that the surgeon receives, that is, they structure her own representations.

A Surgical Operation: Inguinal Hernia
In this subsection I take into account a particular surgical
operation as a case to point out some relevant aspects about
the formal structure and the origin of the representations
used by a cognitive agent. The surgical operation that I consider is the one of inguinal hernia in a male patient (Rutkow
& Robbins, 1995; Shwartz, Spencer, Galloway, Tom Shires,
Daly & Fisher, 1998; Trabucco & Trabucco, 1998). Inguinal
hernia occurs when anatomical elements that are naturally
contained in the abdomen enter the inguinal canal. Table 2
shows a schematic description of the main steps of an inguinal hernia operation in a male patient.

442

Table 2: Main steps of an inguinal hernia surgical operation
1 Incision of the cutis at the level of the inguinal canal
2 Incision of the fascia of the external oblique muscle to
have access to the inguinal canal
3 Isolation of the spermatic cord
4 Isolation of the hernial sac
5 Rearrangement of the hernial sac into the abdomen
6 Hernioplasty at the level of the posterior wall of the inguinal canal
7 Suture of the fascia of the external oblique muscle previously cut
8 Suture of the cutis
One of the most relevant aspects of the inguinal hernia
operation is that this operation requires a precise knowledge
of the anatomy in order to recognize and carefully isolate
the various anatomical structures that are found in the inguinal canal in an anatomical situation which has been altered
by the hernia itself.
The main cognitive process which is involved in this surgical operation is, thus, the process of recognition. I define
recognition as a matching process in which the real situation
with which an agent has actually to do matches the salient
features of an already defined internal representation that the
agent entertains and that represents that identical situation or
an analogous situation. Thus, in the case of surgery, a
mechanism of recognition of an anatomical structure occurs
when the anatomical configuration that the surgeon is confronting matches the internal representation that the surgeon
entertains for that anatomical area.
Now, the first contact that a surgeon has with the external
aspect of the anatomical structures of the human body is in
the study of the illustrative anatomical tables on the anatomy books. This is the first moment in which the surgeon
takes an anatomical representation that comes from outside
and tries to memorize it, i. e., to bring it inside. I call this
process internalization of an external representation. But
every surgeon states that there is a difference between the
book anatomy and the actual anatomical structures encountered in a real body, especially in those cases in which the
anatomy has been altered by the pathological event, as it is
in the case of the inguinal hernia. For this reason every surgeon states that recognizing the anatomical structures is a
fact of experience.
Experience is a concept that deserves to be analyzed from
a cognitive point of view. I have said above that the surgeon
internalizes the anatomical representations that she studies
on the anatomy books and that there is often a mismatching
between these representations and the anatomical structures
encountered in a real situation. Therefore, in order for the
surgeon to be able to recognize anatomical structures in an
actual situation, the book representations of the anatomy
that the surgeon entertained must change in order to be in
accordance with the anatomical structures actually encountered. Through the direct contact with the real anatomical
elements, a process of change and adaptation of the previously internalized representations occurs. This is another

process of internalization, but more complex and slower
than the previous one and slightly different from it.
This new process of internalization of external representations occurs by means of the repeated observation of many
cases similar to each other and it is similar to a process of
abstraction, in which, however, the final abstract representation is constituted by elements that have their deep origin in
the experienced external elements. I use for this process the
name of experience and I define experience as the process of
internalization of external representations and of progressive
change and adjustment, through the contact with the environment, of the internalized representations during which
such representations acquire a configuration that conveys
precise information in an unambiguous way and that can fit
several different particular situations.
Also in the case of experienced surgeons there can be
situations in which it is difficult to recognize the anatomical
structures. This happens when there is such a situation in the
operating field that a gap is created between internalized
representations of the surgeon and actual configuration. It is
in these circumstances that we can see again the cognitive
role that manipulations can play. When anatomical data are
confused and, therefore, the mechanism of recognition is
made difficult, surgeons often make use of manipulations in
order to find known anatomical reference elements. These
manipulations are devoted to fill the gap between actual
situation and internalized representations and, thus, they
have an important cognitive relevance. The surgeon, for example, in front of a situation in which she cannot see an anatomical structure that she can usually see, almost always
uses her hands to touch in certain areas in order to find anatomical reference elements that she expects on the basis of
one of her internalized representations.
In this example is evident the cognitive role played by the
manipulation, which examines the internal parts of a human
body to construct an embodied representation which be in
accordance with the internalized representation of the surgeon herself. At the same time, if the internalized representation of the surgeon is visual, in this example the surgeon is
bringing into coordination two different representations of
the same information, a visual representation and a tactile
representation and this can be taken as an evidence that
demonstrates that human cognitive agents are able to handle
and, in fact, handle different representational codes and not
a single one.
The case of surgery seems to push toward cognitive hypotheses that give the environment and the manipulations
that humans perform upon it a predominant role as to the
process of generation of the representations used in cognitive processes and as to their formal structures.

Double Representation Approach
In the previous section I have presented a case study and I
have advanced some hypotheses about the origin and the
formal structure of representations. In the present section I
propose a model that tries to explain in a more detailed and
more schematic way the nature and origin of representations
and some critical cognitive behaviors that we can observe in
human beings.

443

The classical view within cognitive science drew a distinction between what was called functional architecture and
what was called anatomical architecture (Pylyshyn, 1989).
The anatomical architecture can be considered as the implementational basis on which the functional architecture is
realized. The functional architecture, instead, has to do with
the algorithms that the mind uses when it carries out cognitive processes. The classical view concentrated its attention
especially on the functional architecture and, in some cases,
even argued that the physical level can be considered as a
matter of implementational details. The functional architecture was described as the place of symbolic processes in
which internal symbolic representations was processed. The
symbols had an arbitrary relationship with their referents
and formed symbolic structures which had a combinatorial
syntax and semantics.
I want to revise the distinction anatomical architecture
versus functional architecture and take into account the relationships that can take place between anatomical and functional architecture. To do so, I propose an approach that I
call Double Representation Approach. Such approach locates two different representations as the components of any
cognitive process that takes place in the interaction between
human agent and environment. The idea is as follows:
1) First-Level Representation: this is the pattern of
neural activation that arises as the result of the interaction between body and environment. This is the
representation at the anatomical level and this is not
the representation that human agents directly use in
their cognitive processes.
2) Second-Level Representation: this is the thing for
which the pattern of activation stands and this thing is
the sensation that emerges from the encounter between our receptors and the structures of the environment and that is shaped by the structure itself of
the environment. This is the representation at the
functional level and this is the representation used by
human agents in their cognitive processes.
The First-Level Representation is called representation
because it is a pattern that has an analogical relationship
with the structure of the environment and, thus, can be considered as an analogical representation of the environment.
The Second-Level Representation could be considered as
the “face” that we think the world has; in a certain sense it
could be considered as the world itself. This assertion comes
from the consideration that the world is always given to us
through our sensorial perception, which can be considered,
at last, as the only possible representation in which we can
receive the physical world and the representation which is
closest to the physical world. This means that the SecondLevel Representation, even though it cannot be defined exactly as the world itself, has a strict relationship with the
world. Now, I call representation the Second-Level Representation because the structured configurations of the environment are used in cognitive processes because of their
carrying specific information, their representing such information. Therefore, the representations are the form of cognitively relevant information, they embody this information.

Now I want to explain in more detail what consequences
the Double Representation Approach has on the way we can
account for the way human agents reason. The First-Level
Representation has a twofold influence on the way humans
reason, the first one is direct, the second one is indirect and
is mediated by the Second-Level Representation. We propose the following scheme:
1) The First-Level Representation, as a pattern of neural
activation, can be assumed to influence the basic
mechanism that underlies any cognitive process, regardless of the specific kind of representation used
and of the specific algorithm followed. This basic
mechanism can be assumed to be the one constituted
by the construction of a pattern of elements and the
fixation of this pattern.
2) Thanks to the analogical relationship between the
patterns of neural activation (First-Level Representations) and the structures of the environment, the Second-Level Representations which we entertain reflect
the structures of the environment. Therefore, human
agents use representations that have several different
formal structures each of which influences in a different way the reasoning process.
The Double Representation Approach can provide an account not only of the representations that originate in a direct contact between agent and environment, but also of
those representations that human agents generate internally
in the absence of the environment in order to solve a problem, represent a goal and so forth. The representations that
originate in the contact between agent and environment
take, at the first level, the form of patterns of neural activation and patterns of neural activation, after adequate training, tend to become stabilized structures and to fix. At this
stage the patterns of neural activation no longer need a direct stimulus from the environment for their construction
and fixation. In a certain sense they can be viewed as fixed
internal records of external structures that can exist also in
the absence of such external structures. These patterns of
neural activation that constitute the First-Level Representations always keep record of the experience that generated
them and, thus, always carry the Second-Level Representation associated to them, even if in a different form, the form
of memory and not the form of a vivid sensorial experience.
Now, the human agent, via neural mechanisms, can retrieve
these Second-Level Representations and use them as internal representations or use parts of them to construct new internal representations very different from the ones stored in
memory.
In the case of human beings, whose neural growth, according to the studies in neural constructivism (Clark, 2003;
Quartz & Sejnowski, 1997), seems to be strongly environment-dependent, if we assume a strong relationship between
neural mechanisms and cognitive processes, we are brought
to the conclusion that the representations used in cognitive
processes have a deep origin in the experience lived in the
environment.
At least three conclusions can be drawn from the discussion above. First, as I have already said, the analogical rela-

444

tionship between First-Level Representations and environment causes the representations that human agents use in
cognitive processes, that is, the Second-Level Representations, to be able to have various formal structures, we could
say various types of syntax and not a single one. The Double Representation Approach tries to provide an explanation
of the mechanisms that would occur in those cases in which
it seems evident that humans are handling various types of
representations.
Second, the Double Representation Approach seems to
explain why human agents accomplish both computations of
a “connectionist” type, such as pattern completion or image
recognition and computations that use a combinatorial syntax and semantics, such as the ones exhibited in language
usage. The First-Level Representation is generated as a pattern of neural activation and, if we assume, as I do, a more
direct relation between neural basis and mechanism of reasoning, the mechanisms of connectionist creation of the neural pattern that constitutes the First-Level Representation
could sometimes influence in a direct manner the mechanisms of reasoning carried out by means of the SecondLevel Representation. This would explain the computations
of a connectionist type. But, on the other hand, the FirstLevel Representation, in virtue of its connectionist character
itself, has an analogical relationship with the environment
and gives rise to structured sensations, that is, Second-Level
Representations, that reflect the structures of the environment. Therefore, the cognitive agent can exploit all the syntactic structures that it finds in the environment and, most
important, can follow the computations suggested by these
structures. Now, among the syntactic structures that an
agent can encounter there are the combinatorial ones and
this would explain the combinatorial computations we experience.
Third, the fact that the Second-Level Representation is directly connected to the First-Level Representation and, thus,
emerges from the interaction between body and environment points out the importance of the manipulative actions
at the cognitive level. We can say that, in many cases, it is
the actions of manipulation of the environment that create a
specific representation that embodies specific information.
In this sense, the Double Representation Approach could
give an explanation to all those actions that human beings
seem to perform not for achieving a physical goal, but for
gathering specific information.

Conclusion
In this article I have first reviewed the classical physical
symbol system hypotesis and I have concentrated on the fact
that, according to this classical perspective, the representations that humans use in their cognitive processes would be
internal symbolic structures of a single language with a specific syntax.
Subsequently, I have taken into account surgery as a case
study to point out that the manipulations that humans use to
perceive the environment may have a specific cognitive
value and that the interaction with the environment plays a
direct role in generating the formal structure of the representations used by human cognitive agents in their cognitive
processes. The hypothesis that seems to emerge is that hu-

man agents use not a single representational code, but representations that can have multiple formal structures.
Finally, I have tried to construct a model that was able to
explain in a more detailed way such hypothesis about the
use of representations of multiple formal structures and that
was able to provide an embryonic hypothesis about the way
human cognition works.

References
Clark, A. (2003). Natural-born cyborgs. Minds, technologies, and the future of human intelligence. New York: Oxford University Press.
DeGowin, E. L., & DeGowin, R. L. (1976). Bedside diagnostic examination. Indianapolis, IN: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. A., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988). Connectionism and
cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition, 28,
3-71.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1994). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic action. Cognitive Science, 18, 513-549.
Magnani, L. (2001). Abduction, reason and science. Processes of discovery and explanation. New York: Kluwer
Academic/ Plenum Publishers.
Newell, A. (1980). Physical symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 4, 135-183.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1976). Computer science as
empirical inquiry: Symbols and search. Communications
of the ACM, 19, 113-126.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1989). Computing in cognitive science. In
M. Posner (Ed.), Foundations of cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quartz, S., & Sejnowski, T. (1997). The neural basis of
cognitive development: A constructivist manifesto. Behavioral ad Brain Sciences, 20, 537-596.
Rutkow, I. M., & Robbins, A. W. (1995). Groin hernia. In J.
L. Cameron (Ed.), Current surgical therapy. St. Louis:
Mosby Co.
Shwartz, S. I., Spencer, F. C., Galloway, A. C., Tom Shires,
G., Daly, J. M., & Fisher, J. E. (1998). Principles of surgery. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Swartz, M. H. (2002). Textbook of physical diagnosis: history
and examination. Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders Co.
Trabucco, E. E., & Trabucco, A. F. (1998). Flat plug and
mesh hernioplasty in the “inguinal box”. Description of a
technique. Hernia, 2, 133-138.

445

