UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Probabilistic Judgment by a Coarser Scale: Behavioral and ERP Evidence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0bp0189d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Sun, Yanlong
Wang, Hongbin
Yang, Yingrui
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Probabilistic Judgment by a Coarser Scale: Behavioral and ERP Evidence
Yanlong Sun (Yanlong.Sun@uth.tmc.edu)1
Hongbin Wang (Hongbin.Wang@uth.tmc.edu) 1
Yingrui Yang (yangyri@rpi.edu) 2
Jiajie Zhang (Jiajie.Zhang@uth.tmc.edu) 1
Jack W. Smith (Jack.W.Smith@uth.tmc.edu) 1
1

2

The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030 USA
Department of Cognitive Science, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA
The theoretical claim that the human mind is not adapted
to process probabilities has been a magnet for controversy
(e.g., Gigerenzer, 1994; Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995;
Kahneman & Tversky, 1996). In spite of the centrality of
the question, the internal representations and functional
neural foundations underlying human probabilistic
judgment are poorly understood. Until recently, most
research has relied on observations and interpretations of
behavioral experiments. In this paper we report a study that
investigates the internal representations of human intuitive
probabilistic assessment, from both behavioral and
neurological perspectives.

Abstract
We hypothesize that statistically unsophisticated people
perceive event likelihood with a coarser scale with a limited
number of categories, before they report exact numerical
probability values. Refinement of the scale beyond a certain
level would therefore not improve overall judgmental
accuracy and consistency but just impose a heavier burden on
their limited computational capacity. An experiment of
probabilistic judgment was conducted to test this hypothesis.
Results from both behavioral data and event-related potentials
in EEG recordings supported our hypothesis.

Uncertainty Assessment by Approximation

Introduction
Assessing the likelihood of uncertain events is an essential
aspect of human reasoning and decision-making. In the
absence of adequate formal models for computing the
probabilities, people often rely on intuitions and heuristics
to assess uncertainty. The question of how lay people and
experts evaluate the probabilities of uncertain events has
attracted enormous research interest. (For a historical review,
see, e.g., Goldstein & Hogarth, 1996). Proponents of the
“heuristics and biases” program argued that intuitive
probabilistic judgment is often systematically biased and
error-prone (Kahneman, Slovic, & Teversky, 1982). Various
violations of normative models, including overconfidence,
base-rate neglect, and the conjunction fallacy, have been
attributed to applications of a small number of distinctive
judgmental heuristics. However, others argued that the
human mind has evolved to deal with the structure of the
social and physical environment rather than to solve abstract
probability problems (Chase, Hertwig, & Gigerenzer, 1998;
Gigerenzer et al., 1999; Wang, Johnson, & Zhang, in press).
When external information is presented effectively, people
can be good intuitive statisticians (e.g., Cosmides & Tobby,
1996). For instance, Gigerenzer and colleagues found that
when problems were stated in terms of frequencies instead
of probabilities, the stable errors of judgments disappeared
(Gigerenzer, 1991; Sedlmeier & Gigerenzer, 2001). For a
recent collection of different perspectives on interpreting
human intuitive probabilistic judgment, see Gilovich,
Griffin, & Kahneman, 2002.

A common scheme in psychological experiments of
probabilistic judgment is to ask participants to report
probabilities in numerical values, such as the chance of
breast cancer in percentage given a positive test result (e.g.,
Sedlmeier & Gigerenzer, 2001). One question with this
scheme, however, is that participants’ response of numerical
probability values may not genuinely reflect the true internal
representation of their likelihood assessment. The following
example illustrates this point. When asked to give a
numerical estimate of the probability of a certain event
provided with probabilities of other events, people often
give incoherent answers (e.g., Osherson et al., 2001):
(a) Prob (Clinton is re-elected to the Senate in 2006) = .75
(b) Prob (Giuliani runs for the Senate in 2006) = .5
Participants’ response:
(c) Prob (Clinton is re-elected to the Senate in 2006 and
Giuliani runs for the Senate in 2006) = .1
Apparently, the numerical estimate of .1 is incoherent
with the other two given probabilities, and the correct
answer should be at least .25. However, it is possible that
participants did not distinguish small increments on the
continuous scale of probabilities. The estimate of .1
probably is only an approximation by the idea that the
chance for Clinton may drop dramatically if Giuliani joins
in the competition, rather than the result of exact

1291

calculations. In other words, the incoherence is likely to be
produced by the application of a coarser scale, rather than
by some systematically biased heuristic.
We propose two hypotheses on the internal
representations when people intuitively assess the event
likelihood without exact calculations. First, the task of
judgment of probabilities can be partitioned into two
separate phases: the internal representation and the response
(see Figure 1). The internal representation of event
likelihood is the result of an approximate estimation of
presented information (cues) on a coarser scale (internal
scale). Only when subjects need to report probability values
(e.g., in a typical psychological experiment), the internal
scale is projected onto a finer continuous scale (response
scale). Second, the internal scale has only a limited number
of categories that represent different magnitudes of the
perceived event likelihood. Together, these two hypotheses
allow us to distinguish two fundamentally distinctive types
of internal representations underlying human probabilistic
judgment. We illustrate each of them in detail next.
Responses
Cues

Internal Scale

100%

Anchors

0%
Figure 1. Internal representation on a coarser scale

Internalization by Anchoring and Adjustment
The hypothesis that people’s perception of the event
likelihood may not be infinitely refined is based on the
notion that human beings have limited computational
capacity. Miller (1956) suggested that the number of levels
of any variable that can be internalized is not only finite but
also small. Miller’s finding has been widely cited in
psychometric research on whether there is an optimal
number of response alternatives in designing a scale. Many
researchers believe that a further refinement of scales is
meaningless if it is beyond human information processing
capacity (for a review, see Cox, 1980).
In assessing the event likelihood, the number of
categories on the internal scale is determined by the way
these categories are formed. Previous studies show that
people often use the “anchoring and adjustment” heuristic in
judgments of belief and value (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).
Tversky and Kahneman presented anchoring as a process in
which “people make estimates by starting from an initial
value that is adjusted to yield a final answer” (1974, p.

1128). Chapman & Johnson (2002) provided a review on
recent development in understanding the mechanisms of
anchoring. One important implication of anchoring is that
the number of categories on the internal scale is limited,
rather than infinitely refined, since there are only a limited
number of anchors that can be processed at the same time
(see Figure 1). Note that it is not to suggest that people can
not distinguish two very alike events with subtle difference.
However, such distinction can only be achieved based on a
side-by-side comparison, as one of the two events serves as
an anchor.
The anchors can be directly provided by external cues,
predefined action thresholds, or by knowledge retrieved
from memory (for example, availability heuristic, Tversky
& Kahneman, 1974). In the example of incoherent estimate
mentioned before, the anchors would be likely provided by
the probabilities stated in the first two statements, .75 and .5.
Thus, there would be only three categories of likelihood
divided by these two numbers, more likely than .75, less
likely than .5, and a category in the between. When asked to
report a numerical probability estimate to the third statement,
the category of the lowest possibility was projected onto a
continuous scale As a result, a small number such as .1 was
likely to be generated. It is very conceivable, however, that
in a different occasion the same person would give an
answer of .2 instead of .1 to the same question without
changing his or her perception of the event.
In everyday life situations, it is often the case that one of a
few options is chosen based on predefined action thresholds
rather than on exact probability values. It was found that
physicians often significantly overestimated the probability
of disease given a positive test result. In one study, 95 out of
100 physicians estimated the probability of breast cancer
between 70% and 80% given a positive mammography
while the correct answer is merely 7.8% (Eddy, 1982).
Nevertheless, such large deviations do not necessarily mean
that they are poor physicians. Probably to a physician, what
matters most is a dichotomy whether a test result is positive.
Consequently, a two-category internal representation (for
example, “more likely” and “less likely”) would be adopted
until further diagnosis is conducted. When the physicians
were asked to report an exact numerical value, they simply
just obtained a number that would represent the category of
the highest likelihood on the internal scale. Thus, a large
number was likely to be reported.

Coarser Scales versus Finer Scales
The above argument actually suggests the need to partition
the errors of intuitive probabilistic judgment. By
distinguishing the internal representation from the numerical
responses, we in effect partition the errors into two sources:
systematic errors when the external information is
internalized onto a coarser scale, such as overconfidence,
availability bias, and conjunction fallacy (e.g., Kahneman,
Slovic, & Teversky, 1982), and “random errors” when the
internal representation are projected onto the continuous
scale of numerical values. From Figure 1, it can be seen that
a large portion of errors is elicited by the projection of a

1292

coarser scale onto a continuous scale. Thus, a direct
comparison between human perception of event likelihood
and criteria derived from a normative model very likely has
exaggerated the irrationality of human intuitive judgment. In
the previous example of incoherent estimate, incoherence
would be greatly reduced if a coarser scale is used to
evaluate participants’ responses.
We reason that in assessing uncertainty, people prefer a
coarser scale (e.g., fewer categories) to a finer scale (e.g.,
more categories) as the internal representation, since the
former may function effectively and demand less
computational load in a variety of cognitive tasks. People
assess the event likelihood only to the extent that it is
adequate to reach a conclusion or choose an action. For
example, when a person needs to decide whether or not to
bring an umbrella to work based on the chance of rain, a
chance of 70% and a chance of 80% probably would not
make much difference in such a decision. Sometimes a finer
judgment can be obtained but such refinement might have
little effect to improve the choice. For example, Kareev and
colleagues suggested that the limited capacity of working
memory could actually help the early detection of
covariation (Kareev, 1995; Kareev, Lieberman & Lev,
1997). In Sun & Tweney (2002), researchers found that
participants chose their actions based on a heuristic of using
small samples, and their performance in the task was very
close to that obtained by the optimal strategy.
Our hypothesis that there exists a coarse representation of
uncertainty for intuitive probabilistic judgment is consistent
with the large body of literature on mental presentations of
quantity and numbers. Dehaene and colleagues (Dehaene,
1997; Dehaene et al, 1998) have suggested that there is a
coarse and analog mental number line, which is the
foundation of a "number sense" and shared by humans and
animals. Recent studies using brain-imaging techniques
have provided further support for the existence of such
coarse scale representations. It has been found that the
approximation and exact calculation tasks of large numbers
(as compared to rote arithmetic operations) put heavy
emphasis on the left and right parietal cortices, which may
encode numbers in a non-verbal quantity format (e.g.,
Dehaene et al., 1999; Pesenti et al., 2000; Stanescu-Cosson
et al., 2000).
To test our hypotheses, we conducted an experiment in
which participants performed a task of probability
estimation. The task was to estimate the winning
probabilities of poker hands in a standard “draw poker”
game when presented with the highest two cards out of the
five cards on a hand. The reason we selected this task is that
it provides an objective criterion for evaluating participants’
estimates. Most importantly, this task offers a distribution of
probabilities ranging from zero to close to 100% with
extremely small increments. This feature allows us to look
into the refinement of the internal scale when people need to
make estimates intuitively. We compared two conditions in
the experiment. The coarser-scale condition required
probability estimation within an increment of 30% (e.g., less
than 30%, 30% ~ 60%, and greater than 60%). The finer-

scale condition required probability estimation within an
increment of 10%. Both behavioral data and the event
related potentials (ERP) in EEG recordings were collected.
The experiment results supported our hypotheses. First,
estimates by the finer scale showed significantly worse
performance in terms of overall accuracy and consistency.
Second, significant ERP difference was found over the
parietal area between two conditions, indicating that
different levels of effort were involved in the application of
different internal scales.

Method
Participants Six graduate students in the Houston medical
center area participated in the experiment. All participants
were right-handed males. The averaged age was 27 years
old. None of the participants reported having any in-depth
knowledge of probabilistic theories. All participants
reported having some experience of playing poker games
but only at a novice level.
Procedure The stimuli in the experiment (two-card poker
hands) consisted of 18 levels of winning probabilities,
ranging from 5% to 90% with a step of approximately 5%
(as in a one-deck and two-person game). With suit
variations, there were 36 different hands used in the
experiment. (Note that in this experiment, the suit variation
does not change the winning probability since the highest
hand is a one-pair of aces.) Participants were introduced
with the rules of hand ranking before the experiment (e.g., a
pair is higher than single cards; the Ace is higher than the
King, and etc.) without being informed of the corresponding
probability values.
Figure 2 shows the procedure of the experiment. Stimuli
were displayed on a 17-inch CRT monitor. To reduce eye
movements, the viewing angle of the displays on the screen
was limited to 2%. After the fixation display, two poker
cards were presented. Participants were instructed to form
an estimate of winning probability in their mind
immediately. After the second fixation, a number was
displayed and the participants needed to compare their
estimate to the displayed number as quickly as possible. A
Microsoft PC mouse was used to collect the responses (the
left button for “less than,” and the right button for “greater
than”).
+
Fixation
500ms

Cards
1500ms

+

30

Fixation
500ms

Response
Criterion

Figure 2. Experiment Procedure
There were two experimental conditions: the coarser-scale
condition and the finer-scale condition. In the coarser-scale
condition, participants were instructed to estimate
probabilities in three categories (less than 30%, 30% ~ 60%,
and more than 60%). The number displayed as the

1293

comparison criterion is either 30 or 60, randomly selected.
In the finer-scale condition, participants were instructed to
form the estimate accurate to the single digit. The
comparison criterion was either 5% plus or 5% minus
(randomly selected) the true winning probability. For
example, a pair of aces has a winning probability of 90%.
Then, participants needed to compare their estimates with
either 85% or 95%, depending on which number was
displayed. Each participant completed both conditions. The
order of two conditions was balanced among participants.
Each condition consisted of 72 trials in 2 trial list cycles,
and each of the 36 poker hands was displayed once in each
cycle. The order of trials was randomly shuffled. Response
time was recorded as the latency after the onset of
comparison criterion. During the experiment, ERPs were
sampled at 250 Hz with a 128-electrode geodesic sensor net
(GSN) reference to the vertex (Tucker, 1993).

Results
Behavioral Results Table 1 shows the comparison between
two experimental conditions on participants’ probabilistic
estimates in three categories, accuracy, consistency, and
response time. Accuracy was calculated as the percentage
when participants made the comparison correctly. For
example, if the true winning probability was 70 percent, and
the number displayed as the comparison criterion was 60,
the correct response should be “greater than.” (In case of
identical numbers, either response was counted as correct.)
All participants showed higher levels of accuracy in the
coarser-scale than in the finer-scale condition. On average,
the accuracy was 76.4% in the coarser-scale condition, and
56.0% in the finer-scale condition, with a difference of
20.4% (t(5) = 4.576, p < 0.01, two-tailed). Furthermore, we
compared participants’ accuracy in two trial list cycles in
each condition and found little improvement in accuracy
over the trials. The low accuracy level in the finer-scale
condition was not significantly different from random guess
(comparing to the expected value of 50%, t(5) = 1.836, p
= .12, two-tailed), indicating that participants were not able
to distinguish winning probabilities of poker hands in the
increment of 10%.
To evaluate participants’ judgmental consistency, we
calculated Pearson correlations in their responses over two
identical sets of stimuli (36 poker hands in each set) in each
condition. All six participants in the coarser-scale condition
and only one participant in the finer-scale condition showed
correlations significantly different from zero (n = 36). The
averaged correlation was .472 in the coarser-scale condition,
and .076 in the finer-scale condition, with a difference
of .396 (t(5) = 7.906, p = .001, two-tailed). This finding was
consistent with the difference in accuracy between two
conditions, supporting the speculation that participants were
more likely to make a random guess in the finer-scale
condition.

Table 2 Comparing Coarser-scale and Finer-scale

Accuracy

Coarser-scale
76.4% (8.61)

Finer-scale
56.0% (8.05)

Difference
20.4%

Consistency

.472 (.060)

.076 (.094)

.396

664.1ms
798.4ms
RT
(233.75)
(298.93)
-123.2ms
N = 6. Standard deviations were listed in parentheses. All
three comparisons were significant p < .05 (two-tailed).
The response time was also significantly different
between two conditions. The averaged RT was 664.1ms in
the coarser-scale condition and 798.4ms in the finer-scale
condition, and the former was 123.2ms faster that the latter
(t(5) = -3.118, p < 0.05, two-tailed). Since the response time
was recorded as the latency after the onset of comparison
numbers rather than the onset of poker cards, it is not clear
whether probability estimation or number comparison, or
both, produced the difference. Previous studies found that
the time to make magnitude comparisons decreases linearly
as the numerical distance between two numbers (e.g., Moyer
& Landauer, 1967). Nevertheless, the large RT difference in
our experiment indicated that the task of probability
estimation and comparison as a whole might take more
efforts in the finer-scale condition than in the coarser-scale
condition.
ERP Results We rejected trials with voltages exceeding ±
100 µV. The remaining trials were segmented then averaged
in synchrony with stimulus onset (display of poker cards) in
a window of 1100ms (100ms before and 1000ms after
stimulus onset), digitally transformed to an average
reference, band-pass filtered (0.5 to 20 Hz), and corrected
for baseline over 100ms before stimulus onset.
Experimental conditions (Coarser vs. Finer) were compared
on the 10 central-parietal electrodes by a repeated-measure
ANOVA. We found significant ERP difference between two
conditions at 400 ± 20ms (peak values) following stimulus
onset (Greenhouse-Geisser F(1,5) = 12.511, p <0.05), where
the finer-scale condition yielded more positive voltages over
parietal electrodes. Figure 3 shows the wave forms of
electrode CP1 (GSN 38) and the voltage difference map
(finer-scale minus coarser scale) by spherical spline
interpolation. The comparison between the left and right
hemispheres over the parietal area was not significant
(Greenhouse-Geisser F(1,5) = 5.339, p = .127). At the
current stage of the study, we have not found significant
voltage differences over other brain areas. Furthermore,
examinations on latency did not reveal any significant
differences between two experimental conditions.
Examination of the waveforms showed that the ERP
difference occurred after the P300 component, when
participants were viewing identical displays and had not yet
received the comparison stimuli. The P300 and its subcomponents p3a and p3b have been considered as a process
that indexes the ensuing memory storage operations, as

1294

P300 amplitudes were found related to memory of previous
stimulus presentations (e.g., Fabiani, Karis, & Donchin,
1990; Johnson, 1995; Paller, McCarthy, & Wood, 1988; for
a recent review, see Polich, 2003). Our results are also
consistent with those of Dehaene and colleagues (Dehaene
et al., 1999; Naccache & Dehaene, 2001), who showed that
200-400ms after the stimulus onset is critical to distinguish
among different numerical operations with distinctive
semantic implications. Based on this observation, we
speculate that the difference in ERPs in our experiment
probably was due to different working memory load.
Specifically, when judging the winning chance of a certain
poker hand, other poker hands (either from previous trials or
by temporary construction) were used as anchors to build
categories on the internal representation. Fewer anchors
were needed in the coarser-scale condition. On the contrary,
the finer-scale condition demanded more effort because
more hands needed to be considered at the same time. This
speculation is consistent with the participants’ oral report
after the experiment. For example, one participant reported
that he had to think of more hands with “nearby” rankings
in the finer-scale condition.
Electrode CP1
Finer

5µ V

Coarser
0µ V
0ms

300ms

Finer-scale
minus
Coarser-scale
t = 410ms

and the low consistency level (close to zero) in the finerscale condition indicated that participants were not able to
distinguish winning probabilities of poker hands in the
increment of 10%. Therefore, if the internal scale indeed
had a limited number of categories, most likely this number
was not greater than 10. It is interesting to point out that in
our experiment, there were 36 different hands at 18 equally
distributed levels of winning probabilities. If these hands
were presented externally at the same time in the order of
their rankings, it is reasonable to assume that any participant
can report probability values accurate to the 5% increment
by anchoring and adjustment. Nevertheless, their poor
performance in the finer-scale condition indicated that the
number of anchors that can be processed internally was
quite limited. Furthermore, the ERP difference occurred
when participants were viewing identical displays,
indicating that participants followed the experimental
instruction in forming their estimates at different levels of
refinement. And estimating by a finer scale appeared to
require more computational effort.
Note that the present study is still at its preliminary stage
and there are many questions left to be answered. For
example, more replications are needed and the ERP analyses
can be extended such as comparisons over other brain areas
and source localization. It would also be interesting to test
someone who is an expert at poker and to see whether the
performance would be better, especially in the finer-scale
condition. Another example is that the model of a coarser
internal scale can be further examined by manipulating the
external representations, as previous studies indicated the
important roles of the interaction between internal and
external representations in human numerical cognition (e.g.,
Zhang & Norman, 1995; Zhang & Wang, in press). Upon
further experiments and analyses, we believe that the
present study will provide a better understanding of human
intuitive probabilistic judgment.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the postdoctoral
fellowship from the W. M. Keck Center for Computational
and Structural Biology of the Gulf Coast Consortia for the
first author.
-1µ V

+1µ V

References

Figure 3

General Discussion
In sum, the findings in our experiment were consistent with
our hypotheses of the internal representation of a coarser
scale in intuitive judgment of event likelihood. The analyses
of behavioral data suggested that if participants were only
able to distinguish event likelihood with a coarser scale, a
large portion of errors would be produced when they were
forced to estimate probabilities with a finer scale. This kind
of errors was manifested in both judgmental accuracy and
consistency. The low accuracy level (close to random guess)

Chapman, G. B., & Johnson, E. J., (2002). Incorporating the
irrelevant: Anchors in judgments of belief and value. In T.
Gilovich, D. Griffin, & D. Kahneman (Eds.), Heuristics
and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment (pp.
120-149). New York: Cambridge.
Chase, V. M., Hertwig, R., Gigerenzer, G., (1998). Visions
of rationality, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(6), 206-214.
Cosmides, L. Tooby, J. (1996). Are humans good intuitive
statisticians after all? Rethinking some conclusions from
the literature on judgment under uncertainty. Cognition,
58, 1-73.

1295

Cox, III, E. P., (1980). The optimal number of response
alternatives for a scale: A review. Journal of Marketing
Research, 17, 407-422.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind
creates mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dehaene, S., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., & Cohen, L., (1998).
Abstract representations of numbers in the animal and
human brain. Trends in Neuroscience, 21, 355-361.
Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P. Stanescu, R., Tsivkin, S.
(1999). Sources of mathematical thinking: Behavioral and
brain-imaging evidence. Science, 284, 970-974.
Eddy, D. M. (1982). Probabilistic reasoning in clinical
medicine: Problems and opportunities. In D. Kahneman, P.
Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgments under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 249-267). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Fabiani, M., Karis, D., & Donchin, E. (1990). Effects of
mnemonic strategy manipulation in a von Restorff
paradigm.
Electroencephalography
and
Clinical
Neurophysiology, 75, 22-35.
Johnson, R. (1995). Event related potential: Insights into the
neurobiology of memory systems. In F. Boller & J.
Grafman (Eds.), Handbook of neuropsychology, Vol. 10,
(pp. 135-163). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (Eds.). (1982).
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1996). On the reality of
cognitive illusions. Psychological Review, 103, 582-591.
Kareev, Y. (1995). Through a narrow window: Working
memory capacity and the detection of covariation.
Cognition, 56, 263-269.
Kareev, Y., Lieberman, I., & Lev, M. (1997). Through a
narrow window: Sample size and the perception of
correlation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
126(3), 278-287.
Gigerenzer, G. (1991). How to make cognitive illusions
disappear: Beyond “heuristics and biases.” In W. Stroebe
& M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social
psychology, Vol.2, (pp. 83-115). Chichester, England:
Wiley.
Gigerenzer, G. (1994). Why the distinction between singleevent probabilities and frequencies is important for
psychology (and vice versa). In G. Wright & P. Ayton
(Eds.), Subjective probability. New York: Wiley
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M. & the ABC Research Group
(Eds.). (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002).
Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive
judgment. New York: Cambridge.
Goldstein, W. M, & Hogarth, R. M. (1996). Judgment and
decision research: Some historical context. In Goldstein,
W. M & Hogarth, R. M. (Eds.), Research on judgment
and decision making: Currents, connections, and

controversies (pp. 3-65). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.
Moyer, R. S., & Landauer, T. K. (1967). Time required for
judgments of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 15191520.
Naccache, L., & Dehaene, S. (2001). The priming method:
Imaging unconscious repetition priming reveals an
abstract representation of number in the parietal lobes.
Cerebral Cortex, 11, 966-974.
Osherson, D., Lane, D., Hartley, P., & Batsell, R. (2001).
Coherent probability from incoherent judgment. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 70(1), 3-12.
Paller, K. A., McCarthy, G., & Wood, C. C. (1988). ERPs
predictive of subsequent recall and recognition
performance. Biological Psychology, 26, 269-276.
Pesenti, M., Thioux, M., Seron, X., Volder, A. (2000).
Neuroanatomical substrates of Arabic number processing,
numerical comparison, and simple addition: A PET study.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12(3), 461-479.
Polich, J. (2003). Theoretical overview of P3a and P3b. In J.
Polich (Ed.), Detection of change: Event-related potential
and fMRI findings (pp. 83-98). New York: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Sedlmeier, P., & Gigerenzer, G. (2001). Teaching Bayesian
reasoning in less than two hours. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(3), 380-400.
Stanescu-Cosson, R., Pinel, P., Moortele, P., Bihan, D. L.,
Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2000). Understanding
dissociations in dyscalculia: A brain imaging study of the
impact of number size on the cerebral networks for exact
and approximate calculation. Brain, 123, 2240-2255.
Sun, Y. & Tweney, R. D. (2002). Detecting the local
maximum: The adaptive significance of a simple heuristic.
In C. Schunn & W. Gray (Eds.), Proceedings of the
twenty-fourth annual conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, (pp. 856-860). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Tucker, D. M. (1993). Spatial sampling of head electrical
fields: The geodesic sensor net. Electroencephalography
and Clinical Neurophysiology, 87, 154-163.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Zhang, J. (in press). The order
effect in human abductive reasoning: An empirical and
computational study. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1995). A representational
analysis of numeration systems. Cognition, 57, 271-295.
Zhang, J., & Wang, H. (in press). The effects of external
representations on numerical tasks. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology.

1296

