UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Processes of Artistic Creativity: The Case of Isabelle Hayeur

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5454f9g4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Leclerc, Jude
Gosselin, Frederic

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Processes of Artistic Creativity: The Case of Isabelle Hayeur
Jude Leclerc (jude.leclerc@umontreal.ca)
Frédéric Gosselin (frederic.gosselin@umontreal.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of Montreal
C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montreal, QC, H3C 3J7, Canada

able … to converge toward a common account of discovery
in many areas of human endeavor: practical, scientific and
artistic, occurring both in everyday life and in specialized
technical and professional domains" (p.524). Here, these
concepts and vocabulary are those of problem spaces –
states, operators and goals –, heuristic rules, weak and
strong search methods – hill-climbing, means-end analysis,
planning (Newell & Simon, 1972). Discovery is thus viewed
as a search process in a problem-solving space, composed of
goals, rules and other aspects of the task and situation.
Up until now, artistic creativity had almost never been
studied from a problem-solving perspective. There are a few
exceptions (e.g., Weisberg, 1993), but a lot of groundwork
still needs to be done. So far, the studies of artistic creativity
based on this approach have mainly addressed creative
processes in relatively general terms; they have not
produced specific descriptions of problem spaces and
heuristics in specific artistic practices.

Abstract
What are the problems faced by artists in real-life contexts?
By what processes do they solve these problems? In this
paper, work on scientific discovery (e.g, Klahr, 2000;
Kulkarni & Simon, 1988; Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, &
Zytkow, 1987) and a situated perspective on creative
cognition (e.g., Csikszentmihalyi, 1988, 1999; Nersessian,
2004) are brought together into a unifying framework for
studying the processes of artistic creativity in real-life. Within
this framework, artistic creativity is viewed as situated
problem solving. We illustrated our approach by applying it to
Isabelle Hayeur, a successful Canadian visual artist.

Introduction
In this paper, work on scientific discovery and a situated
perspective on creative cognition are brought together into a
framework for studying the processes of artistic creativity.
Everybody is interested in art, but up until now few have
examined the problem-solving processes that provide
support for the artistic process and the production of works
of art; almost no one has looked at real-life artistic practices.
We begin by reviewing work on scientific discovery
processes. We then present a current definition of creativity
that parallels work on situated and distributed cognition. We
then go on to describe part of an ongoing field study we are
conducting, a study of creative artistic processes in a
contemporary visual arts practice, within our framework.
Finally, we discuss the potential of this approach for future
studies of artistic creativity.

Search Spaces in Scientific Discovery Search spaces or
problem spaces are abstract – representational, conceptual –
spaces explored by a ‘problem solver’ during the problemsolving process. In the case of scientific discovery, scientists
have been found to work in two, three, four, and even in
search spaces of greater dimensionality (e.g., Klahr &
Dunbar, 1988; Kulkarni & Simon, 1988; Schunn & Klahr,
1995; Thagard, 1998; Wolf & Beskin, 1996; see also Klahr
& Simon 1999; Klahr, 2000). The traditional two-space
view of scientific discovery has its origins in Simon and
Lea's (1974) work on problem solving and rule induction; it
was first proposed by Klahr and Dunbar (1988). According
to this model, in the process of scientific discovery, search
happens in two coordinated spaces: (1) the hypothesis space,
and (2) the experiment space. Thus, scientific discovery
involves generating new hypothesis and experiments; then
these experiments serve to evaluate the hypothesis and
further generate new ones. This can be considered a
problem-solving process.
Similarly, we may ask: what problem space is explored by
an artist in the course of the artistic work and practice? In
what problem space, and by what processes, is this search
conducted? And, of course, there is the possibility that the
artist is working through multiple search spaces,
corresponding to diverse subproblems involved in artistic
creativity.

Artistic Practice and Creativity as Situated
Problem Solving
Artistic Creativity as Problem Solving
There is now a tradition of studying creativity from a
problem-solving viewpoint (e.g., Klahr, 2000; Kulkarni &
Simon, 1988; Langley, Simon, Bradshaw, & Zytkow, 1987;
Newell, Shaw, & Simon, 1962). The processes of scientific
discovery, especially, have been studied from this
perspective.
In an excellent review, Klahr and Simon (1999) present
the four major approaches of these studies: historical,
laboratory, direct observation, and computational. What
Klahr and Simon note is that all these approaches to the
study of scientific creativity have led to convergent findings
about discovery processes.
Klahr and Simon propose that by using the concepts and
vocabulary of human problem-solving theory "we may be

Artistic Creativity as Situated Activity
According to Csikszentmihalyi (1999), “For creativity to
occur, a set of rules and practices must be transmitted from
the domain to the individual. The individual must then
801

produce a novel variation in the content of the domain. The
variation then must be selected by the field [the social
organization of the domain] for inclusion in the domain” (p.
315; see also Feldman, Csikszentmihalyi, & Gardner, 1994).
From this point of view, creative cognition is not just “in
the head” (Norman, 1993a), it is a computational process
involving domain and field, as well as the individual. The
parallels with situated or distributed approaches to cognition
are obvious (e.g., Hutchins, 1995; Nersessian, Kurz-Milcke,
Newstetter, & Davies, 2003; Thagard, 1999). Nersessian et
al. (2003), for example, studied innovation – creativity – in
biomedical engineering research laboratories as a situated
and distributed process. The view of creativity as situated,
contextual, points toward individual, field, and domainspecific studies of creativity (Csikszentmihalyi, 1988, 1999;
Li, 1997; Mace & Ward, 2002).
A lot of recent work in cognitive science explores the
situated nature of cognition and action (e.g., Clancey, 1997;
Hutchins, 1995; see Nersessian, 2004; Norman, 1993b).
Nersessian summarizes the challenges posed to traditional
cognitive science by this environmental perspective with
three interrelated questions: “1) What are the bounds of the
cognitive system? 2) What is the nature of the processing
employed in cognition? and 3) What kinds of
representations – internal and external – are used in
cognitive processing?” This perspective effectively poses
challenges to cognitive science; the same challenges are also
implicit in current models of creativity.
Thus, as with the problem-solving approach, situated and
distributed cognition approaches have been used to study
processes of scientific discovery (e.g., Nersessian et al.,
2003).
Within our framework for studying processes of artistic
creativity, in accord with problem-solving theory, recent
approaches to situated and distributed cognition, and with
current definitions of creativity, we view artistic creativity
as situated problem solving. We are interested in finding out
what problem-solving processes are involved in artistic
creativity and in situating these – computations, rules –
within the larger system involved in an artistic practice.

Arts et des Lettres du Québec, and her work has been shown
nationally and internationally.
Isabelle Hayeur works mainly with digital photography
and video. Her digital photomontages and videos have been
shown in solo and group exhibitions, and festivals, in
Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Denmark,
England, Estonia, France, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Malaysia, Mexico, Portugal, Poland, Serbia, Spain, and the
United States. She also produces Internet art projects and
site-specific works. Her artistic work deals mainly with the
impact of the Western model of development on the
environment. Her images often display landscapes, part
idyllic, part disenchanted, amid man’s interventions. Based
on a major sociological survey2 of Québec’s visual artists’
conditions of practice (Bellavance, Bernier, & Laplante,
2001), she can be considered representative of other
successful visual artists in that context.
At the time of writing we had been conducting a field
study of this artist’s creative processes and practice for a
ten-month period; the study is ongoing. Kulkarni and Simon
(1988) discussed the use of different kinds of data for
building models of processes that span many months or
years (e.g., discovery processes in science), where gathering
continuous protocols is not practical; in such contexts,
recourse to other kinds of data is required. Data about this
artist’s creative processes were collected on-site, at the
artist’s studio, through interviews, recording of her artistic
activity at the computer, and photographs taken of her work
space and tools. Extensive field notes were also taken. The
combined data collection allows for the recording of
cognitive processes involving a distributed set of activities
and tools (see Clancey, 2001). All data was digitally
recorded (except for the field notes); the total archived data
volume amounts to close to 30 gigabytes.
Our study is at the crossroads of the observational and
computational approaches to discovery and creativity
processes (Klahr & Simon, 1999); we are using
observational and interview data to build a computational
description and model of processes of artistic creativity.
Here we will focus on the interview data. Eight semistructured interviews were conducted over a six-month
period, at the artist’s studio (Leclerc & Gosselin, 2003). We
took inspiration from the traditional protocol analysis
methodology (Ericsson & Simon, 1993) for eliciting verbal
reports; interviews were thus conducted with the goal of
producing information resembling what Ericsson and Simon
call “Level 2 verbalizations”. This type of verbalization
involves descriptive information; Isabelle Hayeur was
therefore asked for descriptions of her activities as an artist,
not for explanations. Interviews were digitally recorded and
were 30 to 60 minutes long each. These were transcribed
verbatim and represent a total of 74,507 words. Interviews
were organized, stored, and analyzed using Atlas.ti, a
computer package designed for qualitative data analysis.

Contemporary Visual Arts Practice: The Case
of Isabelle Hayeur
To illustrate this approach, we will briefly present
preliminary results obtained from the study of a
contemporary Canadian visual artist’s work and practice.
The main focus of this first phase of analysis is on
determining the search spaces involved in a real-life artistic
work and practice.
Isabelle Hayeur1 is a professional Canadian artist. She is a
professional artist in the sense of Quebec’s law on the
Professional status of artists in the visual arts, arts and
crafts and literature, and their contracts with promoters
(R.S.Q., c. S-32.01); she has received multiple grants from
both the Canada Council for the Arts and the Conseil des

2

This study was commissioned by Québec's main group of
professional visual artists, the Regroupement des Artistes en Arts
Visuels du Québec.

1

Her work, artist’s statement, and resume can be found on her
Web site: isabelle-hayeur.com.

802

Given the preliminary nature of our research, we have
relied mainly on the empirical and on the logical criteria.
We have analyzed transcripts from the interviews and coded
those in terms of rules (i.e., production rules), conditionaction rules. And based on these rules, we have identified
goals and heuristic operators3; these define the spaces
searched by Isabelle Hayeur in the course of her creative
process.

Problem Spaces in Isabelle Hayeur’s Creative
Process
Viewing artistic creativity as a special case of human
problem solving, we have to ask what are the problems
solved by an artist? More precisely, what are the problems
solved by Isabelle Hayeur? Finding what problems she
solves means finding out what problem spaces she explores
in the course of her artistic practice. Problem spaces are
defined in terms of states, operators, goals, and constraints
(Klahr & Simon, 1999, citing Newell & Simon, 1972); we
have coded and analyzed our interviews in these terms.
Recently, some researchers have also started to redefine
the concept of problem space, putting the emphasis not just
on internal representations, search, and operations on these
representations, but also on the physical space, and the
context, involved in real-life problem-solving activity. For
example, Nersessian et al. (2003), in their study of
innovative practices in biomedical research laboratories,
considered the “lab-as-problem-space”; the laboratory, with
its resources, people, technology, equipment, etc., is thus
considered as a ‘problem space’. Similarly, in contemporary
visual arts practice, the artist, work space, tools,
technologies, technical knowledge and skills, environment,
partnerships with other artists, relations with galleries, art
centers, funding agencies… constitute the problem space of
an arts practice (e.g., see Figure 1). Our analysis is thus
based on identifying states, goals, operators, and constraints,
in this sense – in a situated artistic practice.

Artistic Practice and Career Search Spaces Following
coding and analysis of the interviews, two main spaces
emerged as the ones most actively searched in the course of
Isabelle Hayeur’s account of her creative activity: the
artistic practice space and the career space. Throughout the
interviews she describes both areas of activity. For example:
Interview 2
(28:30) I always plan, I plan moments where I
concentrate on my [artistic] production. And there are
moments where I put together my artist’s dossiers; it is
rather dull, but it has to be done. I put together those
dossiers [for submission calls]. You see, there really is
the creative work, you know what this is, and there is
also everything surrounding that, which takes about
half my time [italics added]4.
Interview 3
(29:49) I find myself putting more time on my artistic
work… the artistic work, and the career.
Interview 5
(01:08) Already, I am very busy, with things related to
the dissemination [of the artistic work], but which I
must do, everything surrounding the artistic practice.
In the following sections, we will look at the organization
and role of the artistic practice and the career search spaces.
Artistic Practice Search Space: Goals and Heuristics
Table 1 shows the main set of goals found to operate in the
artistic practice space. These high-level goals shape Isabelle
Hayeur’s artistic practice. Heuristic operators searching
through the artistic practice space apply these goals; these
play a role in many heuristic rules used by Isabelle Hayeur
to accomplish the tasks associated with this space.
Table 1: Artistic practice space main goals

Figure 1: The artist’s “studio-as-problem-space”

[gR2-12; gR2-13] Doing my work as an artist seriously, full
time.
[gR2-14; gR2-15] Living with less money, in order to put
more time into my artistic practice (and less time into
‘bread-and-butter’ jobs).
[gR2-17; gR2-28] Having more time for my artistic practice.

Criteria for Proposing New Search Spaces Schunn and
Klahr (1996; see also Klahr, 2000) have suggested three
criteria for proposing new problem spaces: (1) logical, (2)
empirical, and (3) implementational. The logical criterion
refers to logical coherence of the categories – spaces –
proposed; spaces must be mutually exclusive. The empirical
refers to the fact that there must be some activity going on
in the proposed spaces. And, the implementational criterion
allows precise characterization of the proposed problem
spaces.

3

Goals are labeled gR and rules R. A rule is given the number of
the interview in which it first appeared; goals are constitutive parts
of rules.
4
For this paper, interview excerpts, goals, and rules were
translated from the French language.

803

[gR2-30; gR2-32] Working on my images, especially after a
few weeks of not working on them.
[gR2-31] After a long time working on my images, taking
some time away from the work, doing something else.
[gR2-33; gR-35] Putting time into my practice, taking up
and continuing work on projects, planning time when I
concentrate on my production.
[gR2-38] Art must remain a calling, it must remain research;
the career side must not take too much time.
[gR2-38; gR3-06] I want my images, series, artistic work
and career to succeed.
[gR2-39] Doing art for the knowledge it brings in my own
life, and for what it may teach or give to others.
[gR3-04] Not stopping my artistic work.
[gR3-07] Being an artist; doing this my entire life.
[gR5-01; gR5-02] Creating strong works, strong images;
saying things in a strong way, a stronger way.

[gR2-37; gR3-02; gR3-05] Taking care of the career side –
everything that surrounds the creative work: searching for
submission-call deadlines, new places and centers to show
my work, residencies, putting together my “artist’s dossiers”
according to grants and submission-call deadlines, also
answering specific requests for exhibitions and, at some
point, sending a set of dossiers – around ten at a time – to
art centers I want to reach in a given year, etc. I put half of
my total work time as an artist on these activities (when I do
not have other contracts, ‘bread-and-butter’ jobs to do).
[gR2-38] Not putting too much time on the career side;
leaving aside some activities if necessary, even if I miss out
on some opportunities.
[gR3-01; gR3-06] Being entrepreneurial; sending out a lot
of artist’s dossiers in order to have exhibitions.
[gR3-01; gR3-07] Having success as an artist; being an
artist my entire life.

Among the goals defining the artistic practice space, some
appear to play a major role because they call upon many
other goals to search the problem space. For example, gR307 calls on a host of activities to reach its aim (see Tables 1
& 2, [gR2-33; gR2-35; gR2-36; gR2-37; gR2-38; gR3-01,
gR3-02; gR3-05; gR3-06], for an example of subgoals –
heuristics – called by gR3-07 ).
The artistic practice space is divided further in a number
of important subspaces. Among these figures the imagegeneration space. Of great importance, it is the very basis of
Isabelle Hayeur’s artistic practice; this subspace includes all
the knowledge and skills actually involved in the image
production activity. Another subspace would be a ‘projectmanagement’ subspace. We will not expand on these here.
The task achieved through the artistic practice problem
space is the task of being an artist, of focusing on one’s
artistic practice and of producing art works.

The career space is further subdivided in two main
subspaces: the dissemination and the promotion spaces.
These serve to solve the ‘problem’ of making the artistic
work known and seen.
Some of the career goals are related to the same rules as
some of the artistic practice goals. This is because certain
heuristics operators mediate activity between these two
search spaces. The task achieved through the career problem
space is the task of making one’s work known and seen,
thereby building up a successful career.

Career Search Space: Goals and Heuristics This is the
main set of goals found to operate in the career space. Goals
gR2-36, gR3-01, gR3-06, gR3-07, and their associated
heuristic rules, are the most significant; these actually call
upon every other goal and heuristic in the career space.

[R3-07] If I want to be an artist and I want to be an
artist my entire life, and I know what I have to do, then
I do it immediately (i.e., gR2-33, gR2-35, gR2-36,
gR2-37, gR2-38, gR3-01, gR3-02, gR3-05, gR3-06).

Heuristics Coordinating Search We have found some
heuristic operators, some rules, to be of special importance
in Isabelle Hayeur’s creative process because they
coordinate the search between the artistic practice and
career spaces. Here is such a heuristic operator associated
with the recurrent goal gR3-07:

R3-07 coordinates a lot of activity related to the artistic
practice and the career spaces. In fact, it links vocational
goals, wanting to live the life of an artist, with very practical
career goals and activities.
Here is another example of a heuristic operator linking
artistic practice and career:

Table 2: Career space main goals
[gR2-01; gR2-03] Sitting on panels, juries, etc., with other
artists.
[gR2-01; gR2-02] Learning. Learning how other artists talk
about their work, getting ideas about how to present your
work, how art councils work, etc.
[gR2-26; gR2-27] Being represented by a private art gallery,
in order to sell my work.
[gR2-34; gR6-01] Sending my work to art centers, galleries,
and obtaining exhibitions.
[gR2-35; gR3-05] Putting together “artist’s dossiers” –
artistic projects and related documents about my practice (to
be sent to art centers when there are calls for submissions).
[gR2-36] Doing the things that make a difference in an
artist’s career, in order to have a successful career.

[R2-38] If I want art to remain a calling as it must, and
if at a certain point I realize that the ‘career’ side takes
too much of my time, then I just don’t do it, that
activity (even if it means missing opportunities).
Identifying coordination between search spaces is an
important part of modeling problem-solving processes; as
Klahr (2000) notes, “One must … distinguish search in a
particular space from coordination among multiple spaces”
(p. 215).
804

According to Bellavance, Bernier, and Laplante’s (2001)
survey, few professional artists manage to achieve these
goals in Québec’s and Canada’s socio-cultural and
economic context. One measure of an artist’s success, at
least in regard to the interplay between practice, career, and
economic spaces, seems to be his or her ability to do just
that, focus on the artistic life rather than just on sheer
survival.
Our situated problem-solving perspective on artistic
creativity has shown that two main spaces are directly
involved in a contemporary visual artist’s creative process:
the artistic-practice-as-problem-space and the career-asproblem-space. When Nersessian (2004) describes the
challenges posed by the environmental perspective to the
traditional view of cognition, she mentions considerations of
the boundaries of cognitive systems; according to this
perspective, cognition is situated and distributed in a
complex cognitive system, a system that includes
environment and individual. In this first part of Isabelle
Hayeur’s case study, we found a number of environmental
elements playing a role in the artistic practice space (e.g.,
the artist’s studio, equipment, time and financial resources,
knowledge and skills needed to produce art works, etc.) and
the career space (e.g., relationships with other artists, art
centers and galleries, funding agencies, etc.), and defining
the complex cognitive space of her artistic creativity.

An Additional Search Space This additional space, the
economic space is not directly part of Isabelle Hayeur’s
process of artistic creativity, although, as we will see, it is
essential for it. This space could also be called the ‘working
for a living’ or the ‘bread-and-butter job’ space. Table 3
shows a sample of goals from this space.
Table 3: Some economic space goals
[gR2-07] Taking small jobs, contracts, especially in my
domain or related to my practice, the arts, and the art milieu.
[gR2-07] Trying to find more gratifying, better paid, and a
little bit more interesting jobs.
[gR2-13] ‘Bread-and-butter’ jobs must not take away from
my hours of artistic work.
[gR2-14; gR2-16] To live with less money, in order to need
to work less (in order to have more time for my practice).
[gR2-23; gR2-24] Not putting time into searching for breadand-butter jobs; taking what comes.
[gR2-27; gR2-28] To sell my art work, in order to spend
more time on my production and less on contracts outside
my practice.
Some rules related to these goals show an interaction
between the artistic practice, career, and economic spaces.
Here are some examples:

Conclusions
The project of modeling Isabelle Hayeur’s processes of
artistic creativity is ongoing. What was outlined here is
meant as an illustration of our framework for studying reallife artistic creativity; our preliminary results suggest a wellintegrated set of search spaces and processes involved in
real-life, situated, artistic practice and cognition. Further
work will involve collecting verbal protocols related to the
image-generation search space – the actual picture
producing process; we have already recorded more than 100
hours of her image-generation activity.
Within the artistic creativity as situated problem solving
framework, it is possible to study real-life artistic practices.
The product is a descriptive model of search spaces, goals,
and heuristic operators involved in artistic creativity.
Dasgupta (1994, see also 2003) has done something of the
kind in the context of science and technological innovation.
The type of studies provided by our framework may lead to
computational models of historical instances of artistic
creativity, as studies in science have led to computational
models of historical scientific discoveries (Langley,
Magnani, Cheng, Gordon, Kocabas, & Sleeman, 2001).
Such studies may also serve an educational purpose by
providing information about real-life processes of artistic
creativity.

[R2-07] If you are an artist, and you (necessarily) need
to pay for your own production (e.g., the high cost of
printing large format photographs), and you have the
chance to work in your own domain, then generally
you accept these small jobs.
[R2-14] If I cannot live solely from my art, and I have
to take ‘bread-and-butter’ jobs, and I do not want this
to replace my hours of artistic practice, then I decide to
live with less money, in order to need to work less.
[R2-28] If I sell my art work, even if just one image a
month, then for each picture sold, I have one less
contract to do, and I have more time for my practice.
These rules show that artistic creativity – artistic practice
and career – is supported by the economic space. Search,
minimal search in Isabelle Hayeur’s case, in this space aims
at finding the necessary resources to allow most of the
artist’s activity to be focused on her professional life and
artistic production. The main task achieved through the
economic problem space is finding (minimal) financial
resources to support artistic and career related activities.
In Isabelle Hayeur’s life and developmental trajectory as
an artist, less and less time is spent on the economic space
and more is spent on the actual artistic practice and career
(see goals gR2-12, gR2-13, gR2-14, gR2-15, gR2-16, gR217, gR2-23, gR2-24, gR2-27, gR2-28, gR2-33, gR2-35,
gR2-38, gR3-04, in Tables 1, 2, & 3). The rules that
coordinate the artistic practice, career, and economic spaces
aim at: (1) diminishing economic space activity, (2)
maintaining career activity at a balanced level, and (3)
maintaining or augmenting artistic practice activity level.

Acknowledgments
We thank Isabelle Hayeur for her generous participation in
this research project and for graciously giving her consent to
the disclosure of confidential information. This research was
supported by an Excellency Scholarship from the University
of Montreal awarded to Jude Leclerc, and by an NSERC
805

Mace, M.-A., & Ward, T. (2002). Modeling the creative
process. Creativity Research Journal, 14, 179-192.
Nersessian, N. J. (2004). Interpreting scientific and
engineering practices: Integrating the cognitive, social,
and cultural dimensions. In M. Gorman, R. Tweney, D.
Gooding, & A. Kincannon (Eds.), New directions in
scientific and technical thinking (pp. 17-56). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Nersessian, N. J., Kurz-Milcke, E., Newstetter, W. C., &
Davies, J. (2003). Research laboratories as evolving
distributed cognitive systems. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Newell, A., Shaw, J. C., & Simon, H. A. (1962). The
processes of creative thinking. In H. E. Gruber, G. Terrel,
& M. Wertheimer (Eds.), Contemporary approaches to
creative thinking (pp. 63-119). New York: Atherton Press.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Norman, D. A. (1993a). Cognition in the head and in the
world: An introduction to the special issue on situated
action. Cognitive Science, 17, 1-6.
Norman, D. A. (Ed.) (1993b). Special issue on situated
action [Special issue]. Cognitive Science, 17(1).
Schunn, C. D., & Klahr, D. (1995). A 4-space model of
scientific discovery. In J. D. Moore & J. F. Lehman
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 106111). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schunn, C. D., & Klahr, D. (1996). Integrated yet different:
Logical, empirical, and implementational arguments for a
4-space model of inductive problem solving. In G.
Cottrell (Ed.), Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 25-26).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simon, H. A., & Lea, G. (1974). Problem solving and rule
induction: A unified view. In L. Gregg (Ed.), Knowledge
and cognition (pp. 105-128). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Thagard, P. (1998). Ulcers and bacteria I: Discovery and
acceptance. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science.
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences, 29, 107-136.
Thagard, P. (1999). How scientists explain disease.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Weisberg, R. W. (1993). Creativity: Beyond the myth of
genius. New York: Freeman.
Wolf, D. F., & Beskin, J. R. (1996). Task domains in Nspace models: Giving explanation its due. In G. Cottrell
(Ed.), Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 27-28). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.

(R0010085) and an NATEQ (R0010287) grant awarded to
Frédéric Gosselin.

References
Bellavance, G., Bernier, L., & Laplante, B. (2001). Les
conditions de pratique des artistes en arts visuels:
Rapport d'enquête, phase 1. Montréal, Canada: INRS
Urbanisation, Culture et Société.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Clancey, W. J. (2001). Field science ethnography: Methods
for systematic observation on an expedition. Field
Methods, 13, 223-243.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1988). Society, culture, and person:
A systems view of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), The
nature of creativity (pp. 325-339). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1999). Implications of a systems
perspective for the study of creativity. In R. J. Sternberg
(Ed.), Handbook of creativity (pp. 313-335). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Dasgupta, S. (1994). Creativity in invention and design:
Computational
and
cognitive
explorations
of
technological originality. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Dasgupta, S. (2003). Multidisciplinary creativity: The case
of Herbert A. Simon. Cognitive Science, 683-707.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feldman, D. H., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Gardner, H.
(1994). Changing the world: A framework for the study of
creativity. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and
development of discovery processes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search in
scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1-55.
Klahr, D., & Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of scientific
discovery: Complementary approaches and convergent
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 524-543.
Kulkarni, D., & Simon, H. A. (1988). The processes of
scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation.
Cognitive Science, 12, 139-175.
Langley, P., Simon, H. A., Bradshaw, G. L., & Zytkow, J.
M. (1987). Scientific discovery: Computational
explorations of the creative processes. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Langley, P., Magnani, L., Cheng, P. C.-H., Gordon, A.,
Kocabas, S., & Sleeman, D. H. (2001). Computational
models of historical discoveries. In J. D. Moore & K.
Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (p. 3).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Leclerc, J., & Gosselin, F. (2003). [Interviews with Isabelle
Hayeur]. Unpublished raw data.
Li, J. (1997). Creativity in horizontal and vertical domains.
Creativity Research Journal, 10, 107-132.
806

