UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Pronouns Predict Verb Meanings in Child-Directed Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6002c0s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Laakso, Aarre
Smith, Linda

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Pronouns Predict Verb Meanings in Child-Directed Speech
Aarre Laakso (alaakso@indiana.edu)
Linda Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychology, 1101 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

observed that parents use the inanimate pronoun it far more
frequently as the subject of an intransitive sentence than of a
transitive one. As Cameron-Faulkner et al. note, this
suggests that intransitive sentences are used more often than
transitives for talking about inanimate objects. It also
suggests that the use of the inanimate pronoun might serve
as a cue to some semantic aspects of the verb.
Pronouns may also help learners partition verbs that
express psychological attitudes toward events and states of
affairs into two rough categories. Verbs that express deontic
status, such as goals, purposes or intentions (try to),
volitions or desires (want to), and compulsions (have to)
tend to take infinitival complements, whereas verbs that
express epistemic status, such as perceptions (see that),
beliefs (think that), and knowledge (know that) tend to take
sentential (propositional) complements (Tomasello, 2003).
In the ecology of early childhood, parents tend to be the
ones who know whereas children tend to be the ones who
need. All this suggests the potential value of examining the
distributional relations among pronouns and verbs in
language to young children.

Abstract
Do statistical regularities between pronouns and verbs help
children learn verb meanings? This question is addressed by
an analysis of child directed speech. The results show that
there are statistical regularities in the co-occurrences of
pronouns and verbs that could be used to cue verbs that
describe physical motion, psychological states, and features
such as transitivity. The learnability of these regularities is
demonstrated in a simulation study.

Introduction
It is well known that learning the meanings of verbs is a
difficult task for young children. It is also well known that
pronouns make up a substantial proportion of the nouns that
children hear. The distributional relations between pronouns
and verbs thus could play a role in early verb learning.
There are several reasons why verb meanings are difficult
for children to learn. Whereas parents label objects
(relatively) often, they rarely label events or relations. There
are no observable referents for many verbs, such as
psychological state verbs like look, think, want, believe, and
know. Even verbs that refer to observable actions present
ambiguities—for example, when does the opening of a door
begin? Further, the aspect of an action that is relevant is
ambiguous, and could be, for example, the manner or the
path. Finally, verb meaning often depends on taking a
particular perspective on a scene; consider the difference
between “giving” and “receiving.” In brief, meaning maps
between verbs and the world are not transparent.
Accordingly, many have suggested that word-word relations
are particularly important to learning verbs (see, for
example Gleitman, 1990; Gleitman & Gillette, 1995). Here
we examine how statistical relations between pronouns and
verbs in parental speech might help children learn the
meanings of the verbs.
Pronouns are, by far, the most common syntactic subjects
and objects in adult speech to children. Most syntactic
subjects in spontaneous spoken adult discourse in general
are pronouns (Chafe, 1994), and English-speaking mothers
often begin with a high-frequency pronoun when speaking
to their children, with you and I occurring most frequently
(Valian, 1991). The sheer frequency of pronouns suggests
that pronouns—and their statistical co-occurrences with
verbs—may be developmentally very powerful.
Consistent with this idea, Childers & Tomasello (2001)
suggested that children acquire lexically specific frames
such as “I do it” as a way into learning syntactic frames.
Cameron-Faulkner, Lieven, & Tomasello (2003) also

Experiment 1
The first experiment consisted of a corpus analysis to
demonstrate patterns of co-occurrence between pronouns
and verbs in the child’s input.

Method
Parental utterances from the CHILDES database
(MacWhinney, 2000) were coded for syntactic categories,
then subjected to clustering and statistical analysis. The
target children represented in the transcripts were aged
approximately 1;4 – 6;1.
Materials The following corpora were used: Bates, Bliss,
Bloom 1970, Brown, Clark, Cornell, Demetras, Gleason,
Hall, Higginson, Kuczaj, MacWhinney, Morisset, New
England, Post, Sachs, Suppes, Tardiff, Valian, Van Houten,
Van Kleeck and Warren-Leubecker.1
Coding was performed using a custom web application
that randomly selected transcripts, assigned them to coders,
collected coding input, and stored it in a MySQL database.
The application occasionally assigned the same transcript to
all coders, in order to measure reliability. Five
undergraduate coders were trained on the coding task and
1
The full references for each corpus may be found in
(MacWhinney, 2000).

767

the use of the system. Cluster analysis and other statistical
analyses were performed using MATLAB and R.

parent and the addressee was a target child. A total of
24,286 PCDS utterances were coded, for a total of 28,733
clauses. More than a quarter (28.36%) of the PCDS clauses
contained no verb at all; these were excluded from further
analysis. Clauses that were questions (16.86%), passives
(0.02%), and copulas (11.86%) were also excluded from
further analysis. The analysis was conducted using only
clauses that were intransitives (17.24% of total PCDS
clauses), transitives (24.36%) or ditransitives (1.48%), a
total of 12,377 clauses.
We formed 2 matrices from these clauses: a verbs-bysubjects matrix and a verbs-by-objects matrix. The verbsby-subjects matrix contained only verbs used with an overt
subject; its size was 621 verbs by 317 nouns (subjects). The
verbs-by-objects matrix contained only verbs used with a
direct object; its size was 524 verbs by 907 nouns (objects).
Each cell of each matrix contained the proportion of times
that verb was used with that noun (as subject or object) in a
coded clause.
For the purposes of exploratory data analysis, we then
performed 4 cluster analyses. First, we took the 50 nouns
most commonly used as objects and clustered them
according to their proximity in verb space, i.e., the space
formed by considering each verb as a dimension. Each noun
was placed along each dimension according to the
proportion of times it was used with the corresponding verb.
Hence, a noun never used as the object of a particular verb
would be at 0, and a noun always used as the object of a
particular verb would be at 1. Second, we clustered the 50
most common subject-nouns in verb space. Third, we took
the 50 verbs most commonly used with objects and
clustered them according to their proximity in noun space
(defined analogously to verb space). Finally, we clustered
the 50 most common verbs-with-subjects in noun space.

Procedure Each coder was presented, in sequence, with
each main tier line of each transcript she was assigned,
together with several lines of context; the entire transcript
was also available for viewing by clicking a link on the
coding page. For each line, she indicated (a) whether the
speaker was a parent, target child, or other; (b) whether the
addressee was a parent, target child, or other; (c) the
syntactic frames of up to 3 clauses in the utterance; (d) for
each syntactic frame, up to 3 subjects, auxiliaries, verbs,
direct objects, indirect objects and obliques. Nouns
appearing in prepositional phrases were coded as obliques
(with the exception of recipients indicated with “to”, which
were coded as indirect objects). Object complements were
indicated by coding the direct object of the matrix verb as
“<clause>” and coding the constituents of the complement
clause as the next clause associated with the utterance. This
was intended both to simplify the coding scheme and to
avoid attributing too much grammatical knowledge to the
child—we do not assume that the child can convert an
utterance into an accurate parse tree, only that she can
identify verbs and the nouns that surround them.
The syntactic frames were: no verb, question, passive,
copula, intransitive, transitive and ditransitive. The no verb
frame included clauses—such as “Yes” or “OK”—with no
main verb. The question frame included any clause using a
question word—such as “Where did you go?”—or having
inverted word order—such as “Did you go to the bank?”—
but not merely a question mark—such as “You went to the
bank?” The passive frame included clauses in the passive
voice, such as “John was hit by the ball.” The copula frame
included clauses with a copula (including be, seem and
become) as the main verb, such as “John is angry.” The
intransitive frame included clauses with no direct object,
such as “John ran.” The transitive frame included clauses
with a direct object (or an object complement) but no
indirect object, such as “John hit the ball.” The ditransitive
frame included clauses with an indirect object, such as
“John gave Mary a kiss.”
In total, 59,977 utterances were coded from 123
transcripts. All of the coders coded 7 of those transcripts for
the purpose of measuring reliability. Average inter-coder
reliability (measured for each coder as the percentage of
items coded exactly the same way they were coded by
another coder) was 86.1%.2
We only considered parental child-directed speech
(PCDS), defined as utterances where the speaker was a

Results
We cannot show the cluster diagrams here due to space
limits. We summarize the main regularities observed.
The observed distribution of nouns in the corpus is
consistent with Zipf’s law — the numerical frequency of
words decays roughly as an inverse power of their rank
frequency. Moreover, the most frequent subjects and objects
in the corpus are pronouns, as shown in Figures 1 and 2.
Our quantitative analysis of co-occurrence relationships is
based on the log likelihood ratio as described by Dunning
(1993) and recommended by Manning & Schutze (1999).
Suppose we have observed N clauses with m subject-(or
object-) types and n verb-types. Let

S = s1 , s2 ,L, sm and V = v1, v2 ,L vn
represent the subjects
Furthermore, let

2

Cohen’s kappa coefficient (Cohen, 1960), which adjusts for
chance agreement, is only applicable for two raters. We know of
no chance-corrected multiple rater agreement measures that are
widely used in the language acquisition literature. However, given
the number of variables, the number of levels of each variable (3
speakers, 3 addressees, 7 frames, and 6 syntactic relations), and the
number of coders (5) in the present study, the probability of chance
agreement is low.

and

the

verbs

respectively.

K S = k s1 , k s 2 ,L, k s m and KV = kv1 , kv2 ,L, kvn
represent the observed frequencies of the subjects and verbs
respectively and

K SV = ks1v1 , k s1v 2 ,L, k s1vn , ks 2 v1 ,L, k s m v n
768

by chance. It has also been demonstrated that this statistic
identifies natural collocations in text corpora.
As expected, the inanimate pronoun “it” was more likely
as the object of verbs of physical motion than as the object
of psychological attitude verbs, whereas complement
clauses were more likely to occur with psychological
attitude verbs than with verbs of physical motion. As shown
in Table 1, “it” tended to occur with physical motion verbs
far more often than would be predicted by chance, and
clauses occurred with most physical motion verbs, if at all,
only about as much as would be predicted by chance. The
verb “put” is an exception to this general rule, occurring
with a clause more often than would be predicted by chance.
As shown in Table 2, complement clauses tended to occur
with psychological attitude verbs more often than would be
predicted by chance, whereas “it” only occurred more often
than would be predicted by chance with two of five
psychological attitude verbs. The exceptions were want
(uses such as “Oh, I want it now”) and know (“No, that’s
wrong and you know it”). In any case, as shown in Figure 3,
it is somewhat more likely that a physical motion verb will
occur with “it” than with a complement clause, and
substantially more likely that a psychological attitude verb
will occur with a complement clause than with “it”.

2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0


























Figure 1: The 10 most frequent subjects in PCDS by their
number of occurrences.
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0

Table 1: The log likelihood ratio for uses of object “it” or
a clause with physical motion verbs. * indicates p<0.01;
— indicates no co-occurrences.






















"











%





!

#


"








!

"










put
turn
throw
hold
push

Figure 2: The 10 most frequent objects in PCDS by their
number of occurrences.
represent the observed frequencies of subject-verb cooccurrences. Then the test statistic is the quantity:

“it”
102.79*
72.58*
39.55*
32.17*
24.87*

(clause)
70.70*
—
6.14
—
3.02

Table 2: The log likelihood ratio for uses of object “it” or a
clause with psychological attitude verbs. * indicates p<0.01;
— indicates no co-occurrences.

−2log λ = 2[log L( p1,k si v j ,k v j ) +
log L( p2,ksi − k si v j ,N − k v j ) −

log L( p0,ksi v j ,k v j ) −

think
want
know
remember
mean

log L( p0,ksi − k si v j ,N − k v j )]
Where the components are defined as follows:

L( p,k,n) = p k (1− p)n−k = k log p + (n − k)log(1− p)
k
p0 = p(si ) = si
N
ks v
p1 = p(si | v j ) = i j
kv j
ks − k si v j
p2 = p(si |¬v j ) = i
N − kv j

“it”
—
12.00*
69.53*
—
0.91

(clause)
399.13*
283.28*
134.44*
37.22*
15.81*

Table 3: The log likelihood ratio for uses of subject “I” or
“you” with epistemic verbs. * indicates p<0.01;
— indicates no co-occurrences.
think
know
guess

The test statistic -2logλ is χ2 distributed with 1 degree of
freedom. Intuitively, it represents how much more likely it
is that si and v j go together than should be expected purely
769

“I”
605.01*
200.05*
60.00*

“You”
24.7*
108.17*
—

100

Phys − Clause

Psych − It

Psych − Clause

Log−Likelihood Ratio

200

250

Figure 3: Mean log-likelihood ratio of the object pronoun
“it” (white bars) versus a clause (gray bars) given a physical
motion verb (left) or a psychological attitude verb (right).

0

50

100

We also found that “I” is more likely to be the subject of
epistemic verbs, whereas “you” is more likely to be the
subject of deontic verbs. As shown in Table 3, “I” occurred
with epistemic verbs far more often than would be predicted
by chance. The subject “you” also occurred more often with
“think” and “know” than would be predicted by chance, but
with a much lower likelihood.
As shown in Table 4, “you” tended to occur with deontic
verbs far more often than chance would predict. The subject
“I” was no more likely than chance would predict to appear
with the verbs “like” and “need” and was only slightly more
likely than chance to occur with the verb “want”. In any
case, as demonstrated in Figure 4, it is substantially more
likely that the subject “I” will appear with an epistemic verb
than it is that the subject “you” will appear with an
epistemic verb. It is also somewhat more likely that “you”
will appear with a deontic verb than “I” will appear with a
deontic verb.

Epist − I

“I”
6.72*
0.03
2.69

Epist − You

Deont − I

Deont − You

Figure 4: Mean log-likelihood ratio of the subject
pronoun “I” (white bars) versus “you” (gray bars) given an
epistemic verb (left) or a deontic verb (right).

Discussion
Although pronouns are “light” in their meaning, their
referents determinable only from context, they may
nonetheless be potent forces on early lexical learning by
identifying some kinds of verb meanings as more likely than
others. The results of Experiment 1 show that there are
statistical regularities in the co-occurrences of pronouns and
verbs that the child could use to discriminate verb meanings.
Verbs that describe physical motion or transfer are likely to
be followed by “it,” whereas verbs attributing psychological
state are likely to be followed by a relatively complex
complement clause. Verbs having to do with thinking or
knowing are likely to occur with subject “I,” whereas verbs
having to do with wanting or needing are likely to occur
with subject “you.” This regularity most likely reflects the
ecology of parents and children—parents “know” and
children “want”—but it could nonetheless be useful in
distinguishing these two classes of meanings. The results
thus far show that there are potentially usable regularities in
the statistical relations between pronouns and verbs.

Table 4: The log likelihood ratio for uses of subject “I” or
“you” with deontic verbs. * indicates p<0.01.
want
like
need

150

Phys − It

300

0

50

Log−Likelihood Ratio

150

200

Similarly, not only is “it” likely to appear as the object of
“turn” (as discussed above), but so is “page” (LLR=81.89).
Likewise for “play,” which makes not only the objects
“ball”, “blocks”, “game”, and “house” more likely, but also
the objects “this” and “it”. These are potentially important
on several fronts. The child may learn an association
between pronouns such as “this” and “it” and inanimate
objects, like books and pages. The pronouns “this” and “it”
may then be used to help the child understand the meanings
of other verbs that take inanimate objects as their objects.
Conversely, the verb “tell” selects strongly for the pronouns
“us” and “me” as well as for “Mommy” and “Daddy”.
Hence, the child may learn that verbs taking “us” and “we”
as objects have to do with communicating with or directing
attention toward other people.

“You”
116.97*
74.24*
15.26*

We conclude by noting that there are many other
significant co-occurrences in the corpus, some of which
involve triadic correlations between specific verbs, specific
nouns, and pronouns. For example the objects “book” and
“story” are more likely to appear with the verb “read” than
would be predicted by chance (LLR=131.51, 128.39). Both
the object “book” and the object “this” are likely to appear
with the phrasal verb “look at” (LLR=67.28, 88.01).
770

Training The data was randomly assigned to two groups:
90% was used for training the network, while 10% was
reserved for validation. Starting from different random
initial weights, 10 networks were trained until the crossentropy on the validation set reached a minimum for each of
them. Training stopped after approximately 150 epochs of
training, on average. At that point, the networks were
achieving about 81% accuracy on correctly identifying
subjects, verbs and objects from the training set.

Experiment 2
To demonstrate that the regularities in pronoun-verb cooccurrences in parental speech to children can actually be
exploited by a statistical learner, we trained a connectionist
network to auto-associate subject-verb-object “sentences”
from the input, then tested it on individual verbs and
pronouns. We predict that the network should be able to
learn the statistical regularities demonstrated in
Experiment 1, specifically: (1) physical transfer verbs are
likely to have “it” as an object, whereas psychological verbs
are likely to take a complement clause, and (2) epistemic
verbs are likely to have “I” as a subject, whereas deontic
verbs are likely to have “you” as a subject.

Testing After training, the networks were tested with
incomplete inputs corresponding to isolated verbs and
pronouns. For example, to see what a network had learned
about it as a subject, it was tested with a single input unit
activated—the one corresponding to it as subject. The other
inputs were set to 0. Output unit activations were recorded
and averaged over all 10 networks.

Method
Data The network training data consisted of the subject,
verb, and object of all coded utterances that contained the 50
most common subjects, verbs and objects. There were 5,835
such utterances. The inputs used a localist coding wherein
there was exactly one input unit out of 50 activated for each
subject, and likewise for each verb and each object. Absent
and omitted arguments were counted among the 50, so, for
example, the utterance “John runs” would have 3 units
activated even though it only has 2 words—the third unit
being the “no object” unit. With 50 units each for subject,
verb and object, there were a total of 150 input units to the
network. Active input units had a value of 1, and inactive
input units had a value of 0.

Results
To test the hypothesis that the network learns that
psychological attitude verbs are more likely than physical
motion verbs to take a clause as an object, we tested the
networks with the frames “I ___ (clause)” and “You ___
(clause)” using psychological and physical verbs. The
psychological verbs were “think,” “want,” “know,” and
“remember.” The verb “mean” was not among the top 50
verbs used in the corpus and therefore was not used in the
network training experiments. The physical verbs were
“put,” “turn,” “throw” and “hold.” The verb “push” was not
among the top 50 verbs used in the corpus and therefore was
not used in the network training experiments. As shown in
Figure 6, the networks activated the psychological verbs
more strongly at the output (M = 0.047, SD = 0.152) than
the physical verbs (M = 0.002, SD = 0.014). This difference
was significant, t(80) = -2.62, p = 0.01. Results are similar
for the converse (physical verbs are significantly more
activated when the object is “it”) and for the epistemic /
deontic distinction (epistemic verbs are significantly more
activated when the subject is “I,” whereas deontic verbs are
significantly more activated when the subject is “you”).

0.04
0.03
0.00

0.01

0.02

Mean Output Activation

0.05

0.06

Network Architecture The network consisted of a twolayer 150-8-150 unit autoassociator with a logistic
activation function at the hidden layer and three separate
softmax activation functions (one each for the subject, verb
and object) at the output layer—see Figure 5. Using the
softmax activation function, which ensures that all the
outputs in the bank sum to 1, together with the crossentropy error measure allows us to interpret the network
outputs as probabilities (Bishop, 1995). The network was
trained by the resilient backpropagation algorithm
(Riedmiller & Braun, 1993) to map its inputs back onto its
outputs. It is well known that this sort of network performs
nonlinear dimensionality reduction at its hidden layers,
extracting statistical regularities from the input data.

Physical Verbs

Figure 5: Network architecture

Psyc Verbs

Figure 6: Network output activations for physical verbs
versus psychological attitude verbs for the frames
“I___(clause)” and “You____(clause)”.
771

frequent argument dropping and case-marked pronouns
referring to various levels of social status. We are especially
keen to find out what sorts of cues children might be using
in languages where pronouns are both rarer and “heavier”
than they are in English.

Conclusions
We have shown that there are statistical regularities in cooccurrences between pronouns and verbs in the speech that
children hear from their parents, including regularities that
distinguish between psychological and non-psychological
verbs, as well as between deontic and epistemic
psychological verbs. We have also shown that a simple
statistical learner can exploit these regularities, not to learn
the meanings of verbs per se (the network obviously does
not know the meanings of the verbs), but to learn the formal
associations between tokens of verbs and pronouns. How
might this help the child learn the meanings of verbs? In the
first place, hearing the verb framed by pronouns may help
the child isolate the relevant event or action from the
blooming, buzzing confusion around it; the pronouns can
indicate animacy, gender, number and direction of causality.
This would allow the child to focus on the relevant things.
Second, if we suppose that the child has already learned one
verb and its pattern of correlations with pronouns, and then
hears another verb being used with the same or a similar
pattern of correlations, the child may hypothesize that the
meaning of the unknown verb is similar to the meaning of
the known verb. For example, a child who understood
“want” but not “need” might observe that “you” is usually
the subject of both and conclude that “want,” like “need,”
has to do with his desires and not, for example, a physical
motion or someone else’s state of mind.
Now that we have shown that the regularities exist and are
learnable in principle, the next step is to show that children
actually pick up on these regularities. We are planning a
series of experiments with children from 24-36 months that
will involve priming the children with movies showing
actions corresponding to nonsense verbs in the context of
various pronoun frames (“He zorps it,” “It zorps,” “They
zorp this to her” and so on) and testing whether this
influences their interpretations of these verbs, for example
by having them select which of a pair of novel movies
shows “zorping.” This will provide a strong test of the
hypothesis that children actually use pronoun distributional
statistics to pick up on the meanings of novel verbs.
Future modeling experiments will attempt to capture not
only the statistical relationships among verb-pronoun token
co-occurrences but also their relationships with shared
meanings, by associating words with
featural
representations of their meanings. We are also working on a
mechanism for manipulating the statistical properties of the
relevant conditional distributions to be used for generating
network inputs in future simulations—the distribution of
syntactic frames, the distribution of verbs given a syntactic
frame, and the distribution of nouns (including pronouns) in
each argument position given a verb. We expect that such a
model could be used to test the utility of statistical
associations between pronouns with verbs for a theoretical
learner—simulations run with varying degrees of
correlations could demonstrate not only whether but also
just how much correlation is useful in principle.
Finally, work is underway to collect crosslinguistic data
from Japanese and Tamil, verb-heavy languages with

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIMH grant number ROI
MH 60200. Thanks to our coders for their hard work, to
members of the Cognitive Development Laboratory at IU
for useful discussions, and to three anonymous reviewers for
thoughtful comments on an earlier draft.

References
Bishop, C. M. (1995). Neural Networks for Pattern
Recognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E. V. M., & Tomasello, M.
(2003). A construction-based analysis of child directed
speech. Cognitive Science, 27, 843-873.
Chafe, W. L. (1994). Discourse, Consciousness and Time:
The Flow and Displacement of Conscious Experience in
Speaking and Writing. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Childers, J. B., & Tomasello, M. (2001). The role of
pronouns in young children's acquisition of the English
transitive construction. Developmental Psychology, 37(6),
739-748.
Cohen, J. (1960). A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 20,
37-46.
Dunning, T. (1993). Accurate methods for the statistics of
surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics,
19(1), 61-74.
Gleitman, L. R. (1990). The structural sources of word
meaning. Language Acquisition, 1(1), 3-55.
Gleitman, L. R., & Gillette, J. (1995). The role of syntax in
verb learning. In P. Fletcher & B. MacWhinney (Eds.),
The Handbook of Child Language (pp. 413-427).
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
Analyzing Talk (3rd ed. Vol. 2: The Database). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Manning, C., & Schutze, H. (1999). Foundations of
Statistical Natural Language Processing. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Riedmiller, M., & Braun, H. (1993). A direct adaptive
method for faster backpropagation learning: The Rprop
algorithm. Paper presented at the IEEE International
Conference on Neural Networks 1993 (ICNN 93), San
Francisco, CA.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a Language.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Valian, V. (1991). Syntactic subjects in the early speech of
American and Italian children. Cognition, 40(1-2), 21-81.

772

