UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Recognition effects and noncompensatory decision making strategies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7dx0j9f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Gernaat, Eric P.
Burns, Bruce D.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Recognition effects and noncompensatory decision making strategies
Eric P. Gernaat (gernaat@msu.edu)
Bruce D. Burns (burnsbr@msu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Cognitive Science program
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1117 USA
German cities Americans recognized affected their choices
for which of a pair of German cities was larger. However
Oppenheimer (2003) challenged this empirical evidence for
the recognition heuristic by suggested that because
Goldstein and Gigerenzer used the 30 largest German cities,
recognition was confounded with actual city size. Thus
recognition itself may be irrelevant as a cue or combined
with other cues. Such confounds exist in all their
demonstrations because they state that the heuristic should
only be found to be used when recognition has a correlation
with the correct answer via an ecological valid mediator.
To remove this confound Oppenheimer (2003) presented
a cities pairs task, in which recognition could not have a
valid correlation because one city was fictional, and thus
there was no correct answer. Furthermore the real cities,
with which the fictional cities were paired, were either small
or famous for reasons unrelated to size. Two studies tested
the hypothesis that when subjects were presented with a city
they recognized and one they did not, then preference for
the recognized city would not be above chance (specifically,
he tested if more than 50% of participants chose the
recognized city). Both studies found that significantly fewer
than 50% of participants chose the recognized cities.
Oppenheimer (2003) suggests that Goldstein and
Gigerenzer’s (2002) evidence showing that greater than
50% of subjects choose the city they recognized is
consistent with them using the recognition heuristic.
However because other cues may be confounded with
recognition, these results are also consistent with strategies
that combine cues together. For examples these other cues
could be combined in tallying strategies, weighted additive
models, or regression models and produce results consistent
with the recognition heuristic. Oppenheimer claims that by
demonstrating that cues that should be associated with
recognition (cues indicating small in his experiments, those
indicating big in Goldstein & Gigerenzer) influences the
extent to which subjects chose the recognized city, he has
shown that there is no evidence for the recognition
heuristic. This interpretation of the data is disputable, partly
because exactly what question this data addresses is
arguable.

Abstract
Oppenheimer (2003) challenged the empirical evidence for
the recognition heuristic by pointing to the possibility that
existing demonstrations may have confounded recognition
with a person's existing knowledge. In two experiments we
remove the possibility of such a confound by independently
manipulating recognition in a way similar to the "overnight
fame" paradigm of Jacoby, Kelly, Brown and Jasechko
(1989). We found evidence for a recognition effect, but
neither compensatory nor noncompensatory decision making
strategies seem to be able to completely explain our results.
We discuss what modification to these strategies may be
necessary.

Introduction
Gigerenzer and Todd (1999) proposed that when people
make decisions, rather than using all possible information
that they could, they use "fast and frugal" heuristics selected
from an adaptive toolbox. Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996)
showed that such heuristics can lead to decisions as good or
better at achieving the organisms goals as more resource
intensive strategies. This adaptive rationality approach
challenges the traditional approaches to rationality (see
Chater, Oaksford, Nakisa, & Redington, 2003).
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) proposed that the
toolbox includes the recognition heuristic, which can be
applied "If one of two objects is recognized and the other is
not, then infer that the recognized object has the higher
value with respect to the criterion." (p.76) In this sense it is
an example of one-reason decision making, though it can
also act as a subroutine in heuristics that use information
beyond recognition, such as the Take the Best heuristic
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). Such heuristics embody
Simon's (1956) concept of bounded rationality, which
suggests organisms seek enough information for a good
decision rather than spending resources on obtaining all
relevant information.
However it is apparent from attempts to gather evidence
for or against the recognition heuristic that there are some
conceptual disagreements. In this paper we present our
understanding of the heuristic and its relationship to other
concepts of how recognition cues are used, and we present a
new methodology for examining recognition as a process.

Distinguishing related questions
Experiments on the recognition heuristic have addressed
three questions that are related but not necessarily the same:
1) Are there recognition effects on choice? Demonstrating
this requires showing that people's choices are influenced
by recognizing one option and not the other. This question
generates a testable prediction that Oppenheimer's (2003)

Previous studies
As evidence for people's use of the recognition heuristic,
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (1999, 2002) showed that which
458

problematic question of how they decide which heuristic to
use is raised. If the task determines it then why was a
recognition effect in Goldstein and Gigerenzer's (2002)
paired-city task, but not Oppenheimer's (2003)? If the cues
presented in the task determine which algorithm is used,
then all cues have to be considered, undermining the
efficiency of the "one-reason" decision making. Thus it is
not as "frugal" in terms of processing and information as
Goldstein and Gigerenzer claim.
If more than one cue is available then implicit in the
claim that cues are ordered in a hierarchy is that cues must
be considered at some level. The defining characteristic of a
noncompensatory algorithm seems to be how the cues are
combined at the decision point. In compensatory algorithms
all available cues are integrated requiring some form of
trade-off between those that favor different options,
whereas in noncompensatory algorithms at the point of
decision only one cue is considered and there are no tradeoffs. Whether this means that noncompensatory algorithms
are inherently more "frugal" than compensatory algorithms
depends on what sort of assumptions are made about cue
ordering or cue trade-off processes.
If competing subjective cue validities determine the
order in which cues are considered by noncompensatory
algorithms, then it would be predicted that the nature of the
cues available in addition to recognition would influence the
extent to which recognition determined the choice between
two options. Thus Oppenheimer's (2003) evidence that
other cues may moderate the impact of differential
recognition on a choice does not in itself show that
recognition is used in a compensatory algorithm.
In both Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) and
Oppenheimer (2003) recognition was confounded with
other information. To more effectively test how recognition
is used requires a way to manipulate recognition free of any
confounds.

data addresses: that subjects should prefer the recognized
city at a rate greater than chance. He finds no evidence for
this, and claims that Goldstein and Gigerenzer's (2002)
evidence for it was due to confounds. However this
question is not equivalent to the second.
2) Do people use the recognition heuristic? Oppenheimer
(2003) states that "The recognition heuristic posits that
individuals will use no information aside from mere
recognition to make city size estimations." Goldstein and
Gigerenzer almost certainly disagree with this statement.
Gigerenzer and Todd (1999, p.32) state that different
heuristics may be applied to a choice between two options,
and which is applied depends on the person's knowledge.
The recognition heuristic is most likely applied when the
decider has no information except recognition. When it is
applied then only recognition information should be used,
but there is no claim in Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002)
that the recognition heuristic is always applied. Their own
data show that the recognition heuristic is not always
applied. Gigerenzer and Todd (1999, p. 32-33) briefly
consider the question of how heuristics are selected and
suggest that task and available cues determine it. Although
their concept of a "toolbox" of heuristics implies that
selection is critical, a valid criticism may be that how this is
done is an under-developed aspect of their approach. In this
they are not unusual as Falk and Konold (1997, p. 305)
point out that it hard to make predictions regarding the
representatives heuristic because "there is no established
procedure for deducing how it will be implemented in a
specific task."
3) Is recognition used in a noncompensatory way?
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) propose that the
recognition heuristic is a noncompensatory algorithm, as are
other algorithms proposed by Gigerenzer and Todd (1999).
A prototypical noncompensatory algorithms is a
lexicographic strategy (see Payne, Bettman, & Johnson,
1993). Cues are arranged in a hierarchy based on validity
then starting from the top, one cue at a time is considered
until one is found that discriminates between the options. In
contrast, a compensatory strategy (such as linear regression
or multi-additive models) integrates all cues in making a
choice, although they may be given different weightings. A
flow diagram of a noncompensatory algorithm in which
recognition is the first cue considered is given by
Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996, Figure 2). The stopping
rule for such an algorithm is the first cue considered that
distinguishes between options. Characteristic of such
algorithms is that a decision made on the basis of a higher
cue cannot be reversed by cues lower in the order Goldstein
and Gigerenzer (p. 82). The recognition heursitc is a special
case of a noncompenstory strategy, so recognition need not
be the first cue considered in noncompensatory strategies.
Gigerenzer and Goldstein and Gigerenzer and Todd discuss
various noncompensatory algorithms.
Possibly Oppenheimer's (2003) most interesting claim is
that his data showing that people chose the recognized city
less than 50% of the time shows that recognition is not used
in a noncompensatory way. It is worth examining his
arguments for this claim. He argues that if people are only
sometimes using the recognition heuristics, then the

Manipulating recognition
In existing studies of the heuristic, recognition has always
been a pseudo-independent variable; that is, the studies have
not manipulated recognition but instead examined the
impact of what subjects recognized due to life experience.
We manipulated recognition by pursuing Goldstein and
Gigerenzer's (2002) suggestion that recognition might be
induced in a way analogous to the "overnight fame" effect
found by Jacoby, Kelly, Brown and Jasechko (1989).
Jacoby, et al. presented participants with a list of unfamiliar
names that were included on a later list of names to which
participants were asked to respond: famous or nonfamous?
They were more likely to choose as famous the arbitrary
names from the initial list. We used a similar methodology
with small German cities to examine if induced recognition
could affect the choice of which of two cities was larger.
To induce recognition we gave participants one of two
induction lists consisting of eight German cities or towns
(Zwickau, Leverkusen, Regensburg, Offenbach, Ulm,
Stralsund, Coburg, Dormagen; or, Bochum, Gelsenkirchen,
Darmstadt, Krefeld, Schweinfurt, Goslar, Lingen, Iserlohn)
plus three irrelevant small cities. Participants were asked to
count the number of syllables they thought each city name
459

Method

contained. We conducted a pilot experiment to confirm that
these induction lists could induce recognition. Eight
members of the Michigan State University participant pool
were given one of the induction lists, and nine the other list.
After spending 30 minutes on unrelated tasks, participants
were presented with a list of 20 small German cities,
including the 16 from the two induction lists. For each city
they were asked if they remembered seeing the city on the
list they were given earlier. They recognized more cities
from their own induction list (M = 85%) than from the list
they had not been given (M = 11%), t(32) = 18.62, p < .001.
Therefore the pilot experiment supported our assumption
that presenting the syllable list would induce later
recognition.

Participants
A total of 256 members of the Michigan State University
participant pool participated for partial course credit.
Materials
The two induction lists were the same as those described for
the pilot experiment. For the city-size task, the eight cities
from one induction list were paired with the eight from the
other. Thus for each pair, one city was induced (i.e.,
appeared on the participant's induction list) and one was
noninduced (i.e., appeared on the list the participant did not
see). For each pair, participants chose which city they
thought was larger. To obscure the purpose of the task,
Oppenheimer (2003) included some pairs with obvious
answers. Similarly we added three pairs containing a wellknown large city (Berlin, Frankfurt, Munich).
With each city pair extra cues could appear, though cues
were always independent of reality allowing us to freely
manipulate information. (No participants pointed out that
the information was incorrect.) There were four cue
conditions. For the two cue-none pairs it was stated for both
cities that there was no information available regarding
whether it had a soccer team or which state it was in
(Germany consists of 16 states). For the two cue-neutral
pairs soccer team status was said to be unknown but a state
was given for one city. For the two cue-positive pairs state
was said to be unknown but one city was said to have a
soccer team. For the two cue-all pairs for one city a state
was given and it was said to have a soccer team, whereas
this information was said to be unknown for the other city.
Eight pairs for each participant were necessary because for
four pairs the cue conditions were applied to the induced
city, and for the other four pairs the cue conditions were
applied to the noninduced city.
Note that Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) also
conducted an experiment in which a city having a major
soccer team was used as an extra cue to city size. They
taught participants that having a team was indicative of
being a large city, but found that it did not appear to alter
the effect of recognition based on a between experiments
comparison. We did not teach participants about this
relationship but instead relied on participants generalizing
from their likely awareness that the major American
professional sports teams are rarely in small cities.
The same cities were always paired but each pair
appeared equally often in each cue and induced condition.
Cues appeared in two possible orders (maximum
information to none, or vice-versa), and the cities appeared
in two different orders. Thus there were 16 versions of the
city-size task (four cue by two cue-order by two city-order
conditions) that appeared equally often with each induction
list.

Aims of the experiments
In two experiments using induced recognition we examined
recognition effects and how other cues may moderate any
effect. This allowed us to address two of the three questions
we outlined regarding recognition
1) Are there recognition effects on choice? Oppenheimer
(2003) claims that the Goldstein and Gigerenzer's (2002)
results are flawed because of confounds, but his
experiments intentionally introduce another confound. To
clearly establish whether there are recognition effects in the
cities-pairs task requires a version with no confounds.
2) Do people use the recognition heuristic? The answer
to this question is clearly "not all the time". A more
reasonable question is what factors influence the degree to
which people use the recognition heuristic? However no
one has specified these factors well enough to examine this.
3) Is recognition used in a noncompensatory way?
Addressing this question requires examining how other cues
moderate the effect of recognition. Goldstein and
Gigerenzer (2002) found that adding other cues did not
affect the size of the recognition effect, whereas
Oppenheimer found that they did. However in neither
experiment were cues systematically manipulated within a
single experiment. In our experiments we varied the amount
of other cues available in order to address how information
moderates recognition effects and thus throw light on the
issue of whether recognition is used in a compensatory or
noncompensatory way.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1 we induced in Americans recognition of
small German cities from an induction list of eight, then
presented them with each of these cities paired with one
from the alternative list of eight cities. We predicted that
participants would be more likely to select the induced city
in the pair. We also manipulated giving a positive (has a
major league soccer team) or a neutral (the state the city was
in) cue to the size of one city in the pair, either the induced
or noninduced city. The least amount of extra cues was
none, the next least neutral only, the next positive only, and
the most extra cues received was both neutral and positive.
If recognition is a compensatory cue, then the more
information presented, the smaller the effect of recognition
should be.

Procedure
Participants were first given one of the two induction lists
and told that their task was to write down the number of
syllables in each city name as best they could. They then
460

linear trend, t(765) = 5.38, p < .001. Separately calculating
the proportion of participants choosing the city for which
cues were given, but ignoring whether this was the induced
or noninduced city, we found a strong effect of how much
information participants were given (cue-none .50; cueneutral .58; cue-positive .79; cue-all .84), F(3, 576) = 62.8,
p < .001.
Of the 256 participants, 44 indicated that they thought the
city size task related to the syllable task, but they were not
eliminated from the sample because they said that the
syllable task did not affected their responses. However it is
possible that effects were driven by just these participants
who explicitly remembered the syllable task. Analyzing
separately these 44 participants and the other 212, we found
the same pattern of results for both groups as we found for
the whole sample.

Mean preference for
induced city

spent 30 minutes doing unrelated tasks until they were
given one version of the city-size task and asked to choose
which city in each pair they thought was larger. After
completing this task they were given a questionnaire that
asked them: 1) Does the last task you completed relate to
any of the previous tasks? 2) Were your responses to the
last task you completed affected by any of the previous
tasks? For each question they had to answer "yes" or "no"
and to explain their answer. These questions were used to
determine if participants were explicitly connecting together
the induction and city size tasks. Participants who said the
syllable task affected them when choosing cities were
replaced in the design. This was to protect against the
possibility that participants might just select cities because
they thought they were supposed to select cities from the
induction list. Fewer than 10% of participants were replaced
and subsequent analyses found no evidence that the
replaced subjects responded differently.

Discussion
When recognition was not confounded with any other
information and it was the only cue available, then the city
likely to be recognized was selected more than chance. The
62% selection rate for the cue-none condition was not as
high as Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) report but there
could be several reasons for this. First, we did not test
which cities participants recognized and thus we did not
only analyze pairs for which only one city was recognized,
as Goldstein and Gigerenzer and Oppenheimer (2003) did.
Based on the recognition pilot data, it could be estimated
that this condition would apply for only 77% of our pairs.
(To avoid any possible biases, we analyzed all pairs.)
Second, our induction procedure may produce recognition
that is relatively weak and uncertain compared to that based
on experience. Goldstein and Gigerenzer treat recognition
as a binary, all-or-none distinction; however creating this
distinction is not without error. As the work on eyewitness
testimony has amply shown (Wells & Loftus, 1984),
recognition and can be uncertain and it may be hard for a
person to decide if they recognize something. This may be
especially true for foreign, hard to pronounce words briefly
experienced once. Our induction procedure allowed us to
manipulate recognition, but it may produce recognition with
a different character to that in the previous experiments.
The results also showed that the presence of other cues
can moderate the influence of recognition. Oppenheimer
(2003) suggested that any evidence of such moderation is
evidence against noncompensatory decision making of the
type Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) described. However
evidence that one cue moderates the mean effect of another
cue does not establish that individuals are integrating cues
as in compensatory multi-cue strategies. Our data may be
consistent with Goldstein and Gigerenzer's approach in
which only one cue is applied at a time but cues form a
hierarchy based on validity. When recognition is uncertain
other information may easily be seen as more valid.
Of course there is no true validity for either recognition or
other information in this experiment, as relaxing that
constraint is what allows us to freely manipulate these
factors. We are assuming that participants come to the
experiment with cue validities, thus it is not surprising if
there may be individual differences in how they assign

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
none

neutral

positive

all

Cue condition

Figure 1: Mean preference for the induced city for each cue
level (Bars represent one standard error). Above .50
represent preference towards induced cities.

Results
Figure 1 indicates mean preferences for the induced cities
for each cue level. To calculate preferences we examined
the two city pairs in each of the cue conditions. If a
participant chose the induced city in both pairs (i.e., the pair
in which cues were given for the induced city and the pair
in which cues were given for the noninduced city) they
were assigned 1.0, if they chose the induced city once and
the noninduced once then they were assigned 0.5, if they
chose the noninduced city both times then they were
assigned 0.0. Thus mean preferences range from 0.0 to 1.0.
Preferences above .50 indicate a bias towards induced cities,
whereas below .50 indicates a bias towards noninduced
cities.
Participants had preferences for the induced city above
.50 for the cue-none (.62, t[255] = 5.72, p < .001) and cueneutral (.57, t[255] = 3.78, p < .001) conditions, but not for
the cue-positive (.52, t[255] = 1.14, p = .258) or cue-both
conditions (.50, t[255] = -0.14, p = .887). Ordering the four
cue condition in terms of amount of extras information
given (none, neutral, positive, all) produced a significant
461

validity. There may also be individual differences in
strategy selection (Fasolo, Miscuraca, & McClelland, 2003).

given. We again counterbalanced the four cue conditions
across the city pairs, used two orders of presentation, and
two city-orders, which yielded sixteen version of the city
task. Each version was presented equally often with each
induction list.

Experiment 2
One way of investigating how recognition is combined (or
not) with other cues is to equalize the amount of extra
information given for each city in a pair. Different
compensatory decision strategies differ in the way in which
they combine cues, but the impact of a cue in these
strategies is greatest when that cue differentiates between
options. Thus cues that provide equivalent information for
both choices should have no impact on decision making.
Therefore the moderating effects of extra cues on
recognition should largely disappear.
As Gigerenzer and Goldstein (1996) describe
noncompensatory algorithms, cues should continue to be
considered until one is found that differentiates the options.
This stopping rule implies that only differential cues could
moderate the effect of recognition because even if a
nondifferential cue is higher in the validity hierarchy, it can
have no impact on the final decision. Thus a
noncompensatory strategy also predicts that when extra
cues are not differential then the moderating effect of those
cues on the impact of recognition should disappear.
Experiment 2 varied the same cues as in Experiment 1,
but instead of giving cues about just one of the two cities,
we gave equivalent cues for both. Thus the extra cues never
distinguished the two cities, allowing us to test if
undifferentiating information still moderated the recognition
effect. Both compensatory and noncompensatory
approaches make the same prediction: Whatever recognition
effect is found for the cue-none condition, the same
recognition effect should be found for other cue conditions.
If this prediction is violated and cue condition still
moderates the recognition effect, then it can point to
modifications necessary to these approaches.

Results & Discussion

Mean proportions choosing
induced city

Figure 2 presents the mean proportions of participants in
each information condition who selected the induced city.
In the cue-none condition the rate of choosing the induced
city (.63) was significantly above .50, t(127) = 4.29, p <
.001, but this was not the case for the cue-all condition
(.54), t(127) = 1.37, p = .175. Proportions above 50% were
almost statistically significant for both the cue-neutral (.56),
t(127) = 1.78, p = .075, and cue-positive (.56) conditions,
t(127) = 1.91, p = .058. Thus this experiment again found a
clear effect of induced recognition when no prior
knowledge could be confounded with recognition,
especially when no new information about the cities was
given.
Overall, there was a significant linear trend for cue
condition on the proportions of induced cities selected,
t(381) = 2.15, p = .033. Just as in Experiment 1, giving
participants other cues reduced the impact of recognition.
However it appears that the volume of information was
critical, as this information did not differentiate the options.

Method
Participants
A total of 128 members of the Michigan State University
participant pool participated for partial course credit.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
none

neutral

positive

all

Cue condition

Materials and procedure
The exact same procedures and induction lists were used as
in Experiment 1. The city-size task was identical except that
equivalent cues were given for both members of the eight
pairs. Thus for the two pairs in the cue-all condition a state
was given for both cities and both cities were said to have a
major league soccer team. For the two pairs in the cuepositive condition it was stated that both cities had soccer
teams and that the states were not known. For the two pairs
in the cue-neutral condition a state was given for both cities
and it was stated that whether or not these cities had a
soccer team was unknown. For the two pairs in the cuenone condition it was stated that neither piece of
information was known. Thus the design of Experiment 2
was simpler than Experiment 1 but eight pairs were still

Figure 2: Mean proportions of participant in each cue
condition choosing the induced city rather than the
noninduced city (Bars represent one standard error). Above
.50 indicates a preference for the induced city.

General Discussion
Our results show that recognition effects of the type
Goldstein and Gigerenzer (2002) found are not only due to
recognition being confounded with other cues. When
recognition was unconfounded and was the only available
cue the city more likely to be recognized was selected at a
rate above chance.
Using within experiment manipulations our results
supported Oppenheimer's (2003) finding that the presence
of other cues could moderate a recognition effect. However
462

References
Anderson, J. R., Lebiere, C., & Lovett, M. (1998).
Performance. In J. R. Anderson, & C. Lebiere (Eds.), The
atomic components of thought. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Chater, N., Oaksford, M., Nakisa, N., & Redington, M.
(2003). Fast, frugal, and rational: How rational norms
explain behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 90, 63-86.
Falk, R., & Konold, C. (1997). Making sense of
randomness: Implicit encoding as a basis for judgment.
Psychological Review, 104, 301-318.
Fasolo, B., Miscuraca, R., & McClelland, G. H. (2003).
Individual differences in adaptive choice strategies.
Research in Economics, 57, 219-233.
Gigerenzer, G. (1996). On narrow norms and vague
heuristics: A reply to Kahneman and Tversky (1996).
Psychological Review, 103, 592-596.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G. & Todd, P. (1999). Fast and frugal
heuristics: The adaptive toolbox. In G. Gigerenzer, & P.
Todd (Eds.), Simple heuristics that make us smart (pp.
37-58). New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The recognition
heuristic: How ignorance makes us smart. In G.
Gigerenzer, & P. Todd (Eds.), Simple heuristics that
make us smart (pp. 37-58). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of
ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109, 75-90.
Jacoby, L. L., Kelly, C., Brown, J., & Jasechko, J. (1989).
Becoming famous overnight: Limits on the ability to
avoid unconscious influences of the past. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 326-338.
Newell, B. R., Weston, N. J., & Shanks, D. R. (2003).
Empirical tests of a fast-and-frugal heuristic: Not
everyone "takes-the-best." Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 91, 82-96.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so
frugal!): Rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition,
90, B1-B9.
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The
adaptive decision maker. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding
specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 359-380.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of
the environment. Psychological Review, 63, 129-138.
Wells, G. L., & Loftus, E. F. (Eds.) (1984). Eyewittness
testimony: Psychological perspectives. New York:
Cambridge University Press.

the results of Experiment 1 are consistent with recognition
being part of either compensatory or noncompensatory
strategies, as long as recognition is not always the most
valid cue. In contrast, the results of Experiment 2 are
consistent with the predictions of neither type of strategy, as
nondifferential cues should have no impact on decision
making. What assumptions would need to be added to these
approaches in order for them to explain these results?
Whatever function a compensatory strategy applies to
options, the same function would be applied to both cities in
a pair. Thus providing the same cue for both cities should
just add a constant to the evaluation of both cities. Thus the
difference between evaluations will not change. One way to
deal with the evidence from Experiment 2 would be to make
the total amount of information part of the integration
process. Perhaps there is a Weber function for comparing
options like there is for comparing perceptual stimuli. This
would represent a revision to current compensatory
strategies that would yield testable predictions.
Nondifferential
cues
should
be
ignored
by
noncompensatory strategies. However, they could have an
impact if the algorithm had a stopping rule that may stop
evaluating cues before one is found that differentiates. It
seems consistent with bounded rationality that sometimes
the evaluation is made by an organism that there is little
value in continuing looking for discriminating information.
Thus as each nondifferentiating cue is examined there may
be a nonzero probability that the organism will decide to
stop. If the extra cues may be placed higher in the validity
hierarchy than recognition (as Experiment 1 may suggest)
then such a stopping rule could lead nondifferential cues to
moderate the utilization of differential recognition.
Such a stopping rule might take into account the
anticipated cost of evaluating information. This may be
particular relevant in our paradigm as the type of uncertain
recognition we might have induced may have a cost.
Anderson’s ACT-R framework emphasizes the cost of any
remembering (Anderson, Lebiere, & Lovett, 1998).
Recognition is not necessarily more accurate than recall
(Tulving & Thomson, 1973), and it may be inaccurate and
uncertain (Wells & Loftus, 1984). Thus even a single
nondifferential cue may reduce the impact of recognition if
it can be higher in the cue hierarchy.
Experiments that examine recognition free of confounds
are useful for understanding this heuristic as a processes
rather than just a phenomenon, and the importance of doing
this in general was pointed to by Gigerenzer (1996). Both
the compensatory and noncompensatory approaches to how
multiple cues affect decision-making seem under-specified,
and thus unable to explain the results of Experiment 2. The
paradigm we introduced here has promise for furthering the
understanding of heuristics utilizing recognition and the
process by which recognition affects choices.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Erik Altmann and Tom Carr for
helpful comments on earlier drafts. These experiments were
done as partial fulfillment of the first author's requirements
for the degree of Bachelor of Science (Honors).
463

