UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Retrieval Structure Construction During Reading: Experimentation and Simulation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9xm5n19k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Bellissens, Cedrick
Denhière, Guy

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Retrieval Structure Construction During Reading: Experimentation and
Simulation
Cédrick Bellissens (cedrick.bellissens@univ-paris8.fr)
Laboratoire Cognition et Usages
CNRS & Université de Paris VIII, 2 rue de la liberte
93526 St Denis, France

Guy Denhière (denhiere@up.univ-mrs.fr)
Laboratoire de Psychologie Cognitive
CNRS & Université de Provence, 3 place Victor Hugo
13331 Marseille, France

Abstract
The aim of this study was to investigate the construction
of a retrieval structure during reading, according to the
hypothesis that text macrostructure is used in Long-term
working memory (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995) to maintain
encoded information in an accessible format. We first
designed an experiment for testing the hypothesis that
retrieval structure is a macrostructure of the text. Then,
we conceived and run a model inspired by CI-LSA
Framework (Kintsch, Patel & Ericsson, 1999) in which a
generalization process create macropropositions. Results
are that simulation data were found to be highly
correlated with participants' data.

Macrostructure as Retrieval structure
Classical view of working memory assumes that during
reading relevant information is stored in a Short Term
Memory Buffer (STMB; Baddeley, 2000; Kintsch,
1988). In contrast, Ericsson & Kintsch (1995) argued
that during reading, readers could encode information
in an accessible format in a retrieval structure in longterm working memory (LTWM) consisting of retrieval
cues associated with encoded information in Long Term
Memory (LTM). Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) showed
that clearing STMB by using a reading interruption
procedure (Glanzer, Fisher & Dorfman, 1984) does not
lead to comprehension impairment. We have also
shown that the more a text is familiar, the more readers
can construct an efficient LTM retrieval structure based
on the content of the text (Bellissens & Denhière, 1998;
Denhière & Bellissens, 1999).
A CI-LSA Framework has been proposed (Kintsch,
1998 ; Kintsch, Patel & Ericsson, 1999) to explain LTWM intervention in the comprehension process. The
main characteristic of this framework is the
combination of a model of semantic memory, LSA

91

(Landauer & Dumais, 1997), and of a model of
comprehension, CI (Kintsch, 1988).
LSA represents potential signification of words
belonging to a textual corpus in a semantic space. In the
semantic space, vectors represent the words and the
cosine of the contained angle of two vectors is an
estimation of their respective words similarity. The
more the cosine is close to 1, the more the two words
are considered as semantically similar. The cosine
similarity can be used to weight links in an associative
network in which each node is a word. In CI, the use of
associative network is the way to represent activated
knowledge associated with concepts and propositions
derived from text processing. Hence, architecture of a
text segment representation in CI-LSA is a network that
comprehends propositions and concepts (nodes) linked
with each other by relations (links) weighted by LSA
cosine. This CI-LSA combination improves the
previous comprehension model proposed by Kintsch
(1988) by the fact that LSA can model knowledge base
in CI.
While Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) assumed that the
episodic structure of a text could be a retrieval
structure, Kintsch, Patel and Ericsson (1999) did not
explain exactly how the CI-LSA framework simulates
the construction of a retrieval structure. We assume that
each text segment processing results in an individual
episodic trace. We propose that the set of episodic
traces generated by the text processing is replaced by a
macrostructure, resulting from the application of a
generalization process (O'Reilly & Rudy, 2000). This
generalization process generates macropropositions that
are associated with the encoded information for further
use as semantic retrieval cues. We argue that if two
relevant segments of a text, associated with such
retrieval cues, are given after a reading interruption,
readers should easily reinstate these retrieval cues and
counteract the interruption effect. For example, imagine
an individual reads a text about the invention of a

machine. He/she reads that the machine has a particular
function. Then, the text says that the machine includes
one component with a specific function, then a second
component with an other specific function. At this
moment, the reading is interrupted and then resumed
after the presentation of a probe sentence. After
Ericsson and Kintsch (1995) and Bellissens and
Denhière (2003), the probe sentence should help reader
for reinstated semantic cues in STM associated with
information encoded in LTM when the previous text
has been processed.
The present paper tries to explain how this
reinstatement usually occurs and how the reinstatement
depends on the organization of the retrieval structure.
As we assume that the construction of the retrieval
structure is a generalization process, we predict that a
sentence mentioning the two components of the
machine is a better probe sentence than a sentence
comprising two distinct facts: the machine function and
the function of a machine component; Indeed, the first
type of probe sentence relies on a particular part of the
retrieval structure of the text, a macroproposition:
machine usually possesses components. The second
relies on two separated parts of the macrostructure: the
functions of the machine and its component.
What we have just described is a formal view of the
conditions we constructed for the following experiment.
We predict that if a categorical probe sentence (CAT) is
inserted after a reading interruption, readers should
resume the reading faster than with a functional probe
sentence (FUN).
Table 1: Texts facts
Nb
Title
1

Sentence
The /Machine/
The /Machine/ was invented in /Date/ by
/Inventor/
2
The /Machine/ possesses a /Component 1/ to
/Component 1 Function /.
3
The /Machine/ is mainly used to /Main
Function of the Machine/.
4
The /Machine/ possesses a /Component 2/ to
/Component 2 Function /.
5
This component thus contributes to the function
of the /Machine/.
6
Since its invention, the /Machine/ is an
equipment that was modernized.
7
The modernization of the /Machine/ was useful
for the development of /Human Domain/.
CAT The /Machine/ possesses a /Component 1/ and a
/component 2/ to /Component 2 Function /.
FUN The /Machine/ is used to /Main Function of the
Machine/ and possesses a /Component 2/ to
/Component 2 Function /.
ORI
The /Machine/ possesses a /Component 2/ to
/Component 2 Function/.

92

Experiment
Participants
Participants were 64 students from Université de
Provence, Aix-en-Provence, France.

Materials and Procedure
Twelve pairs of experimental texts and eight pairs of
filler texts were generated. A text pair consisted of a
main text, an interrupting text, and five comprehension
questions. The main experimental texts and the main
filler texts described a machine (e.g., the automobile,
the elevator, the phonograph, etc.). The main
experimental texts all had the same structure (see, Table
1) but the main filler texts did not. The interrupting
texts were stories totally unrelated to the main texts.
An experimental trial included the presentation of the
main text, the interrupting text, and five text
comprehension questions. It began with the self-paced
display of the main text, sentence by sentence. An
experimental trial included the presentation of a main
text, an interrupting text, and five text comprehension
questions. It began with the self-paced display of the
main text, sentence by sentence. To go on to the next
sentence, the reader had to press the space bar on the
keyboard. Sentence 2 of the main texts mentioned a
machine component and its particular function.
Sentence 3 stated the general function of the machine.
Sentence 4 gave a second machine component and its
particular function. Then a message saying "Attention!
Reading time is limited" ("Attention ! Lecture en temps
fixé") appeared on the screen. This message stayed on
the screen for 1500 ms and meant that the interrupting
text would start on the next page. The interrupting text
was displayed sentence by sentence for a fixed amount
of time (4500 ms per sentence). After the presentation
of the interrupting text, a message saying "Attention!
Reading time no longer limited" ("Attention ! Lecture
en temps libre") appeared on the screen.
Then, one of 4 Probe sentences was displayed: either
(i) the original Probe Sentence that was the sentence 4
of the main text (ORI), or (ii) categorical Probe
Sentence that contained the two machine components
and the second component specific function (CAT), or
(iii) a functional Probe Sentence that contained the
general machine function, the second component and its
specific function (FUN); or (iv) a without Relation
Sentence that was a new sentence (WRE). Following
the display of the probe sentence, a critical sentence 5
was then displayed. Sentence 5 contained an anaphoric
device; the referent was the machine component
mentioned in sentence 4 (see, table 2).
In each list, 50% of the main texts were interrupted:
Filler texts were never interrupted.

At the end of reading, participants were asked to
answer 4 comprehension questions about the main text
and 2 comprehension questions about the interrupting
text. Second question was the critical question for
assessing understanding because its correct answer
depends on the encoding of the correct antecedent to
anaphora in the fifth sentence.
In the control condition, the first part of the main texts
was not displayed; and in the experimental condition,
all materials were presented.

The percentage of correct answers to the critical
question was greater in the probe sentence condition
than in the WRE condition, 55.6% vs. 36.0%, F(1,31) =
3.9 p<.05., but there was no difference between the
CAT and the FUN conditions.

Results

Construction Phase. We assumed that a text segment
could be represented as an associative network
consisting in an explicit and an implicit representation.
Explicit representation is the result of a predication
analysis of the segment. Implicit representation
contained the assumed activated knowledge associated
with the concepts and the propositions embedded in the
text segments. In the model, the implicit representation
was made of all of the nearest neighbors (n=2), taken in
an LSA space (General reading up to 1st year college),
of each of the concepts and propositions represented in
the explicit network. Explicit network was weighted by
using the rules provided by Kintsch (1988): link
weights between propositions and argument, embedded
propositions, and proposition that shared an argument
were equal to 1 while others were equal to zero.
Implicit network was weighted by using cosine
similarity from LSA space. If between two vectors,
expressing elements of the net, cosine was .20, the
weight of their link in the network was .20.

Control condition. In the control condition, the first
part of the text was not presented. Results are that the
critical sentence was read faster in the cued conditions
than in the without relation condition, 4221 ms vs. 4597
ms, F(1,31) = 3,6 p<.05. The critical sentence was read
at a same rate in the ORI, CAT and FUN conditions.
Note that the sixth sentence was read faster in the probe
sentence conditions than in the WRE condition, 3488
ms vs. 3823 ms, F(1,31) = 4,86 p<.05. Percentage of
correct answers to the critical question was greater in
the FUN condition than in the CAT condition, 85% vs.
55%, F(1,31) = 6,49 p<.05 and was greater in the probe
sentence conditions than in the WRE condition, 76% vs
42 %, F(1,35) = 7,8 p<.01.
Table 2: example of text (translated from French)
Nb Sentence
Title The elevator
1
The elevator was invented in 1859 by the
American Otis.
2
The elevator possesses a sliding door to protect
the users from the outside.
3
The elevator is mainly used to reach the floors
of a building.
4
The elevator comprises a solid winch that
controls the rise of the cabin.
5
This component thus contributes to the utility of
the elevator.
6
Since its invention, the elevator is equipment
that was modernized.
7
The modernization of the elevator was useful
for the development of the residences.
CAT The elevator possesses a sliding door and a
solid winch that controls the rise of the cabin.
FUN The elevator is used to reach the floors of a
building and comprises a solid winch that
controls the rise of the cabin.
ORI The elevator comprises a solid winch that
controls the rise of the cabin.

Experimental condition. The critical sentence was
read faster in the CAT condition than in the FUN
condition, 3869 ms vs. 4437 ms, F(1,31) = 9.33 p<.01.

93

Simulation with CI-LSA+Generalisation
Framework
Procedure

Integration Phase. This phase is described in Kintsch
(1988). Here, the integration phase simulated activation
spreading in the net. When the network was settled, the
more connected information got the greatest final
activation value and for that reason remained in a shortterm memory buffer, for the next sentence processing.
Short term working memory. Short-term working
memory was involved in the construction and
integration phases and in the accessibility of the most
activated information. Short-term memory in the model
is a temporary memory buffer. It contained the most
activated information at the end of a processing cycle.
We transformed all final activation values in z-notes.
Let a be the average of the activation values, e the
standard deviation of the distribution v i the final
activation value of a node I, the z-note of I is:
zi =(vi –a)/e.
Only the nodes with z-notes above a given constant
were kept in the Short-Term Memory buffer. Hence, the
number of elements in the buffer varied as a function of
a limited amount of activation and of the network
weighting.

In order to simulate a reading interruption as in the
experiment, we emptied the memory buffer: We did not
keep any nodes of the last processed sentence.
Long-term working memory. Long-term working
memory was a retrieval structure consisting in encoded
information and macropropositions associated with it.
To simulate the construction of a retrieval structure, we
build up a matrix containing in row, all activated
information during the different processing cycles and,
in column, the different processing cycles. Each cell of
the matrix contained the final activation value of an
element in a given cycle. If the element was not
activated in the given cycle, the cell contained a zero.
Hence, this matrix contained all episodic memory
vectors. To this matrix was applied a singular value
decomposition to simulate a generalization process. The
decomposition resulted in three matrices (see, Landauer
& Dumais, 1997) but we use the matrix representing the
coordinates of each element in a memory space. The
elements belonging to that space were projected in a
two-dimensional space by reducing its dimensionality.
The procedure resulted in a two-column matrix. The
macrostructure matrix was the product of the twocolumn matrix and its transposed matrix. The
macrostructure matrix was considered as a
generalization of the episodic memory traces encoded
from the text.
Table 3 : reading times (RT) and activation forces (AF)
of the critical sentence and the probe sentence in
Original (ORI), categorical (CAT) and functional
(FUN) conditions.

RT
AF

Critical sentence
Probe sentence
ORI CAT FUN ORI
CAT FUN
14,29 13,16 15,09 8,96
6,94
6,04
11,36 13,76 11,07 11,80 16,66 17,87

Macropropositions reinstatement and reading
resumption. After a reading interruption, we assume
that readers might be able to readily retrieve mental
representation of the text from long-term working
memory by reinstating cues associated with encoded
information. In the model, macropropositions were
reinstated in the short-term memory buffer and were
used as context to process the next sentence. As in the
experiment above, we used three kind of probe
sentences. In a first step, we constructed for each, an
episodic trace. As they resume some parts of the
previous text, their representation shared information
with previous sentences that now belonged to the
macrostructure matrix. But the shared information was
not as such important for each probe sentence. In the
categorical condition, information given by the probe
sentence referred to a categorical macroproposition
"machine has component", while in the functional

94

condition, the probe sentence referred to "machine has a
function" and "component has a function". In a second
step, we multiplied the episodic vector trace of the
probe sentence by the macrostructure matrix. The result
of the product was an echo vector. We z-transformed
the coordinates of the echo vector and only kept the znotes above 1.5. The respective nodes were taken to
make part of the critical sentence network. In a final
step, activation spread in the critical sentence net.
For each probe sentence, and for the critical sentence,
in each condition, we calculated an activation force.
The final activation values of each sentence were ztransformed and we summed all the z-values above 0.

Results
We applied this procedure to three experimental texts.
For each sentence, the mean activation force and the
mean reading times per character and proposition are
presented in the table 3. First, for each text, and in each
of the probe conditions, the anaphora antecedent was
retrieved from the macroproposition structure. Second,
the activation force obtained by the model can predict
the reading times obtained by participants. The
correlation between reading times and activation forces
were negative and significantly different to zero, r=-.83,
z (6) =-2.0, p < .05.

Discussion
As predicted, the CAT sentence led to a faster critical
sentence reading time than does the FUN sentence. This
difference is not due to the fact that the CAT sentence
contained two potential antecedents for the anaphora in
critical sentence. First, the difference appeared only
when the first part of the main text was presented.
Second, although in control condition, the percentage of
correct answers was greater in the FUN condition than
in the CAT condition, this difference was not found in
the experimental condition. This result indicates that
without the first part of the text, readers did not
discriminate the right antecedent from the categorical
cue sentence. Moreover, in control condition, the
presentation of the WRE sentence exerted an effect on
the critical sentence 5 and on the sentence 6 reading
times. This indicated that, in the control condition,
subject could not rely on a retrieval structure built in
LTM to counteract irrelevant information effect on text
processing. It results that when the readers have the
opportunity to construct a retrieval structure, a
categorization of two pieces of information (the two
machine components) had occurred during text
processing, based on meaning overlap between the two
learning episodes: sentence 2 and sentence 4.
The CI-LSA+generalisation framework could explain
how a retrieval structure was build up: During reading,
each sentence of the text was processed and stored in
episodic memory. Then, as a function of meaning
overlap between them, sentences representations were
associated to the same semantic macroproposition in

LTM or were not associated. The remaining question is
when does generalization process occur during reading?
Does it occur during the encoding process or during the
retrieval process ? Research has to answer these
question in the future. Nevertheless, generalization
process and more generally integration process appear
to be necessary processes for building the retrieval
structure that permits texts comprehension.

References
Baddeley, A.D. (2000). The episodic buffer: a new
component of working memory? Trends in cognitive
sciences, 4, 417-423
Bellissens, C., & Denhière, G. (2002). Word order or
environment sharing: A comparison of two semantic
memory models. Current Psychology Letters, 8, 4760.
Denhière, G., & Bellissens, C. (1998). Retrieval from
long-term working memory. Spoken paper presented
at the 8th annual meeting of the Society for Text and
Discourse. Madison.
Denhière, G., & Bellissens, C. (1999). Long-Term
Working Memory: A frequency effect on retrieval

95

time during reading. Spoken paper presented at 40th
annual meeting of the Psychonomics society. Los
Angeles.
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term
working memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211245.
Glanzer, M., Fischer, B., & Dorfman, D. (1984). Shortterm storage in reading. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 23, 467-486.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A paradigm for
cognition. Cambridge. University Press.
Kintsch, W., Patel, V.L., & Ericsson, K.A. (1999). The
role of long-term working memory in text
comprehension. Psychologia, 42, 186-198.
Landauer, T.K., Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory
of the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
O'Reilly, R. C., & Rudy J. W. (2000). Computational
principles of learning in the neocortex and
hippocampus. Hippocampus, 10, 389-397.

