UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Scopal ambiguity preferences in German negated clauses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4q0019p0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Hemforth, Barbara
Konieczny, Lars

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Scopal ambiguity preferences in German negated clauses
Barbara Hemforth (barbara.hemforth@lpl.univ-aix.fr)
Laboratoire Parole et Langage, UMR 6057, Univ. de Aix en Provence
29, av. Robert Schuman, 13621 Aix en Provence, France

Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, IIG, Univ. Freiburg

Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg
Abstract
When following a negated matrix clause, adverbial clauses
(ACs) like “because it was paid very well” in (1) can be
interpreted as residing within the scope of the negation (1b),
or outside of it (1).

IP
AC

neg

(1) a. Peter did not quit his job because it was paid very well
b. Peter did not quit his job because it was paid very
badly.

VP
because it was ...

Depending on the scope of the negative, the interpretation
differs dramatically: Whereas Peter did in fact not quit his job
in (1a), he did so in (1b), but for yet unknown reasons. It has
been shown for English (see Frazier & Clifton, 1996), that
there is a preference to interpret the adverbial clause outside
of the scope of the negation so that (1b) appears fairly odd.
This observation challenges recency based processing
principles, such as late closure, since the high attachment (to
IP) appears to be preferred over low attachment (to VP) (see
figure 1). In this paper, we will present evidence on German
equivalents of (1a,b), varying the order of the negative and the
verb (Experiment I), the context in which the ambiguity
appears (Experiment II), and the position of the adverbial in
relation to the clause boundary where the negation of the main
verb is restricted or even retracted (Experiment III). None of
these variations reduced the preference substantially. Only an
explicit alternative cause reduced it but even this variation did
not eliminate the difficulty of the inside scope interpretation.
We will argue that incremental interpretation as well as
immediate attribution of prosodic structure determine the
interpretation of the adverbial clause.

Figure 1
However, Frazier and Clifton (1996) found a clear
preference for an interpretation of the AC outside of the
negation scope. In their experiments, this preference does
not show up in early stages of processing, but only in later
off-line measures. In the framework of Construal Theory,
the authors argue that only argument like or primary
relations are attached to the phrase marker of the sentence
immediately. Only primary relations are subject to syntactic
attachment principles like Minimal Attachment or Recency.
As a non-primary relation, the adverbial clause is only
construed as part of the maximal projection of the preceding
thematic domain (i.e. the IP). All kinds of factors (syntactic,
semantic, pragmatic, or prosodic) jointly determine the final
interpretation of the clause.
In this paper, we do not want to dispute the immediacy of
the attachment or the interpretation of adverbial clauses. We
are much more interested in the question of which factors
are driving this final preference, and how general or
universal it is. This means testing this preference in
different constructions, in different environments, and
across languages. Therefore, we have been looking at
German versions of Frazier and Clifton’s materials. In four
experiments, we tried to find a way to override the
interpretational preference, by putting the negation in focus
position (Exp I), varying contextually given presuppositions
(Exp II), and restricting the negation (Exp III). Since our
main interest does not lie in the question of when these
factors come into play, but only whether they do have an
effect at all, in all of our experiments, we applied an off-line
acceptability judgment task.

Introduction
Whereas the scope of quantifiers has been the subject of
substantial research (e.g., Ioup, 1975, Johnson-Laird, 1969;
Kurtzman & MacDonald, 1996; for an extensive discussion
see Frazier, 1999) this is much less the case for the scope of
negations. In this paper, we will look at sentences like (1)
where an adverbial clause can be interpreted as either being
within the scope of the negation in the matrix clause or
outside of it. Structurally, the adverbial clause has to be
attached to the VP if it is interpreted as residing within the
scope of the negation whereas it has to be attached to IP if it
is interpreted outside the scope of the negation.
Locality based principles of syntactic attachment as they
are assumed in most theories of human sentence processing
(e.g., Frazier, 1978; Gibson, 1991) predict a preference to
attach the adverbial clause to VP, and thus a preference to
interpret it inside of the scope of the negation.

Experiment I
In Experiment I, we wanted to test whether the preference
for high attachment of the adverbial clause which has
559

Die Sekretärin war unbeliebt, weil sie ein
erhielt
The secretary wasn´t liked very much,
received a high salary.
f. no negation (control-b)
Die Sekretärin war unbeliebt, weil sie
Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary wasn´t liked very much,
received a low salary.

already been established for English can also be found in
German. Additionally, we varied the position of the
negation “nicht” (not). Since the clause final position in
German is prosodically more dominant than clause internal
positions, we assumed that an interpretation of the adverbial
clause inside the scope of the negation might be more viable
if it is clause final. As a control for lexical effects we
included controls without negations.

Methods

hohes Gehalt
because she
ein geringes
because she

Six counterbalanced forms of the questionnaire were
constructed. One sixth of the 18 experimental sentences
appeared in each version in each form of the questionnaire,
and across the six forms, each experimental sentence
appeared once in each version. Each sentence was followed
by a question concerning its acceptability. These 18
sentences were combined with 36 sentences of various
forms varying in complexity (simple main clauses, simple
embeddings and doubly nested embeddings) and plausbility
(from fully plausible to fairly implausible according to the
intuitions of the experimenters). One randomization was
made of each form.

Materials. Eighteen sentences were constructed, closely
related to the materials from Frazier and Clifton (1996).
Each sentence contained a main clause followed by a
subclause beginning with “weil” (because). The comma
preceding “weil” is obligatory in German for all possible
interpretations. It cannot serve as a cue for the interpretation
of the adverbial clause. In the main clause, a character was
introduced as the subject in the default topic position. The
pronoun in the because-clause was meant to refer to the
subject of the main clause. This was the most plausible
reading according to the intuitions of the experimenters and
qualitative interviews after the experiment showed that
subjects interpreted the pronouns exactly this way. Six
versions of each sentence were constructed. In two, the
negation preceded the clause-final participle (condition VPinternal, 2a,b). Two versions had the negation as the last
word of the main clause (VP-final, 2c,d). Crossed with the
position of the negation, the because-clause could either be
plausibly interpreted as being inside of the scope of the
negation or not. In order to control for potential plausibility
differences in the adverbial clauses, we included two
controls (2e,f) which only differed with respect to the
adverbial clause, but did not have a negation in the matrix
clause.

Participants. Eighteen participants, mostly undergraduate
students from the University of Freiburg, judged the
acceptability of sentences presented in a printed
questionnaire. They either received course credits or they
were paid for their participation. All subjects´ native
language was German, none of them was bilingual.
Procedure. The rating technique used was magnitude
estimation (ME, see Bard et al., 1996). Participants were
instructed to provide a numeric score that indicates how
much better (or worse) the current sentence was compared
to a given reference sentence (Example: If the reference
sentence was given the reference score of 100, judging a
target sentence five times better would result in 500, judging
it five times worse in 20). Judging the acceptability ratio of
a sentence in this way results in a scale which is open-ended
on both sides. It has been demonstrated that ME is therefore
more sensitive than fixed rating-scales, especially for scores
that would approach the ends of such rating scales (Bard, et
al., 1996).
Each questionnaire began with a written instruction
where the subject was made familiar with the task based on
two examples. After that subjects were presented with a
reference sentence for which they had to provide a reference
score. All following sentences had to be judged in relation
to the reference sentence.

(2) a. neg. VP-internal, AC outside negation scope
Die Sekretärin hat nicht gekündigt, weil sie ein hohes
Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary has not quit her job, because she got a high
salary.
b. neg. VP-internal, AC in negation scope
Die Sekretärin hat nicht gekündigt, weil sie ein geringes
Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary has not quit her job, because she got a low
salary.
c. neg. VP-final, AC outside negation scope
Die Sekretärin kündigte nicht, weil sie ein hohes Gehalt
erhielt.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she received a
high salary.
d. neg. VP-final, AC in negation scope
Die Sekretärin kündigte nicht, weil sie ein geringes
Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she received a
low salary.
e. no negation (control-a)

Results
Individual judgments were individually standardized and
logarithmized. Table 1 contains mean judgments in the six
conditions.

560

Die Sekretärin hat nicht gekündigt, weil sie ein (a) hohes /
(b) geringes Gehalt erhielt.
Everybody heard the news about the secretary.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she got a (a) high
/ (b) low salary.
(4) Contextual bias: AC outside neg. scope
Jeder hat sich gefragt, ob die Sekretärin gekündigt hat.
Die Sekretärin hat nicht gekündigt, weil sie ein (a) hohes /
(b) geringes Gehalt erhielt.
Everybody wondered, whether the secretary had quit her
job.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she got a (a) high
/ (b) low salary.
(5) Contextual bias: AC within neg. scope (I)
Jeder hat gehört, dass die Sekretärin gekündigt hat.
Die Sekretärin hat nicht gekündigt, weil sie ein (a) hohes /
(b) geringes Gehalt erhielt.
Everybody heard that the secretary had quit her job.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she got a (a) high
/ (b) low salary.
(6) Contextual bias: AC within neg. scope (II)
Jeder hat sich gefragt, warum die Sekretärin gekündigt hat.
Die Sekretärin hat nicht gekündigt, weil sie ein (a) hohes /
(b) geringes Gehalt erhielt.
Everybody wondered, why the secretary had quit her job..
The secretary did not quit her job, because she got a (a) high
/ (b) low salary.

Table 1: Acceptability judgments Experiment I
neg.
VP- neg.
internal
final
AC within
scope of
-.64
negation
AC outside of
.28
scope of
negation

VP-

no negation

-.79

.24

.31

.34

Judgments were submitted to a two-factorial MANOVA
including the factors “negation” (VP-internal, VP-final, no
negation) and “attachment” (IP, VP). There was a main
effect of “negation”
(F1(2, 34) = 11.25, p < 0.001;
F2(2,34) = 10.89, p < 0.001), resulting from the fact that on
average, sentences without negations were judged more
acceptable than those containing negations (VP-internal: 0,178, VP-final: - 0,240; no negation: 0,287). The main
effect of “attachment” as well as the interaction
“negation”*”attachment” reached significance as well
(“attachment”: F1(1,17) = 51.29, p<0.001; F2(1,17) = 26.00,
p < 0.001; “negation”*”attachment”: F1(2,34) = 7.26, p
<0.01; F2(2,34) = 8.64, p < 0.01). Planned comparisons
show that low attachment was judged less acceptable in
sentences containing a VP-internal negation (F1(1,17) =
26,47, p < 0.001, F2(1,17) = 16.20, p < 0.01) as well as in
sentences containing a VP-final negation (F1(1,17) = 38.31;
p < 0.001; F2(1,17) = 29.29, p < 0.001), whereas there was
no difference in acceptability between the control sentences
(F1(1,17) < 1, ns; F2(1,17) < 1, ns).

Methods
We applied the same technique as in the previous
experiment. 24 subjects, all native German speakers and all
students from the University of Freiburg participated in the
experiment. Fillers varied along the full range from fully
grammatical to ungrammatical, as well as from fully
plausible to highly implausible.

Discussion
In Experiment I, we clearly replicated the findings Frazier &
Clifton (1996) report for English. In German as in English it
is harder to interpret the adverbial clause as residing within
the scope of the negation. Varying the position of the
negation, however, did not exert an influence on the
acceptability of this interpretation. The clause-final focus on
the negation is obviously not sufficient to render it more
viable. In the second experiment we tried to put the negated
sentences in contexts that were supposed to bias for either of
the two interpretations.

Results
There was a reliable main effect of Scope: sentences for
which the adverbial clause had to be interpreted inside the
scope of the negation were judged less acceptable than their
counterparts (F1(1,23) = 26.25, p < 0.001; F2(1,15) = 53.4,
p < 0.001).
Table II: Acceptability judgments Experiment II

Experiment II

Neutral
Context

Scope
external
-.38

Scope
Scope
internal I internal
II
-.16
-.44

.26

.39

For Experiment II, we constructed four different contexts
for each sentence: A neutral context, leaving open whether
or not the proposition stated in the following matrix clause
holds or not (3), a context biasing an external scope reading
(4), and two contexts biasing an internal scope reading, with
one context explicitly stating that the proposition stated in
the matrix clause should not be negated (5) and another one
presupposing that e.g. the secretary actually quit her job (6).

AC inside -.54
scope of
negation
AC outside .36
scope of
negation

(3) Neutral context
Jeder hat die Neuigkeiten über die Sekretärin gehört.

No main effect of context was found (F1(3, 69) < 1, ns;
F2(3,45) = 1.23, ns). Although explicitly stating the fact that
561

.52

the proposition described in the matrix clause should not be
negated rendered the sentences slightly more acceptable
numerically, this did not result in an interaction between
Context and Scope (F1(3,69) = 1,12, ns; F2(3,45) = 1.61,
ns).

Methods
As in the other experiments, subjects judged the
acceptability of the sentences in relation to a reference
sentence (Magnitude Estimations). The sixteen experimental
sentences were randomly mixed with 48 filler sentences of
varying acceptability (some ungrammatical, some highly
implausible). Sixteen native German subjects, all students of
the University of Freiburg, participated in the experiment.

Discussion
In all contexts, even in those biasing the inside scope
reading, interpreting the adverbial clause outside of the
scope of the negation was judged more acceptable. Before
we will discuss why this may be the case, we will extend the
phenomenon by including a temporal adverb as a possible
domain for the negation.

Results
The sentences where we included a temporal modifier as a
possible domain for the negation were generally more
complex and judged less acceptable than the shorter
versions 5F1(1,15) = 17.69, p < 0.001; F2(1,15) = 10.07; p
< 0.01). More importantly though, the interpretation of the
adverbial clause outside of the scope of the negation was
clearly preferred in both, the shorter and the longer version
(F1(1,15) = 45.10, p < 0.001; F2(1,15) = 156.00, p < 0.001).
The difference between the inside and the outside scope
reading was, however, somewhat stronger for sentences
without a temporal adverb as indicated by a reliable
interaction between the two experimental factors (F1(1,15)
= 5.71, p < 0.05; F2(1,15) = 7.51; p < 0.05).

Experiment III
In Experiment III we presented the same ambiguous
constructions as in the earlier experiments. However, we
added two conditions with a temporal adverb between the
negation and the adverbial clause. This has the effect that
now, the adverbial clause in (7d) can easily be interpreted
outside of the scope of the negation which is restricted by
the temporal adverb (The secretary quit the job before
yesterday because of the low salary.). The only viable
interpretation for (7c), however is an interpretation of the
adverbial clause inside the scope of the negation (The
secretary actually quit the job yesterday, but not because she
got a high salary, but e.g., because she didn’t have another
job offer before.). The prediction is that we should find the
same preference for the outside scope reading in these
constructions.

Table 3: Acceptability judgments Experiment II

AC within
scope of
negation
AC outside
of scope of
negation

(7) a. AC outside of neg. scope, no restriction before clause
boundary
Die Sekretärin kündigte nicht, weil sie ein hohes Gehalt
erhielt.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she got a
high salary.
b. AC within neg. scope, no restriction before clause
boundary
Die Sekretärin kündigte nicht, weil sie ein geringes
Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary did not quit her job, because she got a low
salary.
c. AC inside of neg. scope, restriction before clause
boundary
Die Sekretärin kündigte nicht erst gestern, weil sie ein
hohes Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary did not quit her job only yesterday,
because she got a high salary.
d. AC outside of neg. scope, restriction before clause
boundary
Die Sekretärin kündigte nicht erst gestern, weil sie ein
geringes Gehalt erhielt.
The secretary did not quit her job only yesterday,
because she got a low salary.

Restriction
before
clause
boundary

No
restriction
before
clause b.

-.54

-.24

-.05

.85

Discussion
Although the sentences including a temporal modifier were
somewhat less acceptable than the shorter versions, they
showed the same preference pattern. Interpretation of the
adverbial clause inside the scope of the negation is always
far less acceptable than its outside scope interpretation. The
interaction between the domain of the scope of the negation
and the presence of a temporal modifier can be explained
by the fact that the sentences including a temporal adverb
were generally semantically more complex. Assuming a
preference for incremental interpretation (Konieczny,
Hemforth, Scheepers, & Strube, 1997; Crocker, 1995), the
negation in these conditions has to be revised (First the
secretary did not quit her job, then she did, but not only
yesterday.). This local revision is obviously less costly
than a revision between clause boundaries as in (7b), but it
may have reduced the difference between the final
interpretation of (7c) and (7d).

562

that this is actually a principle of grammar, meant to
constrain the interpretational domain of quantifiers.
Assuming that even during silent reading, a prosodic
structure of a sentence is constructed (Implicit Prosody
Hypothesis; Fodor, 1998), this may play a role in reading as
well. Since there is a high probability for a prosodic
boundary between the matrix clause and the adverbial
clause, the AC cannot be interpreted inside the scope of the
negation. The inside scope reading of the adverbial clause is
actually only viable with a very marked prosodic contour.
At least intuitively (as stated by several native German and
English informants), the break before the adverbial clause in
this marked prosodic contour is strongly reduced.
Interestingly, this seems to be true even though there still
has to be a comma in the German clauses. So the comma by
itself cannot be the major factor. The remaining difficulty in
interpreting “complete” models may thus result from the
interaction of semantic and prosodic constraints. This will,
however, be a question to be answered in future research
(Bradley, Fodor, Fernandez, Hemforth, & Pynte, in prep).

Experiment IV
In our fourth experiment, we presented a continuation of the
sentence, explicitly providing the alternative cause (8a).
(8) a. Die Sekretaerin hat nicht gekuendigt, weil sie ein
geringes Gehalt erhielt, sondern weil sie ihre Arbeit
langweilig fand.
The secretary did not quit her job because she got a low
salary bur because she found her work boring.
b. Die Sekretaerin hat nicht gekuendigt, weil sie ein
hohes Gehalt erhielt, obwohl sie ihre Arbeit langweilig
fand.
The secretary did not quit her job because she got a
high salary although she found her job boring.
In this Experiment we found, that although the difference is
actually strongly reduced, interpreting the “because”-clause
inside the scope of the negation still causes some difficulties
(mean ME score: 0.09 for 8a, +0.45 for 8b, F1(1,15) = 5.83,
p < 0.05; F2(1,15) = 6.51; p < 0.05).

Acknowledgments

General Discussion

This research has partly been sponsored by the German
Research Foundation (He 2310/3). We want to thank Regine
Becher, Christian Mönke, and Daniel Umber for their
assistance in constructing the materials and running the
experiments. We also want to thank the two anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments.

A strong preference to interpret the adverbial outside of the
negative was established, which turned out to be very stable
across experiments. It is independent of the ordering of the
verb and the negative (Experiment I).
It shows up even in very strong contexts biasing the inside
scope reading where the secretary actually quit her job
(Experiment II), and the same pattern can be established in
constructions, where the negation can be interpreted as
restricted by a temporal adverb (Experiment III). Finally,
Experiment IV shows that the preference for interpreting the
adverbial clause outside the scope of the negation is reduced
but not eliminated by a continuation that provides an
explicit alternative to the negated because clause.
Obviously, the interpretation of the adverbial clause
inside of the scope of the negation is very hard even in a
context biasing for this reading. The question is why this is
the case. One possibility is that the short texts in (5) and (6)
are still semantically incomplete, since we now know what
is not the reason for the secretary quitting her job but not
what the reason for doing so actually is. Since it may be
assumed that negative information is not as well presented
as positive information (Legrenz, Girotto, & Johnson-Laird,
2003)), mental models for texts like these may be
insufficiently specified und thus less acceptable. The data
presented for Experiment IV, on the other hand, suggest that
this aspect actually plays a major role. However, it does not
seem to tell the whole story, since even an explicitly given
alternative does not render the inside scope reading as
acceptable as the outside scope reading.
An further possibility lies in the interaction of semantic
and prosodic information. Ronat (1984) presents the
Prosodic Binding hypothesis for French, roughly stating that
a prosodic boundary delimits the scope of a quantifier or a
wh-phrase (see also the Scope Correspondence Principle
(SPC) suggested by Hirotani, 2003, for Japanese). Note,

References
Bard, E. G., Robertson, D., and Sorace, A. (1996).
Magnitude estimation of linguistic acceptability.
Language, 72(1), 32-68.
Bradley, D., Fodor, J., Fernandez, E., Hemforth, B., &
Pynte, J.(in prep). The role of prosody in reading: A
cross-linguistic study of French and English.
Crocker, M.(1995). Computational Psycholinguistics : An
Inter-Disciplinary Approach to the Study of Language,
Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer Academic Press.
Fodor, J. D. 1998. Learning to parse? Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 27, 2, 285-319.
Frazier, L. (1978). On comprehending sentences: Syntactic
parsing strategies. Doctoral dissertation, University of
Connecticut.
Frazier, L., &Clifton, C. (1996) Construal. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Frazier, L. (1999). On sentence interpretation. Kluwer
Academic Press.
Gibson, E. (1991). A computational theory of human
linguistic processing: Memory limitations and
processing breakdown. Doctoral dissertation, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Hirotani, M. (2003) “Prosodic Boundary and Prosodic
Contour: Interpreting Wh-scope in
Japanese”.
Paper Presented at the Workshop on Scrambling and
563

Wh-questions at the 4th GLOW in Asia, August 23rd,
2003, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
Ioup, G. (1975). Some universals for quantifier scope. In J.
Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and Semantics, vol. 4, New York:
Academic Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1969). On understanding logically
complex sentences. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 21, 1-13.
Konieczny, L., Hemforth, B., Scheepers, C. & Strube, G.
(1997) The role of lexical heads in parsing: evidence
from German. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12,
307-348.
Kurtzman, H.S., & MacDonald, M.C. Resolution of
quantifier scope ambiguities. Cognition, 48:243--279,
1993.
Legrenz, P, Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2003).
Models
of
Consistency.
Psychological
Science 14 (2), 131-137.

Ronat, M. (1984) “Logical Form and Prosodic Islands ”. In
D. Gibbon and H. Richter (Eds.),Intonation , Accent, and
Rhythm: Studies in Discourse Phonology. New York:
Walter de Gruyter, 311-32

564

