UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Updating in Intrinsic Frames of Reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4hr0r3qq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Sun, Yanlong
Wang, Hongbin
Johnson, Todd R.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Updating in Intrinsic Frames of Reference
Yanlong Sun (Yanlong.Sun@uth.tmc.edu)
Hongbin Wang (Hongbin.Wang@uth.tmc.edu)
Todd R. Johnson (Todd.R.Johnson@uth.tmc.edu)
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
Houston, TX 77030 USA

Abstract
The present study investigates the properties of the spatial
updating in terms of intrinsic frames of reference. We
hypothesize that the efficiency of dynamically updating
object-to-object relations is based on two main factors, a
relatively stable frame of reference provided by the orienting
object (or object array), and the behavioral significance
(salience) level of the target objects. Three experiments were
conducted using tasks of direction pointing. It was found that
responses were significantly slower when the orienting object
was constantly rotating. Given a relatively stable frame of
reference, responses to the salient objects were faster than
those to the non-salient objects when the number of salient
objects was limited. The salience effect disappeared and reappeared in the absence and presence of a stable frame of
reference, respectively. These findings indicated that spatial
updating in intrinsic frame of reference is not automatic and is
limited by the number of target objects.

Introduction
As people move through an environment, they continuously
update the spatial relations between themselves and the
environment and the relations between the objects in the
environment. For instance, a pedestrian who is waving on a
taxi may also notice that a dog is chasing the taxi from
behind. In this scenario, two kinds of information have to be
encoded by the pedestrian, the relation between his body
and the taxi, and the relation between the taxi and the dog.
In fact, this example illustrates the distinction between an
egocentric reference system (body-centered) and an
allocentric reference system (more specifically in this
scenario, an object-centered intrinsic system). It has been
generally agreed that in encoding spatial information,
different reference systems can be involved. Many
researchers adopted the distinction between egocentric and
allocentric reference systems and conjectured that
participants in their experiments used either one of such
systems (e.g, Bryant & Tversky, 1999; Diwadkar &
McNamara, 1997; Franklin & Tversky, 1990; Shelton &
McNamara, 1997; Sholl & Nolin, 1997; Simons & R. Wang,
1998. For a recent treatment, see McNamara, 2003, and
Mou & McNamara, 2002).

A large body of research has been focusing on spatial
updating with respect to the egocentric system. It has been
indicated that spatial memories are primarily egocentric and
updating by the egocentric system is of high fidelity and
automatic (e.g., Rieser, 1989; Shelton & McNamara, 1997;
Simons & R. Wang, 1998; R. Wang, 1999). Nevertheless,
Mou and McNamara (2002) and McNamara (2003) recently
proposed that spatial information is encoded primarily of
object-to-object spatial relations, and therefore is allocentric.
This new theoretical framework calls for a systematic study
on properties of spatial updating in intrinsic systems in
dynamic situations, as compared to updating in egocentric
systems. For example, Sholl and Nolin (1997) and R. Wang
(1999) have suggested that egocentric self-to-object spatial
relations are updated automatically as people move through
an environment. It remains unclear whether updating in
intrinsic frame of reference is also automatic. Furthermore,
what kind of information is to be updated in intrinsic
systems? Are all objects in the environment being updated
with equal priorities? The present paper attempts to answer
these questions by reporting three experiments.
Our working hypothesis on spatial updating in intrinsic
frame of reference is that such a process involves paying
attention to both the orienting objects that anchor the
intrinsic frame of reference and the target objects in their
relations to the orienting objects. In other words, there are
two sequential components in such a process: establishing
and maintaining a frame of reference, then, updating the
object-to-object relations. Thus, we hypothesize that
updating in intrinsic systems can be achieved dynamically
only when a relatively stable frame of reference can be
maintained. In the taxi example above, in order to update
the relations between the taxi and the dog, the pedestrian
first needs to identify the orientation of the taxi. Second, we
hypothesize that updating of object-to-object relations is
affected by the behavioral significance of the target objects.
This hypothesis is based on previous findings that visual
selection can be prioritized by the object’s properties, by its
specific location and background (e.g., Duncan, 1984;
Wolfe, 1994), or even by cues in time (e.g., Watson,
Humphreys, & Olivers, 2003). In the taxi example, a dog
chasing the taxi probably is more salient than other objects
on the street (say, a post stand), thus it is more likely to be

1285

attended to continuously by the pedestrian. We will refer to
this effect as the “salience effect” throughout this paper.
We conducted three experiments to test our hypotheses.
The task we used was similar to the direction pointing task
in the visual map condition in Hintzman, O’Dell, and Arndt
(1981). Two major modifications were made to fit our
specific needs. First, we added settings to test the salience
effect. That is, the target objects had two different salience
levels, determined by both behavioral and perceptual
significance. Second, to test real-time updating, our
experiments were implemented in dynamic settings, which
involved continuous relative movement between the
orienting object (intrinsic frame of reference) and the target
objects. We tested three different movements: the
translation-only movement (Experiment 1), the movement
in which the orienting object rotated while the target objects
remained still (Experiment 2), and the movement in which
the orienting object remained still but the target objects
rotated (Experiment 3).

pointing to the corresponding directions. All other keys
were removed and the key for number 5 (which was in the
center of all eight response keys) was replaced with a stud
that could not be pressed. Participants were instructed to use
only one finger to press the response keys. At the beginning
of each trial, they were told to rest the finger on the stud,
and after they made the response, to put the finger back on
the stud.
The primary dependent measure was the reaction times
(RT) measured in milliseconds. To avoid confusion, we
adopted the same labeling scheme as used in Hintzman et al.
(1981). Descriptive names were used for responses (target
direction relative to the submarine’s orientation), such as
front, right-front, right, right-back, back, left-back, left, and
left-front. For submarine orientation (equivalent to the
arrow orientation in Hintzman et al.’s experiment 1 and 2),
we used digits 0 through 7, representing the number of steps
by 45° clockwise from upright (e.g., digit 0 for the upright
submarine orientation, and digit 4 represents the downright
orientation).

General Method
Since all three experiments reported here shared similar
settings and procedures, we summarize the common aspects
of the experimental settings and data analyses in this section.
The experiments were conducted on a Pentium II computer,
and the stimuli were presented on a 19-inch CRT monitor.
The stimuli consisted of one blue submarine image (bird’s
eye view) and a certain number of white dots (non-salient
objects) and red dots (salient-objects) on a grey background.
All three experiments used a 2x8x8x2 within-subjects
design, in which there were two salience levels (salient vs.
non-salient), eight submarine orientations, eight target
directions, and two levels for the number of salient objects.
Each participant completed 256 trials, with each trial
representing one combination of all levels of all factors. The
order of the 256 trials was randomly shuffled. A trial
consisted of three steps. First, the submarine and the
surrounding dots were presented and the submarine flashed
three times to help participants identify its location and
orientation. Then, depending on the specific experiment,
either the submarine or the surrounding dots started to move
(translating or rotating). Finally, the relative movements
stopped and at the same time one of the surrounding dots
flashed as the target. The instruction for all three
experiments was the same. Participants were instructed to
imagine being on the submarine and an enemy submarine
(the target) was hiding at the location of one of those
surrounding dots. The red dots were more likely to be
enemy positions thus participants should pay particular
attention to them. When the target flashed, participants were
told to indicate the direction of the target relative to the
orientation of the submarine.
The responses were made with a number keypad on a
standard PC keyboard. On the keypad, the number keys 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9 were used as response keys, with each
representing one of the eight directions relative to key 5.
These keys were re-labeled with drawings of arrows

Experiment 1
Participants Twelve college students and graduate students
in the Houston medical center area participated in
Experiment 1 (six males and six females, and the average
age was 29.3 years with an SD of 4.81 years). Participants
were paid for participation.
Procedure Figure 1 shows a typical display in Experiment
1. At the beginning of each trial, one blue submarine image
and 400 dots (in which 2 or 4 of them were red and the rest
were white) arranged in a 20 x 20 array were presented
simultaneously. Red and white dots were the same size,
with a diameter of approximately 0.40 cm. The horizontal
and vertical distance between every adjacent two dots
(hence referred to as one unit) was approximately 0.85 cm,
and the submarine image, when upright, was approximately
0.80 cm high and 0.44cm wide. The salient objects were
randomly plotted (without overlapping with each other)
within a 5 by 5 array in the center of the entire array. The
initial position of the submarine was 4, 5 or 6 units
(randomly selected) away from the center of the array,
randomly taking one of the 8 possible orientations but
always approximately pointing to the center of the dot array.

Figure 1
At the beginning of each trial, the submarine flashed three
times and then started to move (translation without rotation)

1286

toward the center of the array. The moving speed was
constant for all trials, which was approximately 2136 ms per
unit (0.47 units per second). When the submarine reached
approximately the center of the array, it would stop and at
the same time, one of the eight dots in the 3 by 3 square
where the submarine was located would flash (the
submarine image covered the dot in the center of the square).
Participants pressed the response key to respond to the
target direction relative to the submarine. The accuracy and
reaction times were recorded. A regular experimental
session took approximately one and a half hour (in which
the training session took approximately 20 minutes).
Results The mean RT for the 12 participants was 1247.4ms
with a standard deviation of 542.40ms. The mean accuracy
rate was 93.5% with a standard deviation of 4.56%. RT as a
function of the target direction is shown in Figure 2, and RT
as a function of the submarine orientation is shown in
Figure 3, with RT broken down by two salience levels,
where error bars represent standard errors. The target names
in Figure 2 are abbreviated (F for Front, FR for Right Front,
etc.). To emphasize the symmetry and continuity, the
direction F in Figure 2 and the orientation 0 in Figure 3
were represented twice. This convention is used in other
similar figures throughout this paper.
1600
1500

RT (ms)

1400
1300
Non-salient
Salient

1200
1100
1000
900
800
F

RF

R

RB

B

LB

L

LF

F

Target Direction

Figure 2. Experiment 1, RT as a function of target direction.
1600
1500

RT (ms)

1400
1300

Non-salient

1200

Salient

1100
1000
900
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

Submrine Orientation

Figure 3. Experiment 1, RT as a function of
submarine orientation.
A significant orientation effect was observed. RT as a
function of the target direction showed an “M” shaped
profile, fastest on the front and back directions and slowest
on the right-back and left-back directions (F7, 77 = 16.14, p
< .001, estimated effect size = .595). As a function of

submarine orientation, RT was fastest when the submarine
was upright (orientation 0), and slowest when the submarine
was pointed down (orientation 4) (F7, 77 = 16.74, p < .001,
estimated effect size = .603).
Of primary interests to us was the salience effect. It is
clear from both Figures 2 and 3 that the salience level had a
significant effect on RT. In all target directions and
submarine orientations, responses to salient objects were
faster than that of non-salient objects, with an average
difference of 128.6 ms (F1, 11 = 27.95, p < .001, estimated
effect size = .718). Moreover, the salience effect appeared to
be very stable in size across all target directions and
submarine orientations: the two curves in each figure are
essentially parallel, and both interactions (salience by target
direction, and salience by submarine orientation) were not
significant (F7, 77 = 1.185, p = .321; and F7, 77 = 1.471, p
= .190, respectively).
The number of salient objects (hence abbreviated as NOS)
appeared to have a small effect on RT. On average, RT was
faster when NOS = 2 than when NOS = 4 (mean difference
= 26.5 ms), which was marginally significant (F1, 11 = 4.57,
p = .056). The effect of NOS would be observed more
clearly through the interaction between NOS and salience,
which was statistically significant (F1, 11 = 6.09, p = .031,
estimated effect size = .356). It appeared that NOS had little
effect on RT when the target was a non-salient object
(1314.9 ms when NOS = 2, compared to 1308.3 ms when
NOS = 4), but the effect was considerably larger when the
target was a salient object (1153.3 ms when NOS = 2,
compared to 1212.9 ms when NOS = 4, mean difference =
59.6 ms).
Other factors remaining constant, faster RT for the salient
objects in Experiment 1 suggests that spatial information
about salient objects was updated with a higher priority thus
retrieved more quickly than the information about the nonsalient objects. Moreover, the orientation dependence was
presented in responses to both salient objects and nonsalient objects: both main effects of target direction and
submarine orientation were significant but none of the
interactions (target direction and salience, submarine
orientation and salience, respectively) reached significance,
implying the important role the orientation plays in spatial
updating.
Furthermore, it is interesting to note that the salience
effect remained but reduced in size when the number of
salient objects increased (from 161.6 ms when NOS = 2, to
95.4 ms when NOS = 4). One explanation is that more than
four salient objects were prioritized but the retrieval of the
corresponding information was achieved in a serial fashion.
Another explanation is that the capacity of such
prioritization was already exceeded when there were four
salient objects. Then, participants might randomly choose,
say, two of the salient objects for particular attention. As a
result, the averaged salience effect in the four salient objects
condition was reduced, compared to the two salient objects
condition. In either case, it appears the salience effect would
eventually disappear when the number of salient objects
exceeds a certain level. It would be interesting to conduct

1287

Experiment 2
Participants Twelve college students and graduate students
in the Houston medical center area participated in
Experiment 2 (four males and eight females, and the
average age was 26.3 years with an SD of 4.49 years).
Participants were paid for participation.
Procedure The procedure was essentially the same as in
Experiment 1. The following were the major differences.
The potential targets were 8 dots aligned on a circle at 45°
intervals, with the submarine located in the center. When
the submarine is aligned upright, these eight dots are on the
front, right-front, right, right-back, back, left-back, left, and
left-front, respectively (see Figure 4). For the two levels of
the number of salient objects, instead of 2 salient objects vs.
4 salient objects, Experiment 2 compared the conditions of 1
salient object vs. 2 salient objects.

The most obvious observation in Figure 5 is the absence
of the salience effect: RT for the salient objects was almost
identical to that for the non-salient objects. Overall, there
was little difference between RT for salient objects and RT
for non-salient objects (mean difference = 18.4 ms, F1, 11 =
0.841, p = .379). Moreover, both the main effect of NOS
and the interaction of salience and NOS were not significant
(F1, 11 = 0.436, p = .522; F1, 11 = 4.190, p = .065,
respectively). Though statistically it is impossible to prove
the null hypothesis (i.e., the salience effect did not exist),
compared to the magnitude of the salience effect observed
in Experiment 1, we are confident that the salience effect
was at least largely reduced in Experiment 2.
2200
2100
2000
1900
RT (ms)

experiments to further investigate the capacity of such a
“salience buffer.”

1800
1700
1600
1500

Non-salient
Salient

1400
1300
1200
1100
F

RF

R

RB

B

LB

L

LF

F

Target Direction

Figure 5. Experiment 2, RT as a function of target direction

Figure 4
At the beginning of each trial, one blue submarine image
and 8 dots (in which 1 or 2 of them were red and the rest
were white, on a circle with a diameter approximately of
5.93 cm) were presented simultaneously. All dots were in
the same size with a diameter approximately of 0.80 cm.
The submarine image, when upright, was approximately
1.98 cm high and 0.88 cm wide. The positions of salient
objects were randomly selected (without overlapping with
each other). The initial orientation of the submarine was
always upright. After flashing 3 times, the submarine started
to rotate around the center of the circle. The rotation speed
was constant for all trials, which was approximately 0.033°
per ms (approximately 2763ms for every 90°). When the
submarine reached a certain orientation, it would stop and at
the same time one of the eight dots would flash. The
rotating distance was determined by the trial settings on the
submarine orientation, with a minimum of 45° and a
maximum of 360°. Among 256 trials, each 32 trials had the
same rotating angle ranging from 45° to 360° in the step of
45°. The order of the trials was randomly shuffled before
presentation.
Results The mean RT for the 12 participants was 1772.7 ms
with a standard deviation of 663.54ms. The mean accuracy
rate was 94.7% with a standard deviation of 6.13%. RT as a
function of the target direction is shown in Figure 5, with
RT broken down by two salience levels. (RT as a function
of the submarine orientation showed the same overlapping
pattern. The figure is omitted here to save space.)

Another interesting finding was that RT in Experiment 2
was much slower than that in Experiment 1 for all target
directions and submarine orientations. (Figure 6 shows the
comparison between all three experiments.) The average
difference in RT between Experiment 1 and Experiment 2
was 525.3ms. We suspect that the absence of a stable frame
of reference played a major role. Compared to Experiment 1,
the major difference in Experiment 2 was that the submarine
was rotating constantly before the target was presented. As a
result, no stable frame of reference was provided in terms of
a fixed submarine orientation. In such a situation, there were
two possible strategies of establishing and maintaining a
frame of reference. One was that participants could first
establish a frame of reference as the submarine was initially
presented, then update (i.e., rotate) that frame of reference
along with the submarine as it rotated. The other was that
participants just waited until the submarine stopped then reestablished a frame of reference. We had two reasons to
believe that the second strategy was preferred and actually
utilized by participants. First, it would take much less effort
to re-establish a frame of reference when the submarine
stopped rotating, than to maintain a frame of reference by
constantly updating it with the rotating submarine. In
extreme cases, the submarine would have rotated 360°
before it stopped. It would make little sense to update the
frame of reference if it would return to its initial position.
Second, if the first strategy was actually applied and our
participants indeed were updating a frame of reference
along with the rotating submarine, Experiment 2 would
have had similar RTs as in Experiment 1.
Nevertheless, one may raise the question whether RTs in
Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 were directly comparable

1288

Experiment 3
Participants Twelve college students and graduate students
in the Houston medical center area participated in
Experiment 1 (four males and eight females, and the
averaged age was 27.7 years with an SD of 5.55 years).
Participants were paid for participation.
Procedure The procedure and device was essentially the
same as in Experiment 2. The only difference was that in
Experiment 3, the eight surrounding dots were rotating
simultaneously while the submarine remained still. Other
factors such as the image sizes, the arrangement of the
display, and the relative rotation speed, remained the same.
The initial orientation of the submarine was randomly
selected as one of eight possible orientations. After flashing
the submarine three times, the surrounding dots started to
rotate around the center of the circle. When they reached a
certain location (determined by the trial settings), they
would stop and at the same time one of the eight dots would
flash.
Results The mean RT for the 12 participants was 1373.1 ms
with a standard deviation of 401.68ms. The mean accuracy
rate was 93.8% with a standard deviation of 4.52%.
Similar to in Experiments 1 and 2, we observed
significant effects of target direction and submarine
orientation in Experiment 3 (F7, 77 = 31.590, p < .001,
estimated effect size = .742; F7, 77 = 41.075, p < .001,
estimated effect size = .789, respectively). Similar to
Experiment 1, we observed a significant salience effect.
Through all target directions and submarine orientations,
responses to salient objects were faster than that to nonsalient objects. The average difference in RT for salient
objects and non-salient objects was 88.8ms, which was
statistically significant (F1, 11 = 16.546, p < 0.01, estimated
effect size = .601). (RT as a function of the target direction
and a function of the submarine orientation showed the
similar split patterns as in Figures 2 and 3. The figures are
not shown here.) The salience effect appeared to be very
stable across all target directions and submarine orientations:
both interactions (salience by target direction, and salience
by submarine orientation) were not significant (F7, 77 = 1.123,
p = .358; and F7, 77 = 0.999, p = .439, respectively).
The number of salient objects (NOS) showed significant
effect on RT. On average, RT was faster when NOS = 1
than when NOS = 2 (mean difference = 79.4 ms, F1, 11 =
32.588, p < .001, estimated effect size = .748). The
interaction between NOS and salience was statistically
significant (F1, 11 = 42.025, p < .001, estimated effect size
= .793). As a result, it appeared that NOS had little effect on
RT when the target was a non-salient object (1415.8 ms
when NOS = 1, compared to 1419.2 ms when NOS = 2), but
the effect was considerably large when the target was a

salient object (1251.1 ms when NOS = 1, compared to
1406.4 ms when NOS = 2, mean difference = 155.3 ms). In
addition, the salience effect here was larger when there was
only one salient object (1415.8 ms compared to 1251.1 ms,
with a difference of 164.7 ms), but essentially disappeared
when there were two salient objects (1419.2 ms compared to
1406.4 ms, with a difference of 12.8 ms). The diminished
salience effect could be due to participants’ limited capacity
in prioritizing salient objects, or due to the conflicting
relations between the two target objects and the orienting
submarine (for example, the two salient objects could be on
the opposite sides of the submarine). We will leave this
question to future investigations.
On average, RT in Experiment 3 was faster than in
Experiment 2 (average difference was 399.6ms), but still
slower than in Experiment 1 (average difference was
125.7ms) (see Figure 6). This observation confirmed the
previous hypothesis that rotation was indeed more difficult
than translation. However, it also confirmed the hypothesis
that faster reaction times can be produced by a relatively
stable frame of reference.

General Discussion
We summarize the general findings in the present study by
comparing all three experiments. The experiments had
similar task instructions (direction pointing by paying
specific attentions to the salient objects), but differed mainly
in the forms of relative movements between the orienting
object and the target objects. By manipulating the relative
movement, we obtained different response times. Figure 6
shows the comparison.
1900
Salient
Non-salient

1800
1700
1600
RT (ms)

since there were confounding factors such as the size of the
stimuli and the difference between translation and rotation.
For example, it was found that imagined rotation was more
difficult than imagined translation (e.g., Presson & Montello,
1994). Due to this consideration, we conducted Experiment
3 with these factors controlled.

1500
1400
1300
1200
1100
Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Experiment 3

Figure 6. Comparison of RT among three experiments
From a computational point of view, updating of the
object-to-object relations in intrinsic frame of reference
depends mainly upon two factors: a frame of reference, and
a potential target. The different reaction times in the three
experiments suggest that a stable frame of reference is
critical when the object-to-object relations are to be updated.
When the orienting object was rotating, it appeared that the
intrinsic frame of reference based on that object was not
continuously updated: responses tended to take longer as if
a frame of reference had to be re-established. Previous

1289

studies have suggested that egocentric self-to-object spatial
relations are updated continuously as people move through
an environment (e.g., Sholl & Nolin, 1997; R. Wang, 1999).
Our results indicate that maintaining an intrinsic frame of
reference is not automatic. The difference might be due to
the fact that an egocentric system is relatively easier to be
maintained.
Furthermore, we found that given a relatively stable frame
of reference, responses for salient objects were significantly
faster than those for non-salient objects (Experiments 1 and
3). In addition, the salience effect was largely reduced when
a fixed frame of reference was removed (Experiment 2), and
re-appeared when a fixed frame of reference was provided
(Experiment 3). This observation confirmed our hypothesis
that updating of spatial relations can take place dynamically
with different priorities when a relatively stable frame of
reference is maintained.
Responses to both salient objects and non-salient objects
manifested the same orientation dependence in all three
experiments, similar to the orientation dependence found in
the experiments where egocentric systems were used (e.g.,
Hinzman, et al.). This similarity might provide an
interesting link between the egocentric systems and intrinsic
systems. Either participants were imposing an egocentric
frame of reference on an external object (e.g., imagine
themselves on the orienting submarine), or, as suggested by
McNamara (2003), people could in effect treat their bodies
as just another object in the space.
Overall, the present study identified several properties of
spatial updating in intrinsic frames of reference. In the real
world situations, the surrounding environment is constantly
changing and people have to adaptively and efficiently
prioritize and organize necessary spatial information.
Therefore, salient spatial entities, determined by both
behavioral and perceptual significance, would receive
higher priorities in processing and updating. Furthermore,
the current study supports the general claim that multiple
reference systems can co-exist in the brain and in the mind
to represent space, with each supporting a different class of
spatial tasks (H. Wang, Johnson, and Zhang, 2001). For
example, while egocentric systems (body-centered) are
more convenient for directly supporting motor actions,
allocentric systems are more important for representing
object-to-object relations in the environment. When a stable
allocentric frame of reference is not available, the spatial
information will have to be inferred from egocentric
information.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported in part by the postdoctoral
fellowship from the W. M. Keck Center for Computational
and Structural Biology of the Gulf Coast Consortia for the
first author and the Grant N00014-01-1-0074 from the
Office of Naval Research Cognitive Science Program for
the second author. We would like to thank Drs. Mike Byrne
and Jiajie Zhang for their comments and suggestions at
different stages of the research.

References
Bryant, D. J., & Tversky, B. (1999). Mental representations
of spatial relations from diagrams and models. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 25, 137-156.
Diwadkar, V. A., & McNamara, T. P. (1997). Viewpoint
dependence in scene recognition. Psychological Science,
8(4), 302-307.
Duncan, J. (1984). Selective attention and the organization
of visual information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 113, 501-507.
Franklin, N., & Tversky, B. (1990). Searching imagined
environments. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 119, 63-76.
Hintzman, D. L., O’Dell, C. S., & Arndt, D. R. (1981).
Orientation in cognitive maps. Cognitive Psychology, 13,
149-206.
McNamara, T. P. (2003). How are the locations of objects in
the environment represented in memory? In C. Freksa, W.
Brauer, C. Habel, & K. Wender (Eds.), Spatial cognition
III: Routes and navigation, human memory and learning,
spatial representation and spatial reasoning (pp. 174191). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Mou, W., & McNamara, T. P. (2002). Intrinsic frames of
reference in spatial memory. Journal Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28, 162170.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1994). Updating after
rotational and translational body movements: Coordinate
structure of perspective space. Perception, 23, 1477-1455.
Rieser, J. J. (1989). Access to knowledge of spatial structure
at novel points of observation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 15, 11571165.
Shelton, A. L., & McNamara, T. P. (1997). Multiple views
of spatial memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4,
102-106.
Sholl, M. J., & Nolin, T. L. (1997). Orientation specificity
in representations of place. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 14941507.
Simons, D. J., & Wang, R. F. (1998). Perceiving real-world
viewpoint changes. Psychological Science, 9, 315-320.
Wang, R. F. (1999). Representing a stable environment by
egocentric updating and invariant representations. Spatial
Cognition and Computation, 1, 431-445.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Zhang, J. (2001). The mind's
views of space. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference of Cognitive Science, Beijing,
China.
Watson, D. G., Humphreys, G. W., & Olivers, C. N. L.
(2003). Visual marking: Using time in visual selection.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 180-186.
Wolfe, J. M. (1994). Guided search 2.0: A revised model of
visual search. Psychonomic Bulletin Review, 1, 202-238.

1290

