UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Strategy Shifts in Mixed Density Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8ng845ks

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Halverson, Tim
Hornof, Anthony J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Strategy Shifts in Mixed Density Search
Tim Halverson (thalvers@cs.uoregon.edu)
Department of Computer and Information Science, 1202 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1202 USA

Anthony J. Hornof (hornof@cs.uoregon.edu)
Department of Computer and Information Science, 1202 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1202 USA

Abstract

headings are present, people will first search the headings
and then the group content.
The current study extends the work in Hornof (2001) and
Hornof and Halverson (2003) by investigating the visual
search of more complex non-hierarchical layouts. The
purpose of this research is to (a) further inform the
development of a predictive tool for evaluation of visual
layouts, and (b) contribute to the theories of applied visual
search in human-computer interaction.
Varying the density of text and objects is one common
design practice used to establish grouping and hierarchy in
visual displays (Mullet & Sano, 1995). This paper reports a
study that investigates the effect of varying local density on
visual search strategies of two-dimensional menu-like lists
of words.
The density of items in a display is one factor that has
been shown in effective field of view (EFV) studies to affect
the number of items that can be perceived in a single
fixation. EFV, also referred to as the useful field of view or
perceptual span, is the region from which the visual
perceptual system processes information in a single fixation.
There have been many studies on EFV for various tasks (for
example, Bertera & Rayner, 2000; Mackworth, 1976;
Rayner & Fisher, 1987; Reingold, Charness, Pomplun, &
Stampe, 2001). These studies have found a limited region in
the visual field that is sufficient for normal perception of
static scenes. This region can be centered on the point of
fixation or can be asymmetric with respect to the point of
fixation. In addition, these studies have found that the EFV
varies in size by type of stimuli, type of task, and task
difficulty.
Bertera and Rayner (2000) varied the spacing (density)
between a fixed number of randomly placed characters in a
search task. They found that search time decreased and the
estimated number of letters processed per fixation increased
as the density increased. Mackworth (1976) showed similar
results in a study in which participants searched for a square
among uniformly distributed circles on a scrolling vertical
strip. Ojanpää, Näsänen, and Kojo (2002) studied the effect
of spacing on the visual search of word lists, and found that
as the vertical spacing between words increased (i.e. as
density decreased), search time also increased. In general,
research examining the interaction between EFV and
density has found that the visual search of more dense
stimuli is faster per object, with the decrease in the number

Visual search in an important aspect of many tasks, but it is
not well understood how many aspects of layout design affect
visual search. This research investigates, with reaction time
and eye movement data, the effect of local density on the
visual search of structured layouts of words. Layouts were allsparse, all-dense, or mixed. Participants found targets in
sparse groups faster even after numerosity effects were
factored out, and searched sparse groups before dense groups.
Participants made slightly more fixations per word in sparse
groups, but these were much shorter fixations. Perhaps most
interesting, roughly halfway through searching each mixed
layout, participants appeared to switch search strategies with
respect to the number of fixations per group of words and
fixation duration. When dense groups were searched early in a
trial, search strategies were more similar to search strategies
in the all-sparse layouts. When searched later in a trial, search
strategies were more similar to search strategies of all-dense
groups. When combining densities in a layout, it may be
beneficial to place important information in sparse groups.

Introduction
It is through visual search that people locate the content and
controls for many tasks. Yet, it is not well understood how
many layout design practices affect visual search. A large
body of basic research on visual search exists in psychology
(for example, Greene & Rayner, 2001; Hayhoe, Lachter, &
Moeller, 1992; Shen, Reingold, & Pomplun, 2000;
Treisman, 1998). Many phenomena have been observed and
many theories have been proposed to explain them.
However, there has been comparably little research on how
to apply basic psychological phenomena in a practical
setting. A good applied theory of visual search is needed.
Previous research has investigated the extent to which
theories from basic research apply to more ecologically
valid tasks in human-computer interaction. One such line of
research investigated the visual search of hierarchical
layouts with experimentation and cognitive modeling
(Hornof, 2001, in press; Hornof & Halverson, 2003). In
these experiments, participants searched for a precued target
item in labeled or unlabeled layouts. In the labeled layouts,
groups had headings and the participant was precued with
the target group heading as well as the target item. In the
unlabeled layouts, the groups had no headings. It was found
that a useful visual hierarchy motivated fundamentally
different search strategies. That is, when useful group

529

Figure 1: A mixed-density layout. All angle measurements are in degrees of visual angle.
of fixations required to find the target being the largest
factor.
Density may be measured as overall density or local
density. Overall density is the number of items per degree of
visual angle over an entire layout. Local density is the
number of items per degree of visual angle within a visually
distinct group.
Besides affecting the search time and number of items
inspected per fixation, local density may also affect the
order of inspection. Several studies have found that visual
attention is drawn to “more informative” stimuli (for
example, Berlyne, 1958; Mackworth & Morandi, 1967).
“More informative” is often defined as regions having
greater contour in pictorial stimuli. For example, with
geometric shapes, angles are considered more informative
than straight lines. Yet, it is not readily known how to
predict a priori which of two stimuli are more informative.
One plausible factor of “informativeness” is local density. It
may be that regions with a higher local density are more
informative since they are more likely to contain more
angles.
The following hypotheses were tested in this study:

items are more complex, such as words, or when density
changes within a visual layout. One spatial property – local
density – was manipulated in this study.

Method
Participants
Twenty-four people, 10 female and 14 male, ranging in age
from 18 to 55 years of age (mean = 24.5) from the
University of Oregon and surrounding communities
participated in the experiment. The participants were
screened as follows: 18 years of age and older; experienced
using graphical user interfaces (such as Microsoft Windows
or Macintosh); no learning disability; normal use of both
hands; and normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Participants were paid $10, plus a bonus that ranged from $0
to $4.54 based on their performance.

Apparatus
Visual stimuli were presented on a ViewSonic VE170 LCD
display set to 1280 by 1024 resolution at a distance of 61 cm
that resulted in 40 pixels per degree of visual angle. The
experimental software ran on a 733Mhz Apple Power
Macintosh G4 running OS X 10.2.6. The mouse was an
Apple optical Pro Mouse, and the mouse tracking speed was
set to the fourth highest in the mouse control panel.
Eye movements were recorded using an LC Technologies
Eyegaze System, a 60 Hz pupil-center/corneal-reflection eye
tracker. A chinrest was used to maintain a consistent eye-toscreen distance.

H1: The search time per word is greater in sparse
layouts than in dense layouts.
H2: Dense regions will be searched before sparse
regions.
The following experiment builds on previous research by
investigating the extent to which previous findings hold in
tasks that are more ecologically valid than those used in
Bertera and Rayner (2000) and Mackworth (1976). While
these previous studies are very informative, the stimuli are
single characters or simple shapes. It is unclear whether the
same phenomena will be seen with stimuli in which the

Stimuli
Figure 1 shows a sample layout from one mixed-density
trial. All trials contained six groups of left-justified,

530

Procedure

vertically-listed black words on a white background. The
groups were arranged in three columns and two rows.
Columns were 7.5 degrees of visual angle from left edge to
left edge. Rows were separated by 0.65 degrees of visual
angle.
There were two types of groups with different local
densities: Sparse groups contained five words of 18 point
Helvetica font with 0.65 degrees of vertical angle between
the centers of adjacent words (0.45° for word height, and
0.2° for blank space). Dense groups contained 10 words of 9
point Helvetica font with 0.33 degrees of vertical angle
between the centers of adjacent words (0.23° for word
height, and 0.1° for blank space). Both types of groups
subtended the same vertical visual angle.
There were three types of layouts: sparse, dense, and
mixed-density. Sparse layouts contained six sparse groups.
Dense layouts contained six dense groups. Mixed-density
layouts contained three sparse groups and three dense
groups. The arrangement of the groups in the mixed-density
layouts was randomly determined for each trial. Sparse and
dense layouts were identical to the mixed-density layout,
with the exception of group densities.
This experiment was designed, in part, to determine the
effect of combining multiple local densities in a single
layout. Combining multiple local densities necessitated
maintaining the number, size (in degrees of visual angle),
and spacing of groups between layouts. Therefore, text size
and number of words per group were varied to produce
different local densities. Text size often covaries with local
density in real-world tasks.
The words used in each trial were selected randomly from
a list of 765 nouns generated from the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1988). No word
appeared more than once per trial. The words in the list
were selected as follows: three to eight letters, two to four
phonemes, above-average printed familiarity, and aboveaverage imagability. Five names of colors and thirteen
emotionally charged words were removed.
The target word was randomly chosen from the list of
words used in each trial. The participant was precued with
the target word before each layout appeared. The precue
appeared at the same location every time, directly above the
top left word in the layout, in 14 point Geneva font.

Each trial proceeded as follows: The participant studied the
precue; clicked on the precue to make the precue disappear
and the layout appear; found the target word; moved the
cursor to the target word; and clicked on it.
The trials were blocked by layout type. Each block
contained 30 trials, preceded by five practice trials. The
blocks were fully counterbalanced.
At the start of each experiment, the eye tracker was
calibrated to the user. The calibration procedure required the
participant to fixate a series of nine points until the average
error between the predicted point of gaze and the actual
location of the points fell below an error threshold
(approximately 6.35 mm). During the execution of the
experiment, an objective measure of the eye tracker’s
calibration was taken during each trial as described in
Hornof and Halverson (2002). In short, if the calibration had
deteriorated below a threshold (2.13 cm), a calibration was
automatically initiated before the next trial. In addition, the
trial in which the error was found was not analyzed, and a
new trial was added to the block.
To separate visual search time from mouse pointing time,
the point completion deadline was used (Hornof, 2001). In
short, participants were instructed to not move the mouse
until the target was found. Once the mouse was moved more
than five pixels in any direction, they had a small amount of
time (determined by Fitts' law) to click on the target. If this
time was exceeded, a buzzer sounded and the trial was
recorded as an error. The trial in which the error occurred
was not analyzed, and a new trial was added to the block.

Results
Since dense groups contained more words, the following
analyses were conducted after normalizing for the number
of words per layout. This was accomplished by dividing the
search time and number of fixations per trial by half of the
number of words in the layout.1 Table 1 shows the mean
search time per word, the mean number of fixations per
word, and the mean fixation duration for each layout type.
The mean search time per word, mean fixations per word,
and mean fixation duration for each of the twenty-four
_______________________________
1

Measures were divided by half based on the assumption that
participants, on average, searched half of the items. This
assumption is not consequential for analysis purposes.

Table 1: Search time per word, fixations per word, and fixation duration for sparse, mixed-density, and dense layouts.
Search Time per Word (ms)

Fixations per Word

Fixation Duration (ms)

Layout
Sparse

Mean
208.25

SD
49.10

Mean
.69

SD
.16

Mean
250.44

SD
33.21

Mixed

253.58

61.78

.70

.14

306.97

48.81

Dense

265.11

54.52

.62

.14

369.65

67.89

n=24

531

target faster when it was in a sparse group, (p < .01).
Group visitation data were also analyzed. A group was
visited if one or more contiguous fixations fell within 1
degree of visual angle of the group. Group revisits were not
included in the analysis presented here. The order of group
visitation in mixed density layouts was tested by comparing
the percentage of visitations to sparse or dense groups for
the first through sixth group visit, regardless of the position
of each group in the layout. The results are shown in Figure
3. The data show that participants tended to visit sparse
groups before dense groups, χ2(5, N = 24) = 500.04, p < .01.
The mean number of fixations per group and mean
fixation duration per group were analyzed. Group revisits
were not included in the analysis presented here because it
was assumed that the participants’ behavior may differ
within groups already visited. Additionally, the final groups
visited were not included because it was assumed that the
participants’ behavior may differ within the group in which
the target was found. Repeated-measures ANOVAs were
conducted to test the effects of group density, layout type
(all one density or mixed density), and order of group visit.
Figure 4 shows the number of fixations per group as a
function of the order in which groups were visited,
regardless of the group position in the layout. Each layout
type is plotted separately. Mixed layouts are further
separated by the visits to dense versus sparse groups. Figure
5 is similar to Figure 4, but shows the mean fixation
duration.
The overall number of fixations in all-dense and allsparse layouts was no different than in mixed-density
layouts, F(1,9) = 2.69, p = .14. The fixations in mixed
density layouts are longer than in other layouts, F(1,9) =
11.22, p < .01. Participants used more fixations per group in
dense groups than in sparse groups, F(1,9) = 112.30, p <
.01. Fixation durations were longer in dense groups than in
sparse groups, F(1,9) = 139.36, p < .01.

Percetange of Group Visits

Mean Search Time per Trial (ms)

participants were analyzed using repeated-measures
ANOVAs. Eye movements that started before the precue
was clicked and after the target was clicked are excluded
from all eye movement analysis. An alpha level of .05 was
used for all statistical tests.
Participants spent, on average, less time per word in
layouts with fewer dense groups, F(2,46) = 13.94, p < .01.
Post-hoc analysis showed that the search time was faster in
the sparse than in the mixed layouts (p < .05) or dense
layouts (p < .05); but not different between the mixed and
dense layouts (p > .05). Participants made slightly fewer
fixations per word in layouts with more dense groups,
F(2,46) = 3.25, p = .05. Post-hoc analysis showed that
participants used fewer fixations per word in the dense
layouts than in the mixed layouts (p = .01). Conversely,
participants’ fixations were longer in layouts with more
dense groups, F(2.46) = 61.82, p < .01. Post-hoc analysis
showed that participants made longer fixations in the dense
layouts than in the mixed layouts (p < .05) and longer
fixations in the mixed layouts than in the sparse layouts (p <
.05).
The search time per trial was analyzed by layout
uniformity (all one density vs. mixed density) and target
group density. Figure 2 shows the results. Locating a target
in dense groups took longer than sparse groups, F(1, 23) =
83.87, p < .01. The mean search time for all-sparse and alldense was no different than the mean search time for mixeddensity layouts, F(1,23) = 1.03, p = .32. However, there was
an interaction between layout uniformity and target group
density, F(1,23) = 16.87, p < .01. In other words, when the
target was in a sparse group, participants found the target
faster in all-sparse layouts than in mixed layouts; when the
target was in a dense group, participants found the target
faster in mixed-density layouts than in all-dense layouts.
Further, in mixed density layouts, participants found the

8000

6000

4000

2000

0

Layout: Sparse
# Words in Layout :
30
Target Group: Sparse

Mixed
45
Sparse

Mixed
45
Dense

Dense
60
Dense

Dense

50

25

0

Figure 2: Search time for trials in which the layout
was sparse, mixed-density, or dense, and the target was
in either a sparse or dense group. Error bars indicate ±1
standard error.

Sparse

75

1st

2nd 3rd 4th 5th
Order of Group Visit

6th

Figure 3: The percentage of visits in mixed density
layouts that were to sparse or dense groups, as a
function of the order in which groups were visited.

532

Mean Fixation Duration (ms)

Number of Fixations per Group

4
3
2

Dense Layout / Dense Group
Mixed Layout / Dense Group
Mixed Layout / Sparse Group
Sparse Layout / Sparse Group

1
0

1st

2nd 3rd 4th 5th
Group Visit Order

6th

Figure 4: Mean number of fixations per group as a
function of layout, the density of the group currently
visited, and order of the visit. Error bars indicate ±1
standard error.

400
300
200

Dense Layout / Dense Group
Mixed Layout / Dense Group
Mixed Layout / Sparse Group
Sparse Layout / Sparse Group

100
0

1st

2nd 3rd 4th 5th
Group Visit Order

6th

Figure 5: Mean fixation duration by group as a
function of layout, the density of the group currently
visited, and the order of visit. Error bars indicate ±1
standard error.

Participants used more fixations per group as search
progressed, F(5,45) = 8.14, p < .01. Contrast analysis
revealed that the sixth group visited received more fixations
than all other groups (all p’s < .05), but there were no
differences between any other orderings (all p’s > .05).
Fixation durations tended to be longer for groups visited
later than for groups visited earlier, F(5,45) = 4.89, p < .01.
The following interactions were also found in the fixations
per group data: The difference between the number of
fixations in sparse and dense groups was greater in uniform
density layouts than in mixed density layouts, F(1,9) = 5.20,
p = .05. As search progressed (i.e. from left to right in
Figure 4), the number of fixations increased faster in mixeddensity layouts than in all-dense and all-sparse layouts,
F(5,45) = 6.7, p < .01. The number of fixations increased
faster in dense groups than in sparse groups, F(5,45) = 5.05,
p < .01.

which could have made it more difficult for people to fixate
directly on the desired words, requiring more saccades as
found in this study. It may be that although various factors
affect local density, they do not all affect visual search of
those densities in the same way.
The data also counter this study’s second hypothesis –
that participants will search dense groups first. A preference
for search order as a function of group density was found.
However, it was in the opposite direction than predicted.
The search time data show that when the target was in a
sparse group, the mean search time was much closer to that
of the sparse layouts, and that when the target was in a
dense group, the mean search time was much closer to that
of the dense layouts. If one density were consistently
searched before the other, then we would expect the search
time for targets located in groups of a preferred density to be
lower than the search time for targets located in the other
groups, which is what we observed. The data suggest that
the participants tended to search the sparse groups first. This
preference was confirmed with analysis of the eye
movements in the mixed layouts. As is seen in Figure 3,
participants tended to look at sparse groups first.
While the first group visited was quite often a dense
group, as seen in Figure 3, this is expected as the top-left
group in the layout was equally likely to be either sparse or
dense and 89% of all initial fixations were to that group.
These are likely anticipatory fixations, as predicted and
observed by Hornof and Halverson (2003).
A trend that emerged from the data analysis is evidence of
a shift in search strategy between the third and fourth group
visited in mixed layouts, right around the time that
participants tended to switch from sparse groups to dense
groups. When a dense group was one of the first three
groups visited, the participants tended to search the dense
groups in the same manner as sparse groups, with fewer and
shorter fixations. Yet, when the participants searched

Discussion
The data counter the study’s first hypothesis – that the
search time per word is greater for sparse layouts than for
dense layouts. The search time data reported here
demonstrate that people actually spent less time per word
searching sparse layouts. Participants adopted a more
efficient eye movement strategy that used slightly more, but
much shorter, fixations in the sparse groups. This result is
contrary to the search time results found by Bertera and
Rayner (2000) and Ojanpää, et al. (2002) in which the
search time decreased as the density increased. This
discrepancy may be due to the way in which density is
manipulated. In the previous studies, the spacing between
items was varied. This could result in a need for more
saccades, as both Rayner (2000) and Ojanpää, et al. (2002)
found, to move the EFV over the next group of unprocessed
stimuli. In the current study, the size of words (i.e. font size)
was varied. The smaller words were more tightly packed,

533

through the all-dense layouts, all-sparse layouts, or sparse
groups in the mixed-density layouts, no significant changes
in oculomotor programming were found at any point during
the search. This suggests that the participants started
searching mixed-density layouts with a more eager
approach, adopting the search strategy used for the preferred
sparse-density groups; then, as the search progressed and the
target had not been found, participants reverted to a
different strategy for dense groups.

hierarchies. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, 8(3), 171-197.
Hornof, A. J. (in press). Cognitive Strategies for the Visual
Search of Hierarchical Computer Displays. HumanComputer Interaction.
Hornof, A. J., & Halverson, T. (2002). Cleaning up
systematic error in eye tracking data by using required
fixation locations. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 34(4), 592-604.
Hornof, A. J., & Halverson, T. (2003). Cognitive strategies
and eye movements for searching hierarchical computer
displays. Proceedings of the Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Ft. Lauderdale, FL.
Mackworth, N. H. (1976). Stimulus Density Limits the
Useful Field of View. In R. A. Monty & J. W. Senders
(Eds.), Eye Movements and Psychological Processes.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Mackworth, N. H., & Morandi, A. J. (1967). The gaze
selects informative details within pictures. Perception &
Psychophysics, 2(11), 547-552.
Mullet, K., & Sano, D. (1995). Designing Visual Interfaces:
Communication Oriented Techniques. Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey: Prentice Hall PTR.
Ojanpää, H., Näsänen, R., & Kojo, I. (2002). Eye
movements in the visual search of word lists. Vision
Research, 42(12), 1499-1512.
Rayner, K., & Fisher, D. L. (1987). Eye movements and the
perceptual span during visual search. In J. K. O'Regan &
A. Levy-Schoen (Eds.), Eye Movements: From
Physiology to Cognition. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Reingold, E. M., Charness, N., Pomplun, M., & Stampe, D.
M. (2001). Visual span in expert chess players: Evidence
from eye movements. Psychological Science, 12(1), 4855.
Shen, J., Reingold, E. M., & Pomplun, M. (2000). Distractor
Ratio Influences Patterns of Eye Movements During
Visual Search. Perception, 29, 241-250.
Treisman, A. (1998). The Perception of Features and
Objects. In R. D. Wright (Ed.), Visual Attention (Vol. 8).
New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database:
Machine Usable Dictionary, Version 2. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 20, 6-11.

Conclusion
This research investigates the effect of local density on
visual search of structured, two-dimensional layouts. It is
shown that sparse groups of words are searched faster and,
when presented with dense groups, sparse groups are
searched earlier than dense groups. This lends support to the
practice of displaying important information in less dense
groups.
Further, at least in the mixed density task, people appear
to apply local search strategies used for sparse groups to all
groups, regardless of density, early in the task. At some
point in the unfolding of their visual search, approximately
halfway through, the participants made a global strategy
shift towards a more thorough search of dense groups. This
suggests that care should be taken when combining densities
in a visual layout. Performance in a mixed density task
cannot be predicted by assuming people will search regions
of a given density the same as they will in a layout of
uniform density. Additional research will determine how
these findings generalize to a variety of mixed-density
layouts.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Office of Naval Research
grant N00014-02-10440 and the National Science
Foundation grant IIS-0308244. Both grants are to the
University of Oregon with Anthony Hornof as the principal
investigator.

References
Berlyne, D. E. (1958). The Influence of Complexity and
Novelty in Visual Figures on Orienting Responses.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55, 289-296.
Bertera, J. H., & Rayner, K. (2000). Eye movements and the
span of effective stimulus in visual search. Perception &
Psychophysics, 62(3), 576-585.
Greene, H. H., & Rayner, K. (2001). Eye movements and
familiarity effects in visual search. Vision Research, 41,
3769-3773.
Hayhoe, M. M., Lachter, J., & Moeller, P. (1992). Spatial
Memory and Integration Across Saccadic Eye
Movements. In K. Rayner (Ed.), Eye Movements and
Visual Cognition: Scene Perception and Reading. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Hornof, A. J. (2001). Visual search and mouse pointing in
labeled versus unlabeled two-dimensional visual

534

