UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Stylistic and Contextual Effects in Irony Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00f994d3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Utsumi, Akira

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Stylistic and Contextual Effects in Irony Processing
Akira Utsumi (utsumi@se.uec.ac.jp)
Department of Systems Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1 Chofugaoka, Chofushi, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan

Abstract
Irony is perceived through a complex interaction between an
utterance and its context and serves many social functions such
as to be sarcastic and to be humorous. The purpose of this paper is to explore what role linguistic style and contextual information play in the recognition of irony (i.e., assessing the
degree of irony) and in the appreciation of ironic functions
(i.e., assessing the degree of sarcasm and humor). Two experiments demonstrated that the degree of irony and sarcasm was
affected primarily by linguistic style (i.e., sentence type and
politeness), while the degree of humor was affected by both
linguistic style and contextual information (i.e., context negativity and ordinariness of negative situation). These results
are almost consistent with the predictions by the implicit display theory, a cognitive theory of verbal irony. Discussion of
the findings also suggests that the implicit display theory can
account for an indirect effect of context on the degree of irony.

Introduction
Irony is an interesting pragmatic phenomenon whose processing involves complex interaction between linguistic style and
contextual information. There are also good reasons for probing the mechanism of irony processing in cognitive science.
First, irony offers an effective way of accomplishing various
communication goals for maintaining and modifying social
and interpersonal relationships that are difficult to do literally.
Second, irony processing requires higher-order mindreading
ability (Happé, 1993), which has been argued to play an important role in the interpretation of ordinary utterances (Wilson and Sperber, 2004). Third, as Gibbs (1994) argues, an
ironic way of talking about experiences reflects our figurative
foundation for everyday thought.
Recently, many studies have paid much attention to irony
processing (e.g., Gibbs, 1994; Sperber and Wilson, 1995; Attardo, 2000; Colston, 2002; Giora, 2003). However, most of
these studies focus only on the difference of processing between ironic utterances and literal ones, in spite of the fact
that irony is communicated by various kinds of expression
(Kumon-Nakamura, Glucksberg, and Brown, 1995; Utsumi,
2000). For example, to your partner who stepped on your feet
many times during a dance, you can say ironically in various
ways: not only an opposition statement like “You’re really a
good dancer”, but also a true assertion “I love good dancers”,
a rhetorical question “Could you step on your own two feet?”,
a circumlocutory utterance “I guess you have a broken leg”,
and so on. The purpose of this study is to empirically examine how irony processing differs among different kinds of
ironic utterances and what role style and context play in causing such differences.

1369

The issue of controversy in irony research is according to
what features of irony people distinguish irony from nonirony. Beyond the fallacious view that irony is a meaning
opposition or a mere violation, a number of studies have proposed a variety of views of irony: Irony is an echoic interpretation of an attributed thought (Sperber and Wilson, 1995),
joint pretense (Clark, 1996), relevant inappropriateness (Attardo, 2000), or indirect negation (Giora, 2003). However,
these theories suffer from the same problem that they have
attempted to provide necessary and/or sufficient properties
for distinguishing irony from nonirony; there appear to be
no such properties shared by all ironic utterances. To overcome this difficulty, I have proposed a more comprehensive
view of irony, implicit display theory of verbal irony (Utsumi,
2000). The implicit display theory takes a comparative view
that irony is a prototype-based category, which is the idea underlying cognitive linguistic research. Another point in which
the implicit display theory radically differs from the previous
views is that it claims a differential role of style and context,
whereas the previous theories do not address such a difference
or they confuse the different roles. According to the implicit
display theory, style of an ironic expression is used to assess
to what degree a specific ironic utterance is similar to the prototype of irony, while context motivates the addressee to interpret an expression ironically. The study I present in this
paper empirically examined to what degree people perceive
an utterance as ironic depending on style of the utterance and
its context, and tested whether the claims of the implicit display theory can explain the observed result.
Another heated topic in irony research is the social function of irony, which provides a plausible answer to why people use irony. The functions are divided into negative ones
such as to be sarcastic and to criticize, and positive ones such
as to be humorous. Previous studies (e.g., Dews and Winner, 1995; Colston, 2002) have compared the degrees of negative effect between ironic utterances and literal equivalent
utterances. However, these studies have not addressed how
various kinds of ironic utterances differ in negative and positive functions. My study thus examined both negative and
positive effects of various ironic utterances by asking people
to rate the degree of sarcasm and humor, and tested whether
the obtained finding can be explained by the implicit display
theory.

Implicit Display Theory
The main claim of the implicit display theory is threefold
(Utsumi, 2000). First, irony presupposes ironic environment,

Degree of Irony

Degree of Sarcasm

pos

Degree of Humor
neg

pos

neg

Similarity between the utterance and the prototype
of irony

Likelihood that an ironic remark will be made
in the context

Linguistic Style

Context

Implicit Display

Implicit Display Theory

Ironic Environment

Figure 1: General hypothesis for irony processing elicited from the implicit display theory.
a proper situational setting in the discourse context. Ironic
environment consists of (a) speaker’s expectation, (b) incongruity between the expectation and the reality, and (c)
speaker’s negative attitude toward the incongruity. In order
for an utterance to be interpreted ironically, the implicit display theory argues, the discourse situation must be identified
as ironic environment through the process of checking or inferring these constituents. In the ‘dance’ example presented
above, you have expected that your partner dances well with
you but your expectation is not fulfilled, and you gets disappointed or angry at the result. That situation is thus identified
as ironic environment.
Second, irony is an utterance that implicitly displays ironic
environment. Implicit display of ironic environment is
achieved by an utterance which (d) alludes to the speaker’s
expectation, (e) includes pragmatic insincerity by violating
one of pragmatic principles, and (f) expresses indirectly the
speaker’s negative attitude by being accompanied by ironic
cues. For example, your utterance “You’re really a good
dancer” in the above situation satisfies the three conditions
of implicit display. First, it mentions, and thus alludes to,
your expectation of the partner dancing well. Second, it is
a literally false statement that violates the maxim of quality.
Third, the hyperbolic word “really” is used to exaggerate the
ironic attitude.
Third, as I mentioned in the introduction, irony is a
prototype-based category characterized by the notion of implicit display. The prototype of irony is an abstract exemplar which completely meets all the three conditions for implicit display. The degree of irony can be assessed by the
similarity between the prototype and a given utterance with
respect to the three conditions. Let us consider again the
‘dance’ example. A circumlocutory statement “I guess you
have a broken leg” can be interpreted ironically, but its degree of ironicalness may be much smaller than the typical
type of irony “You’re really a good dancer”. This difference can be explained in terms of to what degree an utterance
achieves the implicit display. The circumlocutory statement
is only weakly related to the speaker’s expectation by a number of coherence relations, whereas the opposition statement
directly refers to the expectation. Furthermore, the circumlocutory statement is pragmatically insincere to a much lesser
degree than the opposition statement including an apparent
violation.

1370

General Hypothesis
The implicit display theory posits the hypothesis for irony
processing, which is summarized in Figure 1. On the one
hand, style of an ironic sentence, which corresponds to properties of implicit display, governs how similar it is to the irony
prototype, i.e., the degree of irony. On the other hand, context
determines how likely one is to make an ironic remark, i.e.,
likelihood of irony, based on to what degree each of the three
constituents for ironic environment holds in that context.
This differential role of style and context allows us to draw
a general hypothesis about the degree of irony: The degree
of irony is affected by linguistic choice, not by contextual setting, and it is high to the extent that the properties of implicit
display are satisfied. Furthermore, it is reasonably assumed
that the degree of sarcasm of ironic utterances proportionally
depends on the degree of irony because sarcasm is often conveyed in the form of irony. It is therefore hypothesized that
the degree of sarcasm of an ironic utterance is affected only
by linguistic style and it is high to the extent that the properties of implicit display are satisfied. Note that the hypothesis
on the degree of sarcasm does not hold true for victimless
irony, which are often perceived as nonsarcastic (Kreuz and
Glucksberg, 1989). Because this study attempts to explore
the negative function toward a victim of irony, I did not use
victimless ironies in the experiments.
Unlike irony and sarcasm, how the degree of humor is determined cannot be directly explained by the implicit display
theory. I thereby adopt an incongruity-resolution model of
humor (Attardo, 1997), a cognitive model widely accepted
in humor research. The incongruity-resolution model argues
that humor involves an incongruity between what was expected based on our conceptual pattern and what occurred
in the humorous event, which is often expressed by a punch
line in humorous texts. When such incongruity is resolved
immediately by generating a reinterpretation of a humorous
expression, humorous effect takes place. Since we are concerned with interpretable ironic utterances (i.e., they are assumed to be equally resolvable), it is hypothesized that the degree of humor proportionally depends on the degree of incongruity involved in ironic utterances. According to the implicit
display theory, ironic utterances involve two kinds of incongruity: (a) incongruity between an expected type of utterance
(e.g., ironic or literal) and the actual type of a given utterance
(i.e., irony in this paper), degree of which is inversely related

to the likelihood of irony; and (b) incongruity (i.e., dissimilarity) between the irony prototype and a given ironic utterance.
If the incongruity-resolution model and the implicit display
theory are plausible, a general hypothesis about the degree of
humor is as follows: The degree of humor of an ironic utterance is affected by both linguistic style and context, and it is
high to the extent that a discourse context is incongruous to
the ironic environment or that the utterance is dissimilar to
the irony prototype.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 is to test the implicit display
theory by examining how linguistic style affects the degree of
irony, sarcasm and humor. Linguistic style of irony was manipulated by two factors: sentence type and politeness level.
Three sentence types were used in Experiment 1: opposition, rhetorical question and circumlocution. An opposition
is a statement whose positive literal meaning is the opposite
of the negative situation and thus includes the speaker’s expected event or state. A rhetorical question is an interrogative
statement by which the speaker rhetorically asks for the obvious fact to the addressee. A circumlocution is a kind of
understatement which is weakly related to the speaker’s expectation by a number of coherence relations. It is reasonably
assumed that an opposition is more related to, and thus more
alludes to, the speaker’s expectation than a rhetorical question
and a circumlocution, and that an opposition and a rhetorical
question are pragmatically more insincere than a circumlocution. It follows that an opposition would be the most similar
to the prototype of irony and that a rhetorical question would
be more similar than a circumlocution.
Politeness is also an important linguistic property which
can signal irony. Some experimental studies (KumonNakamura et al., 1995; Okamoto, 2002) found that overpolite utterances are perceived as more ironic. In Experiment 1,
politeness level was manipulated by the combination of the
use or nonuse of Japanese honorifics (i.e., a system of politeness expressions incorporated into the grammar) and the
relationship between the speaker and the addressee (good or
bad). The reason for considering speaker-addressee relationship is that whether the use of honorifics shows overpoliteness
is determined according to the speaker-addressee relationship
(Okamoto, 2002). Generally speaking, when the speaker and
the addressee are intimate or on good terms, an utterance with
honorifics would be overpolite and unnatural. On the other
hand, when they are not intimate or on bad terms, honorifics
are usually used for an utterance to be appropriately polite; an
utterance without honorifics would be impolite or rude. According to the implicit display theory, overpolite utterances
are pragmatically insincere because they can be seen as violating the convention in linguistic politeness. Therefore, other
things being equal, overpolite utterances are more similar to
the prototype of irony than appropriately polite or impolite
utterances.

Prediction
The general hypothesis by the implicit display theory makes
the following predictions on the stylistic effect.
(1) Oppositions are the most ironic and the most sarcastic,
and rhetorical questions are more ironic and more sarcas-

1371

tic than circumlocutions. On the other hand, circumlocutions are the most humorous, and rhetorical questions are
more humorous than oppositions.
(2) Overpolite utterances, i.e., utterances with honorifics by
the speaker who is on good terms with the addressee, are
more ironic, more sarcastic and less humorous than appropriately polite or impolite utterances.

Method
Participants One hundred and twenty undergraduate students participated for this experiment. All were native
Japanese speakers.
Materials and Design Twelve stories were constructed in
which the addressee was responsible for the negative situation
(and thus a victim) and in which the speaker gave a remark
toward the addressee. Each of the stories had two versions:
Speaker-addressee relationship is good or bad. Each story
was followed by one of the six versions of the final utterance
(three sentence types×with/without honorifics). An example
of the stories and the final remarks is as follows 1 :
In the restaurant, the customer was not served the ordered
dishes for a while. He said to the master of the restaurant,
who is on {good / bad} terms with him:
Opposition: “This restaurant serves the dishes quickly.”
(Kokoha ryouri wo dasunoga hayai {ne / desu ne}.)
Question: “Do you know the recipe for the dishes?”
(Ryouri no tsukurikata wo shitteiru {no? / no desuka?}.)
Circumlocution: “I think you are just going to buy recipe
ingredients.”
(Ima zairyou wo kai ni itteiru kato {omotta / omoimashita} yo.)

Procedure Each participant was assigned to 12 different
stories involving 12 combinations of conditions. The participants read each story and rated the final utterance at the
end of the story on the following two 7-point scales: “How
sarcastic is the speaker’s remark?” (1 = not at all sarcastic;
7 = extremely sarcastic) and “How humorous is the speaker’s
remark?” (1 = not at all humorous; 7 = extremely humorous).
After reading and rating all stories, they read the stories again
and rated the degree of irony (“Do you feel the speaker’s remark is ironic?”) of all the final utterances on a 7-point scale
(1 = not at all ironic; 7 = extremely ironic).

Results and Discussion
Type (opposition, rhetorical question, circumlocution) ×
Honorifics (with honorifics, without honorifics) × Relationship (good, bad) repeated-measures ANOVAs were conducted. In all analyses, the data were analyzed by subjects
(F1 ) and by items (F 2 ).
Irony and Sarcasm Ratings The main effect of sentence
type was significant both for the degree of irony (only by subject analysis), F1 (2, 238) = 5.30, p < .01, and for the degree
of sarcasm, F1 (2, 238) = 16.18, p < .001, F2 (2, 22) = 5.39,
p < .05. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons (p < .05) revealed
that oppositions were significantly more ironic and more sarcastic than circumlocutions, and more sarcastic than rhetorical questions, as shown in Figure 2. Moreover, rhetorical
1
The original Japanese remarks used in the experiment are indicated by italics and honorific words are indicated by underlines.

Mean Rating

5.5

Opposition
Rhetorical
Question
Circumlocution

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0

Irony

Sarcasm

Humor

Mean Rating

Figure 2: Mean ratings of irony, sarcasm and humor by sentence type.
5.5

Bad

Bad

5.0
4.5

4.5

Good

4.0
Good

Good

3.5

Bad

4.0
3.0
Honorific Non
Honorific Non
Honorific Non
Honorific
Honorific
Honorific

Irony

Sarcasm

Humor

Figure 3: Mean irony and sarcasm ratings for honorific and
nonhonorific utterances and mean humor ratings for honorific and nonhonorific circumlocutions in different speakeraddressee relationships.

questions were found to be significantly more sarcastic than
circumlocutions. These findings are almost consistent with
Prediction (1).
There was also a significant Honorifics × Relationship interaction only by subject analysis for the degree of irony,
F1 (1, 119) = 5.44, p < .05; and for the degree of sarcasm,
F1 (1, 119) = 7.85, p < .01. As shown in Figure 3, when the
speaker was on good terms with the addressee, honorific utterances were rated as significantly more ironic and sarcastic
than nonhonorific ones, but such difference disappeared when
the speaker was on bad terms with the addressee. This result
is consistent with Prediction (2) in that overpolite utterances
are more ironic and sarcastic than appropriately polite utterances. However, the observed higher degrees of irony and
sarcasm for the utterances by the speaker who is on bad terms
with the addressee are not compatible with the prediction.
This finding against Prediction (2) was due to the significant main effect of speaker-addressee relationship. The final
utterances were rated as more ironic and sarcastic when the
relationship was bad than when the relationship was good,
F1 (1, 119) = 21.73, p < .001, F2 (1, 11) = 17.26, p < .01
for the degree of irony; F 1 (1, 119) = 60.55, p < .001,
F2 (1, 11) = 41.60, p < .001 for the degree of sarcasm. This
finding can be explained as an effect of contextual information (in this case, speaker-addressee relationship) on judgment whether an utterance indirectly expresses the negative
attitude, i.e., condition (f) for implicit display. Information
about the speaker-addressee relationship may provide an indirect cue to the speaker’s negative attitude; the speaker is more
likely to have a negative attitude, and thus his/her utterance is
perceived as including more indirect cues and as more typical
of irony when they have a bad relationship than when they
have a good relationship. A number of empirical findings

1372

suggest that this explanation is plausible. Especially, in order
to explain the finding that the speaker’s occupations affected
sarcasm ratings, Pexman and Olineck (2002) stated a similar
view based on the implicit display theory: “ The occupation
stereotype influences interpretation because it contributes to
the ironic environment. It contributes to that environment by
indicating that the speaker is likely to have a negative attitude
(tendency to be critical) and that such an attitude is likely to
be indirectly expressed” (ibid., 268).
Humor Ratings There was a significant interaction of
Type×Honorifics×Relationship, F 1 (2, 238) = 4.11, p < .05,
F2 (2, 22) = 4.42, p < .05. The nature of this interaction was
that the simple interaction of Honorifics × Relationship was
observed for circumlocutions, F 1 (1, 357) = 7.64, p < .01,
F2 (1, 33) = 7.51, p < .01, but such interaction was not observed for oppositions and rhetorical questions. When the
speaker and the addressee had a good relationship, circumlocutions without honorifics were rated as more humorous than
those with honorifics but this difference was not observed
when the relationship was bad, as shown in Figure 3. This
result is consistent with Prediction (2).
There was a significant main effect of sentence type,
F1 (2, 238) = 28.55, p < .001, F2 (2, 22) = 19.14, p < .001.
Pairwise comparisons (p < .05) indicated that circumlocutions were significantly more humorous than oppositions and
rhetorical questions, as shown in Figure 2. This result is compatible with Prediction (1).
The main effect of speaker-addressee relationship was also
significant, F1 (1, 119) = 22.93, p < .001, F2 (1, 11) = 37.14,
p < .001, showing that the utterances were rated as more humorous when the relationship was good than when the relationship was bad. We can consider two possible explanations
for why good interpersonal relationship increases the degree
of humor. One possible explanation may be that speakeraddressee relationship affects judgment for implicit display
and thus the degree of humor, as I described above. Another
explanation can be elicited from the motivational condition
in which humor is experienced. Wyer and Collins (1992)
stated that when the objective of the reader is to understand
and enjoy humorous expressions, humor is more likely to be
elicited. Therefore, a good relationship may motivate the addressee to enjoy ironic remarks, while a bad relationship may
interfere with the addressee’s enjoyable attitude toward them.

Experiment 2
The purpose of Experiment 2 is to test the implicit display
theory with respect to contextual effect on the degree of irony,
sarcasm and humor. In Experiment 2 two independent variables were considered: situational negativity (the situation is
weakly or strongly negative) and ordinariness of negative situation (the negative situation is usual or unusual).
Situational negativity manipulates the degree of incongruity between the expectation and the reality, i.e., condition (b) of ironic environment, in such a way that the incongruity is perceived more easily, and thus irony may be more
likely to be made, in the strongly negative context than in the
weakly negative context. Ordinariness manipulates the manifestness of speaker’s expectation, i.e., condition (a) of ironic
environment. The expectation is more manifest in the context where an unexpected negative event occurs than in the

context where the same negative event repeatedly happens.
Therefore, irony is more likely to be elicited from an unusual
context than from an usual context.

Prediction
The general hypothesis by the implicit display theory makes
the following predictions on the effect of context.
(3) Neither negativity nor ordinariness has an effect on the
degree of irony and sarcasm.
(4) Ironic utterances in a weakly negative context are more
humorous than those in a strongly negative context. In
the same way, ironic utterances in an usual context are
more humorous than those in an unusual context.

Method
Participants Forty-eight undergraduate students participated for this experiment. All were native Japanese speakers.
None of them participated Experiment 1.
Materials and Design Eight out of 12 stories used in Experiment 1 were selected, because natural manipulation of
negativity and ordinariness was not possible in the other four
stories. Each story had four versions: a situation where a
weakly negative event is usual or not, and a situation where
a strongly negative event is usual or not. The stories of the
weakly negative and unusual version were identical to the stories used in Experiment 1 except that the descriptions of the
speaker-addressee relationship were deleted. Each story was
followed by the final remark identical to the opposition utterance without honorifics used in Experiment 1. An example of
the stories is as follows:
{In the restaurant / In the restaurant where it usually takes a
while to serve dishes}, the customer was not served the ordered
dishes {for a while / at all even after a very long time}. He said
to the master of the restaurant,

Procedure Each participant was assigned to eight different
stories involving the four versions equally. The procedure
was identical to that of Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
The data was subjected to Negativity (weakly negative,
strongly negative) × Ordinariness (usual, unusual) repeatedmeasures ANOVAs.
Irony and Sarcasm Ratings There were no significant
main effects and no interactions for both ratings, which favors Prediction (3).
However, as I discussed in the result section of Experiment 1, there is a possibility that context (i.e., negativity and
ordinariness) has an indirect influence on the degree of irony
and sarcasm through its effect on judgment for implicit display. Especially, judgment on allusion to the speaker’s expectation highly depends on manifestness of the expectation, because when the addressee does not know the speaker’s expectation before interpreting an utterance the expectation must
be inferred from the literal meaning of the utterance and contextual information (Utsumi, 2000). It is thus predicted that,
other degrees of implicit display being equal, the degree of
irony would be affected by context, primarily by ordinariness,

1373

when the speaker’s expectation is implicit, but that it would
not be affected by context when the expectation is explicit.
This prediction was tested by reanalysis of the data of Experiment 2. The stories used in Experiment 2 include two
kinds of speaker’s expectation: an expectation about a desirable event/state and an expectation about the addressee’s belief. Because the speaker’s expectation about the addressee’s
belief presupposes that the addressee does not notice it beforehand, it is assumed to be less manifest to the addressee
than other types of expectation. Hence, the eight stories could
be divided into two groups — explicit expectation version
(n=4) and implicit expectation version (n=4) — according to
whether the speaker’s expectation is about the addressee’s belief or not. An example of the texts including an implicit expectation is as follows:
To a friend who eats sweets though she is on a diet:
“You eat nothing at all today, are you?.”
(Kyou ha zenzen tabenai nee.)

In this case, the speaker’s expectation is something like that
the addressee (the speaker’s friend) should know that her behavior is undesirable for a diet. Then the data of irony and sarcasm was subjected to Negativity × Ordinariness × Expectation (explicit, implicit) ANOVAs with repeated measures on
the first two factors.
Concerning the degree of irony, there was a significant interaction of all the three factors, F 2 (1, 6) = 8.94, p < .05. The
nature of this interaction was that the simple interaction of
Negativity × Ordinariness was significant for the implicit expectation context where the speaker’s expectation was about
the addressee’s belief, F 2 (1, 6) = 6.44, p < .05, but such interaction was not observed in the explicit expectation context.
This finding is consistent with the prediction that context has
an indirect effect on the degree of irony when the speaker’s
expectation is implicit.
The observed simple interaction of Negativity × Ordinariness for the implicit expectation was that in the weakly negative contexts the final utterances were rated as more ironic
when the negative behavior was unusual (M = 5.11) than
when it was usual (M = 4.54), but that in the strongly negative contexts the final utterances were rated as more ironic
when the negative behavior was usual (M = 5.21) than when
it was unusual (M = 4.58). This result can be interpreted as
follows: The addressee is less likely to notice the speaker’s
expectation about his/her own belief, and thereby perceives
an utterance as less ironic when his/her own negative behavior is usual than when it is not usual because of habituation
effect. However, once the addressee’s usual negative behavior becomes worse, he/she is more likely to be aware of the
speaker’s expectation because of dishabituation effect.
For the degree of sarcasm, however, there were no significant effects and interactions in the reanalysis. This result
suggests that the speaker’s expectation may be an important
property which distinguishes irony from sarcasm; sarcasm
may not need the speaker’s expectation.
Humor Ratings Only the main effect of ordinariness was
significant by item analysis, F 2 (1, 7) = 7.81, p < .05. Ironic
utterances in the expected contexts in which the addressee’s
negative behavior was usual (M = 3.23) were rated as more
humorous than the same sentences in the unexpected context

Acknowledgments

in which the negative behavior was unusual (M = 3.06). This
result is consistent with Prediction (4). However, the result
that the main effect of negativity was not significant suggests
that context negativity may have little influence on the likelihood of irony.

This research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Encouragement of Young Scientists (No.14780263), The Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and a
grant from Nissan Science Foundation.

General Discussion

References

As I mentioned in the introduction, the prototype-based view
permits the implicit display theory to explain the obtained
finding that the degree of irony differs among various utterances and contexts. For example, allusion-based theories
such as Sperber and Wilson’s (1995) echoic interpretation
theory cannot explain why overpolite utterances were rated as
more ironic than appropriately polite utterances. On the other
hand, insincerity-oriented theories such as Attardo’s (2000)
relevant inappropriateness view cannot account for the finding that the speaker’s expectation affects the degree of irony.
(For details of the superiority of the implicit display theory
over other theories, see Utsumi, 2000).
Furthermore, the echoic interpretation theory also fails to
explain the finding that the degree of irony was affected by
contextual information only when the speaker’s expectation
about the addressee’s belief triggered irony. The reason for
the difficulty in explaining such effect lies in their view that
irony interpretively echoes not only the speaker’s expectation
but also other sources such as someone’s utterances, opinions
or even general norms, whereas the implicit display theory
assumes that only the speaker’s expectation is alluded to by
irony. Therefore the echoic interpretation theory need not,
and indeed does not, assume the speaker’s expectation about
the addressee’s belief to explain irony like the ‘diet’ example;
it assumes that irony echoes the general norm that teenagers
want to be slim by a diet.
Concerning the functions of irony, the implicit display
theory is more consistent with the obtained findings than
the contrast-assimilation theory recently proposed by Colston
(2002). He has claimed that the degree of negative effect of
irony can be explained in terms of “contrast and assimilation”
effects, which are often observed in perceptual judgment. If
the discrepancy between the positive surface meaning of an
ironic utterance and its referent negative situation is large, the
ironic utterance is perceived as more negative than the literal one because of a contrast effect. On the other hand, if
the discrepancy is relatively small, then an assimilation effect
is more likely to occur, resulting in that ironic utterances are
perceived as less negative. Although the contrast-assimilation
theory seems to be compatible with the finding of Experiment 1 that the degree of sarcasm was graded according to the
similarity to the irony prototype, the finding of Experiment 2
that situational negativity did not have an influence on the
degree of sarcasm may provide evidence against the contrastassimilation theory. If Colston’s theory is right, an utterance
should be more sarcastic in the strongly negative context and
less sarcastic in the weakly negative context than the literal
equivalent utterances, because negativity changes the degree
of discrepancy between the utterance and the situation.
To sum up, it can be concluded that the implicit display
theory provides a more consistent explanation of the obtained
findings on both irony recognition and ironic function than
other theories.

Attardo, S. (1997). The semantic foundations of cognitive
theories of humor. Humor, 10(4), 395–420.

1374

Attardo, S. (2000). Irony as relevant inappropriateness. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(6), 793–826.
Clark, H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge University
Press.
Colston, H. (2002). Contrast and assimilation in verbal irony.
Journal of Pragmatics, 34(2), 111–142.
Dews, S. and Winner, E. (1995). Muting the meaning: A
social function of irony. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity,
10(1), 3–19.
Gibbs, R. (1994). The Poetics of Mind. Cambridge University
Press.
Giora, R. (2003). On Our Mind: Salience, Context, and Figurative Language. Oxford University Press.
Happé, F. (1993). Communicative competence and theory of
mind in autism: A test of relevance theory. Cognition, 48,
101–119.
Kreuz, R. and Glucksberg, S. (1989). How to be sarcastic:
The echoic reminder theory of verbal irony. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 118(4), 374–386.
Kumon-Nakamura, S., Glucksberg, S., and Brown, M.
(1995). How about another piece of pie: The allusional
pretense theory of discourse irony. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 124(1), 3–21.
Okamoto, S. (2002). Politeness and the perception of irony:
Honorifics in Japanese. Metaphor and Symbol, 17(2),
119–139.
Pexman, P. and Olineck, L. (2002). Understanding irony:
How do stereotypes cue speaker intent?. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 21(3), 245–274.
Sperber, D. and Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and Cognition, Second Edition. Oxford, Basil Blackwell.
Utsumi, A. (2000). Verbal irony as implicit display of ironic
environment: Distinguishing ironic utterances from nonirony. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(12), 1777–1806.
Wilson, D. and Sperber, D. (2004). Relevance theory. In
Horn, L. and Ward, G. (Eds.), Handbook of Pragmatics,
pp. 607–632. Oxford, Basil Blackwell.
Wyer, R. and Collins, J. (1992). A theory of humor elicitation.
Psychological Review, 99(4), 663–688.

