UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Symbolizing Quantity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/28h7d3zd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Paritosh, Praveen K.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Symbolizing Quantity
Praveen K. Paritosh (paritosh@cs.northwestern.edu)

Qualitative Reasoning Group, Department of Computer Science,
Northwestern University, 1890 Maple Ave,
Evanston, IL 60201 USA
Abstract
Quantities are ubiquitous and an important part of our
understanding about the world – we talk of engine
horsepower, size, mileage, price of cars; GDP, population,
area of countries; wingspan, weight, surface area of birds, and
so on. In this paper, we present cognitively plausible symbolic
representations of quantity and principles for generating those
representations. Bringing together evidence in linguistics and
psychology, we argue that our representations must make two
kinds of distinctions – dimensional, those that denote changes
of quantity, e.g., large and small; and structural, those that
denote changes of quality, e.g. boiling point and poverty line.
We present results of a pilot experiment that suggests that
there is a significant agreement between people about the
dimensional distinctions. We then describe a computational
model CARVE, which is a system that learns to make
dimensional and structural distinctions on quantities by being
exposed to examples.

1 Introduction
Our knowledge about quantities is of various kinds – we
understand that there are Expensive and Cheap things,
that Canada is larger (in area) than the USA, that
basketball players are usually tall, that the boiling
point of water is 100 degrees Celsius. A key part
of such knowledge seems to be a symbolization of the space
of values that a quantity can take. By symbolization, we
mean identifying and naming intervals and points in the
space of values of a quantity. Some examples include tall
and short for the quantity of height of people; poverty
line, lower class, middle class and upper
class for income of people; freezing point and
boiling point for the temperature of water.
These symbolizations and their mapping onto
quantitative values seem to be determined by a mixture of
personal experience (e.g., what I consider to be spicy in
regards to food), society (e.g., middle class), science (e.g.,
phase transitions). Some are task-specific – one makes more
distinctions than freezing and boiling for bath water.
Furthermore, some of these symbolizations have been said
to be vague [Varzi, 2003], in the sense that it is not possible
to tell exactly at what value of height one becomes tall, and
is not tall if any less than that. Given these concerns, finding
systematic principles behind such symbolizations seems to
be a daunting task, and has not been tackled head-on in
cognitive science. That said, there is a vast literature that
bears on these issues. In this paper, we address the
following two fundamental questions about people’s
knowledge of quantities –

1. Representational: What do our representations of
quantity look like? Or, what representational machinery
is needed to make the distinctions that we do?
2. Computational: How are these representations built
with experience?
Large scale knowledge representation efforts like Cyc
[Lenat and Guha, 1989] refer to quantities either purely
numerically, or using ad hoc representations. Most existing
computational models of retrieval and similarity cannot use
numerical representations [Falkenhainer et al, 1989;
Holyoak and Thagard, 1989; Hummel and Holyoak, 1997;
Goldstone and Rogosky, 2002], leading to quantitative
information being ignored in computation of similarity.
There are models in case based reasoning [Ashley, 1990;
Leake, 1996; Ram and Santamaria, 1997] that use numeric
information, but they employ ad hoc similarity metrics that
are not psychologically grounded. A major motivation of
this work is to generate cognitively plausible symbolic
representations of quantity that will enhance computational
models of similarity, retrieval and generalization.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: We next
present relevant research from Linguistics, Psychology,
Qualitative Reasoning, and models of similarity and
retrieval, which provide both background and motivation.
Section 3 reports results of a pilot experiment measuring
just how vague our notion of large, medium and small is.
Section 4 proposes an answer to the representational
question above. Section 5 describes CARVE, a
computational model for building such representations. We
conclude with future work in section 6.

2 Background and Motivation
2.1 Linguistics
In language, one of the ways these symbolizations get
represented is by relative adjectives like large and tall.
Relative adjectives are different from absolute adjectives
like rectangular, red and married in the sense that
(1) they can imply varying degrees of the property in
question, as opposed to all-or-none for the absolute
adjectives, and (2) their meaning varies with context, e.g.,
tall means different things in context of men and
buildings.
These adjectives have been variously called degree,
relative, gradable or dimensional adjectives [Bierwisch
1987]. Here we will stick to the term dimensional
adjectives, emphasizing our focus on those that denote
quantity. It has been proposed that dimensional adjectives
denote measure functions that maps from objects to quantity
values/ intervals [Kennedy, 2003]. It has long been

1083

recognized by linguists that dimensional adjectives convey
an implicit reference to a norm or a standard associated with
the modified noun [Sapir, 1944]. This implies two steps in
interpreting a phrase like “a large x” where x can be a
country/ insect/ etc.: (1) x establishes a comparison class. A
comparison class is a set of objects that are in someway
similar to x. For instance, in some cases, this comparison
class might be the immediate superordinate of the subject
[Bierwisch, 1971]. How to obtain the comparison class is an
open question. Staab and Hahn (1998) propose a
computational model that uses knowledge about correlations
to determine comparison classes on the fly. (2) Once the
comparison class has been found, a standard of comparison
is computed for the class. It is usually believed that this is
the norm value of the property for the comparison class, but
Kennedy (2003) observes that it can also be the minimum or
maximum (e.g., full and open).
The norm in step 2 has not been spelled out in this
literature. In cases where we are referring to stable
taxonomic categories like insects and countries, it is
believed to be some kind of central tendency. But clearly, it
is more than a central tendency, since that would imply that
most things in this world will be either large or small, as not
many will be exactly equal to the norm.

2.2 Psychology
2.2.1 Context sensitivi ty
Rips (1980) considers two hypotheses about how absolute
and relative adjectives might be stored in memory – PreStorage and Computational model. For absolute adjectives
like married and pink, he accepts the pre-storage model,
where these predicates are stored with the concept they
apply to. But because of context dependence of relative
adjectives like big, e.g., in, “Flamingos are big”, he argues
against storing these predicates in memory. We might have
a predicate pink attached to flamingo, but in order to
decide a flamingo is larger than an eagle, we might need a
predicate is-larger-than-an-eagle
associated
with flamingo, which then deescalates into having infinitely
many of those like is-larger-than-turnips and so
on. He also observes that relative adjectives don’t propagate
in a isa hierarchy – e.g., Grasshoppers are large insects does
not imply Grasshoppers are large animals, but if you replace
‘large’ by ‘green’, the implication is right. He then shows
reaction time and error rates for verifying the truth of
statements containing relative adjectives which supports a
different model. In his ‘computational model’ no relative
information is stored. Attached to every predicate is a
normal value, e.g. with insects, a normal size of quarter
inches. An object is called large if it is bigger than this
normal size. Once again the problem is that just storing the
norm doesn’t tell you when the object can be classified as
large. The representation that we propose in section 4 solves
his concerns with pre-storage models.
2.2.1 Reference Points
The psychological reality of such special reference points on
the scale of quantity has been shown in various domains.

Rosch (1975) argued for the special status of such
“cognitive reference points” by showing an asymmetry –
namely that a non-reference stimulus is judged closer to a
reference stimulus (e.g., the color off-red to basic-red) than
otherwise, while such relationship between two nonreference stimuli is symmetric. Existence of landmarks to
organize spatial knowledge of the environment, similar
asymmetries [Holyoak and Mah, 1984 among others]. Other
relevant psychological studies that support the existence of
reference points come from categorical perception [Harnad,
1987] and sensitivity to landmarks [Cech and Shoben,
1985]. Brown and Siegler (1993) proposed the metrics and
mappings framework for real-world quantitative estimation.
They make a distinction between the quantitative, or metric
knowledge (which includes distributional properties of
parameters), and ordinal information (mapping knowledge).
2.2.2 Models of Retrieval, Similarity and Generalization
There is converging psychological evidence for structured
models of retrieval, similarity and generalization.
The structure-mapping engine (SME) [Falkenhainer et
al, 1989] is a computational model of structure-mapping
theory [Gentner, 1983]. Given two structured propositional
representations as inputs, the base (about which we know
more) and a target, SME computes a mapping (or a handful
of them). MAC/FAC [Forbus et al, 1995] is a model of
similarity-based retrieval, that uses a computationally cheap,
structure-less filter before doing structural matching. It uses
a secondary representation, the content vector, which
summarizes the relative frequency of predicates occurring in
the structured representation. The dot product of content
vectors for two structured representations provide a rough
estimate of their structural match. SEQL [Kuehne et al,
2000] provides a framework for making generalizations
based on comp uting progressive structural overlaps of
multiple exemplars.
One limitation of these models – and of other models of
analogical processing (e.g., ACME [Holyoak and Thagard,
1989, LISA [Hummel and Holyoak, 1997], ABSURDIST
[Goldstone and Rogosky, 2002]) – is that they do not handle
numerical properties well:
Retrieval: Just as Red occurring in the probe might remind
me of other red objects, a bird with wing-surface-area of
0.272 sq.m. (that is the Great black-bucked gull, a large
bird) should remind me of other large birds. This will not
happen in the current model, unless we abstract the numeric
representation of wing-surface-area to a symbol, say,
Large.
Similarity: A model of similarity must be sensitive to
quantity.For example, in current matchers, two cars which
are identical in all dimensions have the same similarity as
two that differ in some dimensions, if other aspects of their
representations are identical.
Generalization: A key part of learning a new domain is
acquiring the sense of quantity for different quantities. E.g.,
from a trip to the zoo, a kid probably has learnt something
about sizes of animals.

1084

A symbolic and relational representation of the kind we
propose here would make models of analogical processing
more quantity-aware.

2.3 Qualitative Reasoning
Qualitative reasoning research seeks to understand humanlike commonsense reasoning without resorting to
differential equations and real-valued numbers. There is a
substantial body of research in QR that has shown that one
can, indeed, do powerful reasoning with partial knowledge.
Qualitative reasoning has explored many different
representations: status algebras (normal/abnormal); sign
algebra (– , 0, +), which is the weakest representation that
supports reasoning about continuity; quantity spaces, where
we represent a quantity value by ordinal relationships with
specially chosen points in the space; intervals and their
fuzzy versions; order of magnitude representations; finite
algebras, among others. While these representations are very
promising for cognitive modeling, there has been little
psychological work to date on this.

out of 54 countries, sd = 6.5). This suggests that prior
knowledge should be irrelevant, and their judgments were
based on examining the map.
To see how much subjects agreed about their choices,
we extracted the most frequent choice for each country, and
the percentage of times that was chosen across subjects (e.g,
for both Seychelles and Algeria this is 100%, as the most
frequent choice was always picked, for Kenya it is 79%
which is how often it was called medium). In figure 1 we
show the most frequent, second most frequent and the least
frequent choice and how often they were chosen. The most
frequent choice was chosen an average of 81.2% of the
times, and the second most frequent choice was chosen
18.5%, and the least frequent 0.3% of the times. The
difference between most frequent choice and the second
most frequent choice is statistically significant (t(53)=12.92,
p<0.01).
Subjects seem to do the task in a clustering fashion.
They would pick either small/large and start marking out the
clearly small/large countries, then countries at the other end
of size and then consider the cases in between.

3 Experiment
We conducted a pilot experiment to see how much people
agreed on what they would call large, small or medium. We
expected agreement across subjects on their labeling.
Furthermore, we expected to find out how people go about
mapping these symbols to quantity values in a specific
scenario – being presented with all the examples at once.
And if people indeed agreed on their partitioning, then we
expected to gain insight about where they drew the
boundaries.

Method
The experiment consisted of two tasks – Size Labeling task
and Country Naming task. In the size labeling task, subjects
were presented with an outline political map of Africa. The
countries were numbered from 1 through 54, and at the
bottom of the map were 54 numbered blanks. They were
given the following instruction – “On the following page
you will find a map of Africa. All the different countries are
shown and numbered. For each country, we want you to
think if you will call it LARGE, MEDIUM or SMALL on
the basis of size (land area) as shown in the map. Below the
map you will find numbered index of all the countries on
the map. Please place your answer (LARGE/ MEDIUM/
SMALL) in the blank next to it. Please fill out all the
blanks.”
At the end of this task, they did the country naming task.
Here they were presented another copy of the map, and were
told to name as many of the countries as they could. The
participants were 19 graduate students at Northwestern
University.

Figure 1. Agreement across subjects on their most frequent
choice. The most frequent choice is 81.2%, significantly
higher than the second and third chosen size labels.

4 Representation
A representation of quantity allows us to make certain
distinctions – numbers allow us to make too many, and
dividing the range of values into two equal sized parts
doesn’t
necessarily
provide
useful
distinctions.
Representations do not arise in vacuum. They are molded by
the kinds of reasoning tasks we perform with them
(reasoning constraints), and the things we are trying to
represent
(ecological
constraints).
We
propose
representations based on existing evidence and arguments
from these constraints.

4.1 Reasoning Constraints
Results and Discussion
We found significant agreement across the subjects.
Subjects could correctly name very few countries (mean 6

The three distinct kinds of reasoning tasks involving
quantities are –

1085

1. Comparison: These involve comparing two values on an
underlying scale of quantity, e.g., “Is John taller than
Chris?” Our knowledge of how the quantity varies (its
distribution), and linguistic labels like Large and Small,
are but a compressed record of large number of such
comparisons. The semantic congruity effect [Banks and
Flora, 1977] is the fact that we are better and faster at
judging the larger of two large things than the smaller of
two large things. Part of the account from experiments
involving adults learning novel dimension words, by Ryalls
and Smith (2000) is the fact that in usage, we make
statements like “X is larger than Y” more often than “Y is
smaller than X”, if X and Y are both on the large end of the
scale.
2. Classification: These involve making judgments about
whether a quantity value is equal to, less than or greater than
a specific value, e.g., Is the water boiling?, Will this couch
fit in the freight elevator?, etc. Usually, such classifications
involve comparisons with interesting points (called limit
points in QR) in the space of values for a quantity, where
conditions on either side are qualitatively distinct. The
metaphor of phase transitions describes many such
interesting points, although such transitions in everyday
domains are not as sharply and well defined as in scientific
domains (consider poverty line versus freezing point).
3. Estimation: These involve inferring a numerical value
for a particular quantity, e.g., How tall is he? What is the
mileage of your car? This is the activity that has the
strongest connection to quantitative scales – one can go a
long way in accounting for the above two without resorting
to numbers, but estimation involves mapping back to
numbers [Subrahmanyam and Gelman, 1998]. Knowledge
of interesting points on the scale might play an important
role in estimation, for example in providing anchors to
adjust from [Tversky and Kahmenan, 1974].
These tasks are not completely distinct – classification
involves comparison, and estimation might be used in the
service of classification. Two interesting aspects of our
representations follow from these constraints:
1. Our representations must keep track of interesting points
on the scale of quantity, to classify, as well as to estimate.
2. Labels like large ease making comparisons, as they
setup implicit ordinal relationships (it is larger than most
objects).

4.2 Ecological Constraints
Our representational framework must be capable of
capturing the interesting ways in which a quantity varies in
real-world instances of it. Below we present two different
kinds of constraints on values a quantity can take –
1. Distributional Constraints: Most quantities have a
range (a minimum and a maximum) and a distribution that
determines how often a specific value shows up. For
example, the height of adult men might be between 4 and 10
ft, with most being around 5-6.5ft. More than just the norm,
we can usually talk about the low, medium, high for
many quantities, which seems to be a qualitative summary

of the distributional information. There is psychological
evidence that establishes that we can and do accumulate
distributions of quantities [refer to Malmi and Samson,
1983; Fried and Holyoak, 1984; Kraus et al, 1993; among
others, for more]. Given a dis tribution of values for a
quantity, the next question of how we partition these
distributions has not been raised at all.
2. Structural Constraints: Quantities are constrained by
what values other quantities in the system take, its
relationship with those other quantities, via its relationships
with them1 . For instance, for all internal combustion engines
– as the engine mass increases, the Brake Horse Power
(BHP), Bore (diameter), Displacement (volume) increases,
and the RPM decreases. These constraints represent the
underlying mechanism, or causal model of the object. Limit
points decompose values into regions where the underlying
causal story is different (e.g., ice starting to melt, at the
freezing point), which induces extremely important and
interesting distinctions of quality on the space of quantity.
These two ecological constraints point us to the two
different kinds of information about quantities, which must
be parts of our representations –
1. Distributional information about how the quantity
varies.
2. Its role in and relationship to the underlying
structure/mechanism, and the points at which there are
changes in underlying structure.

4.3 Proposed Representation
There are two kinds of distinctions that our representation of
quantity must make –
1. Dimensional partitions: Symbols like Large and
Small, which arise from distributional information
about how that quantity varies.
2. Structural Partitions: Symbols like Boiling
Point and Poverty Line, that denote changes of
quality, usually changes in the underlying causal story
and many other aspects of the objects in concern.
These partitions may manifest as intervals centered around a
norm, or by boundaries demarcating transitions. Let’s look
at dimensional partitions in more detail. Dimensional
adjectives like large depend upon the context. Consider
area of African countries – in our experiment, people agree
that Algeria is large, and Swaziland is small, Kenya is
medium sized. We represent this as follows –
(isa Algeria
(HighValueContextualizedFn
Area AfricanCountries))
High/Medium/LowValueContextualizedFn
are
functions that take two arguments – a quantity and a context
argument and return a collection of objects. So in the above
example HighValueContextualizedFn denotes the
1

Comic books, mythology, and fantasy, for example, have the
freedom to relax this constraint – a character can be arbitrarily
strong, large, small or be able to fly, even though the physical
design of the character might not be able to support it.

1086

collection of large African countries, and the isa statement
says that Algeria is an instance of that collection. The
LowValueContextualizedFn similarly lets us
represent the negative end, for instance small and cheap.
4.3.1 Relationship to Fuzzy Logic
The dimensional partitions are reminiscent of linguistic
variables in fuzzy logic [Zadeh 1965]. Fuzzy variables can
take on values like Large, Medium and Small; and allow
us to represent overlapping range of values for these
symbols. Fuzzy logic thus provides a framework to
represent what Large means. The specific mapping of
Large-ness to area of countries, for instance, is a choice of
the person building the representation, and is not in the
scope of fuzzy logic. Our focus here is that mapping. So
dimensional partitions are the answer to the question – what
do people mean when they say “a large country,”
specifically, what is the mapping between Large and the
values of area?

5 Computational Modeling
We are developing a computational model, called CARVE,
as an account of the generation of both dimensional and
structural partitions. At this writing, CARVE is partially
implemented. The input to CARVE is a set of examples
represented as collections of facts in predicate calculus.
Countries are an interesting domain for testing CARVE as
there are many quantitative parameters with rich causal and
structural relationships2 . The cases for each of these
countries were built by extracting facts about them from the
Cyc knowledge base. Additional quantitative facts about
attributes like population, literacy, etc., were extracted from
the CIA Factbook knowledge base [Frank et al, 1998] and
added to these cases. There were on average 108 facts per
case.
Dimensional
partitioning for
Ci

(isa Algeria
(HighValueContextualizedFn
Area AfricanCountries)
.
.
.

each quantity

Add these facts to
original cases

Quantity 1

Cj

S1

S2

S3

Structural
clustering
using SEQL

Ci*

Quantity 2
L1

L2

Figure 2. A schematic overview of how CARVE computes
dimensional and structural partitions.

2

Alas, not all of this rich structural knowledge is already
represented in our knowledge bases.

Dimensional Partitioning
CARVE takes as input a set of cases. For each quantity, we
extract all the numeric values for it in our input cases. Given
these values, the job of the dimensional partitioning step is
to find three partitions, corresponding to Low, Medium and
High ranges of the values that the quantity takes.
These partitions are currently generated using a kmeans clustering algorithm. It is possible to plug in different
heuristics that partitions the values into ranges of values.
Heuristics based on central tendency and percentiles do not
work for zipf like distributions which we see in many of the
quantities (e.g., GDP, population, area) associated with
countries. For such distributions, means and variances are
not intuitively meaningful at all.
The k-means clustering algorithm fits with what people
did in our pilot experiment. On an average across subjects,
the dimensional partitions computed by CARVE agreed
with people 74% of the times (sd=27). More empirical data
is needed to conclude what set of heuristics people use to
make these partitions, and when they work. We believe that
depending upon the distribution of data, people will use
different partitioning strategies. The clustering scheme used
is useful across different kinds of distributions and can be
used incrementally without a priori knowledge of
distributions.
For each fact about the value of a quantity, we then add
a High/Medium/LowContextualizedValueFn to
the case depending upon which range that numeric value fell
in. These facts are used in the next step.

Structural partitioning
SEQL [Skorstad et al, 1988; Kuehne et al, 2000] provides a
framework for making generalizations based on computing
progressive structural overlaps of multiple exemplars. The
goal of structural partitioning is to find the structural
clusters in the cases (for instance, groups of developing and
underdeveloped nations) and project these clusters on to
various quantity dimensions. The cases produced at the end
of the dimensional partitioning step are given as input to
SEQL. In figure 2, we see the output of SEQL as three
generalizations S1 , S2 and S3 and some leftover cases that
did not fit any of those. Let’s consider two quantities
Quantity1 and Quantity2 . The projection of a cluster on a
quantity is the range of values for that quantity in the
cluster. For Quantity1 , we see that the projections from all
the three generalizations overlap. On the other hand, the
projections of the generalization on Quantity2 are nonoverlapping. We have marked by L1 and L2 the boundaries
for these ranges. Notice the predictive power of knowing
that for a specific case the value of Quantity2 is less than L1 .
We not only know about the quantity value, but about the
generalization to which the case belongs, and so can predict
a lot of other causal properties of it. For instance, when you
know that a country is a developing country, there are rich
causal predictions you can make.
The algorithm above has been implemented in CARVE.
Unfortunately, because of the lack of rich causal/ relational

1087

knowledge in the cases, it does not yet find any interesting
structural partitions. Structural partitions are a reflection of
our deep understanding of the causal and correlational
structure of examples. In science, phase transitions, and
structural distinctions in socio-economic dimensions were
not easily discovered. We hope that by adding more
knowledge we will get better structural partitions.

6 Conclusions and Future Work
Based on cognitive and linguistic evidence, and arguments
from reasoning and ecological constraints, we presented
symbolic representations for quantity. We find significant
agreement between subjects on dimensional partitions. We
presented a computational model for automatically
generating these representations.
Currently all the cases are given as input to CARVE.
One important way to extend this will be for it to
incrementally build and update its representations. Further,
we need to create rich structured cases with causal and
correlational information and test CARVE.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Computer Science
Division of the Office of Naval Research. The author would
like to thank Ken Forbus, Dedre Gentner, Chris Kennedy,
Lance Rips, Jason Jameson, Tom Hinrichs, Sven Kuehne
and Julie Saltzman for insightful comments and discussion
on the work presented here.

References
Ashley, K.D. (1990). Modeling Legal Argument, MIT Press, MA.
Banks W. P., and Flora J. (1977). Semantic and Perceptual
Processes in Symbolic Comparisons. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3, 278-290.
Bierwish, M. (1967). Some Semantic Universals of German
Adjectivals. Foundations of Language, 3, 1-36.
Brown, N. R., & Siegler, R. S. (1993). Metrics and mappings: A
framework for understanding real-world quantitative estimation.
Psychological Review, 100(3), 511-534.
Cech, C. G. and Shoben, E. J. (1985). Context Effects in Symbolic
Magnitude Comparisons. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11, 299-315.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples. Artificial
Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC: A
model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science, 19(2),
141-205.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative process theory. Artificial
Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Fried, L. S., and Holoyak, K. J. (1984). Induction of Category
Distributions: A Framework for Classification Learning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
10, 234-257.

Frank, G.; Farquhar, A.; & Fikes, R. Building a Large
Knowledge Base from a Structured Source: The CIA
World Fact Book. Knowledge Systems Laboratory, 1998.
Goldstone, R. L. and Rogosky, B. J., (2002). Using relations
within conceptual systems to translate across conceptual
systems, Cognition, 84, 295-320.

Harnad, S. (1987). Categorical perception. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Holoyak, K. J., and Mah, W. A. (1984). Cognitive Reference
Points in Judgments of Symbolic Magnitude. Cognitive
Psychology, 14, 328-352.
Holyoak, K. J. and Thagard, P. R. (1989). Analogical Mapping by
Constraint Satisfaction, Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Hummel, J.E and Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: a theory of analogical access and
mapping, Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Kennedy, C. (2003). Towards a Grammar of Vagueness. Presented
at the Princeton Semantics Workshop, May 17, 2003
Kraus, S., Ryan, C. S., Judd, C. M., Hastie R., and Park, B. (1993).
Use of mental frequency distributions to represent variability
among members of social categories. Social Cognition, 11(1),
22-43.

Kuehne, S., Forbus, K., Gentner, D. and Quinn, B.(2000)
SEQL: Category learning as progressive abstraction using
structure mapping. Proceedings of CogSci 2000.

Leake, D. (Ed.) 1996. Case-based Reasoning: Experiences,
Lessons and Future Directions, MIT Press.
Lenat, D. B. and Guha, R. V. (1989). Building large knowledgebased systems: Representation and inference in the Cyc project,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Malmi, R. A., and Samson, D.J. (1983). Intuitive Averaging of
Categorized Numerical Stimuli, Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 22, 547-559.
Malt, B. and Smith, E. (1984). Correlated Properties in Natural
Categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
23(2), 250-269.
Paritosh, P.K. and Forbus, K.D. (2003). Qualitative Modeling and
Similarity in Back of the Envelope Reasoning. In Proceedings of
the 25th Cognitive Science Conference.
Ram, A. and Santamaria, J.C. (1997). Continuous case-based
reasoning. Artificial Intelligence, 90, 25-77
Rips, L. J., and Turbull, W. (1980) How big is big? Relative and
absolute properties in memory. Cognition, 8, 145-174.
Rosch, E. (1975).
Cognitive Reference Points. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 532-547.
Ryalls, B. O. and Smith, L. B. (2000). Adults Acquisition of Novel
Dimension Words: Creating a Semantic Congruity Effect,
Journal of General Psychology, 127(3), 279-326.
Staab, S. and Hahn, U. (1998). Grading on the Fly. In Proceedings
of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Madison, WI.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases, Science, 185, pp 1124-1131.
Varzi, A. C. (2003). Vagueness, In Encyclopedia of Cognitive
Science, Macmillan and Nature Publishing Group, London.
Zadeh, L. (1965). Fuzzy Sets, Information and Control, 8, 338353.

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.

1088

