UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Synchronization Among Speakers Reduces Macroscopic Temporal Variability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tw625f5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Cummins, Fred

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Synchronization Among Speakers Reduces Macroscopic Temporal
Variability
Fred Cummins (fred.cummins@ucd.ie)
Department of Computer Science
University College Dublin
Belfield
Dublin 4
Ireland
is to deduce the units of control which relate to the linguistic message being uttered, and to uncover their mutual relations. This is not so different in kind from the
above musical analog, though additional levels of complexity undoubtedly arise. Signal variability which is
related to the linguistic content is relevant, while (for
many purposes) one might like to find a way to reduce
or exclude variability of para- or non-linguistic origin.
The approach which I and colleagues have recently been
following is to constrain the speaker to speak in time
with another co-speaker. For this purpose, speakers read
through a given text silently to familiarize themselves
with it, and then commence reading together on a signal from the investigator. For many purposes, recording
using near field head-mounted microphones onto the left
and right channels of a single stereo file is sufficient to
separate the two speakers while preserving the relative
temporal alignment of speech events.
We call speech collected in this manner Synchronous
Speech, and both the task and the product have provided
us with much food for thought (Cummins, 2001; Cummins, 2002; Cummins and Roy, 2001; Cummins, 2003).
In this paper, I will summarize those findings which have
best revealed the advantages of this novel method, then
provide some new results which examine the variability
of intervals below the whole phrase, and finally provide
pointers to areas I believe might benefit from adoption
of the method.

Abstract
A recent method for restricting inessential variation in
speech is presented. Synchronous Speech is obtained by
having two subjects read a prepared text in synchrony.
Past results demonstrate that this is easy for subjects to
do, and that some prosodic variability is greatly reduced
when reading synchronously. Particular advantage has
been found in the analysis of pauses and fundamental
frequency variation, where synchronous speech has been
demonstrated to exhibit markedly less inessential variability, thus furthering analysis and modeling. Here,
duration ratios within a phrase are compared across
synchronous and solo conditions. Variables associated
with global timing and with the relationships between
phrases are shown to be more consistent in the synchronous condition, while smaller units are not noticeably affected by the speaking condition. No systematic
artifacts are found to be introduced by asking subjects
to read in synchrony.

A Method for Restricting Variability
Synchronous Speech is obtained with the simple expedient of having two subjects read a prepared text together,
with the minimal instruction to attempt to maintain synchrony (Cummins, 2002). The reason for constraining
subjects in this manner is perhaps best appreciated by
analogy with the difficult task of attempting to reconstruct a musical score, based only on a recording of a
specific musician (Heijink et al., 2000). This task is interestingly similar to the work of the theoretically minded
phonetician who attempts to uncover control and timing information, along with combinatorial units, from
the continuous stream of speech.
If one were faced with this task, it is worth considering which musician would give one more tractable data:
the soloist, or the 14th violin player in the string section.
Neither will reproduce the durations (or pitches) specified in their score exactly, of course, due to the inherent
underspecification of the score. Both players will overlay
some inherent biophysical noise, along with conventional
timing variability, such as the predictable decellerando
at the end of a phrase. The soloist will add additional
complexity, however, in keeping with her role as the expressive focus in performance, making the inverse mapping from the recording to the score considerably more
difficult.
Now return to the position of the laboratory phonologist (or theoretical phonetician). An overarching goal

Properties of Synchronous Speech
Synchronizing with a co-speaker, without extensive practice, turns out to be simple for subjects to do (Cummins,
2002; Cummins, 2003). After reading through a simple
text once, and being given a start signal, subjects typically manage to keep inter-speaker lags to average values of around 60 ms at phrase onsets, and 40 ms or less
after the first syllable or so. Rather surprisingly, extensive practice at the task does not improve the degree of
synchrony significantly (Cummins, 2003), although with
repeated readings of the same text, and with the same
co-speaker, a slight improvement may be detected. Visual contact with the co-speaker does seem to have a
small beneficial effect on synchrony, even though subjects are typically attending to a read text in front of
them (Cummins, 2003).
In experiments done to date, speakers have not been
carefully matched for familiarity, intrinsic speaking rate

256

Fundamental Frequency Variability

or volume. Among the heterogeneous pairs of speakers
we have studied to date, most appear to be collaborating,
producing speech at a relatively slow rate (but faster
than some of the slowest speakers’ natural reading rate).
We have not yet (in over 60 pairs of speakers) found a
speaking pair in which one speaker consistently lagged
behind the other. Rather, they seem to genuinely speak
together, with a high degree of synchrony.

Phrasing and Pauses
One of the first properties of Synchronous Speech we
noticed, was that phrasing, i.e. the division of a long
stretch of speech into intonational units separated by
pauses, appeared to be much more consistent in Synchronous Speech than in control readings done alone.
In an initial pilot with 4 speakers, we found that in 48
‘solo’ readings, pauses occurred at points other than major expected phrase breaks 48 times (Cummins, 2002).
By contrast, in Synchronous Speech, there were only 4
such idiosyncratic pauses in 24 paired readings.
These findings have been extended in the studies of
pauses in Synchronous Speech (Zvonik and Cummins,
2002; Zvonik and Cummins, 2003), who found that interspeaker variability in pause duration was greatly reduced
in Synchronous Speech, compared with ‘solo’ speech.
The reduced variability allowed the identification of a
quantitative relationship between pause duration and
the length (in syllables) of the preceding phrase—a relationship which was obscured in the rather more variable solo data. Specifically, we found a restricted distribution of clauses of less than 300 ms length. These
pauses were far more likely to occur when the preceding phrase was relatively short (less than 11 syllables
long)1 . We examined pause duration in readings by 6
speakers (3 pairs) of 19 short texts (13 distinct authors).
Table 1 shows the proportion of pauses in each environment (preceding phrase long or short, following phrase
long or short) which were below 300 ms. The preponderance of short pauses in an environment following a short
phrase is clear.
Figure 1: Difference in F0 peaks (HPP, top) and valleys (LPP, bottom) between speakers in a pair in solo
and synchronous readings. All F0 values converted to
semitones before analysis.

Table 1: Number of pauses of duration less than 300 ms
as a function of the length of the surrounding Intonational Phrases. For IPs, ‘short’ is here taken to mean less
than or equal to 10 syllables. Reproduced from Zvonik
(2004, unpublished PhD thesis).
Preceding IP

Following IP

short
short
long
long

long
short
short
long

Given the above findings on phrasing and pauses, it
seemed natural to examine the effect of speaking synchronously on other prosodic variables. To this end, we
recorded six pairs of female speakers reading simple fairy
tales (Wang and Cummins, 2003). We identified peaks
and valleys in the intonation contour (HPP: High Point
of Pitch, LPP: Low Point of Pitch), and looked to see
whether these variables were affected by speaking synchronously. We found that the peaks were considerably
more highly correlated across speakers within a pair in
the synchronous condition (mean r = 0.72, s.d = 0.08)
than in the solo condition (mean r = 0.59, s.d.=0.07).
This did not hold for valleys (Synchronous: mean r =
0.43, s.d.=0.08; Solo: mean r = 0.30, s.d.=0.17). Figure 1 shows the differences in pitch between speakers of a

Proportion of
Short pauses
0.32
0.39
0.11
0.06

1

An earlier observation in Zvonick and Cummins (2003)
that a similar relationship obtained between pauses and following phrases is probably an artifact of the idiosyncratic
text used in that study

257

pair for both conditions. From the peaks (top panel), it
can clearly be seen that there is a substantial reduction
in inter-speaker differences in the synchronous condition,
while the difference is slight or nonexistent for the valleys. This suggests that there might be a difference in
the amount of free variability which speakers may employ in the absolute placement of H and L tones, a possibility which has been suggested independently elsewhere
(Liberman and Pierrehumbert, 1984).

Synchronous Speech. The method requires the reading
of a prepared text, and the additional constraint of synchrony places strict limits on the degree of personal interpretation and expression which a speaker can employ.
Some of what is shorn away can correctly be considered
to be meaningful prosodic structure. This limitation has
an upside, however, as the timing which remains is still
an immensely rich object of study, and those aspects of
speech timing which are preserved (very many!) can be
seen more clearly in the absence of the other additional
sources of variation in speech.
The closest parallels to the demands of the Synchronous Speech task appear to be met in studies of synchronization among ensemble musicians (Rasch, 1979;
Rasch, 1988), and the largely unstudied process of synchronization among dancers. In studying ensemble playing, Rasch (1979; 1988) used the standard deviation of
differences in onset time of simultaneous notes in many
voices as an index of asynchrony and noted typical values of 30 to 50 ms. The more direct measure of mean lag
used in our studies of two voices at a time have provided
values of approximately 40 ms.

On Synchronization
How do speakers manage to synchronize so efficiently?
One possibility which can be discounted already is that
one speaker provides the lead, and the other follows. As
mentioned above, we have yet to find a dyad in which
a single leader could be identified. The very short lags
between speakers also seem to preclude an explanation
along these lines, as the typical lag of 40 ms is simply
too short to allow perceptually guided correction while
speaking.
Most mathematical models we have of synchronization are based on populations of oscillators (Glass and
Mackey, 1988; Strogatz and Stewart, 1993). The mathematics of coupling among periodic sources is complex,
but by and large tractable. Powerful predictive models
have been constructed of such phenomena as juggling
(Beek and Lewbel, 1995), heart cells (Mirollo and Strogatz, 1990), etc. Some have chosen to restrict the term
‘synchronization’ to the “adjustment of rhythms of oscillating objects due to their weak interaction” (Pikovsky
et al., 2001, p. 8). Certainly, speech production is not
oscillatory or periodic in anything but the loosest sense,
and so the known mechanisms of entrainment among periodic sources can not be invoked here.
The answer, it seems to us, must lie in the shared
knowledge speakers have of what is essential and what is
redundant, or optional, in the modulation of the speech
organs. Speakers of the same dialect must have control structures in common that govern the production
of, and temporal relations among, the discrete units of
speech. Little has yet been ascertained about the degree
to which these putative control structures must coincide among such speakers. Certainly, many of the processes of diachronic change in language which have been
described suggest that differences among speakers are
not particularly rare, e.g. the age-related differences observed among speakers of Brazilian Portuguese by Major (1981). Nonetheless, the efficiency of communication
dictates that most such structures must be shared among
speakers. Although we do not have privileged access to
the units and processes of speech production, speakers do
seem to be able to modify their speech in direct response
to the task demands, suggesting that the method of synchronous speech elicitation is a promising technique for
tapping speakers’ unconscious knowledge of the process
of speaking.
An acknowledged limitation of the present is that
much of the prosodic richness of spontaneous speech,
specifically that associated with information management, speaker’s attitudes, etc, is clearly not present in

Effect of Synchronization on
Proportional Durations
An important question about the process of synchronization is whether it introduces artifacts into the temporal structure of speech, or conversely, whether it merely
serves to reduce variability and reveal a shared understanding of temporal structure among speakers. Artifacts might be revealed in the systematic alteration of
proportional durations, as would be the case if, e.g., unstressed syllables were found to be less reduced, and
hence longer compared with stressed syllables. Any
such systematic alteration of the durational properties of
speech would severely limit the potential of Synchronous
Speech to inform researchers about the properties of
speech in the more general case.
As one way to investigate this, we here examine means
and variances of a variety of interval ratios. By looking
at ratios rather than durations, we better capture the
relational properties of speech, and simultaneously avoid
the difficult issue of rate normalization.

Methods
Readings of the first paragraph of the Rainbow Text were
obtained from 27 pairs of speakers, as described in Cummins (2003). Each subject provided one reading alone
and one with a co-speaker, obtained during a larger corpus collection exercise. The second sentence of the passage was chosen for detailed analysis. It reads “The rainbow is a division of white light into many beautiful colors”. Reliably identifiable points in the waveform were
chosen for measurement (stop releases, V-nasal transitions, etc). Figure 2 illustrates a representative set of
measurement points for one recording.
Each variable studied was a ratio of two intervals, and
comparisons were made of both mean values (using ttests) and variability (F-test, one-sided, with the hypothesis of reduced variability in Synchronous Speech). Each

258

Figure 2: Measurement points for a single recording.
Table 2: Comparison of interval ratios in Synchronous Speech and Solo Speech. Intervals are taken from the sentence
“The rainbow is a division of white light into many beautiful colors”. Segments at measurement points are capitalized
and intervals used are in bold face.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6

Variable Type
juncture/phrase
juncture/phrase1
phrase/phrase
unstressed/stressed
syllables
onset segment/word
stressed vowel/word

Interval 1
lighT into Many
lighT into Many
Many...colorS
NY

Interval 2
raiNbow...lighT
Many...colorS
raiNbow...lighT
MA

t (df)
0.15 (93)
0.36 (90)
-0.27 (89)
1.66 (92)

p(t)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

F (df)
1.67 (50,45)
2.0 (50,45)
2.16 (50,45)
1.06 (47,45)

p(F )
< 0.05
< 0.01
< 0.01
n.s.

Colors
divIsion

ColorS
DivisioN

0.7 (94)
-0.56 (79)

n.s.
n.s.

1.04 (50,45)
0.56 (43,42)

n.s.
n.s.

ratio was expressed as the smaller value divided by the
larger, and distributions were checked visually for approximate normality. Adjustment to degrees of freedom
as appropriate for distributions of unequal variance was
made using the Welch approximation.
Previous results had demonstrated that macroscopic
phrasing (the division of an utterance into intonation
phrases, the placement and duration of pauses) was significantly less variable in Synchronous Speech. No analysis of the durations of shorter intervals had yet been
done. The possibility that duration ratios might be
significantly different in Synchronous Speech was of interest, as this would suggest that the process of synchronization introduces artifacts into speech timing, and
speech so obtained cannot be considered as unproblematically related to conventional speech. On the other
hand, it was of interest to see whether the previous indications of reduced inter-speaker variability would be
found with shorter, intra-phrasal, units also.

val to the duration of each of the surrounding phrases
(From the onset of “many” to the fricative onset in “colors” and from the nasal of the initial “rainbow” to the
obstruent closure in “light”). Rows 1 and 2 of Table 2
show that the relative duration of the interval spanning
the juncture is similar across conditions, whether one
takes the preceding or the following phrase as a referent,
but the variability of this ratio is substantially reduced
in Synchronous Speech.
Phrase Length: The durations of the two major
phrases (“The rainbow is a division of white light” and
“into many beautiful colors”) were compared. No difference in the ratios was discernible, but the variability
of the ratio was greatly reduced in Synchronous Speech
(Row 3, Table 2). This result may be attributable to
a greater constancy of speaking rate in the synchronous
condition.
Stressed and Unstressed Syllables: The word
“many” provides unambiguous measurement points
which make a comparison of the duration ratio of an
unstressed to a stressed syllable within the same word
possible. Row 4 of Table 2 provides the results of the
analysis in which no significant differences in either ratios or ratio variability was found across conditions.

Results
Major Syntactic Juncture: The sentence studied
contains one major syntactic juncture, between “white
light” and “into many”. The most reliably measurable
interval spanning this juncture was delimited by the obstruent occlusion at the end of “light” and the first nasal
onset of “many”. We examined the ratio of this inter-

Segment 1: Onset. The length of the initial consonant (closure to voicing onset) in “colors” as a propor-

259

Further Exploitation of Synchronous
Speech

tion of the word length (/k/ closure to /z/ onset) was
examined. Row 5 in Table 2 shows that mean ratio was
not different across conditions, nor was ratio variability
different in Synchronous Speech.
Segment 2: Vowel: The length of the stressed vowel
/I/ in “division”, expressed as a proportion of the word
duration (stop closure to nasal release) was also studied.
Again, neither ratio means nor variability was significantly different across conditions.

The earlier examples of studies of pauses and intonation illustrate two different ways in which Synchronous
Speech offers a novel approach to the analysis of variability in speech. In the former case, Synchronous Speech
provided cleaner data than solo read speech, allowing
the identification of temporal regularities which would
otherwise be obscured. Synchronization among speakers
is a simple and effective way of obtaining high-quality
spoken data which is stripped of inessential sources of
variability. This interpretation of the character of Synchronous Speech is supported by the durational measurements reported here for the first time. No difference
in the fine structure of speech was observed, but variability associated with macroscopic timing was reduced.
Future work should also examine finer gradations in the
prosodic hierarchy: are there changes at levels between
the intonational phrase and the syllable?
In the intonation study, the difference between solo
speech and Synchronous Speech was itself a source of
information about essential variability. By comparing Synchronous Speech with solo speech, we obtain
a partition of variability into essential and inessential
parts. It is tempting to associate the essential variability, preserved in Synchronous Speech, with linguistic sources, and inessential variability, absent in Synchronous Speech, with para- and non-linguistic sources,
but this step is probably premature at this stage. To
gauge the reliability of this attribution of the source of
variation to linguistic or nonlinguistic origins will require
further targeted research. However, the prospect of obtaining this partition potentially opens up new avenues
of exploration for both kinds of variation.
Important information about the quality of Synchronous Speech will come from testing to see if subjects
can perceive artifacts in Synchronous Speech, or indeed
distinguish it from normal speech in perception tests.
This work is ongoing.
One tantalizing possibility is the identification of parameters of free variability which might be exploited in
the synthesis of expressive or characterful voices. Synthetic voices are bland, while carefully tailored voices
which convey some sense of personality (emotion, expression) are laborious to construct. Adding random
variation to synthesis parameters does nothing but reduce intelligibility. However an analysis of the properties of Synchronous Speech and a comparison with solo
speech may inform voice designers about those parameters which they are relatively free to vary for expressive
purposes. For example, the above study on intonation
strongly suggested that an excitable voice might result
from an expanded dynamic range of intonation in which
the high targets are modified, but not the low targets.
Obtaining synchronous speech is not difficult. All
studies of the properties of Synchronous Speech to date
have suggested that the principal effect of the constraint
of speaking together is to reduce idiosyncratic variability, leaving the essential quality of the speech untouched.
This seems to offer two things to the experimental pho-

Discussion
The variables examined in the present study spanned
a range of temporal scales and phonological structures. Those variables which were most directly related to macroscopic temporal structure (i.e. phrasing)
all showed significant reduction in Synchronous Speech
without any discernible change in mean values. The variables which describe smaller intervals showed no effects.
In none of these cases was the proportional duration indexed by the ratio found to differ in its mean value between Synchronous Speech and solo speech, nor was the
variability affected by speaking condition.
These results accord well with previous findings on
Synchronous Speech and suggest areas for further study.
No evidence has yet been found that speaking synchronously produced durational artifacts. The only
properties of Synchronous Speech which have been reliably identified to date are a demonstrable increase
in the consistency of global timing and phrasing (including intonation) across speakers. Those variables
which exhibit substantially reduced variability in the
Synchronous Speech condition are those most closely tied
to timing at a global level, in which whole phrases are
coordinated with respect to one another. Neither the unstressed/stressed syllable comparison, nor the segmental
variables exhibited any difference in mean value or variability, suggesting that at a finer timescale there is little
if any change to speakers’ timing when speaking in synchrony with another person.
Some of the reduction in variability which is observed
may be due to the forced maintenance of a constant
speech rate. The indexing of speech rate is a notoriously difficult problem. Crude indices such as articulation rate, measured in number of syllables or segments
per second, do little to match speakers’ intuitions of a
continuous abstract ‘rate’ of speaking. The constraint
of speaking together with another speaker places severe
limits on the freedom of the speaker to continuously
modulate this abstract speaking rate, as any modification must be predictable for the co-speaker also.

2
Alone among the distributions used herein, the ratios
of the juncture to the second phrase were not normally distributed in the solo condition, but were skewed right. A
Wilcox rank sum test substantiated the findings of the parametric test.

260

netician. Firstly, it provides an easy route to cleaner
(less variable) data, for studies in which non-linguistic
variability is unwanted. Secondly, it may provide a principled manner of partitioning variability, so that intrinsic variability which cannot be voluntarily avoided is retained, while superfluous variability is removed, thus allowing the differentiation of two kinds of variability in
speech.

Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M., and Kurths, J. (2001).
Synchronization: A universal concept in nonlinear
sciences. Number 12 in Cambridge Nonlinear Science Series. CUP.
Rasch, R. A. (1979). Synchronization in performed ensemble music. Acustica, 43:121–131.
Rasch, R. A. (1988). Timing and synchronization in ensemble performance. In Sloboda, J. A., editor, Generative Processes in Music, pages 70–90. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.

Acknowledgements
This work has been done with the help of Elena Zvonik
and Bei Wang. Funding was provided by an Irish Higher
Education Authority grant for collaborative research between Irish Universities and Colleges and Media lab Europe.

Strogatz, S. H. and Stewart, I. (1993). Coupled oscillators and biological synchronization. Scientific
American, pages 102–109.
Wang, B. and Cummins, F. (2003). Intonation contour
in synchronous speech. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 114(4(2)):2397.

References
Beek, P. J. and Lewbel, A. (1995). The science of juggling. Scientific American, pages 92–97.

Zvonik, E. and Cummins, F. (2002). Pause duration
and variability in read texts. In Proc. ICSLP, pages
1109–1112, Denver, CO.

Cummins, F. (2001). Prosodic characteristics of synchronous speech. In Puppel, S. and Demenko, G.,
editors, Prosody 2000: Speech Recognition and Synthesis, pages 45–49, Krakow, Poland. Adam Mickiewicz University.

Zvonik, E. and Cummins, F. (2003). The effect of surrounding phrase lengths on pause duration. In Proceedings of EUROSPEECH, Geneva, CH. to appear.

Cummins, F. (2002). On synchronous speech. Acoustic
Research Letters Online, 3(1):7–11.
Cummins, F. (2003). Practice and performance in
speech produced synchronously. Journal of Phonetics, 31(2):139–148.
Cummins, F. and Roy, D. (2001). Using synchronous
speech to minimize variability in pause placement.
In Proceedings of the Institute of Acoustics, volume
23 (3), pages 201–206, Stratford-upon-Avon.
Glass, L. and Mackey, M. C. (1988). From Clocks to
Chaos. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Heijink, H., Desain, P., Honing, H., and Windsor, W.
(2000). Music representation–make me a match:
An evaluation of different approaches to scoreperformance matching. Computer Music Journal,
24(1):43–56.
Liberman, M. Y. and Pierrehumbert, J. B. (1984). Intonational invariance under changes in pitch range
and length. In Aronoff, M. and Oehrle, R. T., editors, Language sound structure: studies in phonology presented to Morris Halle, pages 157–233. MIT
Press.
Major, R. C. (1981). Stress-timing in Brazilian Portuguese. Journal of Phonetics, 9:343–351.
Mirollo, R. E. and Strogatz, S. H. (1990). Synchronization of pulse-coupled biological oscillators. SIAM
Journal of Applied Mathematics, 50(6):1645–1662.

261

