UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Talking about space: A cross-linguistic perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/371978qt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Feist, MIchele I.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Talking about space: A cross-linguistic perspective
Michele I. Feist (m-feist@ northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

stack of Legos would be described by the same term as
the act of putting a book into its sleeve: both are
instances of tight fit. Further, the act of putting a Lego
onto a stack of Legos is distinguished from the act of
putting a book onto a desk: while the former is a tight
fit relation, the latter represents loose fit.
Even closely related languages are not immune from
such differences in the distinctions drawn between
spatial relational terms. For example, as Bowerman has
pointed out (Bowerman, 1996; Bowerman & Pederson,
1992, 1996; Gentner & Bowerman, 2000), Dutch makes
a three-way distinction where English does not:
between a cup on a table (Dutch op), a picture on a wall
(Dutch aan), and a ring on a finger (Dutch om).
Even if two languages appear to draw the same
distinction, the boundaries between the contrasting
categories often differ. For example, both English and
Finnish mark a distinction between a very intimate
relation such as containment and a less intimate relation
such as surface contact, but the set of configurations
placed in each group differs dramatically between the
two languages (Table 1): rather than categorizing a
handle on a pan as an instance of the less intimate
relation, along with a cup on a table and a picture on a
wall (as English does), Finnish places this configuration
in the more intimate category along with an apple in a
bowl (Bowerman, 1996).
A similar example comes from a comparison of
English and Berber spatial terms. Spatial relational
terms in Berber fail to make a distinction between
inclusion and contact with/support via an external
surface of the Ground (Bowerman & Choi, 2001) akin
to the English in-on distinction. Rather, reminiscent of
the case in Finnish, the distinction is between “being
loosely in contact” and “being ‘incorporated’ into” the
Ground, with “incorporation” including both being
inside and being tightly attached to an external surface
or point (Bowerman & Choi, 2001).

Abstract
What do people attend to when describing the locations
of objects in space? This paper describes a study of the
ways in which speakers of seventeen languages describe
static spatial relations, delving into the meanings of two
kinds of spatial relational terms evident crosslinguistically: specific spatial terms and generalized
spatial terms.
The findings provide support for the
importance of geometry, function, and qualitative
physics to the meanings of specific spatial terms and
suggest an interplay between semantic and pragmatic
elements of meaning for generalized spatial terms.

Introduction
Multiple times each day, speakers make use of a
relatively small set of spatial relational terms (Landau
& Jackendoff, 1993) in order to localize themselves and
the entities with which they interact. Use of these terms
is practically automatic; from the point of view of the
native speaker, they are simple, clear, and obvious.
However, the difficulty that spatial terms present to
second language learners belies this apparent
simplicity. Furthermore, the prodigious cross-linguistic
variability in spatial terms (cf, Levinson, Meira, & The
Language and Cognition Group, 2003) suggests that
they are anything but simple, clear, and obvious.
The variability evident in spatial language takes on
many different forms.
As Bowerman and her
colleagues have shown, distinctions that are drawn in
one language may not be drawn in another. For
example, while English distinguishes between support
and contact, on the one hand, and containment, on the
other, this distinction does not appear in Korean spatial
terms (Bowerman & Choi, 2001). Instead, Korean
distinguishes between a tight fit and a loose fit between
two objects, a distinction not evident in English spatial
terms. Thus, in Korean, the act of putting a Lego onto a

Table 1: English and Finnish categorizations of some Figure-Ground relations (adapted from Bowerman, 1996,
Figure 4).

English
Finnish

Apple in
bowl
In
Inessive
case

Handle on
pan
On
Inessive
case

Bandaid on
leg
On
Inessive
case

Ring on
finger
On
Inessive
case

375

Fly on
door
On
Inessive
case

Picture on
wall
On
Adessive
case

Cup on table
On
Adessive
case

Despite this variability, all humans have the same
ability to perceive spatial relations. As suggested by
the cross-linguistic variability, spatial relational terms
encode a variety of factors of the scenes they are used
to describe (Bowerman, 1996; Levinson, 1996; Sinha &
Thorseng, 1995), including geometric, functional, and
qualitative physical factors. Furthermore, there is
evidence from studies of English spatial prepositions
that the influences of the factors interact, leading to
complex meanings (Feist, 2002; Feist & Gentner,
2003). What are the roles of these factors in the spatial
terms of a diverse set of languages? Are there some
factors that recur in spatial meaning across languages?
If so, these factors could underlie our conception of
space in general.

elicitation of a narrow set of spatial relational terms
across a diverse set of languages. The ranges of use of
the elicited terms illuminated the importance of a few
attributes of spatial scenes instantiating relations along
Bowerman and Pederson’s similarity gradient,
providing clues to the likely organizing dimensions of
spatial terminology.

Method
Informants Twenty-eight speakers of seventeen
languages (representing twelve language families, with
1-4 participants per language) were recruited from
around
the
Northwestern
University/Evanston
community; one additional informant was recruited
from the New York area. Informants ranged in age
from 18 to 69 and were all native speakers of the
languages in which they participated.

How Do Speakers of Different Languages
Talk About Space?
In a wide-reaching cross-linguistic survey, Bowerman
and Pederson (1992, 1996) presented a set of carefully
drawn pictures to speakers of thirty-four languages.
Each picture depicts a spatial relation, with the Figure
colored in yellow and the Ground in black and white.
Informants provided descriptions of the pictures,
including the spatial relational term that would most
naturally be used to describe the relation depicted.
Bowerman and Pederson examined the ways in
which the languages in their survey grouped the spatial
relations in their pictures, as defined by description by
the same term. This led to the discovery of a
“similarity gradient” (Bowerman & Choi, 2001) along
which they could arrange the scenes from their study.
At one end of the gradient lie configurations in which a
Figure is supported from below by a Ground (e.g., a
cup on a table); at the other end lie configurations in
which a Figure is completely included within a Ground
(e.g., a pear in an otherwise empty bowl). In between
lie configurations bearing similarities to both endpoints,
arranged according to whether they are more similar to
support from below or to complete inclusion.
Although Bowerman and Pederson found variation in
how linguistic terms grouped spatial configurations,
this variation was systematic. In particular, all of the
languages in their sample respected the similarity
gradient that Bowerman and Pederson had identified,
only describing non-adjacent configurations with the
same term if all configurations that lie between them
are also described by the term. In other words, the
ranges of use of spatial terms were found to be
continuous with respect to the similarity gradient.
I borrowed Bowerman and Pederson’s pictorial
elicitation technique for collecting spatial terms, asking
speakers of seventeen languages to describe a single set
of simple pictures taken from the larger set used by
Bowerman and Pederson.
This resulted in the

Stimuli The stimulus set consisted of twenty-nine line
drawings, each depicting two objects in a simple spatial
relation. The relations depicted span the similarity
gradient described by Bowerman and Pederson (1992,
1996; Bowerman & Choi, 2001). Following their
methodology, one of the objects in each picture, the
Figure, was colored yellow; and the other, the Ground,
was black and white. Twenty-seven of the twenty-nine
drawings were borrowed from Melissa Bowerman and
Eric Pederson’s Topological Picture Series (cf.,
Bowerman & Pederson, 1992, 1996; Gentner &
Bowerman, 1996, 2000; Levinson et al., 2003); one of
the remaining two, a picture of an address on an
envelope, was modified from a picture in the
Topological Picture Series, and the other, a picture of
flowers in a vase, was borrowed from an example in
Coventry (1998).
Procedure Each informant participated individually in
a session lasting an average of one hour. In the first
part of the session, informants were shown each picture
in the set individually. They were asked to provide a
description in their native language of the location of
the yellow object with respect to the other object.
Responses were both tape-recorded and phonetically
transcribed.
After all of the pictures had been
described, informants provided as close to a morphemeby-morpheme translation as could be elicited.1 Finally,
informants for languages using the same orthography as
English were asked to provide a written transcription of
their responses.

1

Variation in the exactness of the morpheme-by-morpheme
translations resulted from informants’ inability and/or
unwillingness to provide translations below the level of the
word.

376

Picture coding In previous work, there are numerous
arguments for the importance of geometry (e.g.,
Bennett, 1975; Feist & Gentner, 1997, 1998, 2003;
Herskovits, 1986; Landau, 1996; Miller & JohnsonLaird, 1976), function (Coventry, 1998; Coventry,
Carmichael, & Garrod, 1994; Feist & Gentner, 1998,
2003; Vandeloise, 1991, 1994), and qualitative physics
(Bowerman & Choi, 2001; Feist & Gentner, 2003;
Forbus, 1983, 1984; Talmy, 1988) to spatial relational
meaning. In order to determine whether there are
attributes of spatial scenes that figure in the meanings
of spatial relational terms across a range of languages2,
I coded each of the pictures for whether it matched each
of a small set of attributes related to geometry, function,
and qualitative physics.
For geometry, I coded for a difference in vertical
position (important to terms such as above, below, over,
and under (O’Keefe, 1996)), contact (important to
terms such as on (Cienki, 1989; Herskovits, 1986;
Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976)), and inclusion
(important to terms such as in (Cienki, 1989;
Herskovits, 1986; Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976)), as
well as for relative size. Although not argued for in
previous work, relative size was coded because a larger
Ground might facilitate the matching of other attribute
values, such as support or inclusion of the Figure, thus
influencing spatial term use.
For function, I coded for the functional relatedness of
the Figure and the Ground – the likely interaction
resulting from an object’s function (cf, Coventry, 1998;
Coventry et al., 1994; Vandeloise, 1991, 1994 on the
importance of function in general). For example, a
lamp and a table are functionally related; a cloud and a
mountain are not.
For qualitative physics, I coded for support by the
Ground (important to terms such as on (Bowerman &
Pederson, 1992, 1996; Herskovits, 1986; Miller &
Johnson-Laird, 1976)).
In addition, I coded for
animacy3 and the ability of the Ground to constrain the
location of the Figure, which both influence what
predictions can reasonably be made about the
qualitative physics of a scene. Specifically, if a Ground
can constrain the location of a Figure, the configuration
may seem less subject to outside forces and thus more
likely to remain as pictured. In addition, animacy of the
Figure and the Ground was found in past research to
influence speakers’ choice between English in and on
(Feist & Gentner, 1998, 2003). In addition, constraint

of location may be important to some functional
relations (such as functional containment; see Coventry
et al., 1994), prompting its inclusion as an independent
factor.

Results
Two kinds of spatial relational terms appeared in the
elicited descriptions. The first, specific spatial terms,
occur only in limited contexts and impart relatively
specific information about the location of the Figure4.
This kind of term can be exemplified by the English
prepositions in and on and by the terms in examples (1)
(from Croatian) and (2) (from Swedish).
(1) Jabuka je v zdjeli.
apple is in bowl
The apple is in the bowl.
(2) Koppen
står på bordet.
cup-definite stands on table-definite
The cup is on the table.
The second kind of term, generalized spatial terms,
occur in all spatial descriptions and impart no specific
information about the location of the Figure. Rather,
these terms just serve to relate the Figure to the Ground.
Such terms do not occur in English, but can be
exemplified by terms such as Japanese ni (example (3))
and Indonesian di (example (4)), both glossed simply as
LOC (locative).
(3) Kaban no
naka5 ni haite iru hako.
bag genitive inside LOC put-in is box
The box is in the bag.
(4) Cincin itu di jari.
ring that LOC finger
The ring is on the finger.
Although generalized spatial terms are often glossed
as at, in, or on, such glosses are hardly appropriate
characterizations of the meanings of the terms, as will
become clear below. In particular, generalized spatial
terms appear in environments where the glosses would
be unacceptable, raising questions about whether the
glosses can capture the true meaning of the generalized
spatial term.
Specific spatial terms For each specific spatial term
collected, I grouped together the pictures that the term
had been used to describe. Then, for each group, I
isolated the attributes that were common to all of the
pictures in the group. Only four of the attributes coded

2
Here I consider only those terms whose distribution suggests
that they are specific spatial terms (see below).
3
I used a fairly broad definition of animacy, namely, things
that are capable of self-determination (e.g., human legs, cats)
were taken as animate, while objects incapable of selfdetermination (e.g., jackets, doors) were not. Looking across
languages, this is not the only way to look at the notion of
animacy.

4

I include here spatial nominals and locative cases along with
adpositions, as both occur (in languages using them) as
answers to where-questions, and neither is expected to display
semantic patterns different from those of adpositions
(Levinson et al., 2003).
5
Specific spatial terms like the Japanese spatial nominal naka
often appear in spatial descriptions with generalized spatial
terms, as will be discussed further below.

377

appeared as unifying factors for the ranges of use of the
terms I collected: difference in vertical position of the
Figure and the Ground, contact, support of the Figure
by the Ground, and inclusion of the Figure within the
Ground. This is exemplified by the terms in Table 26;
each term listed is marked with a plus under those
attributes that must be true of scenes described by the
term and a minus under those that may not be true.
Attributes with neither a plus nor a minus may, but
need not, be true of scenes described by the term. For
example, the Polish term na requires that the Figure and
the Ground be in contact and that the Ground support
the Figure, regardless of which, if either, is higher, and
regardless of whether the Figure might be included in
the Ground7.
These four attributes highlight the importance of
geometry, function, and qualitative physics (cf., Feist &
Gentner, 2003). The first two, difference in vertical
position of the Figure and the Ground and contact, both
encode information about the geometry of the relation
between the Figure and the Ground. The next attribute,
support, encodes information about the physics of the
interaction (the Ground is constraining the location of
the Figure in one dimension) and about the function of
the Ground. Lastly, inclusion provides information
about geometry, function, and physics, as the typical
situation when a Figure is geometrically included in a
Ground is that the Ground functions as a container for
the Figure and thereby constrains the location of the
Figure in more than one dimension.
In addition to highlighting the importance of
geometry, function, and qualitative physics across a
sizable sample of languages and spatial terms, this data
demonstrates that important similarities co-exist with
cross-linguistic variation (cf., Bowerman & Pederson,
1992, 1996; Levinson et al., 2003; Regier, 1996).

Table 2:
Example terms and the attributes
characterizing them.
Example
terms
ue
(Japanese)
taas
(Tagalog)
[nad]8
(Russian)
[upar]
(Hindi)
na (Polish)
på
(Swedish)
sur
(French)
auf
(German)
an
(German)
u (Croatian)
-bVn
(Hungarian)
iqinde
(Turkish)
(6)

Figure
higher
than
Ground
+

Contact

Ground
supports
Figure

Inclusion

+
+

-

+

+
+

+
+

+

+

+
+
+
+
+

Parmen itu di kotak.
candy that LOC box
The candy is in the box.
⇒ di dalam may be substituted for di
(7)
Meja itu di bawah lampu.
table that LOC beneath lamp
The table is under the lamp.
⇒ di may not occur alone
As mentioned earlier, generalized spatial terms such
as Indonesian di are often glossed as at, in, or on (e.g.,
Macdonald, 1976). However, examination of the range
of uses evident for di reveals that no single English
preposition can occur in the entire range. Although di
may occur alone in situations where English uses at, in,
or on, it also appears in combination with locational
nouns in situations where the English glosses are
unacceptable (e.g., example (7)). Thus, glosses – which
are a function of both the scene and the sentence as a
whole (Ameka, 1995) – fail to capture their meaning.
What then is the meaning of the generalized spatial
term? To account for both classes of use, I propose one
basic element of meaning appropriate to all uses (8) and
two pragmatically licensed elements of meaning (9).
(8) di = location of the Figure in the region of
interaction of the Ground

Generalized spatial terms The criterial factor for
identifying generalized spatial terms is that they occur
in all spatial descriptions. These terms can either
appear alone or in combination with a more specific
term, as exemplified by the Indonesian examples in (5)
– (7).
(5) Buku itu di meja.
book that LOC table
The book is on the table.
⇒ di atas may be substituted for di
6

Due to space constraints, I only present a representative
subset of the terms collected.
7
Although the norm when the Figure is included in the
Ground is to use a term marking inclusion, such as Polish w,
terms such as na may be used to describe configurations such
as a face on a stamp, in which the Figure may be conceived of
as included in the Ground.
8
Terms from languages that do not use the English alphabet
are presented as phonetic transcriptions in square brackets.

378

recurred in the meanings of specific spatial terms: a
difference in vertical position, contact, support, and
inclusion. This finding corroborates recent work by
Levinson and his colleagues (Levinson et al., 2003)
suggesting the importance of attachment, a difference
in vertical position (both super- and subadjacency),
proximity, and containment to spatial meanings across
languages. These attributes together highlight the
importance of geometric, functional, and qualitative
physical factors, all of which have been argued in
previous work to be important to spatial relational
meaning in a small set of languages, to the meanings of
spatial relational terms more generally.
Whereas specific spatial terms have received a fair
amount of attention in linguistics and cognitive science,
the attention accorded generalized spatial terms has
been far sparser. However, an understanding of the
uses of generalized spatial terms, both with and without
accompanying specific spatial terms, is integral to an
understanding of the range of spatial meanings evident
in human language. The analysis of Indonesian di
presented here provides a step towards a comprehensive
account. Further testing of this analysis, including a
study of the applicability of sentences without specific
terms as descriptions of a variety of pictures, will be
necessary to solidify the conclusions reached here. In
addition, in order to arrive at a descriptively adequate
account of generalized spatial terms, these studies will
need to be repeated for generalized spatial terms of
further languages.
Although more work, including the examination of
a wider range of languages, is necessary to completely
understand the factors influencing how humans talk
about locations in space, I have presented here two
windows into spatial relational meaning. The view
from these windows, illuminating both cross-linguistic
variation and commonalities in specific spatial terms
through one, and a coherent meaning for a previously
misunderstood set of terms through the other, furthers
our understanding of cross-linguistic variation and
linguistic universals in the semantics of space.

(9)

(a) the Figure is in contact with the Ground.
(b) the Figure-Ground relation is canonical.
The element of meaning in (8) serves to unite the
disparate range of uses of di without falsely implying
equivalence between di and its English prepositional
glosses.
Additionally, the pragmatically licensed
elements of meaning proposed in (9) make a clear
prediction about when di felicitously appears alone and
when the addition of a locational noun is preferred.
The default assumption when di appears alone is that
the elements in (9) are true, although this is not always
the case (see (11) and (12)). The use of a locational
noun emphasizes the specifics of the relation and
highlights any deviations from this assumption.
To test this analysis, I created spatial descriptions
that violate each of the proposed elements of meaning
(example (10) violated (8); (11) violated (9a); and (12)
violated (9b)). Each sentence involved a use of di
without the addition of a more specific term.
(10) *Buku itu di meja, tapi bukan dekatnya.
Book that LOC table but not nearpossessive
The book is on the table but not near it.
(11) Buku itu di meja tapi tidak menyentuh.
Book that LOC table but not touching
The book is on the table but it’s not touching it.
(12) Buku itu di meja tapi menempel dengan aneh.
Book that LOC table but stuck
manner weird
The book is on the table but it’s attached in a
weird manner.
Eleven speakers of Indonesian were asked to assess
the acceptability of the created sentences. The different
violations resulted in quite different acceptability
judgments: violations of (8) were rarely accepted (9%);
violations of (9), while odd, were more acceptable
(55% for (9a); 73% for (9b)), F(2,32) = 6.09, p < .01.
These data support the hypothesis that (8) is part of the
semantics of di, while the elements in (9) are
pragmatically licensed.

Discussion

Acknowledgments

Analysis of the terms used to describe spatial locations
across seventeen languages revealed spatial terms that
fall into two classes: specific spatial terms, which
provide semi-precise information about the location of
a Figure; and generalized spatial terms, which simply
serve to locate the Figure in the region of interaction of
a named Ground.
By investigating spatial semantics in many
languages, we can gain insights into the range of
attributes of spatial scenes to which humans attend
when localizing objects.
By grouping pictures
described by each individual specific spatial term, it
was possible to isolate those attributes of the spatial
scenes described that are important to the use of each
term. Across seventeen languages, four attributes

This work was supported by NSF-LIS award SBR9720313 and NSF-ROLE award 21002/REC-0087516.
I thank Florencia Anggoro for help in translating
materials and conducting the Indonesian study. I am
grateful to Melissa Bowerman and Eric Pederson for
the use of their Topological Picture Series. I also thank
Dedre Gentner, Beth Levin, Judith Levi, Terry Regier,
Florencia Anggoro, and Jason Jameson for comments
on the ideas presented here.

References
Ameka, F.K. (1995) The Linguistic Construction of
Space in Ewe. Cognitive Linguistics 6, 139-181.

379

Bennett, D. C. (1975). Spatial and temporal uses of
English prepositions: An essay in stratificational
semantics. London: Longman.
Bowerman, M. (1996). The origins of children's spatial
semantic categories:
Cognitive vs. linguistic
determinants. In Gumperz, J. and Levinson, S. (Eds.),
Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Bowerman, M. & Choi, S. (2001). Shaping meanings
for language: Universal and language specific in the
acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In M.
Bowerman & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Language
acquisition
and
conceptual
development.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bowerman, M., & Pederson, E. (1992). Crosslinguistic perspectives on topological spatial
relationships. Paper presented at the 91st Annual
Meeting of the American Anthropological
Association, San Francisco, CA.
Bowerman, M., & Pederson, E. (1996). Crosslinguistic perspectives on topological spatial
relationships. Manuscript in preparation.
Cienki, A. J. (1989). Spatial cognition and the
semantics of prepositions in English, Polish, and
Russian. Munich, Germany: Verlag Otto Sagner.
Coventry, K.R. (1998). Spatial prepositions, functional
relations, and lexical specification. In Olivier, P. and
Gapp, K-P. (Eds.), The representation and
processing of spatial expressions. Mahwah, NJ.:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Coventry, K., Carmichael, R., & Garrod, S. C. (1994).
Spatial prepositions, object-specific function, and
task requirements. Journal of Semantics, 11, 289309.
Feist, M. I. (2002). Geometry, function, and the use of
in and on. Paper presented at the Sixth Conference
on Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and Language,
Houston, TX.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1997). Animacy, control,
and the IN/ON distinction. Paper presented at the
Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Workshop on Language and Space,
Providence, RI.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (1998). On plates, bowls,
and dishes: Factors in the use of English IN and ON.
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, 345-349.
Feist, M. I., & Gentner, D. (2003). Factors involved in
the use of in and on. Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Forbus, K. D. (1983). Qualitative reasoning about
space and motion. In D. Gentner & A. L. Stevens
(Eds.), Mental models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative process theory.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence, 24, 85-168.

Gentner, D., & Bowerman, M. (1996). Crosslinguistic
differences in the lexicalization of spatial relations
and effects on acquisition. Paper presented at the
Seventh International Congress for the Study of
Child Language, Istanbul, Turkey.
Gentner, D., & Bowerman, M. (2000). Not all on's are
equal: Crosslinguistic differences in spatial relations
and their effects on acquisition. Unpublished mss.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition:
An interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in
English. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Landau, B.
(1996).
“Multiple geometric
representations of objects in languages and language
learners.” In Bloom, P., Peterson, M. A., Nadel, L.,
and Garrett, M. F. (Eds.), Language and Space.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and
“where” in spatial language and spatial cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Levinson, S.C. (1996). Relativity in spatial conception
and description. In Gumperz, J. and Levinson, S.
(Eds.), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S., Meira, S. & The Language and Cognition
Group. (2003). “Natural concepts” in the spatial
topological domain – adpositional meanings in
crosslinguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typology. Language, 79 (3), 485-516.
Macdonald, R. R. (1976). Indonesian Reference
Grammar. Washington: Georgetown University
Press.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(1976).
Language and perception. Cambridge, MA: Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press.
O’Keefe, J. (1996). The spatial prepositions in
English, vector grammar, and the cognitive map
theory. In Bloom, P., Peterson, M. A., Nadel, L., and
Garrett, M. F. (Eds.), Language and Space.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Regier, T. (1996). The human semantic potential:
Spatial language and constrained connectionism.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sinha, C. & Thorseng, L. A. (1995). A coding system
for spatial relational reference. Cognitive Linguistics,
6-2/3, 261-309.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and
cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49-100.
Vandeloise, C. (1991). Spatial prepositions: A case
study from French. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Vandeloise, C. (1994). Methodology and analyses of
the preposition in. Cognitive Linguistics, 5 (2), 157184.

380

