UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Task Interruption: Resumption Lag and the Role of Cues

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/18b4r661

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Altmann, Erik M.
Trafton, J. Gregory

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Task Interruption: Resumption Lag and the Role of Cues
Erik M. Altmann (ema@msu.edu)

J. Gregory Trafton (trafton@itd.nrl.navy.mil)

Department of Psychology
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824

Naval Research Laboratory, Code 5513
4555 Overlook Avenue S. W.
Washington, DC 20375

Abstract

again, when an interruption is over and we can return to
what we were doing before. There is surprisingly little
research focused on this measure, and what there is is
distributed across a variety of domains and paints no clear
picture of whether interruptions are disruptive or not. For
example, in a study of interruption of administrative and
clerical workers, disruptive effects of interruption were
difficult to detect (Zijlstra, Roe, Leonora, & Krediet, 1999),
and interruption in a simple question-answering task can
actually improve performance, measured in terms of overall
accuracy and time-on-task (Speier, Vessey, & Valacich,
2003). In the mainstream cognitive psychology literature,
research on “task switching” (Monsell, 2003) would seem to
be relevant, as studies in this domain typically focus on the
“switch cost” associated with shifting from one task to
another. However, this literature is perhaps not so aptly
named; the “tasks” used in task-switching studies take a few
hundred milliseconds to complete, with switch cost a small
and not particularly relevant fraction of that (Altmann, in
press). We are interested in higher-level tasks with greater
ecological validity, where switch cost is measured not in
tens of milliseconds, but in seconds or longer.
In operational terms, the dependent measure in the current
study is the resumption lag, illustrated in Figure 1. The
resumption lag is the time interval separating the end of the
secondary task and the first subsequent action taken by the
human operator in the primary task. We report first a
comparison of this resumption lag to an estimate of the time
interval that usually separates actions in the primary task, to
give a sense of the absolute magnitude of the disruptive
effect; to preview, the mean inter-action interval, in the
highly interactive primary task we are using, is roughly 2 s,
and the resumption lag is roughly 4 s, indicating a
substantial disruption both in absolute and relative terms.
We then report on two factors that have the potential to
reduce the resumption lag. Both focus on the interruption
lag, also illustrated in Figure 1. The interruption lag is a
brief transitional interval immediately preceding an
interruption, during which the operator knows of the
pending interruption but is not yet engaged by it. An
example is the time between the phone starting to ring and
the act of actually taking the call; during this interval, there
is a brief opportunity to complete a thought, for example, or
negotiate quickly with a conversation partner (physically
present) how and when to resume after the call is over.
Many real-world interruptions, even more urgent ones,
afford a brief interruption lag; even when a fire alarm
sounds, one is still likely to take time to save changes to an
electronic document, for example, before evacuating.

The consequences of interrupting someone in the middle of a
complex task are of considerable practical and theoretical
interest. We examine one behavioral measure of the
disruption caused by task interruption, namely the resumption
lag, or the time needed to “collect one’s thoughts” and restart
a task after an interruption is over. The resumption lag (in
our task environment) was double the interval between
uninterrupted actions (3.8 s vs. 1.9 s), indicating a substantial
disruptive effect. To probe the nature of the disruption, we
examined the role of external cues associated with the
interrupted task, finding that cues available immediately
before an interruption facilitate performance immediately
afterwards (reducing the resumption lag). This c u e availability effect suggests that people deploy preparatory
perceptual and memory processes, apparently spontaneously,
to mitigate the disruptive effects of task interruption.

Introduction
For better or worse, interruptions are part of everyday life.
For better, interruptions are an essential part of efficient
communication, among people and between people and
machines. For worse, interruptions can be annoying, and can
seem disruptive. For example, the annoyance of unwanted
telephone solicitations drove the recent overwhelming
popularity of “do not call” registries in the United States.
Similarly, consider the “software assistant” included in
Microsoft products in the late 1990s. If Word, for example,
detected what it thought was a letter being drafted, it would
freeze the keyboard and demand to know if the user needed
“help” — a feature that in more recent editions of the
software is no longer enabled by default.
There are many parameters to how an interruption is
structured — including interruption duration, for example,
or whether the interrupted person has control over
interruption timing (McFarlane & Latorella, 2002) — and
there is also a range of different behavioral measures on
which the assess the impact of an interruption. In one classic
result, Zeigarnik (1927/1938) found that interrupted tasks
were actually remembered better, in terms of recalled detail,
than tasks that were allowed to run to completion. In more
applied work, however, interruptions have been found to
have detrimental effects on situational awareness in
dynamic task environments like aviation (Latorella, 1996),
where losing one’s place in a checklist during takeoff, for
example, can have catastrophic results (NTSB, 1988).
The current study examines the disruptive effects of
interruption in terms of the time needed to resume the
primary (interrupted) task after the secondary (interrupting)
task is complete. In less formal terms, we examine the time
needed to collect one’s thoughts, or pick up the thread

43

Time

pending interruption). Moreover, because processes like
perceptual search and memory encoding take time, we
varied the duration of the interruption lag across
experiments, to examine what length of interruption lag
would render cue availability effective in reducing the
resumption lag.

Primary task performance
Alert

Interruption lag

Experiments
We conducted four experiments, with interruption lags of
two, four, six, and eight seconds respectively. These values
were based on evidence that an 8-second interruption lag is
enough to allow people to (at least partially) prepare to
resume (Trafton et al., 2003). The primary task involved
planning and resource allocation subject to constraints, and
thus involved a substantial amount of state information to be
represented cognitively. The secondary task was less
complex but nonetheless involved a series of tightly-spaced
forced-choice decisions unfolding over a 30- to 45-second
period. Interruption timing was under system, rather than
operator, control, a factor that tends to aggravate the
disruptive effects of interruption (McFarlane & Latorella,
2002).
The independent variable within each experiment was
whether or not cues were available during the interruption
lag. The main dependent variable was the resumption lag
(Figure 1), but we also compare the resumption lag to the
mean interval between primary-task actions, to estimate the
overall disruptive effect of an interruption.

Start of secondary task

Secondary task performance
End of secondary task

Resumption lag
First action after interruption

Further primary task performance

Figure 1: Time course of an interruption. For
example, if the alert is the phone starting to ring, then
the secondary task is the ensuing phone conversation.
Two characteristics of the interruption lag are examined
here: (1) whether or not the primary task display is
perceptually available during this brief period, and (2) the
actual duration of this period. The relevance of these two
factors is predicated on a memory model of what makes
interruptions disruptive (Altmann & Trafton, 2002; Trafton,
Altmann, Brock, & Mintz, 2003). The basic premise of the
model is that during an interruption, the cognitive
representations that support performance of the primary task
will decay, in particular relative to the cognitive
representations that support performance of the secondary
task. Thus, when resuming the primary task, retrieval cues
will be necessary to re-activate the relevant representations.
This memory analysis predicts, qualitatively, that the
interruption lag — the brief interval before an interruption
— has a crucial role to play in facilitating resumption after
the interruption. During the interruption lag, when the
operator is aware that he or she will soon be interrupted but
can still focus mentally on the primary task, there is an
opportunity to “prepare to resume,” for example by
prospectively encoding goals to accomplish at resumption
(Trafton et al., 2003). To the extent that people do engage in
such preparatory processing, it should help to have the
primary-task display perceptually available during the
interruption lag, to allow retrieval cues to be quickly
accessed and accurately encoded. Thus, to build on earlier
evidence that people do prepare to resume (Trafton et al.,
2003), we asked here whether cue availability is a factor in
this process. In the cue condition the primary task display
was preserved during the interruption lag, whereas in the
n o - c u e condition the screen went blank during the
interruption lag (starting with onset of an alert signaling the

Method
Participants Ninety-six Michigan State University
undergraduates participated in exchange for partial credit
toward a course requirement. Each of the four experiments
involved 24 participants, randomly assigned to the cue and
no-cue conditions (described below).
Materials The primary task was a complex resourceallocation task (Trafton et al., 2003) in which participants
were asked to defeat a set of simulated destinations using
simulated tanks. Participants selected which destinations to
attack and in what order, and issued tanks with appropriate
amounts of fuel and munitions. Fuel was consumed in
reaching a destination, and munitions were consumed in
engaging it, but tank payload was limited, as was the total
number of tanks and other resources available. Points were
awarded for defeating destinations and subtracted for
consuming resources.
Figure 2 shows a view of the primary-task display as it
normally appears when the participant is doing the task.
There is a central window with buttons for allocating tanks
to missions, choosing destinations, and displaying a map
with distances between destinations. There is also an area
for displaying mission outcomes (whether a destination was
defeated, whether a tank ran out of fuel, etc.) To the left are
windows showing the supply pool (available fuel,
munitions, and tanks) and windows for outfitting heavy and
light tanks with varying amounts of fuel and munitions. To
the right is a window showing the participant’s scoring

44

Figure 2: Screen shot of the primary task display during normal performance (see text for summary).
history from past simulations, and windows showing the
status of selected tanks and destinations.
Figure 3 shows (at a more reduced scale) the state of the
display during the interruption lag in the no-cue condition.
To signal the pending interruption (and thus mark the start
the interruption lag), an “eyeball alert” appeared in the topright corner of the display. In the no-cue condition, the
primary-task display was blanked out simultaneously with
alert onset, whereas in the cue condition the primary-task
display was preserved. In both conditions, with the start of
the secondary task (and thus the end of the interruption lag),
the primary-task display (whatever its state) was completely
erased and replaced with the secondary-task display.
During the interruption lag, the cursor was hidden and
disabled, so that all physical interaction with the primary
task ceased. After an interruption, the primary-task display
was reinstated in the same form it was in at the moment the
eyeball alert appeared, with the following exceptions: The
window that was active then — that is, the window that the
participant was working in at the moment the alert appeared
— was de-activated at task resumption, and the cursor was
moved to the top-left corner of the screen. The effect was to
eliminate the active window and the mouse cursor as

Figure 3: Screen shot of the primary task display during the
interruption lag in the no-cue condition. The "eyeball alert" in
the top right corner onsets at the start of the interruption lag
and remains until start of the secondary task. In the cue
condition the eyeball alert is identical but the primary task
display (as in Figure 2) is preserved during the interruption lag.

45

retrieval cues that participants could deploy strategically to
remind themselves of what they had been doing before the
interruption, and therefore make resumption lag more
sensitive to our experimental manipulations.
The secondary task involved evaluating “tracks,” or
targets on a radar screen, as friendly or hostile, according to
attributes like speed and shape of icon (Trafton et al., 2003).
A screenshot of the secondary-task display appears in
Figure 4. Each instance of the secondary task lasted 30 to 45
seconds; afterwards, the participant was returned directly
back to the primary task, as described above.

Resumption lag
Inter-action interval

Time (s)

5
4
3
2
1
0
2

Design Interruption lag varied between experiments, as
described above. Within each experiment, the independent
variable was cue availability during the interruption lag
(cue, no-cue), which was manipulated between subjects.
The main dependent variable was resumption lag, the time
from the end of the secondary task to the first subsequent
action (mouse click) in the primary task. The other measure
of interest, for comparison with resumption lag, was the
inter-action interval, the mean time between actions in the
primary task. Reported values for these measures are means
of participant medians. For the inter-action interval, values
below 1 s were discarded first, to eliminate anticipation
errors, as well as ballistic components of motor plans, such
as the second click of a double-click action.

4

6

8

Interruption lag (s)
Figure 5: Resumption lag compared to inter-action
interval, across experiments. The difference is an
estimate of the disruption caused by task interruption.
interruption lag in facilitating resumption mentioned to
participants; thus, any effects of cue availability can be
attributed to spontaneous use of preparatory strategies.
Results We conducted two analyses of variance (ANOVAs)
for each experiment. The first ANOVA, for which the data
appear in Figure 5, compared mean resumption lag to mean
inter-action interval; for all four experiments the difference
was highly reliable, ps < .0001. The second ANOVA, for
which the data appear in Figure 6, compared cue resumption
lags to no-cue resumption lags. For 2- and 4-second
interruption lags, there was no effect of cue availability,
Fs<1. For the 6-second interruption lag, the cue-availability
effect was marginal, F(1,22)=4.1, p=.056. For the 8-second
interruption lag, the cue-availability effect was reliable,
F(1,22)=5.7, p<.03.
We also conducted an omnibus ANOVA to compare
across experiments, with cue availability and interruption
lag as factors. The cue-availability effect was marginal,
F(1,88)=3.6, p=.060, the interruption-lag effect was not
reliable, F(3,88)=1.2, p>.30, and the two factors did not
interact, F(3,88)=1.4, p>.25.

Procedure Participants were tested individually, in sessions
lasting roughly 90 minutes. A session began with a training
period, in which participants learned to perform both tasks
separately and were shown an example of how the computer
would switch them from one task to the other and back
again. After training, there were three 20-minute blocks of
actual task performance. Within each block there were 10
interruptions, each triggered by a mouse click selected
randomly to occur within a time window with quasi-random
boundaries, to make interruption timing difficult for
participants to predict.
At no point was the hypothetical function of the

Discussion
The first empirical finding was that resumption lag is
substantially longer than the mean interval between actions
(Figure 5). This affords one measure of the disruptive effect
of interruptions, at least in this highly interactive task in
which, without interruption, actions occur at a rapid pace:
The first action after an interruption took longer to execute
than the first action after another primary-task action. In
absolute terms, the resumption lag was 3.8 s – double the
1.9 s inter-action interval, which was measured rather
conservatively by excluding all inter-action intervals under
1 s. This difference would appear to be of considerable
practical interest in dynamic task environments, for example
involving real airplanes or even automobiles traveling at
highway speed, in which the world can look substantially
different after an additional few seconds have elapsed.
The disruptive effect of interruption, as illustrated in
Figure 5, was large and robust, which may agree with our
intuitions about interruptions but doesn’t necessarily agree

Figure 4: Screen shot of the secondary task display.
Participants classified objects moving across a simulated
radar display, according to color, shape, and speed.
46

participant was engrossed, in order to interrupt with the
greatest impact.
The second empirical finding was that cue availability
during the interruption lag (before the interruption) affected
performance at task resumption (after the interruption, 30 to
45 s later), at least for longer interruption lags (Figure 6).
One interpretation of this result, consistent with our memory
analysis earlier, is that the various cognitive operations
required to locate and encode retrieval cues during the
interruption lag take somewhere between 6 and 8 seconds to
complete (in our task environment). In other words, longer
interruption lags afford enough time to link cognitive
representations to external cues to facilitate retrieval later.
However, this interpretation would also seem to predict that
resumption lag in the cue condition should decrease at
longer interruption lags, because cues are facilitating
resumption. Instead, though, Figure 6 suggests that longer
interruption lags drove an increase in resumption lag in the
no-cue condition. Cue availability and interruption lag did
not interact in the cross-experiment ANOVA, so the
increase in no-cue resumption lags could be spurious, but
given the exploratory nature of this work it seems useful to
consider alternative accounts of why the cue-availability
effect was limited to longer interruption lags.
One possible explanation of the increase in no-cue
resumption lags might implicate changes in alertness or
arousal – participants might simply have gotten bored,
staring at a blank screen for 6 or 8 seconds. Some studies
suggest that task interruption serves to increase arousal and
stress, and thus improve overall (globally-measured)
performance, at least on simple tasks (Speier et al., 2003);
perhaps a long interruption lag, without visual information
to focus on, moderates this effect. However, if arousal were
to play a role in the cue-availability effect, it would remain
to explain how a change in arousal before the interruption
could affect performance after the interruption, tens of
seconds later. Perhaps a drop in arousal caused participants’
minds to wander in a way that activated irrelevant thoughts
that in turn interfered with relevant cognitive
representations. In such an account, however, memory
would again play a central role in mediating the effect of
pre-interruption variables on post-interruption performance.
One could explain the cue-availability effect without
reference to memory processes if changes in arousal during
the interruption lag persisted across the entire length of the
interruption, to influence performance directly at task
resumption. Secondary task performance was basically at
ceiling for all subjects, so offers little evidence on this
possibility. However, if arousal effects were to persist for
the entire 30 to 45 seconds of the interruption, one might
expect them to persist somewhat beyond as well, and then
only gradually dissipate. This would predict that the time
between the first and second action after the interruption
would also reflect the cue availability effect. Revisiting our
data, however, we found no difference, as a function either
of interruption lag or cue availability, in the duration of the
interval between the first and second actions after an
interruption; this measure appears in Figure 7. It seems most
likely, then, that even if cue availability and interruption lag
interact to affect arousal before an interruption, memory

Resumption lag (s)

Cue condition
No-cue condition

5
4
3
2
1
0
2

4

6

8

Interruption lag (s)
Figure 6: Resumption lag for cue and no-cue
conditions, across experiments. The difference is
is marginally reliable with a 6-second interruption lag
and reliable with an 8-second interruption lag (see text).
with other controlled studies (e.g., Speier et al., 2003;
Zijlstra et al., 1999). Three factors may have contributed to
the robust effect measured here in terms of resumption lag.
First, resumption lag is a local measure, taken immediately
after every interruption; in contrast, other studies have
reported global measures, such as overall time on task
(Gillie & Broadbent, 1989; Speier et al., 2003). In our
study, one global measure is a participants’ total score over
a session, but this was highly variable and showed no
interpretable trends (so we did not report it). One specific
problem with global measures is that they allow for
compensatory strategies to work against the disruptive
effects of interruption. Zijlstra et al. (1999), for example,
speculate that their administrative workers compensated for
interruption by using the time in between interruptions more
efficiently.
A second factor may have been the relatively substantial
cognitive state required to perform our primary task. In
many scenarios in this task, beyond the resource-allocation
tradeoffs involved, it was a challenge simply to piece
together missions that would actually succeed in defeating
destinations. In other studies, the primary task was simpler
(Speier et al., 2003) and may have been more automated
(Zijlstra et al., 1999), and therefore placed a smaller
premium on maintaining complex representations in
working memory.
Finally, a third factor may have been our implementation
decision to trigger interruptions using mouse clicks, rather
than strictly on the basis of time passage. Our rationale was
that motor actions are often selected and programmed with
the intention of achieving specific goals, so we reasoned
that action-triggered interruptions would be more likely to
disrupt these goals, which are one critical element of
cognitive state; even in mundane tasks it’s not uncommon to
have “Now what was I doing?” moments, and it may be that
these are more effectively induced by linking interruptions
to actions rather than leaving interruption timing entirely to
chance. Indeed, in Zeigarnik’s (1927/1938) classic study,
the experimenter was charged with judging when the

47

Post-resumption
action interval (s)

Cue condition

5

these functions are deployed in complex dynamic task
environments.

No-cue condition

4

Acknowledgements

3

This research was supported by grants N00014-03-1-0063
(to EMA) and N0001400WX21058 (to JGT) from the US
Office of Naval Research. Thanks to the conference
reviewers for helpful suggestions for improvement.

2
1
0
2

4

6

References

8

Altmann, E. M. (in press). Advance preparation in task
switching: What work is being done? Psychological
Science.
Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2002). Memory for goals:
An activation-based model. Cognitive Science, 26, 39-83.
Ballas, J. A., Kieras, D. E., Meyer, D. E., Brock, D. P., &
Stroup, J. (1999). Cueing of display objects by 3-D audio
to reduce automation deficit. Paper presented at the
Fourth annual symposium on situational awareness in the
tactical environment, Patuxent River, MD.
Gillie, T., & Broadbent, D. (1989). What makes
interruptions disruptive? A study of length, similarity,
and complexity. Psychological Research, 50, 243-250.
Kieras, D. E., & Meyer, D. E. (1997). An overview of the
EPIC architecture for cognition and performance with
application to human-computer interaction. HumanComputer Interaction, 12, 391-438.
Latorella, K. A. (1996). Investigating interruptions:
Implications for flightdeck performance. PhD thesis, State
University of New York, Buffalo, NY.
McFarlane, D. C, & Latorella, K. A. (2002). The scope and
importance of human interruption in human-computer
interaction design. Human-Computer Interaction, 17, 161.
Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 134-140.
NTSB. (1988). Aircraft accident report: NWA DC-9-82
N312RC, Detroit Metro, 16 August 1987 (No.
NTSB/AAR-88/05). Washington, DC: National
Transportation Safety Board.
Speier, C., Vessey, I., & Valacich, J. S. (2003). The effects
of interruptions, task complexity, and information
presentation on computer-supported decision-making
performance. Decision Sciences, 34, 771-797.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., Brock, D. P., & Mintz, F. E.
(2003). Preparing to resume an interrupted task: Effects
of prospective goal encoding and retrospective rehearsal.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58,
583-603.
Zeigarnik, B. (1927/1938). On finished and unfinished
tasks. In W. D. Ellis (Ed.), A source book of Gestalt
psychology (pp. 300-314). New York: Harcourt Brace.
Zijlstra, F. R. H., Roe, R. A., Leonora, A. B., & Krediet, I.
(1999). Temporal factors in mental work: Effects of
interrupted activities. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 72, 164-185.

Interruption lag (s)
Figure 7: Inter-action interval between the first and
second actions after an interruption, for cue and no-cue
conditions, across experiments.
and/or perceptual processes mediate the delayed effect on
task resumption.
At least two avenues of future work seem indicated to
clarify the effects of our interruption-lag manipulations on
speed of task resumption. First, it will be important to repeat
these manipulations in context of a factorial design in which
interruption lag and cue availability are fully crossed; here,
one objection is that the cross-experiment comparison is
potentially confounded by changes in the subject
population.
Second, although the model that motivated these
experiments emphasizes memory processes (Altmann &
Trafton, 2002), there are alternative characterizations of
why task resumption is time consuming. In particular, one
account of automation deficit (Ballas, Kieras, Meyer, Brock,
& Stroup, 1999) — like resumption lag, but measured in
terms of accuracy — is that it reflects encoding of
perceptual information (Kieras & Meyer, 1997) rather than
memory retrieval. Thus, in our task environment it could be
that the difference between the resumption lag and the
baseline inter-action interval (Figure 5) simply reflects the
cost of re-encoding the display, and that this re-encoding is
what is facilitated by cue availability during the interruption
lag. To distinguish between these accounts, one could vary
the extent of the cognitive representations required to
perform the primary task on one hand, and the perceptual
complexity of the display on the other. Under a memoryretrieval model, the cue-availability effect should be linked
to complex cognitive states, whereas under a perceptualencoding model the effect should be linked to complex
external displays; in our task environment, these two factors
are confounded.
Whatever the ultimate explanation, the cue-availability
effect shows an interesting link between what happens
before an interruption and what happens later, after tens of
seconds of intervening behavior. In practical terms, the
effect suggests that interface designs, and possibly training
interventions, could exploit cue availability in some way to
facilitate resumption in task environments in which
interruptions are frequent and seconds matter. In theoretical
terms, probing this effect should help us develop constraints
on models of memory, perception, and cognitive control as

48

