UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Temporal Distance, Event Representation, and Similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/535037fp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Day, Samuel B.
Bartels, Daniel M.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Temporal Distance, Event Representation, and Similarity
Samuel B. Day (s-day2@northwestern.edu)

Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

Daniel M. Bartels (d-bartels@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 N. Sheridan Drive Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

of similarity judgment.
A demonstration that these
construal effects may influence similarity—which is widely
implicated in such fundamental cognitive processes as
retrieval, categorization and inference—could serve to
emphasize the expansive role that this kind of context-based
effect plays throughout cognition.

Abstract
A recent line of research suggests that an event’s temporal
distance from the present has an effect on the way in which it
is likely to be construed. Specifically, more distant events are
proposed to be represented primarily in terms of abstract,
decontextualized information, while events in the near future
tend to produce relatively more concrete, situation-specific
construals. In the current study, we examine the extent to
which this sort of effect can differentially emphasize
commonalities between two events. Similarity ratings were
collected for pairs of events sharing either high-level or lowlevel commonalities, and described as occurring in either the
near or distant future. Consistent with predictions, an
interaction was observed between temporal distance and
commonality level. Broader implications for cognitive
processing are discussed.

Temporal Construal Theory
A recent set of studies in the judgment and decision
making literature suggests that the way a person construes
an event can be influenced by the temporal context in which
that event takes place. According to Temporal Construal
Theory (TCT) (Liberman & Trope, 1998; Sagristano, Trope,
& Liberman, 2002; Trope & Liberman, 2000), events in the
near future are likely to be represented largely in terms of
concrete, circumstantial, and goal-irrelevant features, while
the representations of events in the distant future tend to
emphasize features that are more abstract, central, and goalrelevant. Trope and Liberman refer to these sparser, less
contextualized representations characteristic of the distant
future as high-level construals, and to the more enriched and
highly contextualized representations more common in near
future events as low-level construals.
These differences in representation can have behavioral
consequences. For instance, one might agree to give a talk
at a conference on some date in the distant future, perhaps
focusing almost exclusively on the event’s abstract, positive
aspects: the opportunity to receive feedback on one’s work,
the opportunity for public exposure, and so on. As the date
of the conference approaches, however, one’s focus may
begin to shift to some of the contextualized details that were
absent in the initial representation. For instance, the time
demands one faces in preparing for the presentation might
become more salient, making the whole experience seem
more effortful. The net effect, in this case, would be that the
presentation loses some of the positive valence it once had.
These proposed differences in event representations can
lead to changes in preference, depending on whether an
event is described as being in the near or distant future. In
one set of studies (Liberman & Trope, 1998), participants
were given descriptions of events which, like the conference
example, had opposite evaluative valences for high- versus
low-level construals. For instance, one set of participants
was asked to judge their likelihood of attending a lecture
that was described as relevant and interesting but scheduled
at an inconvenient time of day, while another set considered
the case of a less interesting lecture, but one which was
scheduled for a more convenient time. In the first group,
the high-level construal was assumed to be positive

Introduction
One of the remarkable strengths of the human cognitive
system is its flexibility. Not only are we able to store vast
amounts of information about our world, organized into
categories, scripts and schemas, we also seem particularly
proficient at tailoring that information to fit the current
demands of our environment. In particular, we seem
capable of representing the same entity or event in a wide
variety of ways. In addition to taxonomic organizations that
can differentially emphasize various aspects of the same
individual (e.g., animal / mammal / dog / collie / Rover), we
appear to fluently cross-classify things based on goals,
scripts, and evaluations (Barsalou, 1983, 1985; Ross &
Murphy, 1999). Further, activation and retrieval of specific
information can be highly subject to effects of general
context (e.g., Tulving, 1972; Godden & Baddeley, 1975).
Similarly, contextual or top-down effects may have a
substantial impact on how new experiences are perceived
and encoded (Bower, Black, & Turner, 1979; Bransford &
Johnson, 1972). An important implication of this variation
in representation concerns the impact that it may have on
the processes that operate this activated information.
An intriguing recent body of research demonstrates an
additional factor which may broadly affect event
representations: temporal distance. Given the importance
of our perceptions of the future for our ability to plan, to set
and pursue goals, and to generally make long-term
judgments, predictions, and choices, these effects have
received surprisingly little attention in cognitive science on
the whole. In the current paper, we examine the impact of
such temporally-based construals on the ubiquitous process
274

level, relational commonalities may be highlighted in
comparison.

(relevant, pleasant experience) and the low-level construal
negative (the logistics of fitting it into one’s schedule). The
second group was expected to have the opposite pattern of
appraisal: a more negative impression of the abstract details
of the situation, but a more positive sense of the low-level
procedures involved in participating. While participants
were more likely to attend the interesting lecture overall,
this difference was more pronounced when the lecture was
described as taking place a year from now rather than
tomorrow. In other words, the decision pertaining to the
near future seemed to give significantly more weight to the
concrete, contextual aspects of the situation. The overall
preference for the interesting lecture is also relevant, since it
is consistent with the theory’s suggestion that more
proximal events are represented by some combination of
contextual and abstract information, while distant events are
primarily abstractly represented.
Note, however, that in these studies, the focus is on shifts
in preference; representation is just a tool for the
demonstrations. As such, this and all of their evidence
concerning how we represent events is second-order, in that
we have to infer differences in event representation from
people’s choices, or from people’s preferred descriptions of
events (see Liberman & Trope, 1998). One purpose of the
present study was to seek more direct evidence for
differences in event representation as a function of temporal
context.

Experiment
The primary goal of this study was to determine whether
temporal distance could affect event representations in such
a way as to alter the perceived similarity between events.
There are two significant motivations for this approach.
First, it would provide a fairly direct way of assessing
representation that would not need to rely on complex
secondary tasks. Second, and perhaps more important, it
would provide a bridge linking temporal effects such as
these to a much broader set of cognitive issues. The critical
role that similarity is proposed to play in so many mental
activities suggests that observed systematic changes in
similarity should have a relevant and far-reaching impact on
cognition generally.
Just as any entity or event may be represented in a wide
variety of ways, so may any pair of things share a great
number of commonalities. Some have gone so far as to
suggest that this robs similarity of any explanatory power
(Goodman, 1972), since all pairs of items are potentially
infinitely similar to one another (e.g., two things may both
have mass, may both be smaller than the sun, etc.). A more
measured and practical approach has been to emphasize the
relative salience of the various pieces of information in each
entity’s representation. This salience could vary as a
function of things such as prior knowledge, recent exposure
or priming, and even the nature of the comparison context
itself (Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993; Tversky, 1977;
Gentner & Markman, 1997; Gentner, Rattermann & Forbus,
1993). Information that is more salient in a representation is
assumed to be given more weight in judgments of similarity.
Importantly, as previously noted, the properties that
contribute to similarity judgments are not limited to
concrete perceptual features, but also include the more
abstract, relational concepts that structure and bind those
features together (Gentner & Markman, 1997).
The predictions for the current study are straightforward.
If the representations of two events are composed primarily
of high-level, abstract descriptions of those events, then
commonalities (or lack of commonalities) at that level of
analysis should play a major role in their perceived
similarity. That is, we would expect similarity ratings to be
driven significantly by abstract, structuring information
such as goals, causes and relationships. If, on the other
hand, the representations also contain information involving
low-level concrete and perceptual aspects of the situations,
an impact of the commonalities at that situation-specific
level should also be observed.
Consider for a moment your representation of visiting a
dentist’s office. This representation could include fairly
high-level information pertaining to conscientiousness and
long-term health benefits, as well as more concrete
situational information about the particular setting and
sensations involved. Now consider two different events to
which this situation could be compared: the act of joining a
health club, or the act of getting a tattoo. The health club
event seems to share a number of abstract characteristics
with the dentist visit (the goal of health benefits, etc.), but

Similarity and Representational Level
Similarity is widely held to be one of the most critical
concepts in cognition, and there are few aspects of mental
life that do not seem to depend on it in one way or another.
Similarity is seen as playing a vital role in recall through
reminding (Hintzman, 1984; Ross, 1984); most theories of
categorization rely heavily on the concept of similarity to
determine category membership of a new item (Hintzman,
1986; Medin & Schaffer, 1978; Nosofsky, 1984); similarity
is proposed to be fundamental in making generalizations,
inferences and knowledge transfer (e.g., Novick, 1988;
Osherson, et al, 1990; Ross, 1984).
It has been demonstrated that judgments of similarity are
not simply a function of low-level featural overlap, but also
depend on structural relationships between representations
(Gentner & Markman, 1997; Markman & Gentner, 1993).
This is true not only in terms of the impact of
commonalities in the relations and relational systems
themselves, but also in the way that attributes in
corresponding roles that are defined by those structures are
emphasized.
These “deeper” commonalities of relational systems are
extraordinarily useful for generating new knowledge and for
applying existing knowledge to new situations.
For
example, recognition of a common causal structure in two
ostensibly different systems may lead to a deeper
understanding of one system via analogical inferences from
the other (see Gentner, 1983; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997).
Thus, the similarity rating task seems particularly apt in
the current context, first because it acts as a connection to
deeper aspects of cognition in general, and also because it
may provide added insight into situations in which high275

Additionally, these events were described as taking place
either in the near future (“this week”) or the distance future
(“next year”). This distinction acted as a between-subjects
factor, with all events for a particular participant being
described at the same temporal distance. Commonality
level served as a within-subjects factor, with half of the
standards randomly being paired with high-level
comparison sentences and the other half with low. Thus, the
experiment was a 2 (temporal distance: near vs. distant
future) × 2 (commonality level: high vs. low pairing) mixed
design.
In total, 10 test items (five at each commonality level) and
13 filler items were presented in a completely randomized
order (different for each participant), with the exception that
all participants were given the same two initial items (one
literally similar, and one non-similar) to help “anchor” their
rating range and reduce variability. Within each item,
sentence order was randomized, with the standard appearing
first in approximately half of the pairs. A typical test item
might read as follows: “Tomorrow, Karen will go to the
dentist. Tomorrow she also will join a health club.”
Sample materials are given in Table 1.
The experiment was implemented as a computer-based
task. After instructions, the first sentence pair appeared on
the screen, followed by the prompt “How similar do you
think these activities are to each other?” Beneath this
prompt was a horizontal bar, with endpoints labeled “very
dissimilar” and “very similar”. Participants were instructed
to click a location on this bar to indicate their perception of
the similarity of the two events. This response was
normalized to a value between 0 and 1, for the “dissimilar”
and “similar” endpoints, respectively. To ensure that
participants were attending to the task, response latencies of
less than 3 seconds for any item resulted in the warning
“Too Fast” appearing on the screen, followed by a delay of
several seconds before proceeding to the subsequent item.

appears quite different in terms of the situation-specific
details. The tattoo, on the other hand, shares a surprising
number of low-level, concrete features (reclining chair,
needles, physical pain), but little in the way of high-level
commonalities. The important outcome of this is that the
abstraction level at which the dentist event is construed
should have significant (and opposite) effects on the
outcomes of these two comparisons.
This is exactly the situation that we created in our study.
Participants were asked to give similarity ratings for pairs of
events that shared primarily either high-level or low-level
commonalities. Further, these events could be described as
taking place in either the near future or the distant future. If,
in fact, the temporal relationship of the events to the present
time has an impact on their level of construal, then we
should expect to see an interaction between temporal
distance and level of commonality, such that pairs with
high-level commonalities should be perceived as more
similar in the distant than the near future, while pairs
sharing low-level features should become less similar in the
distant future relative to the near future.

Participants
Twenty-three Northwestern University undergraduates
participated in this study for partial course credit.

Materials and Procedure
The materials for this experiment consisted of sentence
pairs describing two events that a fictitious character was
planning to undertake in the future. Each test item included
a standard sentence, and one of two comparison sentences.
These comparison sentences were constructed to share
either high-level or low-level commonalities with the
standard, but not both. In addition to these test items, the
material set included several filler sentence pairs, which
were either literally similar, sharing both high- and lowlevel features, or non-similar, sharing neither.

Table 1. Sample events. Low-level comparison sentences were designed to share concrete features and procedures
with the standard, while High-level comparisons share more abstract commonalities.
Event Standard

Low-level comparison

High-level comparison

Reading and coding completed
research questionnaires

Doing taxes

Conducting telephone surveys

Going door-to-door distributing
leaflets about the environment

Going trick-or-treating with daughter

Writing letters to congressmen and
local council members

Going to the dentist

Getting a tattoo

Joining a health club

Buying diamond necklace for wife

Buying expensive watch for self

Taking wife out for gourmet meal

Calling colleges requesting
information packets

Calling hotels to arrange Summer trip
to Mexico

Taking the SAT

276

Results
Consistent with predictions, a 2 × 2 ANOVA revealed an
interaction between temporal distance and commonality
level, F (1, 21) = 8.60, p < .01. Participants rated high-level
pairs as more similar in the distant future condition (M =
0.63, SD = 0.11) than in the near future condition (M = 0.58,
SD = 0.10). Conversely, low-level pairs were rated as more
similar in the near future condition (M = 0.54, SD = 0.10)
than in the distant future condition (M = 0.40, SD = 0.09).
A main effect of commonality level was also observed.
Participants rated high-level pairs as more similar (M =
0.60, SD = 0.11) than low-level pairs (M = 0.47, SD = 0.12)
overall, F (1, 21) = 18.84, p < .001. Additionally, there was
a marginal trend for participants to rate near future events as
more similar than distant future events (p = .092). This
latter effect is more pronounced in the across-item analyses:
a 2 × 2 ANOVA run across items revealed the same
interaction between temporal distance and commonality
level, F (1, 18) = 7.77, p = .012, the same main effect of
commonality level, F (1, 18) = 9.96, p = .005, and a
significant effect of temporal distance, F (1, 18) = 4.73, p <
.05. This final effect reflects the fact that the low-level
comparisons showed a more dramatic decrease with
temporal distance than the corresponding increase in the
high-level comparisons. In fact, post-hoc t-tests indicated
that only the low-level comparisons changed significantly
across distances (t (1,22) = 3.67, p < .01) (see discussion
below).

1.0

Low-level

0.9

High-level

Similarity rating

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Close

Distant

Temporal distance

Figure 1. Interaction between commonality level
and temporal distance.
The most immediate implication of these findings is that
this sort of temporally-based context effect should now be
predicted to influence many of the other cognitive processes
in which similarity participates. For instance, it is possible
that categorization of events and entities considered as being
in the distant future may be based on somewhat more
abstract dimensions than those considered in the immediate
present. This categorization would in turn affect the
inferences that an individual is likely to make in the absence
of explicit knowledge, and their confidence in the accuracy
of those inferences. One interesting prediction is that these
perceived similarities may influence the extent to which
knowledge is successfully transferred from one domain to
another. Moreover, this knowledge transfer—which is seen
as relying on the mapping of structural commonalities—
might benefit more generally from the abstract
representations characteristic of temporal distance.
Preliminary pilot data collected by the authors suggest
that temporal context may have an effect on cued retrieval.
That is, the perceived increase in similarity associated with
an “appropriate” encoding situation (temporally close for
low-level commonalities, temporally distant for high-level
commonalities) may improve the probability of retrieving
an event from memory when cued with the previously
compared event.
The results suggest a number of avenues for future
research. One important direction would involve varying
the kind of high-level commonalities involved in the
comparisons to include abstract characteristics other than
those emphasizing individual plans and goals. While this
proved to be a useful way of describing future events for our
experimental purposes, it could potentially lead to
confounds such as attribution of particular personality traits
to the characters (e.g., planning to do x is consistent with
planning to do y), and the use of a broader set of abstract
event commonalities would help to address this.
Another interesting approach would be the examination of
temporal distance in the opposite direction, seeing whether
similar results could be obtained with events that occurred

Discussion
The primary predictions of the experiment were
confirmed. Participants judged event pairs with abstract,
high-level commonalities to be more similar in the distant
future than the near future, while pairs sharing more
concrete and low-level procedural features showed the
opposite pattern. This supports the proposal that temporal
distance is in fact influencing the level at which events are
construed, and that these representational differences are
stable enough to be reflected in perceived similarity.
The two observed main effects, while not predicted, are in
retrospect completely consistent with the assumptions of
temporal construal theory.
While distant events are
assumed to be represented primarily in terms of their
abstract characteristics, proximal events are suggested to
have more “enriched” representations that combine some
contextual and some abstract information. Consistent with
this characterization, the greatest observed effect was the
drop in the similarity of low-level pairs between close and
distant conditions, contributing to both of these additional
effects. As noted above, although both low- and high-level
comparisons changed in the predicted direction with
temporal distance, this change was only statistically
significant for the low-level pairs.
The second main effect—the overall preference for highlevel commonalities—has been replicated in more recent
pilot data, and is consistent with prior research showing a
preference for relational over attributional similarity
(Gentner & Clement, 1988; Goldstone, Medin, & Gentner,
1991).
277

Goldstone, R. L., Medin, D. L., & Gentner, D. (1991).
Relational similarity and the non-independence of
features in similarity judgments. Cognitive Psychology,
23, 222–264.
Goodman, N. (1972). Seven strictures on similarity. In N.
Goodman (Ed.), Problems and Projects (pp. 437–447).
New York: Bobbs-Merrill.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427–466.
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility
and desirability considerations in near and distant future
decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 5–18.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993b). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517–535.
Medin, D. L., Goldstone, R. L., & Gentner, D. (1993).
Respects for similarity. Psychological Review, 100(2),
254–278.
Medin, D.L., and Schaffer, M.M. (1978). Context Theory of
Classification Learning, Psychological Review, 85, 207–
238.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 104–
114.
Novick, L. R. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem
similarity, and expertise. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 510–
520.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., and
Shafir,
E.
(1990).
Category-based
induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185–200.
Ross, B.H. (1984). Remindings and their effects in learning
a cognitive skill. Cognitive Psychology, 16(3), 371–416.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
495–553.
Sagristano, M. D., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2002). Timedependent gambling: Odds now, money later. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 364–376.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2000). Temporal construal and
time-dependent changes in preference. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 876–889.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In E.
Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of
Memory. New York: Academic Press.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327–352.

in the recent or distant past. Taking this a step further, it
may be the case that the important dimension in these
effects is psychological distance rather than simply
temporal distance. If this were the case, we might expect to
find similar effects by varying dimensions such as similarity
of the character to the participant, or the probability of a
future event occurring.

Conclusions
We spend a great deal of time thinking about the future.
In fact, this capacity seems to be a defining and distinctive
characteristic of human cognition. We consider possible
outcomes, evaluate potential alternatives, and pursue distant
goals that may take years or even decades to achieve.
Because our mental focus is so often situated in the future, it
seems particularly relevant to consider the influence of
temporal distance on cognition. The current study, though
modest, highlights just how far-reaching these effects may
be.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by ONR award N00014-02-10078. Thanks to Jason Jameson, Jennifer Asmuth,
Wisconsin Badger hockey, and the Similarity and Analogy
group.

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 211–227.
Barsalou, L. W. (1985). Ideals, central tendency, and
frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded
structure in categories. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 11, 629–
649.
Bransford, J. D, & Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual
prerequisites for understanding: Some investigations of
comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 11, 717–726.
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979). Scripts in
memory for text. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 177–220.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45–
56.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., and Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology 25(4), 524–575.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Context
dependent memory in two natural environments: On land
and underwater. British Journal of Psychology, 66(3),
325–331.

278

