UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Prior Task Experience on Bias in Predictions of Duration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9c63d855

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Thomas, Kevin E.
Newstead, Stephen E.
Handley, Simone J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Prior Task Experience on Bias in Predictions of Duration
Kevin E. Thomas (k.e.thomas@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth. Devon. PL4 8AA. UK.

Stephen E. Newstead (s.newstead@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth. Devon. PL4 8AA. UK.

Simon J. Handley (s.handley@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth. Devon. PL4 8AA. UK.

Abstract
The effect of prior experience on bias in time predictions on two
different types of laboratory task was examined in two studies.
Experiment 1 revealed that prior experience of performing a
substantial part of the same task led to greater time prediction
accuracy. However, contrary to the weight of previous research,
there was little evidence of the temporal underestimation indicative
of the planning fallacy. In fact, temporal underestimation only
occurred on a longer duration task when it was preceded by a much
shorter task, which was either related (Experiments 1 and 2) or
unrelated to it (Experiment 2). In contrast, temporal overestimation
prevailed on tasks ranging from about 30 seconds’ to four minutes’
duration. Contrary to the theory of the planning fallacy, these
studies indicate that people do take account of their performance
on previous tasks and use such distributional information when
predicting task duration. The potential role of the anchoring and
adjustment cognitive heuristics in determining temporal
misestimation is discussed.

Introduction
The process of predicting task duration has been the subject
of considerable research (e.g., Buehler, Griffin &
MacDonald, 1997; Koole & Van’t Spijker, 2000). In
general, such research has produced evidence of temporal
underestimation on various laboratory (e.g., Josephs &
Hahn, 1995) and real world tasks (e.g., Buehler, Griffin &
Ross, 1994). Such research supports the cognitive judgment
phenomenon known as the planning fallacy, which is the
tendency to underestimate task duration despite being aware
that previous similar activities took longer than anticipated
(Buehler, Griffin & Ross, 2002).
The planning fallacy was identified by Kahneman and
Tversky (1979), who suggest that distinct two types of data
are available to people when predicting task duration.
Namely, singular information, which is data about the task
at hand; and distributional information, which concerns data
about previous tasks. An aspect of singular information is
the amount of work involved in completing a current task,
whereas personal performance on previous similar tasks is
an aspect of distributional information.
Kahneman and Tversky (1979) propose that the planning
fallacy is a consequence of heuristic information processing
whereby singular information becomes the focus of
attention at the expense of distributional information, which
is overlooked. Hence, temporal underestimation occurs

because the current task is treated as a unique event, which
is dissociated from previous similar activities.
Given that the neglect of distributional information has
been suggested as a possible cause of the planning fallacy
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), it is notable that the issue of
prior task experience has received little empirical treatment
in relation to time estimation. One exception is the work of
Thomas, Newstead and Handley (2003; see also Thomas,
Handley & Newstead, 2004), which revealed that prior
experience of performing (or mentally planning how to
complete) certain laboratory tasks led to a reduction in
temporal misestimation. However, Thomas et al. (2003)
found little evidence of the temporal underestimation
indicative of the planning fallacy on short duration (i.e., up
to four minutes’ duration) laboratory tasks such as the
Tower of Hanoi.
In fact, there was evidence of general temporal
overestimation on such tasks, with underestimation only
occurring on longer tasks when they were preceded by a
shorter version of the same task. For example, temporal
underestimation prevailed on the five-disk Tower of Hanoi
task only when the three-disk version of this task was
performed beforehand. The findings of Thomas et al. (2003)
indicate that there are certain tasks on which the temporal
underestimation indicative of the planning fallacy does not
occur and is reversed.
Thomas et al. (2003) suggest that the temporal
underestimation they observed may have been a
consequence of participants using the anchoring and
adjustment cognitive judgmental heuristics (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1982). That is, information such as the
perceived duration of the first task served as an anchor for
time predictions on the second task, which were
insufficiently adjusted according to the greater demands of
the upcoming task. Such a judgment strategy would be
expected to result in temporal underestimation if the
perceived duration of a just-completed shorter task served as
a basis for time predictions on a current task.
A principal aim of the present research was to further
address the issue of prior experience by employing
laboratory tasks that are not only less artificial than those
employed by Thomas et al. (2003), but are more akin to the
ones used in previous research supporting the planning
fallacy (e.g., Byram, 1997). That is, tasks that have well-

1339

defined components and must be completed sequentially by
following a set of instructions.
The present studies also sought to determine the direction
in which time predictions were biased (i.e., under or
overestimation) on a laboratory task that takes longer to
complete than those used in our earlier work, but is of
similar duration to some of the laboratory tasks employed in
previous research (e.g., Buehler et al., 1997). Given that the
tasks employed by Thomas et al. (2003; 2004) were of
shorter duration than the laboratory tasks used in research
supporting the planning fallacy (e.g., Josephs & Hahn,
1995), it could be that temporal underestimation is only
evident on tasks that take longer than four or five minutes to
complete. Consistent with this suggestion, temporal
underestimation has been observed on laboratory tasks
ranging in duration from about 10 minutes (e.g., FrancisSmythe & Robertson, 1999) to over one hour (Byram,
1997). The issue of task duration was addressed in the
present studies by employing tasks that were of similar
duration to those used in our previous research alongside
one that took longer to complete.

80 seconds were needed to preview the instruction booklet
and the plastic components of the long task. Pilot testing
revealed that the instruction booklet and the plastic
components of the short and medium tasks could be
previewed in 20 and 40 seconds, respectively.
The long duration task involved building a multi-turreted
castle with surrounding jetty and battlements by assembling
a series of molded plastic components in a pre-specified
order. The medium duration sub-component task involved
building the castle without the surrounding jetty and
battlements. The short duration sub-component task
involved building one wall of the castle. A digital stopwatch
was used to measure task duration.

Results
Means (and standard deviations) of predicted and actual
completion time on the second task are presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Predicted and Actual Duration of the Second Task
Per Task Experience Condition (In Seconds).
Time

Experiment 1
The issue of task duration was addressed in this study by
using three different versions of the same miniature
construction kit (i.e., toy castle) manufactured by
Playmobil®. One of these tasks (long duration task) took
about 11 minutes to complete whilst the others took either
four minutes (medium duration task) or 30 seconds to finish
(short duration task). The medium and short tasks were subcomponent versions of the long duration task, and involved
constructing different parts of the same miniature castle.
The issue of prior task experience was addressed by varying
the order in which the long duration task was performed.
That is, whether time prediction bias differed when the long
task was performed after, or was preceded by, one of the
two shorter tasks.

Method
Participants. Eighty (64 female and 16 male) students at
the University of Plymouth participated voluntarily in
partial fulfillment of a psychology course requirement. No
biographical data other than gender was recorded.
Design, Materials and Procedure. A 2 (time: predicted vs.
actual duration) x 4 (task experience: long then short task
vs. short then long task vs. medium then long task vs. long
then medium task) mixed factorial design was used. The
time factor was a repeated measure, with participants
producing a predicted and actual task completion time. Task
experience was manipulated between groups, with
participants being randomly assigned to one of the four
equal-sized conditions.
Prior to judging task duration, the amount of time that
participants were given to view the task components and
instruction booklet differed according to the type of task
that was about to be performed. Pilot testing revealed that

Predicted
Actual

Task Experience Condition
ShortLongMedium LongLong
Short
-Long
Medium
Task
Task
Task
Task
(n = 20) (n = 20) (n = 20) (n = 20)
435.00
28.15
550.50
254.25
(181.70) (20.12)
(129.59) (109.20)
556.25
18.55
497.85
178.95
(147.18) (18.00)
(124.14) (35.68)

There was considerable variability within the predicted
and actual task completion time data, and frequency
distributions of these data from each task experience
condition were positively skewed. Hence, these data were
subjected to a logarithmic transformation before being
statistically analyzed.
A 2 (time) x 4 (experience) split-plot analysis of variance
(ANOVA) produced a main effect of task experience,
F(3,76) = 637.66, MSE = .14, p < .001, with overall time
being longest in the medium then long task condition.
Pairwise comparisons (Scheffé) revealed significant
differences between the means of all conditions (ps < .05)
except those of the medium then long task and the short
then long task conditions (p > .10). The main effect on the
time factor was not significant (F < 3, p > .10).
The ANOVA also produced an interaction, F(3,76) =
6.12, MSE = .11, p < .01 (see Figure 1 below). This
revealed that temporal overestimation was evident on the
medium and short duration tasks, whereas the direction in
which time predictions were biased on the long task differed
according to the relative duration of the previous task.
Specifically, temporal overestimation was evident when the
medium task had just been completed, whereas
underestimation occurred when the short task was
performed initially. Tests for simple effects revealed that
predicted and actual time differed significantly on the

1340

Lo
ng
-M
ed
ium

Me
diu
mLo
ng

Lo
ng
-S

ho
rt

600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Sh
or
t-L
on
g

Mean Time (Seconds)

medium and short duration tasks (ps < .05). On the long
duration task, the difference between predicted and actual
time was significant when the short task (p < . 05), but not
the medium task was performed beforehand (p > .10).

Predicted Time
Actual Time

Figure 1: Predicted and actual completion time on the
second task per task experience condition

Discussion
Temporal overestimation was evident on the medium and
short duration sub-component tasks when they were
performed after the long task. Consistent with the work of
Thomas et al. (2003; 2004), this finding indicates that the
temporal underestimation indicative of the planning fallacy
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) is not evident (and is
reversed) on another type of laboratory task with a duration
of less than five minutes.
There was some evidence of temporal underestimation on
the long duration task, but only when the short subcomponent task had just been completed. The latter finding
concurs with the notion that individuals might use the
anchoring and adjustment cognitive heuristics when judging
the duration of the second of two consecutive tasks (Thomas
et al., 2003). That is, information about the previous task
serves as an anchor for time predictions, which are
insufficiently adjusted according to the relative demands of
the current task.
In contrast, temporal overestimation (rather than
underestimation) prevailed on the long task when the shorter
duration medium sub-component task was performed
beforehand. Thus, it seems that an anchoring and adjustment
strategy was not used when judging the duration of the
second task when a sizeable portion of this task had just
been completed.
A possible explanation for these findings is that, due to
differences in the extent of prior experience, different kinds
of task-related information were used when predicting the
duration of the long task. As completion of the medium task
involved assembling half of the long task, participants in
this experimental condition possessed considerable
information about the nature of the long task when
predicting its duration.

Given the extent of these individuals’ prior task
experience, they might have engaged in more thorough
information processing when making a second time
prediction. For example, they may have calculated the
number of large plastic components required to complete
the medium task, and appropriately scaled up this figure as a
function of the greater number of major components
involved in finishing the long duration task.
Using such a judgment strategy could result in temporal
overestimation if it involved thinking about factors that
delayed the completion of the previous task (e.g., fitting
some plastic components together incorrectly). Thus, these
participants may have erred on the side of caution because
they took account of their previous task performance. In
fact, time predictions were more accurate when the long
task was preceded by the medium rather than the short task,
suggesting that greater prior task experience was used to
good effect.
As participants who performed the short task initially
constructed only one wall of the Playmobil® castle (i.e., one
part of the long task), they possessed little information about
how to complete the long task when predicting its duration.
In the absence of substantial prior task experience, these
individuals may have used heuristic information processing
when making a second time prediction. For example, time
predictions may have been anchored on the perceived
duration of the first task with insufficient upward
adjustment for the longer duration of the second task. Thus,
due to insufficient prior task experience, these participants
may have relied on the anchoring and adjustment cognitive
heuristics when judging the duration of the long task.
Whilst this study suggests that time predictions on the
longer of two successive tasks might be based on
information about the first task, the nature of this taskrelated information is not known. Given that the present
tasks differed in duration, it could be that an anchoring and
adjustment judgment strategy involving the perceived
duration of the previous task is responsible for temporal
underestimation when a longer task follows a shorter one.
In contrast, as the present tasks share the same structure
(i.e., they are different versions of the same task), it could be
that information about the nature of the first task formed
the basis of time predictions on the second task. For
example, the number of major plastic components involved
in completing the previous task could serve as an anchor for
time predictions on the current task. Temporal
misestimation would be expected to occur as a consequence
of using this kind of judgment strategy if the number of
major plastic components differed between the first and
second tasks. That is, if time predictions were not
sufficiently adjusted from an anchor value to take account of
the number of major plastic components needed to complete
the second task.
Having found evidence of temporal underestimation on
the long duration task when a much shorter version of it had
just been completed, Experiment 2 sought to determine the
type of information about a just-completed shorter task that

1341

formed the basis of time predictions on the long duration
task.

Experiment 2
The issue of the relevance of prior task experience was
addressed in this study, where a related or an unrelated
shorter duration task was performed before the long
Playmobil® task. The related task was the short duration
task from Experiment 1, whereas the unrelated task was the
three-disk version of the Tower of Hanoi task. Pilot testing
revealed that the three-disk task and the short subcomponent task were of similar duration (Ms = 28.59 and
25.37 seconds, respectively).
Performing the short Playmobil® task initially would
provide participants with some information about the nature
of the long duration task, whereas no information about the
long duration task would be acquired whilst completing the
three-disk task.
If time predictions were based on information about the
nature of the previous task, then they should be more
accurate on the long duration task when the related task was
performed beforehand. Conversely, if time predictions were
based on information such as the perceived duration of the
previous task, then the extent of judgment bias on the long
task should not differ according to the relevance of prior
experience.

Method
Participants. Fifty-six (42 female and 14 male) students at
the University of Plymouth participated voluntarily. Fortythree individuals participated in partial fulfillment of
psychology course requirement whilst the remainder were
paid £2.50 each. No biographical information other than
gender was recorded.

Results
Means (and standard deviations) of predicted and actual
completion time on the long task are presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Predicted and Actual Duration of the Long Task
Per Prior Experience Condition (In Seconds).
Time
Predicted
Actual

Prior Experience Condition
3-disk Task
Short Task
First (n = 28)
First (n = 28)
412.50
432.86
(137.99)
(177.66)
614.04
599.07
(125.32)
(140.91)

For the same reasons that were specified in Experiment 1,
the predicted and actual completion time data were
subjected to a logarithmic transformation before being
statistically analyzed. A 2 (time) x 2 (task experience) splitplot ANOVA produced a main effect of time, F(1,54) =
61.81, MSE = .07, p < .001, with completion times
exceeding predictions (Ms = 606.56 and 422.68 seconds,
respectively). This finding indicates that temporal
underestimation was evident on the long duration task. The
main effect of prior experience and the interaction were not
significant (Fs < 1, ps > .10). The absence of a significant
interaction suggests that the extent of temporal
underestimation on the long duration task did not differ
according to the type of shorter task that was performed
beforehand.

Discussion

Design, Materials and Procedure. The long duration
Playmobil® task, and a wooden Tower of Hanoi task
apparatus containing three different-sized disks were used.
A digital stopwatch was used to measure task duration.
There were two equal-sized groups of participants who
performed either the three-disk task or the short subcomponent task before the long duration Playmobil® task.
The amount of time that participants were given to preview
the plastic Playmobil® task components and instruction
booklet differed according to the type of task that was about
to be completed.
On the three-disk and short duration sub-component tasks,
participants were given 20 seconds to preview the
instructions and task apparatus or plastic components.
Participants previewed the plastic components and
instruction booklet of the long duration task for 80 seconds.

Consistent with the results of Experiment 1, temporal
underestimation was evident on the long duration
Playmobil® task when the short sub-component task was
performed beforehand. Temporal underestimation also
prevailed on the long task when it was preceded by an
unrelated task that was of much shorter duration (i.e., the
three-disk Tower of Hanoi task).
The presence of temporal underestimation on the long
task is consistent with Thomas et al.’s (2003) suggestion
that the anchoring and adjustment cognitive heuristics are
used when judging the duration of the second of two
successive tasks. However, as the extent of underestimation
did not differ significantly according to the relevance of
prior experience, it seems that information about the nature
of the previous task was not used as a basis for time
predictions on the long duration task. Instead, some other
kind of task-related information presumably served as a
basis for time predictions on this task.
A possible candidate source of such information is the
perceived duration of the previous task. That is, individuals
judged how long the first task took to complete, and used
this figure as a basis for their second time prediction.
Indeed, at the end of the first experimental trial, several
participants commented that the just-completed task had
taken them less time to finish than they predicted. Whilst

1342

such evidence is purely anecdotal, it indicates an awareness
of temporal misestimation on both of the short tasks, and
suggests that several individuals estimated the duration of
the first task retrospectively.
An anchoring and adjustment judgment strategy involving
the perceived duration of the previous task should result in
time prediction bias when successive tasks differ in
duration. That is, temporal misestimation is a consequence
of failing to increase or decrease the current prediction
according to the longer or shorter duration of the upcoming
task (Thomas et al., 2003). Such insufficient adjustment
from an anchor value (i.e., the perceived duration of the
previous task) would lead to temporal underestimation if the
current task took longer to complete than the previous one.

General Discussion
The present studies provide further insight into the role of
prior experience in the process of predicting task duration.
In Experiment 1, we found that, relative to building just one
wall of the Playmobil® castle initially, constructing half of
the castle on the first trial resulted in greater time prediction
accuracy on the long duration task. This finding is
consistent with previous research, which has found that
prior experience attenuates bias in temporal (e.g., Josephs &
Hahn, 1995) and non-temporal judgments (e.g., Smith &
Kida, 1991) of task performance.
More importantly, this finding suggests that performance
on previous similar activities is not only considered when
judging task duration, but can also be used to good effect
(i.e., to improve time prediction accuracy). Given that
distributional information seems to be a key component of
the planning fallacy, the role of prior task experience in
mediating temporal misestimation is in need of further
study. That is, further insight into how such distributional
information can be used effectively will enhance our
understanding of the planning fallacy phenomenon.
Whilst it has been shown that possessing considerable
prior task experience reduces temporal misestimation
(Experiment 1), the present research also indicates that the
use of such distributional information does not always
improve judgment accuracy. In both studies, there was
evidence of temporal underestimation on the long
Playmobil® task when it was preceded by a much shorter
duration sub-component task. However, the extent of this
temporal underestimation was similar when either the short
sub-component task or an unrelated short duration task was
performed initially (Experiment 2).
Consistent with our previous work (Thomas et al., 2003;
2004), this finding indicates that information about a justcompleted similar task is considered when predicting task
duration, but can lead to judgment bias. If, as we propose,
an anchoring and adjustment strategy involving the
perceived duration of a previous shorter task forms the basis
of time predictions on a longer task, then an alternative
interpretation of the planning fallacy suggests itself. That is,
temporal underestimation is a consequence of time
predictions being based on the shorter duration of a previous

task, but being insufficiently scaled up according to the
greater demands of the current task.
Whilst it is for future research to determine whether the
present findings generalize to more everyday kinds of task,
the use of the anchoring and adjustment cognitive heuristics
could explain the prevalence of the planning fallacy on
many large scale projects. That is, individuals who
undertake such projects will typically have experience of
performing similar but less complex tasks (Kidd, 1970).
Moreover, as large scale (e.g., construction) projects tend to
be performed infrequently, judgments of their duration can
only really be based on the shorter duration of previous less
complex tasks. If time predictions are anchored on the
duration of previous smaller scale tasks, then temporal
underestimation would be expected to occur.
In both studies, there was some evidence of the temporal
underestimation indicative of the planning fallacy on the
long duration Playmobil® task. This finding suggests that
temporal underestimation might only be evident on
laboratory tasks that are of longer duration than those
employed in our earlier research. However, temporal
underestimation was not evident on the long duration task
when the medium sub-component task was performed
initially (Experiment 1).
It was suggested that temporal overestimation on the long
duration task was due to participants taking account of
factors that delayed the completion of the medium task (e.g.,
incorrectly fitting some plastic components together) and
incorporating such information into their second time
prediction. Although further research is required to test the
validity of this claim, it has been shown that thinking about
such information can reduce bias in non-temporal
judgments of task performance (e.g., Koriat, Lichtenstein &
Fischhoff, 1980).
Given the present findings, it could be that, when prior
experience is substantial, people incorporate potential
impediments to optimal task completion into their temporal
judgments on subsequent tasks. This kind of judgment
strategy might lead to temporal overestimation, and also to
greater time prediction accuracy. Support for the latter
suggestion comes from Experiment 2, where time
predictions on the long duration task were less biased when
participants possessed more extensive prior task experience.
That is, when the medium rather than short duration subcomponent task was performed beforehand.
The existence of temporal overestimation on the short and
medium duration sub-component tasks (Experiment 1)
highlights the directional nature of time prediction bias. A
possible explanation for the presence of temporal
overestimation on tasks with a duration of up to four
minutes is that people tend to judge task duration in whole
minutes rather than seconds, or by using longer temporal
units such as 5 or 10 minutes (Fraisse, 1984).
Given the duration of the two shorter tasks used in
Experiment 1, temporal overestimation should prevail if
participants used temporal units such as five minutes when
judging their completion times on the medium sub-

1343

component task. Likewise, giving a time prediction of two
or three minutes would be expected to result in temporal
overestimation on the short sub-component task. Thus, the
reversal of the temporal underestimation indicative of the
planning fallacy on the two shorter Playmobil® tasks could
be a consequence of the type of time unit used to judge task
duration.

of simple tasks. Current Psychology of Cognition, 22, 1,
83-100.
Thomas, K. E., Newstead, S. E. & Handley, S. J. (2003).
Exploring the time prediction process: The effects of task
experience and complexity on prediction accuracy.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 17, 6, 655-673.

Acknowledgments
References
Buehler, R., Griffin, D. & MacDonald, H. (1997). The role
of motivated reasoning in optimistic time predictions.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 3, 238247.
Buehler, R., Griffin, D. & Ross, M. (1994). Exploring the
"planning fallacy": Why people underestimate their task
completion times. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67, 3, 366-381.
Buehler, R., Griffin, D. & Ross, M. (2002). Inside the
planning fallacy: The causes and consequences of
optimistic time predictions. In T. Gilovich, D. Griffin &
D. Kahneman (Eds.). Heuristics and biases: The
psychology of intuitive judgment. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Byram, S. J. (1997). Cognitive and motivational factors
influencing time predictions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 3, 3, 216-239.
Fraisse, P. (1984). Perception and estimation of time.
Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 1, 1-36.
Francis-Smythe, J. A. & Robertson, I. T. (1999). On the
relationship between time management and time
estimation. British Journal of Psychology, 90, 3, 333-348.
Josephs, R. A. & Hahn, E. D. (1995). Bias and accuracy in
estimates of task duration. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 61, 2, 202-213.
Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. (1979). Intuitive prediction:
Biases and corrective procedures. TIMS Studies in the
Management Sciences, 12, 313-327.
Kidd, J. B. (1970). The utilization of subjective probabilities
in production planning. Acta Psychologica, 34, 338-347.
Koole, S. & Van't Spijker, M. (2000). Overcoming the
planning fallacy through willpower: Effects of
implementation intentions on actual and predicted taskcompletion times. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 30, 873-888.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S. & Fischhoff, B. (1980). Reasons
for confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6, 2, 107-118.
Smith, J. F. & Kida, T. (1991). Heuristics and biases:
Expertise and task realism in auditing. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 3, 472-489.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1982). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. In D. Kahneman, P.
Slovic & A. Tversky (Eds.). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Thomas, K. E., Handley, S. J. & Newstead, S. E. (2004).
The effects of prior experience on estimating the duration

This research was supported by a research grant from the
Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) of the
United Kingdom (Award No. R42200034413) to the first
author. Requests for re-prints of this article should be
addressed to: Kevin Thomas, School of Psychology,
University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth. Devon.
PL4 8AA. UK.

1344

