UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Recognition Heuristic: Fast and frugal, but not as simple as it seems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1307c2h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
McCloy, Rachel
Beaman, C. Philip

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Recognition Heuristic: Fast and frugal, but not as simple as it seems.
Rachel McCloy (r.a.mccloy@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Reading,
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL.

C. Philip Beaman (c.p.beaman@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Reading,
Reading, U.K., RG6 6AL.

hence may be a more effective cue than those used by more
knowledgeable participants.
Having demonstrated the usefulness of the heuristic,
Goldstein & Gigerenzer (2002) examined whether the
heuristic was actually employed in practice. Data from 22
participants showed that all of them produced choice
behavior consistent with use of the recognition heuristic.
These data were, however, disputed by Oppenheimer (2003)
who noted that the American participants tested by
Goldstein & Gigerenzer may have accessed information
other than mere recognition in making their choices.
Goldstein & Gigerenzer required their participants to select
the larger of the two in pairs of German cities. Oppenheimer
suggested that the stimuli employed conflated recognition
with knowledge that the recognized city was one of the
largest cities in Germany.
In his study, Oppenheimer presented participants with
towns or cities that were local to them and that were known
to be small. In doing so, Oppenheimer demonstrated that the
recognition heuristic is not an inevitable strategy when
faced with forced-choice tasks where only one of the
choices is recognized. Oppenheimer’s participants proved
smarter than the recognition heuristic by choosing the
recognized city significantly less often than would be
expected by chance. However, the differences between the
studies by Goldstein & Gigerenzer (2002) and by
Oppenheimer (2003) go beyond the choice of stimuli. One
aim of the current paper is to consider how differences in
procedure may have contributed to the reported
contradictions in choice behavior between the two studies.
In doing so we will provide a more balanced view of the
place of the recognition heuristic in decision-making
generally and in the adaptive toolbox in particular.
The key methodological difference between the two
studies was the time pressure that participants experienced.
In the Oppenheimer study (Experiment 1), participants
made 10 choices over a five-minute period, an average of 30
seconds for each choice. In Oppenheimer’s Experiment 2,
participants were given a week to return the booklet
containing their answers. In contrast, in the Goldstein &
Gigerenzer study (Experiment 1), participants made
between 300 and 435 choices during a single experimental
session. Although Goldstein and Gigerenzer did not specify
how long their participants had to complete the task, it is
likely that their participants had substantially less time per

Abstract
Two experiments examine the use of the recognition heuristic
which states that, in the absence of other information,
individuals make judgments on the basis on recognition alone.
This has been shown to be adaptive (Borges, Goldstein,
Ortmann & Gigerenzer, 1999) and in Experiment 1 we
demonstrate that the heuristic is reliably employed when
participants are placed under time pressure. Experiment 2
considers a possible confound of the adaptive recognition
heuristic with a less-adaptive recognition-preference strategy
and shows that both may be employed but that the
recognition-preference strategy is not sufficient to account for
the recognition heuristic. We discuss the implications of our
results for the recognition heuristic and the rest of the
adaptive toolbox (Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999).

Introduction
A recent approach to human judgment and rationality put
forward by Gigerenzer and colleagues (Gigerenzer, 2000;
Gigerenzer & Todd, 1999) emphasizes the real-time
constraints of many decision-making and reasoning tasks. In
doing so they have suggested that many so-called “biases”
in human judgment are actually adaptive within real-world
situations. The approach uses “fast and frugal” heuristics
that have been shown to be highly effective in a number of
situations (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999; Borges et al.,
1999) even when compared to more sophisticated methods
that take into account multiple sources of information.
The recognition heuristic is one such strategy and is,
furthermore, the first step in a number of fast and frugal
strategies within what has been termed the adaptive toolbox
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). Simply stated, the
recognition heuristic provides the following rule of thumb:
“If one of two objects is recognized and the other is not,
then infer that the recognized object has the higher value”
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999, p. 41). So, for example, if
an experimental participant is asked to judge which of two
cities has the larger population, the participant will be
following the recognition heuristic if they choose the city
which they recognize. This leads to the less-is-more effect
whereby participants using the recognition heuristic
outperform other participants who recognize both cities and
should, therefore, have more information available upon
which to base their decision. The reason for this is that
recognition of city correlates with the size of the city and
933

stopwatch. In order to encourage them to work quickly,
participants were given updates on the time at 15-second
intervals. On completion of the first part of the task
participants were then given a list of all of the towns used in
the experiment (both real and fictional) and were asked to
circle those out of the list that they recognized.

choice than the 30 seconds for each choice taken by
participants in the first Oppenheimer study (as, if this were
the case, participants who had 435 choices to make would
have taken over 3 ½ hours). We suggest that participants
will be much more likely to use so-called “fast and frugal”
strategies when tasks put them under time pressure. This
situation basically reinstates the constraints under which
boundedly rational approaches such as the use of fast and
frugal heuristics are presumed to operate (Simon, 1956). It
alos provides an alternative explanation, besides the
difference in stimuli, of why participants were much more
likely to use the recognition heuristic in the Goldstein and
Gigerenzer study than in Oppenheimer’s experiment.
In the two experiments that we report we therefore
replicated the general procedure of Oppenheimer (2003) but
gave participants a strict time limit for the experimental
session. In order to address the issue of the confound in the
stimuli identified by Oppenheimer we chose English towns
or cities whose soccer teams played in the UK First
Division, not in the Premier League, as the recognizable
stimuli. The town or city names would thus have been
familiar to the participants without being considered a large
or major city as large cities in the UK (e.g., London,
Liverpool, Manchester) tend to have soccer teams in the
Premier League. The city names used as the (hopefully)
unrecognizable stimuli were the fictional cities invented by
Oppenheimer, all of which had made-up but (to UK
participants) foreign-sounding names.
The general situation experienced by the participants
therefore is one where the recognition heuristic is applicable
(only one of the names is recognized) and there is no other
information upon which to base a choice. The recognized
name is not known to be a particularly large city (unlike the
Goldstein & Gigerenzer study). Equally, the participant has
little time with which to consider what they know of the
recognized town or city or attempt to infer anything
regarding the unrecognized city (unlike the Oppenheimer
study). Under these circumstances the recognition heuristic
is the only tool available in the adaptive toolbox. In
Experiment 1 we consider whether, with these potential
confounds identified and controlled for, participants will
make use of the recognition heuristic. Failure to observe the
use of the single simplest heuristic in the toolbox under such
circumstances would be a severe setback to the fast and
frugal heuristics research agenda.

Materials and Design
The materials used in this experiment were based on those
used by Oppenheimer (2003). We created a group of stimuli
where participants could show the recognition heuristic by
pairing the names of 10 real English towns with the names
of 10 fictional towns (taken from Oppenheimer; see
Appendix). The English towns were selected from the list of
towns with First Division soccer teams, and each was paired
with three different fictional towns, giving 30 recognition
heuristic items in all. In addition, we created two groups of
filler items. The first group consisted of pairs of real towns
and cities taken from a list of 8, which contained four
international towns/cities (e.g., Limerick) and four English
towns (e.g., Bradford). Each participant received 10 pairs of
this type. The second type of filler item consisted of pairs of
the fictional towns. Participants each received 9 pairs of this
type1. Therefore, each participant received 49 choice pairs in
total, of which 30 were of the critical recognition heuristic
type. The order of presentation of these pairs was
randomized across participants.

Results
Coding Some participants did not complete all 49 choices in
the allotted time. In addition, some participants either failed
to recognize a real place name, or erroneously recognized a
fictional place name. Therefore, on the basis of the number
of items that they had completed, and their responses to the
recognition task, we calculated for each participant: (a) the
number of times that they could have used the recognition
heuristic, (b) the number of times that they did use the
recognition heuristic. The second figure divided by the first
gave us a figure for the proportion of responses that
conformed to the recognition heuristic.
Analysis One sample t-test showed that, by participant, the
proportion of responses attributed to the recognition
heuristic was significantly greater than would be expected
by chance, t = 3.55, df = 49, p = .001 (2-tailed). These data
are shown in Figure 1 (overleaf).

Experiment 1
Participants and Procedure
The participants were 50 adult volunteers. The 30 men and
20 women who took part had an average age of 28 years
(range 17-62; standard deviation 11.2). Each participant was
presented with a four-page experimental booklet. The
instructions told them that they would be presented with
pairs of names of towns, and that their task was to circle the
town with the largest population in each pair. Participants
were given one minute to complete the task, timed with the

1

There should have been 10 pairs of this type, but, due to a
printing error with the materials, participants only received 9 pairs.

934

Proportion of Responses

suggested by Goldstein & Gigerenzer (1999), were using
recognition in a different way. For example, one participant
reported deliberately choosing city names he did not
recognize on the assumption that these foreign-sounding
cities must be larger than the local towns that he knew. This
use of recognition could explain the pattern of choice
displayed by those participants who showed significantly
less choice of recognized towns than would be expected by
chance. This explanation is consistent with the data reported
by Oppenheimer (Experiment 1).
If participants are capable of using recognition in a
strategic and less rigid way than suggested in the
formulation of the recognition heuristic, we would expect to
see recognition effects not only in judgments of which of
two cities is the larger but also in judgments of which of two
cities is the smaller. According to the formal account of the
recognition heuristic asking which of two cities is the
smaller is equivalent to asking which is the larger. So
participants would, paradoxically, be expected to use the
recognition heuristic to choose the unrecognized city (since
it is inferred that the unrecognized city is smaller of the
two). However, if participants merely choose the recognized
city because of some learned preference (e.g., Zajonc, 1968)
or strategy we might expect them to continue to choose the
recognized city. This hypothesis is tested in Experiment 2.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Participant

Figure 1: Proportion of Recognized Items Chosen by
Participant (Experiment 1).
Further analysis of the choices made by individual
participants shows that 23 out of the 50 participants showed
evidence of use of the recognition heuristic at levels greater
than chance, binomial z > 1.28, p < .05. Interestingly, a
further 6 participants showed the reverse pattern, using the
recognition heuristic significantly less often than chance,
binomial z > 1.66, p < .05.

Experiment 2

Discussion
These data confirm Goldstein & Gigerenzer’s contention
that participants use recognition in choice behavior when no
other information is available. Use of this recognition
heuristic may, however, be limited to situations when the
participant is under time or other pressure. We should note
that our participants did not use the recognition heuristic as
frequently as those of Goldstein and Gigerenzer. This may
have been due to the materials we used, and hence may
provide some support for Oppenheimer’s position.
Additionally, not all the participants used the recognition
heuristic consistently in their responses in our experiment
and a significant subgroup of participants appeared to be
using quite the opposite strategy. This was confirmed by the
spontaneous self-reports of some participants. There are
drawbacks to analyzing individual participants’ data in this
manner, for example, if participants were responding at
random we might expect some individual participants to
appear to use the recognition heuristic purely by chance.
However, we are following a precedent in the literature
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Rieskamp & Hoffrage,
1999) in attempting to identify individual strategies rather
than averaging over potentially very different strategies. To
answer some of these questions, we therefore ran a further
experiment to examine whether altering the form of the
question for the same choice stimuli would influence use of
the recognition heuristic.
One possible explanation of our data is that participants,
rather than using the recognition heuristic in the manner

Method
The participants were 42 adult volunteers. The 24 men and
18 women who took part had an average age of 21 years
(range 18-48; standard deviation 4.5). The procedure and
materials for this experiment were the same as that of
Experiment 1. The only difference being that instead of
making judgments of which of two towns was the larger,
participants made judgments of which of two towns was the
smaller.

Results
Coding We once again assessed participants’ usage of the
recognition heuristic taking into account the number of
items completed and the participants responses to the
recognition task in calculating a proportion of choices of the
recognized item.
Analysis In this experiment, one sample t-test by participant
failed to show that choice of recognized item varied
significantly from chance, t = 1.0, df = 41, p > .05. These
data are shown in Figure 2. Examination of Figure 2 also
suggests, however, that some individual participants did use
the recognition heuristic reliably in their responses.

935

Proportion of Responses

magnitude. When a choice is made between the larger, or
the more numerous, of two items it is frequently the case
that the recognized item is, in fact, the larger or more
numerous of the two. This is formalized within the
recognition heuristic by stating that “when an individual
only recognizes one of two items, the individual will judge
the recognized item to be greater in whatever dimensions
are positively correlated with recognition” (Oppenheimer,
2003, p. B2; see also Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1999; 2002).
Oppenheimer questioned the unthinking use of the
recognition heuristic in his study. However, both
Oppenheimer’s study and the earlier reports by Goldstein &
Gigerenzer confound choosing the recognized object
because of the inferred correlation between recognition and
magnitude and choosing the recognized object on some
other basis, for example preference due to mere exposure
(Zajonc, 1968).
In our studies, the two possible strategies of use of the
recognition heuristic as a means of inferring relative
magnitude and simple choice of the recognized item
regardless of the question were examined in Experiment 2.
We found that some participants do indeed choose the
recognized item regardless of the framing of the question, a
strategy indistinguishable from the recognition heuristic in
standard formulations of the problem. However, the number
of participants who use this strategy is small and although it
might exaggerate the effect ascribed to recognition heuristic
elsewhere, it cannot account for it.
The recognition heuristic was demonstrated in our
Experiment 1 using similar materials to Oppenheimer
(2003) and a similar procedure to that of Goldstein &
Gigerenzer (2002). The majority of our participants did use
the recognition heuristic as a “fast and frugal” means of
decision-making when placed under time pressure, a
constraint that was absent in the Oppenheimer (2003) study.
However, the heuristic is not automatically applied as the
number of participants showing it was reduced in our
Experiment 2. This was despite the fact that the choice to be
made was identical and the heuristic would therefore have
equivalent adaptive value in both situations. The recognition
heuristic is the single simplest heuristic in the adaptive
toolbox and makes up the first principle in more complex
decision-making algorithms such a take-the-best
(Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996). Establishing the situations
when the recognition heuristic is employed is a necessary
prerequisite for evaluating the applicability of the fast and
frugal tools within the adaptive toolbox. There have been
very few experiments on this. The current study goes some
way towards addressing this issue. We suggest that our
results also throw up some interesting avenues for future
research. For example, a future study could vary the degree
of time, or other, pressure on participants and examine the
effects of this on the frequency with which a recognition
strategy is used.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Participant

Figure 2: Proportion of Recognized Items Chosen by
Participant (Experiment 2).
Further analysis of the choices made by individual
participants shows that 10 out of the 42 participants showed
evidence of use of the recognition heuristic at levels greater
than chance, binomial z > 1.28, p < .05. A further 7
participants showed the reverse pattern, using the
recognition heuristic significantly less often than chance,
binomial z > 1.28, p < .05.

Discussion
The results of this experiment are intriguing because exactly
the same stimuli and presentation conditions were used as in
Experiment 1 yet we find a different pattern of results. The
choice that participants needed to make was also identical to
the previous experiment - judging the relative sizes of two
towns or cities. The only thing that changed was the framing
of the question, from asking which of the two was larger, to
asking which was smaller. Some participants (n = 10) used a
recognition heuristic to judge the smaller of the two towns,
however, others (n = 7) used a diametrically opposed
strategy. Consequently, the sample as a whole did not
significantly differ from chance in their choice behavior. In
this experiment, therefore, although all the preconditions for
using a recognition heuristic were met, only a minority of
participants did so.
Analysis of individuals’ data showed that some
participants did reliably use the recognition heuristic in their
choices. It also showed that, as in the previous experiment,
some participants used the even simpler strategy of always
picking a town they recognized, regardless of the framing of
the question. However, only a small group of participants
appear to use this strategy, which, in the previous
experiment, would have been indistinguishable from the
recognition heuristic.

General Discussion
The recognition heuristic is an adaptive strategy in decisionmaking because of the correlation between recognition and
936

Acknowledgments

Appendix

Thanks to Alexandra Marshall for collecting and scoring the
data for Experiments 1 and 2.

Towns and Cities used in Experiments 1 & 2
Fictional
Papayito
Al Ahbahib
Las Besas
Weingshe
Rio del Sol
Heingjing
Rhavadran
Gohaiza
Schretzberg
Svatlanov

References
Borges, B., Goldstein, D. G., Ortmann, A., & Gigerenzer, G.
(1999). Can ignorance beat the stock market? In: G.
Gigerenzer, & P. M. Todd, (Ed.s). Simple heuristics that
make us smart. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Adaptive thinking: Rationality in the
real world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1999). The recognition
heuristic: How ignorance makes us smart. In: G.
Gigerenzer, & P. M. Todd, (Ed.s). Simple heuristics that
make us smart. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of
ecological rationality: The recognition heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109, 75-90.
Oppenheimer, D. M. (2003). Not so fast! (and not so
frugal!): rethinking the recognition heuristic. Cognition,
90, B1-B9.
Rieskamp, J. & Hoffrage, U. (1999). Why do people use
simple heuristics and how can we tell? In: G. Gigerenzer,
& P. M. Todd, (Ed.s). Simple heuristics that make us
smart. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of
environments. Psychological Review, 63, 129-138.
Zajonc, R.B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 1-27.

Real
Norwich
Ipswich
Preston
Wigan
Sunderland
Crewe
Coventry
Gillingham
Sheffield
Burnley
Filler
Limerick
Toledo
Berkley
Haifa
Stoke
Rotherham
Bradford
Derby

937

