UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Structure on Object-Location Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6rj133zw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Winkelholz, Carsten
Schlick, Christopher
Brutting, Mark

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Structure on Object-Location Memory
Carsten Winkelholz (winkelholz@fgan.de)
Christopher Schlick (schlick@fgan.de)
Mark Brütting (bruetting@fgan.de)
Research Establishment for Applied Science (FGAN)
Research Institute for Communication, Information Processing and Ergonomics
Neuenahrer Strasse 20
53343 Wachtberg, GERMANY

The effect of layout structure on object-location encoding
and retrieval could best be investigated if a computational
model of human spatial cognition is considered. Recently
some compelling works toward this goal has been published
(Wang et al 2002; Johnson et al 2002). This paper shows
one application area for computational models of human
spatial memory, but also sheds some new light on the
requirements of such a model.

Abstract
This paper aims to study the effect of structure in a graphical
layout on object-location memory. In two experiments several
structures have been examined in respect to the performance
of object-location retrieval. The results show that beside
simple object-to-object spatial relations also the spatial
relation of three objects is encoded in human spatial memory
as a noisy distance-angular pair. Further the results show that
noise in spatial memory is not symmetric, but seems to be
distorted towards a higher accuracy to the horizontal
directions.

Design of the Experiments

Introduction
One aspect of human spatial memory is the usage of
allocentric frames of references to encode and retrieve the
location of an object. This aspect of human spatial memory
implicates that the structure of a graphical layout might
affect the performance of object-location encoding and
retrieval.
Basically the study presented in this paper is motivated by
some experiments performed recently in the community of
information visualization. One experiment of Travanti &
Lind (2001) investigated object location memory in
hierarchical information structures across different instances
of 2D and 3D displays. The results of their tests show, that
the 3D display improves performance in the spatial memory
task they designed. They were aware that their result does
not prove their hypothesis that the natural appearance of the
3D display used in the test actually affected the improved
performance. They speculated that possibly other visual
properties of an item in the 3D display were used as a
reminder for the memory task. Cockburn (2004) showed
that neither the natural appearance nor the different sizes of
the items in the 3D display affected the performance of
object-location retrieval. In both studies the memory task
was to associate alphanumerical letters to the items.
Therefore Cockburn suspected that the vertical orientation
of Travanti & Lind’s 2D display made the formation of
effective letter mnemonics more difficult than the horizontal
3D layout, because words and word combinations normally
run horizontally left to right. By analyzing these studies we
came to the conclusion that one major factor had not been
considered - the factor of the object-to-object spatial
relations (the structure of the graphical layout respectively).

The papers cited above inspired the design of the
experiments in this study. There were two phases in the
cited experiments. In the encoding phase the subjects had to
learn associations of alphanumerical letters to one object in
the structure. During the encoding phase a click on one of
the objects in the display highlighted the object and revealed
a letter at the top of the display, which had to be associated
to the position of the object. In the retrieval phase the
subjects had to find all of the letters, one at a time. A
randomly selected letter had been shown at the top of the
display area, and the subject had to click the object
associated with it.
This design of the experiment has two drawbacks. First
the subjects are free to choose the objects in the encoding
phase and second that alphanumerical letters are used as
retrieval cues. The first point gives subjects the opportunity
to develop strategies for learning the object-letter
associations. In combination with the usage of
alphanumerical letters this increases the probability that
subjects create mnemonics through possible abbreviations
of words that can be read from a row.
In respect to a cognitive model these are task specific
aspects. The study of this paper was interested in more
general mechanisms of object-location encoding/retrieval.
To meet this goal the design of the experiment had to
prevent subjects from further processing object-locations in
the encoding phase. This suggested the task of memorizing
a randomly created sequence of highlighted objects from the
structure. The number of correct repeated sequences is used
as a measure of performance. Furthermore allows this kind
of memory task an effective analysis of the errors subjects
make.
Two experiments were performed. The first experiment
investigated the factor horizontal vs. vertical orientated

1458

layout structure and the factor of the existence vs. nonexistence of symmetric features in the layout structure. The
second experiment focused on the investigation of noise in
the encoding of spatial object-to-object relations.

Subjects and Apparatus
30 volunteer subjects (only male, average age 35) were
recruited from the staff of our institute to perform both
experiments. All subjects had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. Three sets of different structures have been created.
Each structure consisted of red spheres of equal size. The
layout structures were presented against a black background
on a 21’’ VGA monitor with a resolution of 1280x1024
pixels. The monitor was in front of the subjects within 2
feet. Subjects were asked to respond by clicking with a
mouse. Subjects wore a head-mounted eye-tracking device
while they were conducting the experiments.

Experiment 1
The first experiment aimed at showing if the performance of
recalling objects is still improved in the horizontal oriented
structures, even if in the experimental design no semantic
content is used. Further one horizontal structure was added
that contains not the symmetric features of the horizontal
structure used by Travanti & Lind and Cockburn. Another
purpose of this experiment was to show if there is any
learning progress in the performance of object-locations
encoding/retrieval. It might be possible, that subjects
become more familiar with a structure the longer they are
exposed to them. In combination with the factor of
symmetric features in the structure it might be speculated,
that in the presence of symmetric features a subject needs
less time to become familiar with the structure.

Materials
Figure 1 shows the three structures that were used in the
first experiment. The first two structures are similar to the
structures used by Travanti & Lind. Each structure consists
of 25 spherical items. The first structure represents a 2D
display of a tree-structure, like it is used in most common
graphical user interfaces. The second structure represents
the structure of the 3D display, where any perspective clues
have been removed. The third structure is equivalent to the
first one except that it is rotated by 900 counterclockwise.
A2
A3
A1

one object of the sequence was highlighted at once. The
sequences were five items long. The highlighted object
differed from the not highlighted objects by color (blue
instead of red), increased size and a cross that appeared
within its circle shape. The end of a sequence was indicated
by an second acoustical signal. Subjects were instructed to
repeat the highlighted objects in correct order, by clicking
them with the mouse. After five objects had been clicked,
another acoustical signal rang out and a short online
questionnaire with a subjective rating occurred. Subjects
had to rate how confidant they were about their answer and
the degree of difficulty to memorize the sequence. The
questionnaire was inserted between the tests of two
sequences to reduce stress by diversion. Each subject was
tested on all structures. The experiments consisted of three
blocks. In each block the same structure was tested four
times in succession. Between each block there was a break
of one minute. Subjects were randomly divided into six
groups with five persons, where in each group the order of
the three blocks belongs to one of the six possible
permutations.
Before the main experiment started, each subject passed
through a training run, consisting of two blocks of four
sequences. The structures presented in the training run
consisted of 16 objects randomly located on the display. The
length of the sequences subjects had to learn varied between
four and six items.
All sequences for the training run and for the actual test
were created randomly only with the property that not the
same item occurred in the sequence one behind another. For
each subject new random sequences were created. This was
done to avoid that for one structure an easy sequence would
have been created by chance (e.g. the items of a sequence
are only in one row). In general for each structure there
might be sequences that are easy to learn, but for some
structures these are more likely than for others. And clearly
this is a property of a structure that one likes to deduce from
its spatial layout. To fix the sequence across subjects would
mean that two different factors are controlled. Creating
random sequences for each subject means to balance the
factor of the sequence among subjects. To fix a sequence
across subjects would be interesting to study one specific
factor in detail. This was done in parts in the second
experiment that is reported in the next section.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy data The number of correct and incorrect
repeated sequences for each structure is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Contingency table (2x3) of correct and erroneous
sequences

Figure 1: Set of structures used in experiment 1.

Design and Procedure
In each encoding retrieval trial, the subject was presented
one structure. After an acoustical signal the computer started
to highlight objects of one randomly created sequence. Only

1459

Structure
Correct seqs.
Erroneous seqs.

A1
46
74

A2
61
59

A3
63
57

The effect of structure approaches significance (2x3
contingency table p = 0.056, χ2 =5.77). When comparing the
numbers of correct repeated sequences between each pair of
structures with a one-sided analysis of the corresponding
2×2 contingency tables, the exact Fisher test yields that
performance in the horizontal oriented structures are
significantly higher (p<0.05), whereas the symmetric
features in the structure did not show any significant effect.

collect eye movement data for a more detailed analysis of
how subjects encode object-locations.

Materials
The structures used in the second experiment are shown in
Figure 3. They are divided into two subsets, because the
limited pool of subjects didn’t allow testing all permutations
needed to prevent order effects.
B1

B2

C1

C2

B3

Learning progress Figure 2 shows the development of the
performance by each trial in the same structure.
C

18

correct sequences

C

G

G

G
C

12

C

A

A

A

10

A
2

3

4

16

structure
A
G

C

A1
A2
A3

14

G

1

Figure 3: Set of structures used in experiment 2.

trial

Figure 2: Development of performance in dependence of
number of trials.
Structure A1 with no symmetric features exhibits an
increasing performance with each trial, whereas the
horizontal oriented structure with symmetric features even
shows a decrease in the last trial. The effect of trials on
performance is not significant in any structure (2x4
contingency table χ2 statistical test). Hence, this effect may
result from noise in the data.
The most important result of experiment 1 is that it shows
that the horizontal oriented structures do improve
performance, even if no alphanumerical letters are used as
retrieval keys. However, this result may be culture
dependent. For example people, who are used to read in
columns instead of rows, might be more familiar with
horizontal oriented structures.
One culture independent reason for this result might be
that the human field of view is more extended into the
horizontal direction. This increases noise of allocentric and
egocentric memory chunks in vertical directions. If this
hypothesis was right, people used to read in columns would
profit from a horizontal oriented tree view in two ways:
First the horizontal structure would increase performance of
object-location retrieval and secondly, inscriptions could be
written in columns instead of rows.

Experiment 2
The second experiment aimed at showing how the aspects
of human spatial memory, like they are discussed in Wang
et al (2001, 2002), affect the performance of object-location
encoding/retrieval in dependence on different graphical
layout structures. Another purpose of experiment 2 was to

Justification The structures in set B and C were created to
test some factors assumed to play an important role in the
process of object-location encoding/retrieval in structures.
The motivation to choose these structures is founded in the
assumptions and expectations before the experiments were
performed. Mainly the following factors were expected to
contribute to the overall performance:
1. Hierarchical features.
2. Noise in the location of an allocentric memory
chunk.
3. Noise in the location of an egocentric memory
chunk
4. Higher activation of allocentric memory chunks
if objects are in spatial vicinity.
The last factor seems plausible, because the effort to assess
spatial object-to-object relations is smaller if objects are
close together; possibly no eye movement is needed. This
last factor would give the spatial narrow matrix B1 an
advantage over the spatial wide matrix B2 in respect to
performance of object-location encoding/retrieval. But also
the other factors listed above may contribute. In the linear
structure the noise in the memory chunks are more grievous
than in the matrices, because there is only one dimension
that contributes information, whereas in the case of the
matrices also the direction contributes. The tables below
show which structure profits by which factor compared to
another structure in its set. A + sign in one cell means, that
the structure of the row takes an advantage over the
structure in the column in respect to the factor of the table,
whereas a – sign indicates the opposite The factor of
hierarchical features is balanced within each set, so this
factor is not included in the tables. (For this purpose the
linear structure has been separated into three groups with
four objects).

1460

Except for one sequence in each block all sequences were
created randomly for each subject. One sequence for the
structures of set C was predefined. Like mentioned above,
this was done to be able to analyze experimental tracing
data effectively. The sequence was predefined for the
structures C1 and C2 respectively. The predefined sequence
is shown in Figure 4 on the left. It was used in the first
block for structure C1 and in the second block for C2 or vice
versa. By alternating, which structure in the first block starts
with the predefined sequence, the effect of remembering the
sequence in the second block had been balanced between
the structures C1 and C2.

Table 2: Which structure profits by which factor in set B.
Less noise in
allocentric memory
chunks
B1 B2 B3
B1
0
++
B2 0
++
B3 -- --

Less Noise in
egocentric memory
chunks
B1 B2 B3
B1
-B2 ++
+
B3
+
-

Higher activation of
allocentric memory
chunks
B1 B2 B3
B1
++
+
B2 -B3
+

Table 3: Which structure profits by which factor in set C.
Less noise in
allocentric memory
chunks
C1 C2
C1
+
C2
-

Less noise in
egocentric memory
chunks
C1
C1
C2

+

C2
-

Higher activation
caused by spatial
vicinity
C1
C1
C2

Results and Discussion

C2

Accuracy data The numbers of correct repeated sequences
are shown in the contingency tables 4 and 5.

+

-

To estimate the overall performance, the tendencies shown
in the tables have to be quantified. Furthermore, not any
factor might contribute equally to the overall performance.
Without any computational model it can only be speculated
about these questions. However, in the setup used in the
experiment, it can be assumed that the differences in the
noise of the egocentric memory chunks are nearly
negligible, because the changes in the average visual angles
between the different objects in the scene are small
compared to the human field of view. Whereas the
directional angular of the allocentric memory chunks
possibly covers the whole range. The effect of noise in the
allocentric memory chunks in the structure B1 and B2 are
expected to have an equal effect, because all relative
distances are equal. It was expected, that the effect of
decrease in performance in the linear structure would be
very distinct.
Structure C1 and C2 differ only by the distances between
the six pairs of objects; the distances between the two
objects within a pair are equal. The hypothesis for this
structure is that for sequence containing transitions between
objects of two far distant pairs it will become more difficult
for the subject to encode the location of the object within a
pair. This results from a higher noise in the spatial object-toobject relation. To show this effect one predefined sequence
was used. This allows analyzing behavior of subjects more
efficient. Data from experiments can be used for the
parameterization of stochastic models. The regularities
found by the algorithms can be analyzed and interpreted
(Winkelholz et al., 2003).

Design and Procedure
The experimental design was similar to experiment 1. This
time the sequences were six items long. Furthermore, the
experiment consisted of two blocks instead of three and in
one block each structure from each set was presented once.
The first three structures in each block were chosen from set
B ordered by one of the possible six permutations. The last
two structures in each block were C1 and C2, which order
again was balanced within groups of subjects.

Table 4: Contingency table (2x3) of correct and erroneous
sequences in set B.
Correct seqs.
Erroneous seqs.

B1
38
22

B2
34
26

B3
16
44

Table 5: Contingency table (2x2) of correct and erroneous
sequences in set C.

Correct seqs.
Erroneous seqs.

C1
35
25

C2
25
35

The performance in the linear structure is significantly
lower than in the structures of the matrices (exact Fisher-test
p<0.001). Although the number of correct sequences in the
narrow structure is a little bit higher than in the wide matrix,
this difference is not significant. In table 5 the number of
correct and incorrect sequences from the randomly created
sequences and the predefined sequence are combined.
Analysis of errors A look at the errors subjects made in
their answers gives more insight into the underlying
cognitive processes. To analyze the answer sequences for
the predefined sequence in set C we used a modified
algorithm for variable length markov chains (VLMC) (Ron
et al 1996, Bühlmann & Wyner 1998) to parameterize a
stochastic model by the answer sequences. Roughly
speaking this algorithm can be seen as a filter for
subsequences (called contexts) from the data that contain
predictive information. We modified this algorithm in a way
that only contexts that contain significant predictive
information in a statistical sense are included into the model
(Winkelholz et al 2004). To apply this algorithm to the
answer sequences the objects in the structure has to be
assigned to symbols. The contexts of erroneous behavior
found by this method in the answer sequences of the
structures C1 and C2 are shown in Figure 4. In the first
column of the table the contexts found by the algorithm are

1461

shown in parenthesis, followed by an arrow, and the most
probable next symbols that occur in the answer sequences, if
this context is given. E.g. “(7,10)->3”, means: If subjects
had clicked on object 7 followed by object 10, the most
probable object they will click next is object 3. If on the
right side of an arrow, more than one symbol/number is
listed, they are ordered by their probabilities, with the most
probable next symbol first. On the right of an arrow possible
next symbols are listed, as far as their frequencies for the
given context meet one of the two conditions: First, the
frequency is significantly higher than for the symbols with
lower frequencies. Second, the frequency does not differ
significantly from the frequency of the symbol with the next
higher probability.

in the encoding phase of the predefined test sequence the
same method as in the analysis of the errors in the answer
sequences was used. The pictures obtained from this
procedure are shown in Figure 5. Each picture shows the
transitions in the eye movement between the pairs of
objects, when the object shown as a filled circle is
highlighted. The most probable pairs of objects that will be
fixated next if one fixation and the highlighted object is
given are presented as arrows starting at the currently
fixated pair of objects.
1

2

3

4

5

6

C1

4

8

12

3

7

11

2

6

10

1

5

9

Context -> Next
Symbol
(4)->10, 11
(6)->7,9
(10) ->11, e
(b)->6,7
(7,6) -> 9
(b, 7) -> 6
(4,9)->11
(9)->4,11

Interpretation
Omission of object 10.
Omission of object 7.
Surprised by the end.
Changed order of the first two
events in the sequence
The spatial vicinity, caused
subject to mistake 9 for 10.

Figure 5: Eye movement data during the encoding phase for
the predefined sequence (see figure 4).

C2
4

8

12

3

7

11

2

6

10

1

5

9

Context -> Next
Symbol
(9)-> 4,3
(3)->10
(7) -> 9,10
(7,10) -> 3
(4)->10,11
(4,11)->e

Interpretation
The spatial vicinity, caused
subject to mistake 3 for 4.
The spatial vicinity, caused
subject to mistake 9 for 10.
If subject mistake 10 for 9 he
also mistake 3 for 4.
Omission of object 10.

Figure 4: Contexts of erroneous behavior found by
the parameterization of a stochastic model. Left: The
structure with symbols assigned to the objects and
the predefined test sequence. Right: Table with
contexts and possible interpretation.
In structure C2 with the more distant pairs there are more
contexts concerning with the confusion of the objects within
the pairs of the upper left, and down right corners, whereas
for structure C1 there are more contexts concerning the
omission of an object. The most notable context for
structure C2 is “(7,10)->3”. The angular between the line
from 7 to 10 and the line from 10 to 3 is nearly similar to
the angular between the lines 7 to 9 and 9 to 4. Therefore
this context indicates that subjects used the relative change
in angular direction of two transitions as a reminder.
Eye movement data Currently only the eye movement data
of the structures C2 and B2 have been analyzed. Only these
two structures exhibit spatial distinct features that allow a
reliable assignment of fixations to attended features in the
structure. In the structure C2 the fixations were only
assigned to one pair. The resolution of the eye tracking
device was not sufficient to distinguish between fixations
within each pair. For the analysis of the eye movement data

The sizes of the arrows are scaled by the frequency of this
transition. Although the predefined test sequence does
contain two transitions that connect the objects from the
upper left corner to the down right corner, there is only one
transition in eye movement that connects these pairs
directly. Even in the case of a transition from the down right
to upper left corner in the test sequence subjects first fixated
the group more near to the currently fixated pair of objects
(picture 3-4). It was expected that after these transitions in
the test sequence occurred, subjects would tend to repeat
these transitions by eye movement to create memory chunks
for this spatial relation. Instead subjects seem to create
spatial relations to the pairs in the middle column. This
result becomes more affirmed by taking a look at the eye
movement data of the randomized sequences of the
structures C2 and B2. An overlay of the transitions in the
randomized test sequences and the corresponding transitions
in the eye movement data are shown in Figure 6.
Although the transitions in the test sequences contain
equally transitions between distant objects, these transitions
are merely absent in the eye movement data. In both
structures most transitions in eye movement are transitions
between locations in the vicinity of the two objects in the
middle of the screen. In the case of the matrix, movements
of the fixation toward objects at the border are very sparse,
whereas in the structure with the pairs of objects there are
noticeable more fixation movements toward each pair of
objects. This also explains the not expected result, that there
is no significant difference in the performance of the wide
and the narrow matrix structure. Possibly, it is sufficient to
fixate a location in the middle of the screen to asses most of

1462

the spatial object-to-object relations. Moving attention in the
visual buffer to repeat transitions is possible without moving
fixation. Therefore the effort to repeat transitions of the test
sequences in structure B1 and B2 are similar. Different in
structure C2; here subjects needed to move fixation to
resolve which object within a pair had been highlighted.
Overlay of all transitions
in the randomized test
sequences

Overlay of all transitions in
eye movements.

Third, the results from the comparison of the horizontal
and vertical oriented structures in the first experiment
suggest that noise in the memory chunks of spatial memory
is distorted towards a higher accuracy in the horizontal
direction. This is a plausible assumption, because the human
vision field of view is more extended into the horizontal
direction and this should be true for coordinates in all
frames of references.
Fourth, eye movement data showed, that subjects need not
to gaze at objects they are attending to assess their locations
in different frames of references. Therefore it may be
disputed, if developers of cognitive models within ACT-R
need to control fixation and attention independently. The
noise in the assessed object locations should depend on the
distance to the current location of fixation.

References

Figure 6: Comparison of transitions in the randomized test
sequences with transitions in the eye movement data.

Conclusions and Future Work
The experiments reported in this paper showed how single
aspects of human spatial memory affect the overall
performance in memorizing tasks of object-locations in
layout structures. A computational model that quantifies the
interaction of the different aspects of object-location
memory is needed to get reliable predictions about the
overall performance. The development of such a model
within a general architecture of cognition like ACT-R,
(Anderson & Lebiere, 1998) enables the implementation of
meaningful cognitive models for the application field of
information visualization.
The results of the two experiments make the following
suggestions with regard to a computational model within the
ACT-R architecture:
First, like Wang et al (2002) suggested the model should
encode spatial object-to-object relations between the
previously and currently attended objects as memory
chunks.
Second, also the relation between three objects should be
encoded in a memory chunk. In the same fashion as objectto-object relations are encoded this can be done by the
visual module whenever attention shifts between three
different objects. This memory chunk should be of the form
of a noisy angular. Thus the model would show the
systematic failures found in the analysis of the answer
sequences.

Anderson J. R.; Matessa M. & Lebiere Christian (1998):
The Atomic Components of Thought. Lawrance Erlbaum
Association, Inc. Publishers
Bühlmann, P. & Wyner A.J. (1999). Varaible Length
Markov Chains. Annals of Statistics 27 (1), pp. 480-513,
1999.
Cockburn A (2004). Revisiting 2D vs 3D Implications on
Spatial Memory. Proceedings of the Fifth Australasian
User Interface Conference (AUIC2004). Dunedin, New
Zealand. January 2004, pages 25-32.
Johnson, T. R., Wang, H., Zhang, J., & Wang, Y. (2002). A
Model of Spatio-Temporal Coding of Memory for
Multidimensional Stimuli. In W. Gray & C. Schunn
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 506511). Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ron, D., Singer, Y. & Tishby, N. (1996): The Power of
Amnesia: Learning Probabilistic Automata with Variable
Length. Machine Learning 25, 2/3, 1996, pp.117-149.
Travanti , M. & Lind M. (2001). 2D vs 3D, Implications on
Spatial Memory. In proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization 2001.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., Zhang, J., & Wang, Y. (2002). A
study of object-location memory. In W. Gray & C.
Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 920925). Mahweh, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wang, H., Johnson, T. R., & Zhang, J. (2001). The mind’s
views of space. Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference of Cognitive Science (pp. 191-198).
Winkelholz C., Schlick C. & Motz, F. (2003): Validating
Cognitive Human Models for Multiple Target Search
Tasks with Variable Length Markov Chains. SAE-Paper
2003-01-2219. In: Proceedings of the 6th SAE Digital
Human Modeling Conference, June 2003, Montreal,
Canada.
Winkelholz C.; Schlick Ch. (2004, submitted): Statistical
Variable Length Markov Chains for the Parameterization
of Stocastic User-Models from Sparse Data. 2004 IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics

1463

