UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The transformation of scientific information through artifacts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7bp232w7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Romero, L. Fernando
Brem, Sarah K.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The transformation of scientific information through artifacts
L. Fernando Romero (fer@asu.edu)
Psychology in Education, #0611
Tempe, AZ 85287-0611 USA

Sarah K. Brem (sarah.brem@asu.edu)
Psychology in Education, #0611
Tempe, AZ 85287-0611 USA

Abstract
We use artifact analysis to describe the process of scientific
dissemination in a community-based program that informs
parents and professional caregivers about early childhood
development. We define this program as a network of
information management and our unit of analysis are the
sociocultural activities of dissemination, and the artifacts that
shape them. Drawing upon activity theory, social networks
theory, and distributed practice, we describe and analyze the
impact, evolution, and sociocultural nature of understandings,
goals, values, artifacts, actions, events, and organizational
elements. Our data were collected through observations, field
notes, focus groups, artifact collection, and stimulated recall
interviews. Results suggest that as artifacts move from one
environment to another, their role changes, often resulting in a
loss or distortion of information. We describe how and why
these problems are overlooked and the potential problems
they may create.

Studies of scientific dissemination are rich sources of
information about cognitive processes situated in a
sociocultural context. The dissemination process has been
almost completely the domain of large corporate,
government,
or
academic
entities—universities,
pharmaceutical companies, the National Institute of Health,
media networks, and the like. The role of lay people and
their communities has been largely one of end-user, with the
assumption that they could be expected to act as recipients
of information rather than disseminators; a passive role at
the bottom of the organizational structure (Epstein, 1996)
The importance of community involvement in education,
advocacy, and decision making has been growing over the
past decade (Minkler & Wallerstein, 2002). At the local
level, the project team identifies community needs through
community engagement (Minkler & Wallerstein, 2002), an
approach to research and intervention characterized by its
use of the community as a unit of identity, action and
analysis. Communities may be formed around geography,
socioeconomic status, shared emotions, or common goals.
Facilitators are community members who bring scientific
information to the attention of local end-users, translate
concepts and terms, and help end-users apply the
information in making personal decisions.
Facilitators can also inform disseminators and scientists
about end-user interests and needs; thus, ideally,
information can flow in both directions. However,
facilitators need aid in finding and organizing information,

contextualizing scientific findings, applying them to local
situations, providing emotional support, and serving as
advocates and spokespeople. In short, facilitators need
support to provide support, in terms of content, culturally
relevant delivery, and information management. There is
growing evidence for community-based dissemination,
scientific communication that is culturally responsive,
accounts
for audiences’ prior knowledge and
ability/willingness to acquire new knowledge, and is
flexible enough to fit diverse goals, resources, and interests.
(e.g., Minkler & Wallenstein, 2003; Shonkoff & Phillips,
2000; Wilcox, Hadley, & Bacon, 1998).
This creates interesting questions regarding reasoning in
community engagement setting, especially in regard to
facilitators and outreach personnel. They are, on a number
of dimensions, in limbo. Regarding the scientific content,
they are neither experts nor novices; they usually have some
teaching or outreach experience, but they often have never
functioned in this role with this population before. They are
engaged in scientific dissemination, but they are not part of
the groups usually studied in the context of dissemination
studies, such as scientists, media, or teachers.
Research on community-based interventions also offers
interesting opportunities for dissemination research. A main
reason is that facilitators are engaged in a process that
requires a quick turnaround; their training may last few
weeks or months and they are soon ready to work in the
field. Updates, refresher courses, and additional training are
put to work within a similar timeframe. This allow us to
watch the inflow and outflow of information in a way that
we cannot with dissemination agents whose timeline
involves years of training or experience, such as a journalist,
scientist, or social worker.
In short, community engagement and community
facilitators are playing an increasingly important role in
scientific dissemination, they are unusual in a number of
ways, and they also provide opportunities to watch the
dissemination process in a compressed format. Of course,
this can both create unusual patterns and behaviors that are
not seen in other areas of dissemination, but it does not
necessitate uniqueness. Therefore, it is initially important to
examine the ways in which this format repeats patterns in
other spheres of scientific dissemination, and the ways in
which it reinvents these patterns or creates new ones.
To construct a framework for this comparison process, we
draw upon multiple streams of dissemination research in
attempting to cover the ambiguous position of facilitators

1173

and community engagement. This includes novice reasoning
about scientific information in structured settings (Sandoval,
2003; Schank & Ranney, 1995), and informal settings
(Zimmermann, Bisanz & Bisanz, 1998), lay advocacy and
policy involvement (Epstein, 1996; Margolis, 1996),
scientists reasoning among themselves (Latour, 1987), and
interactions between lay people and experts (Lemke, 1990).
Using this framework, we examine a community
engagement program providing parents and professional
caregivers with information about new psychological and
neuroscientific research on early childhood learning and
development.

Sites & Program Description
The program that we have been following, The First
Teacher Project (FTP), is part of a larger initiative started in
the city of Chandler, AZ in 2002, The Steps to Learning
Initiative (StL). Funded by an Early Learning Opportunities
Act Grant from the U.S. Department of Education, StL was
created to educate the community about the importance of
early literacy and learning, develop stronger links among
service providers working with children and families in the
Chandler community, create a comprehensive network of
early childhood programs, and make information and
programs more affordable and accessible. The grant was
secured and is overseen through the Mayor’s Literacy Task
Force, and administered by the Chandler Public Library.
Other partners include the Chandler Unified School District
and the Chandler (East Valley) Regional Hospital.
Chandler is one of the fastest growing cities in Arizona,
with a large traditionally underserved population. In the
2000 Census, Chandler had one of the largest Latino
populations in the state, ranging from 25% to over 50%,
depending on neighborhood (Morrison Institute, 2001). It is
also an economically diverse city, home to Intel and
Motorola, but also to a federally-designated Enterprise
Zone. Eighty percent of Zone residents are Latinos and 68%
of households are monolingual Spanish. Seventy percent of
students qualify for free or reduced-price lunch, 50% of
families earn less than $5,000/year, and almost 50% of
adults lack a high school diploma.
The FTP component of StL focuses on children’s
development from ages 0 to 3. The program focuses on
sensory development, bonding and attachment, cognitive
skills such as categorization and language, and the value of
play and pretense. The information provided can be used to
identify developmental delays, sensory deficits, and other
problems early on, as well as providing parents of
mainstream children with new perspectives on their
children’s learning and development. FTP involves
disseminating a significant amount of scientific information,
much of it relatively new even to scientists in the relevant
fields. Topics include neural pruning, synaptic formation,
plasticity, limbic and cortical functions, biological and
psychological aspects of temperament and language
acquisition.
The FTP initiative is coordinated by a full-time outreach
coordinator. A group of 12 paid community professionals
(eight educators, three librarians, and the outreach

coordinator) receive forty-five hours of training, and
conduct mock workshops before beginning to facilitate
parent workshops in their schools and libraries. Facilitators
receive continuing education on a monthly basis, and have
committed to a tenure of at least 18 months. StL is currently
looking for ways to fund and support the program beyond
this 18 month timeframe.

Activity, Artifacts, Dissemination & Education
In addition to setting up a content framework, we need also
to construct an epistemological and methodological
framework for the analysis. We do so in a hierarchical
fashion.
At the highest level, we have chosen to adopt an activity
theory perspective. In activity theory, the unit of analysis is
continually developing activities—events, transactions,
practices—and the analysis is organized around objects that
motivate, guide, and give meaning to activity. Objects have
both physical and semiotic properties, and affect human
interactions with their environment, as tools for physical and
mental activity. Because of activity theory’s emphasis on
social factors and the interaction between agents and
objects, it is useful for capturing the process of scientific
dissemination, the practices of which depend heavily on
tools and networks of social interaction.
In identifying objects that organize events and
transactions of importance, we use Latour’s concept of
artifact (Latour, 1987). It is a fairly broad conceptualization
of artifact, in which artifacts are physical entities that have
been given meaning by human beings through utilization
and construction.
Using this artifact-oriented approach to examine the
dissemination of scientific information, specifically in the
context of educational dissemination, and compare our
findings to the existing research in other areas of scientific
dissemination. Based on this analysis, we find that the
scientific content is altered by organizational goals,
available materials, etc; that it is important to distinguish
explicit, tacit, and incidental features of artifacts; and that
the distinction between the “scientific content” of the
artifact and elements added during these alterations is often
not identified by facilitators and parents.

Method
In this study, we take the perspective that the FTP can be
conceived of as an activity system with the primary purpose
of knowledge management and community dissemination.
Drawing upon concepts from activity theory, social
networks theory, and distributed cognition, we describe and
analyze the development and consequences of stakeholders’
understandings, goals, values, artifacts, actions, and
organizational dynamics. We collected data over the full 18
month existence of the program, using observation, video
recordings, field notes, focus groups and stimulated recall
interviews, artifact collection, and surveys.
Extended observation and videography was conducted
throughout the life of the program; all training sessions and
most of the parent workshops were observed and/or
recorded, and most of the ongoing monthly meetings have

1174

been observed. In addition, several meetings of the grant
oversight committee, the Mayor’s Literacy Task Force, have
been attended by at least one of the authors. Field notes
provide in depth descriptions of activities, settings, and
interpersonal dynamics, were the only means of establishing
a record of events where we were not granted permission for
videography, or when it was not appropriate to record a
particular event.
Focus groups with the facilitators took the form of
discussions that allowed us to collect information about
their perspective, and the meaning they attached to
particular artifacts and events. Video-elicited and artifactelicited interviews are used to obtain an in-depth perspective
of the local meanings teacher create in relation to key
perceptions, goals, experiences, actions, and elements of this
program.
Artifact collection and documentation refers to the
process of gathering/recording objects and conceptual
symbols. Artifacts are objects that have both material and
conceptual characteristics and that have been transformed
through the history of this program. This category includes
curriculum binders, slides, handouts, props, toys, logos,
memos, announcements, electronic newsletters, websites,
acronyms, jargon, and definitions.
Content area questionnaires are used to assess teachers’
knowledge of infant brain development before training
began, and at intervals after training. These assessments
include fact-based, open-ended, and problem-solving items.
A separate motivation survey was designed to address affect
and efficacy in relation to distinct aspects of participation;
training, instruction, curriculum materials, trainers, and
programmatic characteristics.

Results & Discussion
The First Teacher Project is best described as an activity
system configured into a dynamic network of information
management. This network relies upon the interconnection
of different levels of cognitive mediation (e.g., object,
social, organizational). Our analysis is primarily based on
the study of how these mediations become embodied into
the conceptual to material continuum of artifacts. We use
Collins et al (2002) hierarchy of mediating artifacts to
categorize what, how, why, and where-to artifacts. The what
category refers to artifacts that serve as a means to
achieving an object (e.g., using chart paper to write down
parent questions). How artifacts contribute to understanding
how to achieve purposes or goals (e.g., using a case study to
demonstrate how routines help babies). Why artifacts
motivates achievement of the goal (e.g., presenting statistics
of neglect and abuse linked to academic achievement to
encourage parent-child bonding). Where-to artifacts
motivate the evolution of all activity elements (e.g.,
identifying a pocket population that was not targeted and redefining main project goals).
Artifact analysis is primarily an in depth description of
the history and meaning of tools and signs that evidence
intentionality and activity of agents within this network of
information management. Artifact analysis is a process of
analytic induction that focuses on how artifacts evidence

actions that occur in specific settings and in connection to
specific meanings. We use Erickson’s (1990) five methods
of evidentiary inadequacy to determine the degree to which
we have a) adequate amounts of evidence, b) adequate
variety of evidence, c) trustworthy evidence, d) adequate
disconfirming evidence, and e) adequate discrepant case
analysis.
An example of an artifact is the brochure community
professionals put together to attract participants to the parent
workshop. At one point, this brochure may represent
everything target parents know about the project. However,
parents are unaware of the history of this artifact, how the
printed language reflects interpretations of science, how
explicit goals of the workshop relate to assumptions about
needs in this community, or how this workshop expects to
influence parenting. The brochure is a byproduct that
reflects negotiated goals, program priorities, perceptions of
the target population, and a way to sum up the essential
components of a newly developed expertise. The final draft
of the brochure is edited by the project coordinator after
asking community professionals to develop drafts, after
discussing these drafts during taskforce meetings, and after
receiving approval from all stakeholders. In this way, the
development of a simple communication product is
informative of the way this project is represented to the
larger target population, the role of distributed cognition and
distributed practice, and the protocols and the organizational
structure necessary to develop this double-sided page. And
the workshop brochure is just the entry point to the vast
world of artifacts that are part of this BBE curriculum. As
the parent arrives to the actual workshop he/she will be
exposed to graphs, binders, slides, toys, props, sounds,
video-clips, case studies, analogies, metaphors, acronyms,
jargon, and abstract ideas.
It is important, too, to recognize that artifacts are not
necessarily bounded physically, but by the role they play in
a network of activity. We address this in our analysis by
examining agent-artifact units, i.e. units comprised of an
artifact and the agent who is currently making use of the
artifact. Thus, a brochure handed to a parent by their child’s
teacher is a different agent-artifact unit than a brochure
taken from a stand at the door of a library.

Content transformations
The main goal of the FTP is to translate neuroscience into
recommended practices that will improve parenting and
normal child development outcomes. Research techniques
and directions, however, often do not directly support this
goal. Much of the neuroscientific research available,
however, has been conducted using deficit models, and
highly constrained tasks and environments. Therefore,
application to normal developmental practices is rarely an
explicit element of the scientific report. Thus, when a report
in a journal is read by a curriculum developer, the
developer-report unit is a different entity than the scientistreport unit, and the report is used for different purpose
(developing parenting recommendations vs. informing peers
of experimental results), establishes credibility in different
ways (appearance in a prestigious journal vs. surviving the
actual peer-review), and becomes a symbol for establishing

1175

authority rather than a document containing information to
be examined.
The effects of this transformation are several. One way in
which this is done is through broad generalizations into
maxims that would be difficult to find objectionable.
Statements that encourage parents to provide a stimulating
but not overwhelming environment, to not neglect their
children emotionally or physically, to create a loving and
protective environment. The training providers believe that
by taking these unobjectionable messages and pairing them
with laboratory research that is tenuously connected, they
will make these messages more persuasive by making them
more authoritative and making them appear to be based in
“science.”
Another approach is to take deficit model findings and
transform them into “best practice” recommendations. The
logic, roughly, is that if the absence of certain elements has
a deleterious effect, then parents should be encouraged to
make sure these elements are present. While this is not
always faulty logic, it can at times produce the implication
that since less is bad, more is better, and that greater
amounts of play, visual stimulation, exposure to human
faces, and so on, will have a beneficial effect beyond that
which normal caregiving would provide. Research studies
based on abnormal case studies produce dramatic research
findings on how neurological disorders, neglect and abuse
can adversely affect brain development. However, this
program is not designed to target parents of children with
major disabilities, but to target the general population. In
this way, research findings from deficit models are
discussed outside of their context, and derived applications
may involve unwarranted alterations of the science content.
For example, facilitators are taught that physiological and
psychological traumatic events can chronically elevate an
individual’s cortisol levels, which in turn may result in the
destruction of neurons or a reduction of synaptic
connections. Children who have high levels of cortisol in
response to trauma have been shown to experience more
developmental delays (Gunnar, 1996). A key artifact here is
a video-clip interview of neuroscientist who explains how
cortisol levels show how the brain responds to stress levels.
In the context of a parent workshop or facilitator training,
this functions not so much as a way to deliver information
but to prove the curriculum’s scientific backing. That
sustained high levels of cortisol can cause delays does not
imply either that transient elevation from minor stresses will
cause problems, nor does it imply that extremely low stress
will facilitate development. With community facilitators
there is a tendency to blur two distinctions: the difference
between stress and trauma, and the distinction between
temporary and permanent changes in cortisol levels.
The content may also be transformed because of the
physical constraints imposed as artifacts are paired with new
agents. An example is the inclusion of infant massage
experiments in the curriculum. A meta-analysis conducted
by the Cochrane Review found the evidence to be weak,
though in the direction of supporting the use of massage
with infants receiving neo-natal intensive care (Vickers,
Ohlsson, Lacy, & Horsley, 2004). Findings regarding its use
in other areas appear likewise ambiguous.

Those experiments supporting infant massage as
beneficial are incorporated into popular books (e.g., Field,
2000) by clinicians and researchers that wish to make their
case with the public. These are then taken by curriculum
developers and integrated with specific how-to activities and
instructions that guide parents into giving leg, foot, arm and
hand, face and head massages to infants. How-to activities
often have not been equally researched, though this
distinction is not made in the materials given to facilitators
during training. A focal artifact here is a written description
created by the curriculum developers where they describe
that, ideally, parents are to take into consideration the age of
the child to determine the type, duration and frequency of
massaging a baby: A massage for a newborn baby should be
limited to 3-5 minutes, while a month old baby can receive a
10 minute massage. In addition, it is said that parents should
be attentive to determine individual differences in
responding and tolerating touch. When the community
professionals attended their training, these written
instructions are verbally described by the trainers who also
modeled concepts by using realistic baby dolls. Participants
practice the massage on these dolls, which then become part
of their representation of infant massage.
However, the specifics of the infant massage curriculum
are not covered in the same fashion by facilitators as they
bring this information to parents. The infant massage
demonstration and hands-on activity is time-consuming, so
the facilitators do not have the same opportunity to
emphasize this topic as do the developers. Moreover, they
have only one doll, making even demonstrating to a group
somewhat difficult. The facilitators rely on slides showing
bullet points that summarize the main ideas on how touch
enhances bonding. Moreover, we observed that discussions
often wandered onto interesting but misleading tangents,
such as formal training in infant massage therapy. The
superficial overview in the context of such a discussion is
misinterpreted by some parents as a need to seek a special
training. There is not a deliberate plan to distort information,
but the way information is presented has an unexpected
effect.

Artifacts & Expectations
During the initial intensive period of training, NDI
structured the content of its curriculum around two
acronyms STEPS for security, touch, eyes, play, and sound
and ABC’s of learning for attention, bonding, and
communication. These acronyms were developed as a way
to organize the curriculum, and resulted from feedback of
prior FTP programs that had been implemented in different
communities. Those prior programs received a similar
training with very little organizing structure, and limited
curriculum materials. FTP trainees received a binder with
five major divisions that corresponded to the STEPS
acronym, their training was structured around these topics,
and each of the STEPS concepts was discussed as relating to
the ABC’s. In addition, NDI developed a wide array of
materials that included slides, power-point presentations,
video-clips and activity sets called the brain boxes. In turn,
the facilitators structured their first parent workshop series
as five meetings, each of which reflected the STEPS

1176

structure. The different sites reported that five workshops
proved to have a high turnover, and StL decided along with
NDI to structure the curriculum around 3 meetings. Then,
the curriculum started to be reorganized around the ABC’s
as the guiding acronym, with the STEPS concepts
subsumed. These acronyms are artifacts that reflect which
concepts are central to NDI, how those concepts help
organize activity, and the affordances those acronyms have.
These acronyms are just one way of organizing knowledge
that links neuroscience with parenting and child
development, and they in fact seem to be useful in
organizing workshops and discussions. Our preliminary
findings suggest that these acronyms act as a paradigm
through which experts, trainees, and parents think about and
recall infant brain development information. For example,
during a focus group activity we asked facilitators to write
down which are the most compelling ideas they take from
this training, and most participants referred to the acronyms.
Other ways in which this acronyms influence information
management and distributed cognition is that they implicitly
convey the idea that these categories are all encompassing,
and that scientific information is stable. We discuss these
ideas further in the next section.
Artifacts may set up expectations because of their
appearance or immediately perceived function. If they are
improperly designed, or if the design is misinterpreted,
problems can occur. To illustrate this point we refer to the
script NDI puts together for facilitators to guide their
presentation as they conduct the parent workshops. The
script is text that corresponds to a particular slide and
elaborates the main ideas represented. The parent workshop
is usually structured around a series of slides, and the series
of slides are connected through an overarching curriculum
concept (e.g., security, eyes, touch). Most facilitators plan
their parent workshops by reviewing this script, and they
often refer back to the script as they conduct their
presentations. This way of implementing the workshop is
efficient in conveying many concepts to the parents who are
part of the audience, and it also creates consistency and a
good point of reference across facilitators. On the other side,
the script winds up dictating most of what is said during the
parent workshop. The script sets the tone for the
presentation of information slide after slide, with facilitators
either rephrasing or reading off the script. As a result, it is
not infrequent to observe that the workshop is run as a fortyslides presentation with very few questions asked.
Therefore, the script drives the workshop, leaving a small
amount of time for unscripted events, which is taken up
making introductions, allowing for breaks, doing take-home
activities, and checking out materials.
Furthermore, the script and slides seem to endorse the
perception that these curriculum materials are a selfcontained representations of brain-research; sufficient to
achieve the main goals of the workshop. Facilitators do not
feel the need to continue exploring the science beyond this
point. During continuous support meetings, NDI has
emphasized the importance of speaking more explicitly
about the specific brain research facts and language.
Facilitators try to adjust by using the language that is part of
the script, but do not go beyond this information.

As facilitators become more experienced in conducting
the parent workshop, however, they take greater ownership
of the content. They rely less on the script and make use of
personal examples that have been effective in the past. Still,
when parents ask questions that relate to more specific
details of the research, facilitators have difficulty addressing
those questions. A parent asked how scientists know that
children see blurry at first and they see faces very clearly
around three months. Even though an explanation of
techniques used to determine babies’ responses is provided
for facilitators, they only seem reliably aware of the
information presented through the script. They have a very
hard time addressing those issues if they feel the question
must have a right answer that is lying somewhere in a
library. Facilitators are often more successful if they can
find examples that relate to their own personal experiences
as caregivers or teachers. They are capable of finding
connections that are relevant and that help illustrate the
main points, but when questions are asked about the
scientific content that cannot be grounded in case from their
experience, facilitators quickly face difficulties.

Conclusions
The unique characteristics of community based programs
for the dissemination of scientific information include a
rapid training turnaround and the opportunities to document
how science concepts are transformed through actions,
objects, social interaction, and organizational elements.
Community-based programs for the dissemination of
science are complex activity systems that manage
information in ways that reflect elements such as
organizational knowledge, learning, and culture. In this
particular case, the FTP program based high-level goals by
presenting them as truisms that are difficult to challenge
(e.g., parents should create a loving environment), while
tacit low-level goals go underdetermined (e.g., research
based on deficit models is applied to the general
population). As a result, neuroscience is translated in ways
that bypass issues of ecological validity.
Artifacts with flawed designs, or artifacts that are
misinterpreted are likely to create problems that can go
unidentified. Scripts that are meant to guide facilitators end
up dictating the pace of the parent workshops in ways that
limit parents’ active participation, and in ways that
communicate to facilitators that these materials are a
finished-all-inclusive product. Finally, the development of
artifacts such as communications (e.g., newsletters,
brochures) give insight into how goals are proposed,
negotiated, and enacted. This analysis also illustrates how
the entire system works as a network that manages
information.

Acknowledgments
This study is funded by an ASU/Spencer Fellowship to the
first author, and an NSF CAREER grant to the second
author.

1177

References
Epstein, S. (1996) Impure Science; AIDS, activism, and the
politics of knowledge. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Fields, T. (2000) Touch Therapy. NY: Harcourt-Brace.
Gunnar, M. (1996). Quality of care and the buffering of
stress physiology: Its potential in protecting the
developing human brain. University of Minnesota
Institute of Child Development.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Margolis, H. (1996). Dealing with Risk: Why the Public and
the Experts Disagree on Environmental Issues. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Minkler, M. & Wallerstein, N. (2002). Community-based
participatory research for health. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Ranney, M. & Schank, P. (1995). Protocol modeling, textual
analysis, the bifurcation/bootstrapping method, and
Convince Me: Computer-based techniques for studying
beliefs and their revision. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, and Computers, 27, 239-243.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Conceptual and epistemic aspects
of students' scientific explanations. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 12, 5-51.
Vickers, A., Ohlsson, A., Lacy, J.B., Horsley, A. (2004)
Massage for promoting growth and development of
preterm and/or low birth-weight infants (Cochrane
Review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 1. Chichester,
UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Zimmerman, C., Bisanz, G. L., & Bisanz, J. (1998).
Everyday scientific literacy: Do students use information
about the social context and methods of research to
evaluate news briefs about science? The Alberta Journal
of Educational Research , 44, 188-207.

1178

