UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Cue Predictability on Long-Range Dependencies in Response Times versus
Response Durations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5wf9r82f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Beltz, Brandon C.
Kello, Christopher T.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Cue Predictability on Long-Range Dependencies
in Response Times versus Response Durations
Brandon C. Beltz (bbeltz@gmu.edu)
George Mason University, 4400 University Drive
Fairfax, VA, 22030-4444, USA

Christopher T. Kello (ckello@gmu.edu)
George Mason University, 4400 University Drive
Fairfax, VA, 22030-4444, USA

correlated with itself at any offset, and hence, there are no
persisting patterns in the fluctuations. This condition is
often referred to as white noise (see top series in Figure 1),
and it is common to assume that error variance is some type
of white noise (e.g., Gaussian). However, it turns out that
measurements of human behavior are often not
characterized by white noise. Instead, they exhibit serial
dependencies such that C(k) is positive for some k > 0.

Abstract
Two experiments were conducted in order to test the effects
of cue predictability on serial dependencies in response times
and response durations. Predictability in the timing
(Experiment 1) and identity (Experiment 2) of response cues
was manipulated. Results of both experiments showed that
long-range dependencies in response times were stronger
when cues were predictable versus unpredictable. By contrast,
long-range dependencies in response durations were
unaffected by cue predictability. Results are discussed in light
of five hypotheses about the source of long-range
dependencies in human behavior.

Introduction
In most psychological experiments, the variability in human
behavior is divided into two categories: some variations in
measurement are explained by the experimental factors, and
other variations are not. The latter category is often termed
error variance, and it usually does not play a role in
theorizing about the psychological processes under
examination. One reason why researchers ignore error
variance is because they often assume that it is effectively
random, or possibly the product of mundane factors such as
practice, fatigue, or perseveration. These assumptions lead
one to think of error variance as uninformative or, at best,
irrelevant.
A growing body of experimental results has recently
prompted some researchers to pay closer attention to the
ostensibly random fluctuations in human behavior. It
appears that, contrary to popular belief, these fluctuations
tend to exhibit patterns that persist over time. A transparent
way to think about these patterns is through the
autocorrelation function. Suppose that Xt is a time series of
measurements taken from a participant in an experiment.
The autocorrelation of this time series is defined as
(Wagenmakers, Farrell, & Ratcliff, in press),

Figure 1: Illustrations of white noise (top) and pink noise
(bottom; from Gilden, 2001).
Serial dependencies have been found in a wide variety of
human behaviors (for a review, see Van Orden, Holden, &
Turvey, 2003). With respect to the study of perception and
cognition, serial dependencies have been found in
experiments on mental rotation (Gilden, 1997), lexical
decision (Gilden, 1997), perceptual learning (Wagman,
Dahle, & Schmidt, 2002), simple reaction time (Ward &
Richard, 2001), and visual search (Aks, Zelinsky, & Sprott,
2002).
A major question about these findings concerns the kind
of dependencies that were observed. The authors of these
studies interpreted their findings as evidence for a particular
kind of serial dependency often referred to as long-range
dependency, of which 1/f noise or pink noise are special
cases (see bottom series in Figure 1). In a long-range
dependent series, C(k) is positive and decreases as a power
of k,

,
where E[] is expected value, µ is the mean of Xt, and k is
some number of measurements between the time series and
an offset copy of itself.
If measurements are strictly independent of each other,
then C(k) is zero for all k > 0. The time series is not
96

Long-range dependency is of special interest because it
appears to be ubiquitous in nature (see Van Orden et al.,
2003), and it has some intriguing properties such as fractal
structure, i.e., a change in the time scale of measurement
does not affect the distributional properties of a long-range
dependent time series. Long-range dependencies have
motivated a number of general theories about the sources of
fluctuations in human behavior, and these theories were the
focus of the current experiments.
However, before the theories are addressed, it must be
noted that long-range dependencies can be difficult to
distinguish from short-range dependencies, in which C(k)
decreases exponentially with k (Wagenmakers et al., in
press),

structure. Long-range dependence in human behavior has, in
fact, been found across a range of scales of measurement
(for a review, see Van Orden et al., 2003).
Many Short-Range Dependencies. Granger (1980) showed
that, under certain circumstances, the summation of many
short-range dependent series can produce a true long-range
dependent series. Ding, Chen, and Kelso (2001) proposed
that long-range correlations found in timing tasks (and, by
extension, in other kinds of tasks) may be the result of such
summations. Their argument was based on the premise that
cognitive processes are supported by large-scale networks of
neural processes. Ding et al. reasoned that, in at least some
cases, such neural networks will be characterized by large
sets of short-range dependent processes. If the timing of
behavior is driven by the summation of these processes,
then fluctuations in timing will exhibit long-range
dependence.
Ding et al. (2001) made the further statement that more
difficult tasks require larger numbers of short-range
dependent processes. This statement leads to the prediction
that long-range dependencies will be stronger in more
difficult tasks. In support of this prediction, they reported
two timing tasks in which participants were asked to match
their rates of tapping with the beat of a metronome. In one
condition, participants were asked to tap in synchrony with
the metronome. In another condition, participants were
asked to tap at the midpoint between each pair of beats (i.e.,
to syncopate). Syncopation is a more difficult tapping task
(e.g., less stable; see Kelso, DelColle, & Schner, 1990)
compared with synchronization, and fluctuations in
syncopated tapping exhibited stronger evidence of longrange dependence compared with synchronized tapping.

where -1 < Φ1 < 1. Although C(k) declines more quickly in
short-range dependent series compared with long-range
dependent series (hence their names), the difference in rates
of decline can be rather small. Nonetheless, short-range
dependent series have very different properties (e.g., they
can be generated by simple autoregressive processes), and
they lead to different kinds of theories about fluctuations in
human behavior. Therefore, Wagenmakers and his
colleagues argued that empirical tests of long-range
dependency must treat short-range dependency, rather than
white noise, as the null hypothesis. Using this more
stringent criterion, Wagenmakers et al. still found longrange dependencies in measurements of human behavior
under a variety of experimental conditions. Their findings
and analyses confirm that long-range dependency is a real
phenomenon.

Explanations of Long-Range Dependence
Why do fluctuations in human behavior exhibit long-range
dependencies? Only certain kinds of processes are known to
produce long-range dependencies (for a review, see
Wagenmakers et al., in press). The ostensibly special status
of long-range dependencies has prompted researchers to
search for general properties of human behavior that might
explain their source(s). Here we review five explanations
that have been offered.

Mental Set. Gilden (2001) proposed that experimental tasks
whose demands are relatively consistent across trials invoke
a “mental set” in the participant. Gilden’s definition of
mental set entailed the repeated formation of mental
representations necessary to perform the task. When the task
is consistent, Gilden proposed that a dynamic of memory is
created by this repetition such that memory components
interact on multiple time scales. Under some circumstances,
interactions of this nature have been shown to generate
long-range dependencies (e.g., see Jensen, 1998).
Gilden (2001) left the nature of his proposed memory
components unspecified, but his hypothesis was nonetheless
formulated in sufficient detail to make a testable prediction.
If mental set is broken by sudden changes in task demands,
then the hypothesized dynamic of memory would not have
an opportunity to form, and long-range dependencies in
response fluctuations should disappear. Gilden tested this
prediction by measuring series of reaction times to color or
shape discriminations when each of these tasks was
blocked, compared with a mixed condition in which
participants had to switch between tasks across trials.
Gilden found evidence of long-range dependence in the
blocked conditions, but not the mixed conditions. These
findings were consistent with his mental set explanation of
long-range dependence.

Three Time Scales. Any specific observation of long-range
dependence can be mimicked mathematically by the
combination of three sources of white noise that operate on
different time scales, each scale separated by an order of
magnitude. In the context of perceptual and cognitive
processes, Ward (2002) has suggested that unconscious,
preconscious, and conscious processes may be three such
sources of white noise whose combination is observed in
fluctuations of human behavior.
While the transparency of this explanation is appealing, it
is somewhat brittle because any three particular scales of
white noise will mimic long-range dependence only for a
single, particular scale of measurement (see Van Orden et
al., 2003). What this means is that three-scale accounts must
be fit to data posthoc. By contrast, true long-range
dependence exists over all scales of measurement (within
the limits of the system in question) due to its fractal
97

Strategy Shifts. By definition, a long-range dependent
series is stationary in the sense that its distributional
characteristics do not change over time. However, a longrange dependent series can be difficult to distinguish from
some kinds of non-stationary series that go through changes
in their distributional characteristics over time.
It is probably true that any given experimental task can be
performed in a number of ways, despite any and all efforts
to make the task demands as explicit and precise as
possible. If each means of performing a task is termed a
“strategy”, then it is very possible that a participant will
change his or her strategy for performing a task over the
course of an experiment. If strategy shifts occurred
repeatedly over the course of measurement, they would have
the potential to mimic long-range dependence.
Wagenmakers et al. (in press) presented a computational
demonstration of how strategy shifts (shifts in response
criteria, in this case) can create non-stationary fluctuations
in response times that mimic long-range dependencies.

after the previous response (see Methods section). By
contrast, when the timing of cues was unpredictable, the
timing of responses had to be driven primarily by the cue
itself, rather than any expectancies internalized by the
participants.
If long-range dependence is internal to human behavior,
then external variability should mask it. This idea is
consistent with some previous explanations of long-range
dependence (see Discussion section). This idea also leads to
a further prediction that is quite counterintuitive.
Participants were asked to press a key as soon as they
perceived a cue. Thus, the task demands were satisfied when
the finger moved down and the key made contact with its
sensor. The task made no demands on when participants
should lift their finger off the key. Therefore, fluctuations in
the durations of key presses should be free to reflect internal
variability, provided that the timing of the downward
motion can be dissociated from timing of the upward
motion. If so, we should observe no effect of predictability
on the degree of long-range dependency in response
durations.
In Experiment 2, sources of external variability were
introduced by a different means. The identity of cues,
instead of the timing of cues, was manipulated to be
predictable or unpredictable. Two different cues signaled
two different responses. Cue identity was made predictable
or not by giving a preview or not of each upcoming cue.
Analogous to the manipulation of predictability in
Experiment 1, the preview manipulated the degree to which
behavior was driven by the cues themselves, versus
expectancies about the cues.

Interaction-Dominant Dynamics. Van Orden et al. (2003)
proposed that, at a very general level, humans are composed
of many component processes that all interact on multiple
time-scales. Their proposal was based on the fundamental
idea that the structure and complexity seen in human
behavior is a phenomenon of self-organization, and that
self-organizing systems are ones that have interactiondominant dynamics. They argued that it is these dynamics,
intrinsic to human beings (and many other types of
systems), that give rise to long-range dependencies in
human behavior.
As general as they are, the ideas put forth by Van Orden
and his colleagues (2003) lead to a testable prediction. If
long-range dependence is the intrinsic signature of selforganization in human behavior, then any perturbations to
behavior caused by external factors should disrupt the
intrinsic dynamics, thereby obscuring their signature. Van
Orden et al. argued that the results to date on long-range
dependencies in human behavior (e.g., as cited in the other
explanations listed here) are consistent with this prediction.

Experiment 1
Participants. Eighteen participants were recruited for the
experiment. Sixteen were undergraduates who participated
for course credit, and two were graduate students who were
compensated for their participation.
Procedure. Each participant saw one block of predictable
cues and one block of unpredictable cues, with block order
counterbalanced across participants. Participants were
instructed to press the space bar with their dominant hand as
quickly as possible every time they saw an “X” flash on the
screen. Demonstrations and practice blocks were given
before each experimental block. Participants were instructed
to wait till they saw an “X” before responding; if they
pressed the space bar before a cue appeared, they heard a
warning tone. Each block consisted of 1100 cues and took
about 25 minutes to complete. The experimenter stayed in
the room with the participant throughout the experiment.
Participants took a short break between blocks.
Participants were seated about two feet away from a CRT
monitor, and each cue appeared for about 50 ms in the
center of the screen in Times New Roman font. A pair for
visual flankers appeared immediately following each cue,
and remained on the screen until the participant pressed the
space bar. The flankers provided a redundant cue that the
computer was awaiting a response (in case the participant
missed a cue by accident).

Current Experiments
Two experiments are reported here that were designed to
explore a factor that was predicted to modulate the degree of
long-range dependence in RT fluctuations. The factor was
motivated by the explanations just listed. In particular, we
tested whether sources of variability external to the
participant would reduce the degree of long-range
dependence in fluctuations of human behavior. Key presses
were the measured behaviors, and sources of external
variability were manipulated by the degree of cue
predictability.
In Experiment 1, predictability in the timing of response
cues was manipulated to be either completely predictable or
completely unpredictable. When cues were predictable,
fluctuations in response times were driven primarily by the
participant. The cues themselves had little bearing on
behavior because they were entirely redundant; participants
knew that the next cue would always appear one second
98

Each subsequent cue was timed relative to the previous
response. In the predictable condition, the next cue always
appeared 1 s after the previous response was given. In the
unpredictable condition, the timing of the next cue was
sampled randomly from an exponential distribution with a
mean of 1 s, a minimum of 1 ms and a maximum of 12 s.
The exponential distribution was used because it has a flat
hazard function, which means that the probability of
receiving a cue was constant as a function of wait time
(Simpson et al., 2000). The time from cue to key press was
recorded (response time), as well as the length of time that
participants pressed each key (response duration).

was regressed against log power. The slope of this
regression line in log-log coordinates was used as a measure
of serial dependence: more negative slopes correspond to
stronger degrees of serial dependence.
RDs in Unpredict (ms) aaaaRDs in Predict (ms)

Results
To illustrate the time series structures that were typically
observed, the series of response times for one participant in
the predictable and unpredictable conditions are shown in
Figure 2. The series of response durations for this
participant are shown in Figure 3.
500
400

150

100

50

200
150
100
50

Start Block

300

End Block

Time

Figure 3. Response durations for one participant in the
predictable and unpredictable conditions of Expt 1.

200
100
0

Response Times

1

500
400
Log Power

RTs in Unpredict (ms)aaaa RTs in Predict (ms)

200

300
200

0

100
0

Start Block

Time

End Block

-1

Figure 2. Response times for one participant in the
predictable (top) and unpredictable (bottom) conditions of
Expt 1 (responses above 500 ms have been truncated).

Response Durations

1

Log Power

Averaged across participants, the percentage of
anticipatory responses was 1.99% in the unpredictable
condition, and 3.9% in the predictable condition. All
anticipatory responses were removed from the analyses. The
mean correlation of response times with response durations
was r = .02 in the unpredictable condition, and r = -.21 in
the predictable condition.
Spectral analyses are standardly used to measure the
degree of long-range dependence in a time series, and we
adopted the method of spectral analysis described by
Holden (unpublished; also see Gilden, 1997). In particular,
outliers were first removed from each time series (values >
1000 ms or outside 3 SDs of each participant’s mean for
each measure in each condition). Then, linear and quadratic
trends were removed to avoid dependencies caused by
practice or fatigue. A power spectrum was then computed
over 1024 of the remaining data points, and log frequency

0

X Predictable: O Unpredictable
-1
-3

-2.5

-2

-1.5
Log Frequency

-1

-0.5

0

Figure 4. Aggregate spectral plots for Expt 1.
The aggregate power spectra, averaged across participants
for each condition, are plotted in Figure 4. For response
times, slopes in the predictable condition were reliably more
negative than slopes in the unpredictable condition, t(17)=
4.26, p < .001. For response durations, there was no reliable
difference in slopes, t(17) < 1. Moreover, slopes for
99

response durations were reliably more negative than slopes
for response times, t(35) = 7.21, p < .001.

explanation, one would need to develop a more explicit
means of parsing internal and external sources of variability.

Experiment 2

Response Times

1

Log Power

Participants. Eighteen undergraduates participated in the
experiment in exchange for course credit.
Procedure. The procedure was identical to that used in
Experiment 1, except for the following changes. The
response cue was either ‘>’ or ‘<’, and participants were
instructed to press the right arrow key for the former, and
the left arrow key for the latter. Flankers appeared on either
side of the response cues as signals to respond, and the
flankers always appeared 1 s after the previous response
was given. In the preview condition, the next response cue
always appeared immediately following the previous
response; thus, participants had 1 s to process the cue and
prepare their response. In the no-preview condition, each
cue appeared in conjunction with its signal to respond; thus,
participants had to process the cue and choose their
response as quickly as possible.

0

-1

Response Durations

Log Power

1

0

Results
X Predictable: O Unpredictable

Averaged across participants, the percentage of
anticipatory responses was .03% in the unpredictable
condition, and .45% in the predictable condition. The
percentage of errors was .80% and .27%, respectively. All
anticipatory responses were removed from the analyses, but
the few errors were retained. The mean correlation of
response times with response durations was r = .05 in the
unpredictable condition, and r = -.08 in the predictable
condition.
The aggregate power spectra are plotted in Figure 5. For
response times, slopes in the predictable preview condition
were reliably more negative than slopes in the unpredictable
no-preview condition, t(17) = 2.31, p < .05. For response
durations, there was a small but unreliable difference in
slopes, t(17) = 1.80, p < .09. Moreover, slopes for response
durations were reliably more negative than slopes for
response times, t(35) = 3.55, p < .001.

-1
-3

-2.5

-2

-1.5
Log Frequency

-1

-0.5

0

Figure 5. Aggregate spectral plots for Expt 2.
It is important to note that the hypothesis of long-range
dependence was not explicitly tested against the short-range
alternative in the current data. We did not conduct these
tests because the IDD predictions could be tested without
them. However, the long-range/short-range distinction is
important, and we plan to address this issue in future work.
How do the current results bear on the five explanations
of long-range dependence outlined in the Introduction
section? We address this question here for each explanation
in turn.
Three Time Scales. Sources of white noise on three
different time scales could be used to mimic the long-range
dependencies (or lack thereof) for each participant in each
condition of the two reported experiments. However, these
parameter fits would be posthoc, and they would offer no
insight into the differences in degree of long-range
dependence between experimental conditions.

Discussion
Two experiments were reported in which long-range
dependencies were measured as a function of cue
predictability. Results showed greater degrees of
dependency in series of response times when the cues were
predictable, both in terms of timing and identity. By
contrast, results showed large and comparable degrees of
dependency in all series of response durations. The observed
dissociation between response times and response durations
was consistent with the idea that external sources of
variability mask the long-range dependence that is intrinsic
to human behavior.
It also appeared that the effect of predictability in cue
timing (Experiment 1) was stronger than that in cue identity
(Experiment 2), albeit further experiments are necessary to
bear this out. One possible explanation is unpredictable
timing introduces more external variability compared with
unpredictable choice responding. However, to test this

Many Short-Range Dependencies. As noted earlier, this
explanation leads one to predict that greater degrees of longrange dependence should be found in more demanding
tasks. The unpredictable conditions were clearly more
demanding because their mean RTs were much greater.
However, the unpredictable conditions showed lesser
degrees of long-range dependence compared with the
predictable conditions. Moreover, summations of shortrange dependencies appear to offer no insight into the
observed differences in dependencies between response
times and response durations.
100

Mental Set. Gilden (2001) proposed that long-range
dependencies should be weaker when a person’s mental set
is repeatedly broken or interrupted. One could imagine that
participants were able to maintain a more stable mental set
in the predictable conditions compared with the
unpredictable conditions, which would make the current
results consistent with the mental set explanation. It is less
clear how the mental set explanation would apply to the
differences in long-range dependence between response
times and response durations. One would presumably have
to propose that these behaviors are governed by different
mental sets, but given the close physical relationship
between a button press and its release, the idea of different
mental sets seems implausible. The bottom line is that the
mental set explanation is not yet formulated to the point
where it might offer insight into the current results.

References
Aks, D. J., Zelinsky, G. L., & Sprott, J. C. (2002). Memory
across eye-movements: 1/f dynamic in visual search.
Nonlinear Dynamics, Psychology and Life Sciences, 7,
161-180.
Chen, Y., Ding, M., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2001) Origins of
timing errors in human sensorimotor coordination.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 33, 3-8.
Ding, M., Chen, Y., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2002). Statistical
analysis of timing errors. Brain & Cognition, 48, 98-106.
Gilden, D. L. (1997). Fluctuations in the time required for
elementary decisions. Psychological Science, 8, 296-301.
Gilden, D. L. (2000). Cognitive emissions of 1/f noise.
Psychological Review, 108, 33-56.
Granger, C. W. J. (1980). Long memory relationships and
the aggregation of dynamic models. Journal of
Econometrics, 14, 227-238.
Jensen, H. J. (1998). Self organized criticality. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Holden, J. G. (2003). Gauging the fractal dimension of
cognitive performance. Unpublished manuscript,
California State University, Northridge, CA.
Kelso, J. A. S., DelColle, J. D., & Schoner, G. (1990).
Action-perception as a pattern formation process. In M.
Jeannerod (Ed.), Attention and performance XIII (pp.
139-169). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Simpson, W. A., Braun, W. J., Bargen, C., & Newman,
A. J. (2000). Identification of the eye-brain-hand system
with point processes: a new approach to simple reaction
time. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 26, 1675-1690.
Van Orden, G. C., Holden, J. G., & Turvey, M. T. (2003).
Self-organization of cognitive performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 331-350.
Wagenmakers, E., Farrell, S., & Ratcliff, R. (in press).
Estimation and interpretation of 1/fα noise in human
cognition. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review.
Wagman, J. B., Dahle, C., & Schmidt, R. C. (2002, May).
Perceptual learning dynamics. Paper presented at the
International Conference on Brain and Behavior, Delray
Beach, FL.
Ward, L., & Richard, C. M. (2001). 1/fα noise and decision
complexity. Unpublished manuscript, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
Ward, L. M. (2002). Dynamical cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Strategy Shifts. Wagenmakers et al. (in press) conjectured
that participants might be more apt to shift strategies, and
therefore exhibit long-range dependencies in their
behaviors, when they are bored. Participants were almost
certainly bored in all of the current experimental conditions,
but one could argue that the predictable conditions were
more boring than the unpredictable ones. If so, the finding
that long-range dependencies in response times were
stronger in the predictable conditions is consistent with the
strategy shifts explanation. However, one would have to
apply this explanation to response durations as well, and
there was no such effect on long-range dependencies in this
measure. It remains to be seen whether a strategy shift
explanation could be made to account for these results.
Interaction-Dominant Dynamics. This explanation states
that long-range dependencies come from the interdependent
dynamics that underlie the self-organization of human
behavior. These dynamics are hypothesized to be perturbed
by external forces. If sources of external variability are
thought of as external forces, then all the results reported
herein are consistent with the interaction-dominant
dynamics explanation. Predictability was a force on
response times, but not response durations, because the task
made demands on the former but not the latter.
In conclusion, the current results are, for the time being,
most consistent with the interaction-dominant dynamics
explanation. Of course, these explanations are all in their
infancy; it would be an overstatement at this point to refer to
them as theories. Be that as it may, the results were clear
and far from trivial to explain. We believe that further
empirical and theoretical investigations into the sources of
long-range dependence in human behavior will prove to be
valuable to studies of perception and cognition.

Acknowledgments
We thank Anthony Novak for his assistance with data
collection, and Guy Van Orden and Jay Holden for helpful
conversations about the theory and methodology
surrounding long-range dependence. The work was funded
in part by NIH Grant MH55628, and NSF Grant 0239595.
101

