UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Temporal Delay on the Interpretation of Probability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5dc475ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Bloomfield, Amber N.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Temporal Delay on the Interpretation of Probability
Amber N. Bloomfield (a-bloomfield@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
produce a solid preference when their probabilities are
multiplied by a common probability. A person might be
indifferent between a 5% chance of $10 and 2% chance of
$15, but prefer the $15 option if both probabilities are
multiplied by 50%. Immediacy and certainty effects involve
the overweighting of immediate outcomes in intertemporal
choice and the overweighting of certain outcomes in risky
choice. Magnitude effects occur when large amounts are
discounted to a lesser (temporal discounting) or greater
(discounting for risk) degree than are small amounts. Sign
effects involve a tendency towards risk-aversion for gains
and risk-seeking for losses in risky choice, and a steeper
discounting of gains than losses in intertemporal choice.
Given these parallels, it is not surprising that some
researchers have suggested that discounting for risk and
discounting for delay arise from the same source. For
instance, Benzion, Rapoport and Yagil (1989) argue that, in
addition to the time value of money (characterized as the
accepted interest rate) delay introduces a risk premium,
which arises from the implicit risk associated with delay. By
this interpretation, the temporal discounting stems from
implicit risk combined with the rational time value of
money. Alternatively, Rachlin and Raineri (1992) argue that
probability can be expressed as waiting time, by estimating
the number of trials until a win (60% chance ≈ 6 out of 10
trials are wins), and adding together the amount of time
between each trial preceding the first win to calculate
overall waiting time. These two ideas both argue for a
fundamental source of uncertainty (either risk or delay) that
leads to both types of discounting.
It is likely that because of the focus on equating
probability and delay little attention has been paid to how
they affect each other, both in determining the value of
outcomes and directly. Only a few studies have actually
presented participants with outcomes that are both delayed
and probabilistic. Keren and Roelofsma (1995) argue for
two different types of uncertainty present in intertemporal
choice: internal (involving doubts about one’s ability to
predict future tastes/needs) and external (concerning doubts
about whether promised future payments will be honored).
Internal uncertainty is the type of uncertainty typically
associated with intertemporal choice. External uncertainty is
probabilistic uncertainty, which they argue is also a
component of any temporal delay. They found that the
immediacy effect could be derailed by making the options
probabilistic (the immediate option was no longer overweighted), and that adding a delay to a certain option
weakened the certainty effect (the certain option was no
longer as over-weighted, and more people preferred a risky

Abstract
The studies reported here investigate the interaction between
probability and delay. In the first study, the fits of a range of
high and low probability words were calculated for numerical
probabilities presented with either a short or long delay.
Results show that participants in the long delay condition felt
that high probability words fit small numerical probabilities
better and that low probability words fit large numerical
probabilities better than did participants in the short delay
condition. In a second study, participants were presented with
money offers that were both delayed and risky. Findings
indicate that delay is given less weight at low probabilities,
and probability is given less weight at large delays when
probabilities are mid-range. Combined, these data suggest that
a trade-off occurs between giving attention to delay and
giving attention to probability in judgments. One component
of this arises from long time delays “dampening down” the
influence of probability level, but the complete nature of the
interaction between probability and delay remains to be
explored.

Introduction
In everyday decision making, individuals must determine
the value that various outcomes have for them. Often, even
if people have a clear idea of the value that an outcome has
for them in general (such as a week in Paris), they must
assess its value in terms of different types of uncertainty
associated with the outcome. One type of uncertainty arises
from the outcome having a less than 100% likelihood of
occurring (i.e., it is probabilistic). This type of uncertainty is
normatively applied by translating an outcome into its
expected value (EV): multiplying the value of the outcome
by its probability of occurring. Another type of uncertainty
associated with outcomes is temporal delay. Adjustment of
an outcome due to temporal delay is referred to as temporal
discounting.
Choice involving risk (i.e., probabilistic outcomes) and
intertemporal choice have several parallel anomalies (Prelec
& Loewenstein, 1991). These anomalies include common
difference and ratio effects, immediacy and certainty effects,
magnitude effects and sign effects. Common difference
effect occurs when a pair of delayed outcomes which an
individual is indifferent between produce a decisive
preference for him or her when a common delay is added to
both. For instance, a person might be indifferent between
$25 now and $40 is one week, but may express a preference
for the $40 if a one-week delay is added to both options.
Similarly, common ratio effect occurs when two
probabilistic options which a person is indifferent between
132

statement, participants rated 10 probability words on the
basis of their fit. The probability words, (from lowest to
highest probability-mapping, according to Budescu, et al.,
2003) were: Impossible, Improbable, Unlikely, Doubtful,
Toss-up, Possible, Probable, Good chance, Likely and
Certain. The numerical probabilities were presented in a
different randomized order for each participant.
Procedure Participants received the instructions for the
task and responded to the test items via computer. During
the task, participants were presented with each numerical
probability statement followed by the 10 probability words.
Participants typed in their rating for each word on the
keyboard. After responding to all 10 numerical probability
statements, participants were presented with the debriefing.

option that had a higher payoff). Keren and Roelofsma did
not find a significant interaction of delay and probability,
and suggested that the two factors are additive. However,
they used only two levels of probability in their experiment
examining the immediacy effect, and only one level of
temporal delay when examining the certainty effect.
Keren and Roelofsma’s (1995) description of the external
uncertainty component of delay does suggest that the
subjective interpretation of a given probability when a delay
is introduced should be lower, because the uncertainty
associated with a delay should make the relevant outcome
seem even less likely to be received. While Keren and
Roelofsma only used delay and probability to make
qualitative departures from certainty and immediacy,
respectively, a more continuous effect of delay on
probability should be evident if external uncertainty
increases with delay.
In the following studies, the effect of delay on the
interpretation of probability is explored. In the first study, a
range of probabilities are paired with one of two levels of
delay for all participants, and 10 probability words are rated
as to their fit of each of the numerical probabilities. In the
second study, multiple levels of probability and delay are
combined to examine their effects on the value of two
different monetary outcomes.

Participants Participants were 32 Northwestern
undergraduates who participated to fulfill partial course
requirement (17 in the 6 month delay condition, 15 in the 3
year delay condition).

Results
The mean rating of each probability word for each
numerical probability in the two conditions was translated
into proportion of total fit (by dividing the mean score by
eight). These proportions were then collapsed across the
three low probability words, not including impossibility
(Improbable, Unlikely, and Doubtful) and the three high
probability words, not including certainty (Probable, Good
chance and Likely) to create a composite Overall-Low and
Overall-High fit for each numerical probability.
A regression performed on the Overall-Low composite
fits revealed a significant effect of probability (t(19) = 24.94, B = -.979, p<.001), a marginally significant effect of
condition (t(19) = 2.05, B = .080, p = .058) and a significant
interaction between probability and condition (t(19) = 2.51,
B = .099, p<.05). Figure 1 displays the Overall-Low fits for
the 6 month and 3 year conditions across numerical
probabilities.
Overall-Low fits decreased as probability increased (as

Study 1
In Study 1, a direct method of examining the influence of
delay on probability was employed. This design was based
on past work by Budescu, Karelitz and Wallsten (2003)
examining how numerical probabilities are mapped on to
linguistic probability words/phrases. The method of
presentation was reversed, so that participants were asked to
rate degree of fit of 10 probability words for each of 10
numerical probabilities. It was predicted that, if there is an
external uncertainty component of delay, this would lead to
numerical probabilities presented with the longer temporal
delay to elicit higher fit ratings for the low probability
words and lower fit ratings for the high probability words.

Methods

1
0.9

Materials
Instructions Participants were asked to respond to each
numerical probability item by rating each probability word
for that numerical probability on a scale from 1 to 8, with 1
indicating that the word fit the numerical probability “not at
all” and 8 indicating that the word “absolutely” fit the
numerical probability.
Stimuli Participants were randomly assigned to receive
all numerical probability statements with either a short (6
months) or long (3 years) delay. Participants were presented
with 10 numerical probabilities (5% - 95% in steps of 10%)
embedded in the following statement: “If someone told you
‘you have a _% chance of winning $9,864 in 6 months/3
years,’ to what degree do you feel each of the following
words fits the probability this person stated?” For each

0.8
A v e ra g e F it

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

3 yrs

0.3
0.2

6 mos

0.1
0
5% 15% 25% 35% 45% 55% 65% 75% 85% 95%
Probability

Figure 1: Overall-Low Proportions Across Probabilities
133

does influence how numerical probabilities are understood,
and the direction of this effect depends on the level of the
numerical probability. Because this interaction exists, it is
important to look at how probability and delay combine in
determining the value of outcomes that are both delayed and
probabilistic. In Study 2, the effects of delay and
probability, and the interaction between the two, on the
value of monetary outcomes are investigated.

would be expected), and were higher for the 3-year delay
condition (as was predicted). However, the interaction
between condition and probability reveals a more
complicated picture: While participants in the 3 year delay
condition have higher Overall-Low fits for the higher
numerical probabilities than do participants in the 6 month
delay condition, there is also a tendency for these
participants to rate the fit of low probability words as lower
for the smaller numerical probabilities.
A regression performed on the Overall-High composite
fits revealed a significant effect of probability (t(19) =25.47,
B = .981, p<.001) and a significant interaction between
probability and condition (t(19) = -2.90, B = -.111, p<.05).
Figure 2 presents the Overall-High fits across probabilities
for both conditions. For the Overall-High ratings, the nature
of the interaction between condition and probability is more
pronounced. Participants in the 3-year condition provided
lower fit ratings of the high probability words for the higher
numerical probabilities and higher fit ratings for the lower
numerical probabilities.
The findings of Study 1 suggest that delay does not have a
uniform effect on the interpretation of probabilities. Rather,
the effect of delay is determined by both the level of the
numerical probability and the “level” of the probability
word. The longer delay increases the fit of the low
probability words to the numerical probabilities, as
predicted, but only for those probabilities in the mid-range
or higher. For smaller numerical probabilities, the longer
delay decreases the participants’ ratings of low probability
words. Similarly, the longer delay decreases participants’
ratings of high probability words for probabilities in the
mid-range or higher, as predicted, but increases these
ratings for the lower numerical probabilities. It seems that a
longer delay decreases the “positive-ness” of the high
probabilities but also the “negative-ness” of the low
probabilities. At long delay, participants do not seem to
uniformly interpret probabilities as lower, but do seem to
uniformly interpret probabilities as less extreme.
Given the findings of Study 1, it is apparent that delay

Study 2
Methods
Materials
Instructions Participants were instructed to respond to
each item by providing a certainty equivalent (CE) for the
money offer. A certainty equivalent is an amount that will
be received immediately and for certain, such that
participants feel they would be indifferent between this
amount and the presented money offer.
Stimuli Participants responded to a total of 70 money
offers. For each of two payoff amounts ($10,000 and $1
million) participants responded to five gambles with one of
five probabilities (5%, 30%, 55%, 80% or 95%), five
delayed payments with one of five time delays (6 months, 1
year, 3 years, 5 years or 10 years) and 25 delayed gambles,
combining each probability level with each delay level once.
Gambles, delayed payments and delayed gambles for both
payoffs were presented in a different random order for each
participant.
Procedure Participants received the instructions for the
task and responded to the test items via computer. During
the task, participants were presented with each money offer
and typed in a certainty equivalent using the keyboard.
Participants were not given any feedback on their
performance. At the end of the 70 money offers, participants
were read debriefing information by the experimenter.
Participants Participants were 18 Northwestern
undergraduates who participated to fulfill partial course
requirement. The data from two additional participants was
excluded due to a failure to follow directions (more than ¼
of their responses were greater than the payoff of the money
offer or they responded “0” to one or more items).

1
0.9
0.8
Average Fit

0.7

Results

0.6

Because several participants had one or two responses that
were greater than the payoff amount (errors occurring from
accidentally typing an extra “0” into the computer), all
analyses were performed on median responses as opposed to
mean responses.

3 yrs

0.5

6 mos

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Weighting and Discounting Factors Using the responses
to the delayed payments, it was possible to calculate the
temporal discounting factor (k) for each participant. This
factor represents the extent to which, for each day of delay,
an individual devalued the payoff amount. The formula for k

0
5% 15% 25% 35% 45% 55% 65% 75% 85% 95%
Probability

Figure 2: Overall-High Proportions Across Probabilities
134

effects of probability (t(49) = 23.15, B = .95, p<.001) and
delay (t(49) = -2.97, B = -.12, p<.01), and a marginally
significant interaction between probability and delay (t(49)
= -1.88, B = -.08, p = .068), on the median proportion CE.
The effect of probability on response was as expected
(greater CEs provided for larger probabilities), although
participants over-weighted 5% to a far greater degree than
has been found in past studies. Delay also had the predicted
effect, with smaller CEs provided for larger delays. Figure 3
displays the overall findings of proportion CE for the five
delays and the five probabilities. Because amount had no
significant influence on proportion CEs, they are collapsed
across amount.

is derived from the formula for temporal discounting
developed by Mazur (1987): k = (V/dv)-(1/d), where V is
the undiscounted value of the outcome, d is the delay in
days and v is the provided subjective value of the outcome.
A k of 0 implies no discounting of the outcome for delay.
For each participant, the median k across all delayed
payments was obtained.
There was a significant effect of amount on the median k
values: participants tended to have larger ks for payoffs of
$10,000 than for payoffs of $1 million (t(17) = 2.85, p <
.05). The mean k for the $10,000 delayed payments was
.0005, while that for the $1 million delayed payments was
.0002. Larger ks imply greater temporal discounting, and
greater discounting of smaller payoffs is consistent with the
magnitude effect discussed in Prelec and Loewenstein
(1991). Although the difference between the k factors for
the two amounts seems quite small, such a difference would
result in an 8% decrease in value for $10,000 delayed by 6
months compared to only a 4% decrease for $1 million
delayed by 6 months.
Using the responses to the gambles, the probability
weighting factor (h) was calculated for each participant.
This factor represents the extent to which an individual’s
weighting of probabilities in their responses corresponds to
expected value (h = 1 means responses are perfectly in line
with expected value). An h greater than 1 demonstrates riskaversion (the certainty equivalent is less than the expected
value of the gamble), while an h between 0 and 1 shows
risk-seeking (the CE is more than the gamble’s expected
value). The formula used to calculate h was derived from
the probability weighting formula provided by Rachlin and
Raineri (1991): h = pV/v(1-p) – p/(1-p). Here, p is the
probability of acquiring the outcome amount V, and v is the
provided subjective value of the outcome. For each
participant, a median h was obtained.
There was no significant effect of amount on h, (t(17) =
1.51, p > .05). The mean h for $10,000 gambles was 1.66,
and 5.62 for the $1 million gambles. The large difference is
due to one participants’ extremely risk-averse responses for
the $1 million gambles (median h for $10,000 = 1; for $1
million, median h = 1.11). This is consistent with Green,
Myerson and Ostaszewski (1999), who found that
magnitude effects in probability discounting are often small
or non-existent. However, it is worth mentioning that, of the
14 participants that had different probability weighting
factors for the $10,000 and $1 million gambles, 10 had
larger h values for the $1 million gambles, which is
consistent with the discussion of Prelec and Loewenstein
(1991).

1
0.9
0.8
0.7

186

0.6

365

0.5

1095

0.4

1825

3650

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.05

0.3

0.55

0.8

0.95

Figure 3: Proportion Certainty Equivalents by Delay and
Probability
The delay by probability interaction is most apparent for
the two longest delays (5 and 10 years). Participants show
little increase in proportion CE with the increase from 30%
to 55% probability for delayed gambles at a 5 or 10 year
delay. In addition, participants show little sensitivity to
delay at the two smallest probabilities.
These findings suggest an interaction between probability
and delay of the type found in Study 1. Probability appears
to be given less weight at longer delays. While the lines
representing gambles at 5 and 10 year delays show no
increase in CEs between 30% and 55%, the lines for
gambles at 6 month, 1 year and 3 year delays show a
relatively constant increase with probability. The influence
of delay on probability is not evident until delay reaches
high levels.
The findings of Study 2 are not so one-sided, however. In
deciding the value of delayed and probabilistic outcomes,
participants seem to be dividing their attention between
probability and delay. It is not simply that probability is
given less weight when longer delays are present:
probability levels are given less weight at long delays when
probabilities are small. Further, as is evident from
examining the points at 5% and 30%, little attention is given

Overall Analyses for Delayed Gambles Participants’
certainty equivalents were transformed to proportion of
payoff amount (e.g., $5000 for a $10,000 payoff was .50)
for overall data analyses. Again, the median rather than the
mean of these proportions was used for analyses to control
for extreme responses. A regression with amount,
probability and delay as predictors revealed significant
135

delays on probability was present one would have expected
to see less weight given to probability, not just for the midrange probabilities, but for the higher probabilities as well.
However, if the interaction of delay and probability arises
largely from the influence of delay on probability, it would
be extremely difficult to see in the data from Study 2. As
was pointed out above, probability had a much greater
impact on responses than either delay or the interaction of
delay and probability. In fact, it was not unusual for
participants to show no sensitivity to delay at all in
responding to the delayed gambles, but rather simply
respond in accordance with expected value.
Past studies have demonstrated that outcome amount and
probability have a dominant/subordinate relationship, with
outcome amount taking precedence (Liberman & Trope,
1998; Sagristano, Trope, & Liberman, 2002). Although
Study 2 did not provide any way of looking at that particular
relationship, its findings do suggest that a similar
relationship may exist between probability and delay.
Probability accounted for most of the variance across both
outcome amounts, and was significant within both outcome
amounts. Delay, on the other hand, accounted for a small
amount of variance across amounts, and ceased to be a
significant predictor when only the $1 million gambles were
considered. This makes sense if payoff is more important to
participants than probability, which is more important than
delay. The possibility of a dominant/subordinate
relationship between probability and delay should be more
directly examined in future studies using a method similar
to that used by Liberman and Trope (1998).
If probability is indeed more important to participants
making decisions about delayed gambles than is delay,
techniques to highlight delay could be used. In Study 2, for
all delayed gambles, participants were given the probability
information first. This could have decreased the role of
delay in participants’ responses. Further, payoff amounts
were expressed as round numbers ($10,000 and $1 million)
for which it would be relatively easy to calculate expected
value. A current study is investigating the influence between
delay and probability when items are counterbalanced as to
which information is presented first, and when payoffs are
not round (e.g., $10,135). It is hoped that this study will
produce responses that are more sensitive to delay, and
allow a clearer picture of the interaction between delay and
probability.
Another question that remains unanswered is the manner
in which probability level influences the interpretation of a
given delay. Study 2’s findings suggest that the effect of
delay may be dampened by the presence of a small
probability. If the external uncertainty portion of the
temporal delay affects probability interpretations, perhaps
the external uncertainty associated with risk changes the
interpretation of delays, by highlighting the delay’s external
uncertainty. Although it is difficult to find a factor to pair
with delay that will parallel the relationship between
numerical probabilities and probability words, one could be
constructed presenting linguistic descriptions of durations

to delay at the two smallest probability levels (it is not until
a 55% probability of winning that participants really begin
to differentiate between the delay levels in their responses).
This interpretation does not necessarily require that long
delays induce smaller subjective probabilities. Rather, in the
influence of delay on probability, at long delays participants
could simply be using probability less in determining their
responses. This idea of trading off attention between option
components is supported by analyses performed for the
$10,000 and $1 million gambles separately: delay was not a
significant predictor for the $1 million gambles (t(24) = 1.61, B = -.09, p > .10, but was significant for the $10,000
gambles (t(24) = -2.67, B = -.15, p < .05). This could
indicate that, when outcome amount was large, participants
devoted attention to the amount and the probability level in
their figuring of a certainty equivalent, leaving no attention
for delay.
The present interaction demonstrates that probability is
weighted less when a long delay is associated with the
gamble, and that delay is weighted less when probability of
winning is low. Study 2 provides evidence that probability
and delay influence each other in determining the value of
payoffs.

Discussion
Study 1’s findings indicate that delay influences the
interpretation of probability, such that low probabilities are
interpreted as less unlikely, improbable and doubtful, and
high probabilities are interpreted as less probable,
representative of a “good chance,” and likely. A large delay
seems to take attention away from probability at both high
and low levels, suppressing the negative-ness of the low
probabilities, and the positive-ness of the high probabilities
(in effect, “dampening ” the impact of probability).
Study 2’s findings support the idea that delay influences
the interpretation of probability: Probability (when it is midrange) is given less weight in participants’ judgments when
delays are long. However, the relationship between delay
and probability seems to be more complicated: delay is also
given little weight when probability is very small. This
suggests that what may actually be going on in the
evaluation of the delayed gambles is a tradeoff between the
attention given to probability and the attention given to
delay. Thus, when delay is very large, and probability is
mid-range, probability is given less attention than at smaller
delays. Conversely, when probability is small, delay is
given less attention than when probability is higher. The
finding that delay is not a significant predictor for $1
million gambles also suggests that when amount is very
high, there may not be enough attention left over for delay
to figure into participants’ responses.
Whether or not the “dampening” effect was present in
Study 2 is not completely clear. Although the interaction of
delay and probability can be interpreted as less attention
given to probability when delay is very long, the effect of
probability level on the weight given to delay was
unanticipated. Further, if the dampening effect of large
136

Liberman, N, & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility and
desirability considerations in near and distant future
decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 5-18.
Mazur, J.E. (1987). An adjusting procedure for studying
delayed reinforcement. In M.L. Commons, J.E. Mazur,
J.A. Nevin, and H. Rachlin (eds.), Quantitative Analyses
of Behavior: Vol. 5. The Effect of Delay and of
Intervening Events on Reinforcement Value (pp. 55-73).
Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Prelec, D., & Loewenstein, G. (1991). Decision making
over time and under uncertainty: A common approach.
Management Science, 37(7), 770-786.
Rachlin, H., & Raineri, A. (1992). Irrationality,
impulsiveness, and selfishness as discount reversal
effects. In G. Loewenstein and J. Elster (eds.), Choice
Over Time (pp. 93-118). New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Sagristano, M., Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. Time dependent
gambling: Odds now, money later. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131(3), 364-376.

(e.g., “brief time” or “very long wait”) to examine the
influence of small and large probability levels on the
interpretation of delays associated with monetary outcomes.
It is possible that for a very small probability people will not
differentiate as much between different levels of delays as
they do with a large probability.
A final area yet to be examined is that the two uncertainty
components of delay (internal and external) mentioned in
Keren and Roelofsma (1995) may be able to be separately
manipulated. For instance, it is easy to imagine situations
where a delay could imply greater external uncertainty (e.g.,
a promise from an unreliable source), but not necessarily
greater internal uncertainty. Conversely, while a spring
vacation in Cancun might seem very valuable to me now, I
have good reason to believe that it will have less value for
me when I am ten years older, though I have no reason to
think that I am less likely to receive that trip in ten years as
opposed to a trip to Spain. Looking at how delay influences
the value of different outcomes which emphasize or increase
its internal or external uncertainty component is necessary
to fully understand why delay decreases value.

Conclusion
The present studies demonstrate that there is an effect of
delay on the interpretation of probabilities and an interaction
between delay and probability on the value of monetary
outcomes. When delay is longer, probabilities are
interpreted as less extreme, at both higher and lower levels.
Further, mid-range probabilities are weighted less at longer
delays when valuing monetary outcomes, and delay is
weighted very little when probabilities are small, suggesting
that attention is traded off between delay and probability,
depending on the levels of each. Because choices in life
often involve delays and likelihoods less that 100%, it is
worthwhile to explore the way people combine these two
types of uncertainty and, especially for temporal delay, to
gain a better understanding of the roots of delay’s influence
on value.

References
Benzion, U., Rapoport, A., & Yagil, J. (1989). Discount
rates inferred from decisions: An experimental study.
Management Science, 35(3), 270-284.
Budescu, D., Karelitz, T., & Wallsten, T. (2003). Predicting
the directionality of probability words from their
membership functions. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 16, 159-180.
Green, L., Myerson, J., & Ostaszewski, P. (1999). Amount
of reward has opposite effects on the discounting of
delayed and probabilistic outcomes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25(2), 418-427.
Keren, G., & Roelofsma, P. (1995). Immediacy and
certainty in intertemporal choice. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 63(3), 287297.
137

