UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Origins of Arbitrariness in Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34g8355v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Gasser, Michael

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Origins of Arbitrariness in Language
Michael Gasser (gasser@indiana.edu)
Computer Science Department; Lindley Hall 215
Indiana University; Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract

of noise added to both the form and the meaning. Two
constraints that you need to consider in your design are
ease of learning and ease of storage. Each user has finite resources for learning and storage, and there is an
advantage to languages that are learned with fewer presentations.
The main issue of concern in this paper is how the
solution to a language design task of this type is constrained by the number of distinct meanings that are to
be conveyed by the language. I will argue that there
are advantages to languages with systematic relationships between forms and meanings and advantages to
languages without such systematicity. I will then discuss
how competitive learning fares at learning both types of
languages. Finally I will discuss the implications for acquisition and evolution of human language.

Human language exhibits mainly arbitrary relationships
between the forms and meanings of words. Why would
this be so? In this paper I argue that arbitrariness becomes necessary as the number of words increases. I
also discuss the effectiveness of competitive learning for
acquiring lexicons that are arbitrary in this sense. Finally, I consider some implications of this perspective
for arbitrariness and iconicity in language acquisition.

A Language Design Task
Imagine you are inventing a language. It should associate signals (“forms”) that can be produced and perceived by the users of the language with perceptual or
motor categories (“meanings”). Assume that both forms
and meanings are patterns of values across sets of dimensions and that you have been given the form and meaning
dimensions. Assume further that the specific design task
includes a set of meaning categories that need to get reliably conveyed. That is, given a particular pattern across
the meaning dimensions, if it belongs to one of the given
set of categories, a user who knows the language should
be able to assign a form to it, that is, an appropriate pattern across the set of form dimensions. Similarly, given
a pattern across the form dimensions, if it belongs to
one of the set of form categories that you have built into
your language, a user who knows the language should be
able to assign a meaning to it. Furthermore, the form
assigned to an input meaning should be the “right” form;
that is, the form that gets output should pass the comprehension test in the reverse direction. Providing this
form to a user who knows the language should result in
an output meaning that is at least closer to the original
meaning than to any of the other meaning categories. In
the same fashion, the meaning assigned to an input form
should pass the production test in the reverse direction.1
Your language is not hard-wired into a user; it must be
learned through a series of presentations. A presentation
consists of a pairing of a form and a meaning selected
randomly from the set of possible form-meaning pairs
that are built into the language, with a small amount

Iconicity and Arbitrariness
How Iconicity Can Help
Learning the association between forms and meanings
can be facilitated if there is a systematic relationship between the patterns. A simple example of such a relationship is a correlation between the values on a form dimension and a meaning dimension. There are two possibilities for where such a correlation might come from. One
is for it to be based on a natural relationship between
the two dimensions, for example, if they are the same dimension at a more abstract level. Such relationships are
familiar in human language from onomatopoeia, in which
form imitates meaning on one or more acoustic/auditory
dimensions, for example, pitch. Examples of this type
are more common in sign languages, where a movement
of the hand in signing space may represent a physical
movement of some object in meaning space.
A further possibility is for the relationship between the
correlating dimensions to be completely arbitrary, or at
least opaque to the users. In some sign languages, for
example, American Sign Language and Japanese Sign
Language, movement towards or away from the head
represents the gain or loss of knowledge: learning, remembering, forgetting. But the motivation for the association between the form and meaning dimensions in this
case would require that the user know that knowledge is
in some sense in the head. Thus the relationship between
the form and meaning dimensions in this case could be
viewed as arbitrary by a particular learner, though the
learner might still notice the systematicity of the rela-

1
Note that in this sense, these simple languages deviate
from human languages, which permit multiple forms for the
same meaning and multiple meanings for the same form. But
the constraint has to roughly hold for communication to get
off the ground, and young children learning language seem to
behave as though it does (Markman, 1989).

434

tionship, that is, that within this set of signs the head
represents the location of knowledge.
These kinds of systematic relationships between form
and meaning are referred to as iconicity. I’ll return to
the topic of iconicity and arbitrariness, the absence of
iconicity, in human language later in the paper.
In an iconic language, there is less to learn than in a
purely arbitrary language, so learning should be faster
and require less storage. This is easily seen by imagining a language with five meanings to be conveyed and a
single dimension each for form and meaning. An arbitrary language would require storing separately each of
the five form-meaning pairs of values on this dimension,
but a completely iconic language with a perfect correlation between the dimensions would only require a single
value, a correlation of 1.0. This is illustrated in Figure 1.














form (ambiguity) increases. Obviously both sorts of
overlap can interfere with communication; a noisy form
pattern might get assigned to more than one meaning
category, for example. They also interfere with learning;
it will be more difficult to make the proper associations
if forms or meanings are sometimes ambiguous.
Now consider how iconicity affects the likelihood of
these sorts of overlap. Because iconicity constrains the
possible form-meaning associations, it results in a narrowing of the space. This is illustrated in Figure 2. If
we imagine the fixed set of meanings that are to be conveyed in the language as non-overlapping channels in the
form-meaning space, then the possible forms for each can
be viewed as circles (or hyperspheres in spaces of more
dimensions) that can be slid back and forth in the channels, resulting in different languages. If we arrange two
of these circles so that a portion of one is above a portion
of another, we have the sort of overlap that represents
ambiguity. There are obviously more ways to arrange
the circles and avoid ambiguity in an arbitrary language
like the one on the left than there are in a highly iconic
language like the one on the right.


























!

"

#

$

&

%

)
"

'






(







'






























Figure 1: Arbitrariness and iconicity. Two simple languages,

each with one form and one meaning dimension and five
meanings to be conveyed. Noisy form-meaning pairs are indicated by circles in form-meaning space. In an arbitrary
language, there is no correlation between form and meaning.
In a perfectly iconic language, form and meaning correlate.



Iconicity can play a further role in the comprehension
of the language. If an unknown or poorly learned form is
presented in the presence of constraints on the possible
meanings for the form, for example, if several candidate
meanings are present, then iconicity can add further constraints. For example, if a user of a language knows that
loudness in forms that refer to emotions tends to correlate with the strength of the emotion referred to, then
for a particularly loud novel form, the user can eliminate
candidate emotions that are mild.















Figure 2: Arbitrariness, iconicity, and vocabulary size. For

relatively large vocabularies, iconicity can interfere with communication because of the greater likelihood of overlap between form-meaning pairs. For a given vocabulary size, there
are more ways to avoid ambiguity (and homophony) in an arbitrary than an iconic language.

A Simulation
For a learning algorithm that responds to regularities
in the association between form and meaning, then, we
should observe an interaction between vocabulary size
and systematicity in the association (arbitrariness vs.
iconicity), as measured by learning error.
To test this idea, I trained several feedforward connectionist networks to learn the associations from a set
of meanings to a set of forms. The languages differed
on two dimensions, vocabulary size and systematicity in
the association. Both forms and meanings were represented by values along three dimensions, with ten possible values for each. Each dimension was represented by
ten units, and each input and target value activated a
gaussian pattern across the units so that there was the

How Iconicity Can Interfere
However, this advantage of iconicity should decline as
the number of meanings to be associated with forms increases. Increasing the number of form-meaning pairs
causes the average distance between these pairs in formmeaning space to decrease. Because of the noise that is
part of form and meaning patterns, each form-meaning
association occupies a region of the space. In other
words, as the number of form-meaning pairs increases,
the likelihood that the form regions for two different
pairs share the same meaning (homophony) or that the
meaning regions for two different pairs share the same

435

possibility of some generalization from a value to values
close to it.
The “small” languages contained 15 form-meaning
pairs, while the “large” languages contained 100 formmeaning pairs. For “iconic” languages, each formmeaning pair coincided on two of the three dimensions,
which were randomly selected for each pair. For example, a possible iconic form-meaning pair was: form {3, 2,
8}, meaning {3, 5, 8}. Note that for the iconic languages,
there is thus a significant correlation across all three pairs
of dimensions. For “arbitrary” languages, the values for
each form-meaning pair were selected completely randomly. For each form-meaning pair, the network saw
five separate presentations, one with the canonical pair,
and four with noisy variations on this pair. For each of
these variations, each dimension value was changed by 1
with a probability of 0.2.
Since these were feed-forward networks, they only
learned the associations in one direction. Each network contained 30 meaning input units, 30 form output
units, and 64 hidden units and was trained using backpropagation. Figure 3 shows the mean square error as
training progressed. As can be seen, iconic languages
have an early advantage because of the correlations that
back-propagation can easily discover. For the small languages, this advantage holds throughout training. For
the large languages, however, the network learning the
arbitrary language eventually overtakes the one learning
the iconic language, apparently because of the proximity
of some of the form-meaning pairs to one another and
the resulting confusion in the presence of noise.
Note that the potentially adverse effects of iconicity on
learning depend crucially on the number of dimensions
that are used to represent forms and meanings because
the size of the form-meaning space increases with the
number of dimensions. For a large enough number of dimensions, iconicity should be superior to arbitrariness,
even for a relatively large vocabulary. In fact, if we increase the number of dimensions in the simulation from
three to four, the long-term advantage of the arbitrary
over the iconic language disappears.

Figure 3: Learning of iconic and arbitrary languages by a
feed-forward network. Root mean square error during training is shown for iconic and arbitrary languages consisting of
15 (small) and 100 (large) form-meaning pairs.

categories, an algorithm that focuses on within-category
regularity, while it ignores between-category regularity,
makes sense. Of course, the categories are not specified
to the learner in advance; the learner neither knows how
many form categories there are nor how many meaning
categories there are. Thus the algorithm must be unsupervised.
Competitive learning (e.g., Grossberg, 1987) is such
an algorithm (or family of algorithms). It seeks to cluster input patterns on the basis of similarity, and it is
oblivious to any regularities that exist between the categories that it finds. It would seem to be well-suited to
the task of learning words. But how does it respond to
iconicity and arbitrariness?
A competitive learning network has an input layer and
an output layer consisting of potential category units.
The output layer either has a fixed number of units, representing an upper bound on the number of categories
that can be learned, or, in a constructive competitive
learning algorithm, the output layer adds new category
units in response to error. In the simple version of competitive learning used here, for each input pattern the
category unit whose weights best match the input pattern is treated as the “winner” for that pattern. It updates its input weights in the direction of the input pattern. The “losing” units also update their weights in the
direction of the input, but with a much smaller step size.
A competitive learning network for the form-meaning

Arbitrariness and Competitive Learning
Learning Arbitrary Categories
Let us assume that the communicative demands of the
users of the language require forms for a very large
number of meanings and that the number of form and
meaning dimensions available for representing forms and
meanings is small enough that a mostly arbitrary language has a clear advantage over a mostly iconic one.
Now suppose we have some control over the kind of
learner that is confronted with this large and mostly
arbitrary language. What sort of learning mechanism
would be best suited for this task? What matters most
is that the different form-meaning pairs be kept distinct
from one another. That is, each of these is in effect a
separate category. (Since we are now dealing with categories of form-meaning association, it is time to start
calling them “words.”) Since in an arbitrary language
there is little or no regularity to be found between the

436

A Simulation

learning task has both form and meaning as inputs feeding into an output layer of category units. During training, an input pattern consisting of a form-meaning pair
activates a winning unit, and the weights are updated.
Ideally, a single category unit gets assigned to each formmeaning category; that is, each unit ends up representing
a word. A single training presentation is illustrated in
Figure 4A.

To test whether competitive learning could elucidate
both the advantages and disadvantages of iconicity, I
trained a competitive learning network of the type described above on both a completely arbitrary language
and a maximally iconic language, in which all form dimensions correlated with meaning dimensions. There
were four meaning and four form dimensions and 100
form-meaning pairs in the language. In addition to the
form and meaning input layers, the network had a growable layer of category units. At each input presentation,
a new category unit was added with a probability based
on the error for the input pattern (the distance of the
winning category unit from the input). Separate identical networks were trained for 50 epochs on the two kinds
of languages. Figure 5 shows the results for several kinds
of tests following training.

:

4

*

+

,

0

5

/

3

1
+

,

6

2

5

8

7

-

.

/

0

1

.

/

0

1

2

1

3

1

3

9

4

0

5

/

3

1
+

,

6

2

5

8

7

<

;
=

*

+

,

-

2

Figure 4: Competitive learning of form-meaning pairs. A.

Training. An input pattern, consisting of both form and
meaning patterns, is presented to the network, which selects
a “winning” category unit, and updates its weights and, to a
lesser extent, the weights of other units. In the constructive
version of the algorithm used in the simulation, the category
layer grows during training (indicated by the dashed border);
it adds a new unit whenever error for an input pattern is
above a threshold. B. Comprehension. An input pattern,
consisting of a form pattern only, is fed to the network (1)
and the winning category unit is activated (2). The active
category unit activates a pattern on the meaning units (3).

Figure 5: Competitive learning of arbitrary and iconic lan-

guages. Results are shown for the proportion of words that
are not assigned distinct category units (”LexErr”); the final error on training patterns, that is, the average distance
of input patterns from winning category units (”TrainErr”);
the proportion of words in comprehension tests for which the
meaning output was closer to a meaning category other than
the intended one (”CompCat”); and the average distance of
the meaning output in comprehension tests from the intended
meaning (”CompDist”).

The first two columns show tests directly related to the
degree to which the networks mastered the languages.
The first column shows what proportion of the 100 words
became associated with distinct category units during
training. Any category unit that ends up representing
more than one word will obviously interfere with comprehension or production. For the iconic language there
are more units doing double duty because of the greater
similarity between the words. The second column shows
another measure of learning, the average distance between an input pattern and the category unit that wins

Following training, the network can perform production or comprehension using the trained weights. For
comprehension, a form pattern alone is input to the network, and a winning category unit is selected on this
basis. This unit then activates the meaning units using
the weights learned in the other direction. Production
works in the opposite fashion, with meaning as input and
form as output. Figure 4B shows how comprehension is
implemented.

437

behavior (Vygotsky, 1978).
But this brings up more questions. First, what about
iconicity in human language? It is well-known that,
far from being non-existent, iconicity actually thrives
in some corners of language (Hinton, Nichols, & Ohala,
1994). It is a property of so-called expressive words,
which make up an entire grammatical category in a wide
range of languages, including Japanese, Korean, and
many languages spoken in Africa, South Asia, Southeast
Asia, and the Americas. It is also much more common in
sign languages (Taub, 2001) than in spoken languages.
Given what I have claimed, we would expect iconicity
in circumstances where the number of words is unusually small or in circumstances where the space of possible
distinguishable forms is unusually large. The number of
words is small early in first language acquisition, and
there is some evidence that in at least one language with
a large category of iconic words, Japanese, these words
are relatively common in speech to children and they are
easier for children to map onto meanings than arbitrary
forms are (Yoshida, 2003). That is, they seem to play
the role in comprehension that is suggested by the discussion above. Another situation in which a vocabulary
is very small is experiments in which which adults have
to communicate with one another without speaking. Not
surprisingly, subjects in such experiments create highly
iconic gestures to represent categories of objects and relations (Oda & Gasser, 2003).
However, expressives survive into the adult language
for speakers of languages like Japanese, Tamil, and Zulu.
One possible explanation is that these categories are
more or less self-contained, existing in a sense in their
own space. They tend to be characterized by particular
formal properties such as reduplication, and they tend to
convey particular categories of meanings such as movements, sounds, and textures. Perhaps expressives fail to
interfere with other words because learners place them
in a category all by themselves.
But what of sign languages? Although there is no evidence yet that the iconicity of sign languages helps young
children pick up the meanings of words, there is lots of
anecdotal evidence that adults learn sign languages relatively rapidly, presumably because of the iconicity. But
how can we account for the pervasiveness of iconicity in
the vocabularies (not to mention the grammars) of these
languages? Although there is an apparent tendency towards somewhat less iconicity as these languages change,
there is no evidence that the iconicity is disappearing
(Taub, 2001). Of course it is possible that sign languages are more iconic than spoken languages because
there are more ways to be iconic in the spatial than in
the acoustic domain. But that does not explain how all
of the iconicity can be tolerated, how the words keep
from overlapping in the sense I have discussed. One possibility suggested by the account I’ve sketched is that
the space itself is larger, that the number of dimensions
along which signs vary or the number of distinguishable
values along these dimensions is greater than it is for
spoken word forms. This seems worth investigating.
Finally, how would competitive learning deal with a

when it is presented following training. The smaller this
number, the more successful the network has been in
handling all of the words. Again the network trained on
the arbitrary language out-performs that trained on the
iconic language.
The third and fourth columns represents tests of comprehension of forms, one for each of the words in the
training set. There are two ways to test comprehension. One determines whether the meaning that is output is closer to the intended meaning (the one actually
associated with the form in the language) than to any
other. The result for this test appears in the third column. Again the arbitrary language has an advantage. A
second way to test comprehension measures the distance
between the meaning that is output and the intended
meaning. The result for this test appears in the fourth
column. Here the iconic language has a small advantage,
one that holds over a range of parameter settings. This
can be explained by considering what happens when a
noisy or poorly learned form is presented to a network
that has learned the iconic language. Even if the category unit that wins for this input is not the appropriate one, that is, the one that would yield the intended
meaning, the meaning that is output will not be far off.
Somewhat surprisingly, then, even though the iconic language is less well learned, it is more easily comprehended
in this sense.

Human Language
What does all of this have to do with human language?
Since at least the work of de Saussure (1983), it has
been recognized that the association between form and
meaning in human language is largely arbitrary. However, in Saussure’s work and in other influential work by
scholars such as Peirce (1998), iconicity and arbitrariness seem never to have been spelled out clearly enough
to admit to any sort of rigorous test. They have always
boiled down to “motivation” or “resemblance” or their
absence.
The discussion above provides both a formalization of
iconicity and arbitrariness and an account of why human language might have a strong tendency to be arbitrary. For whatever reason, we need to distinguish tens
of thousands of categories of objects, attributes, states,
and events, and the associations between these categories
and the forms that convey them in a language need to
be stored in a brain and to be learned through presentations that do not make explicit what the categories
are. Under these circumstances, the arbitrariness of the
form-meaning association helps keep words separate during learning.
Another implication of the discussion above is that
word learning and word access in humans is a competitive process, that words are categories. This isn’t a novel
idea at all. In fact models of word recognition (e.g., Norris et al., 2000) and word access in language production
(e.g., Levelt et al., 1999) that are not competitive are
the exception. And the fact that competitive learning
results in localized representations of words is compatible with the idea that words are the origin of symbolic

438

language, or a subset of a language, that exhibited some
iconicity, along with the more normal arbitrariness? The
competitive network discussed above is doomed to being thrown off by the iconicity. Although it might, in
the short run, perform better on a comprehension task,
as happened in the simulation above, in the long run,
it needs to be able to keep words separate from one
another. However, there is nothing about competitive
learning that restricts it to a single layer of category
units. A more flexible network in fact is one that allows
for different degrees of granularity in how the clustering
of inputs takes place. This is achieved with layers with
different numbers of category units or, for constructive
networks, with different thresholds for the creation of
new category units. The competition among units to
classify inputs is only within, not between the layers.
Such a network is shown in Figure 6. A network like
this was trained on a set of 100 words, again with four
form and four meaning dimensions, in which either the
first form and first meaning dimension correlated or the
second form and second meaning dimension correlated.
The other two dimensions of form and meaning were uncorrelated. The larger category layer learned the set of
words as before (note that the behavior of this layer is
completely unrelated to the behavior of the other), while
the smaller layer divided the patterns into two clusters.
A comprehension task in a network like this relies on
two winning category units, rather than one. That is,
it can combine the correlational information embodied
in the weights to the smaller layer with the arbitrary
associations embodied in the weights to the larger layer.

H

D

I

C

G

E
?

@

J

F

I

there’s little or no sense to how forms relate to meanings. This arbitrariness in turn favors algorithms that
categorize form-meaning pairings, in short, algorithms
that learn words. On this view, words are the local representations that result from the competitive learning of
mainly arbitrary form-meaning associations.
But if this is so, how did it or how does it get that
way? Did the advantage of being a competitive learner
of form-meaning pairings cause our ancestors to evolve
this approach to language? Or is this a mechanism that
develops in children as they are exposed to a system that
mostly fails to be iconic? Investigating the first possibility using evolutionary algorithms and investigating the
second through the modeling of early word learning in
children are future directions for this project.

References
de Saussure, F. (1983). Course in General Linguistics.
G. Duckworth, London.
Grossberg, S. (1987). Competitive learning: from interactive activation to adaptive resonance. Cognitive
Science, 11, 23–63.
Hinton, L., Nichols, J., & Ohala, J. (Eds.). (1994). Sound
Symbolism. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelefs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999).
A theory of lexical access in speech production.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 1–75.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and Naming
in Children: Problems of Induction. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

L

K

Norris, D., McQueen, J. J., & Cutler, A. (2000). Merging information in speech recognition: feedback is
never necessary. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
23, 299–325.

>

?

@

A

B

C

D

E

F

E

Oda, H. & Gasser, M. (2003). Gesture Language Game
— simulating the emergence of linguistic signs..
Paper presented at the 8th International Cognitive
Linguistics Conference, Logroño, Spain.

G

Peirce, C. S. (1998). The Essential Peirce: Selected
Philosophical Writings: Volume 2. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN.

Figure 6: Competitive learning with multiple layers of cat-

egory units. The number of category units (or the threshold
for the creation of new units) in a layer governs the number
of categories that it discovers.

Taub, S. F. (2001). Language from the Body: Iconicity
and Metaphor in American Sign Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Conclusions

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Thought and Language. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

Since iconicity seems to make so much sense and since
humans are so good at imitation, it might seem surprising that human languages exhibit such overwhelming arbitrariness in the form-meaning relationships that define
words. I have tried to show in this paper how the sheer
number of concepts we feel the need to talk about inhibits us from making use of this strategy. It’s crucial
that words be kept separate, and it’s easier to do this if

Yoshida, H. (2003). Iconicity in Language Learning: the
Role of Mimetics in Word Learning Tasks. Ph.D.
thesis, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

439

