UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Toward a Model of Comparison-Induced Density Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88v3v5t9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Choplin, Jessica M.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Toward a Model of Comparison-Induced Density Effects
Jessica M. Choplin (jchoplin@depaul.edu)
DePaul University Department of Psychology
2219 North Kenmore Avenue
Chicago, IL 60614-3504
end of these distributions will be smaller than the portion of
the range at the sparse end. To cover the entire range of
values the remaining verbal labels or category ratings would
have to be assigned asymmetrically.
In this paper, I propose yet another possible explanation
for density effects. Namely, that some density effects might
be comparison-induced (Choplin & Hummel, 2002). Verbal
comparisons will tend to bias values apart in dense regions
making the slope of the evaluation function steep and bias
values together in sparse regions making the slope of the
evaluation function shallow. These biases would make
evaluation functions concave for positively skewed
distributions and convex for negatively skewed
distributions. The assignment of verbal labels or category
ratings to these biased values might explain why values
drawn from positively skewed distributions are often judged
larger than are values drawn from negatively skewed
distributions.
I start by reviewing the basic tenets of ComparisonInduced Distortion Theory (Choplin & Hummel, 2002) and
describing how comparisons could produce density effects. I
present simulation data to demonstrate signature
characteristics of comparison-induced density effects and
how they differ from density effects produced by other
mechanisms. I then describe an experiment in which I found
preliminary support for the view that some density effects
might be comparison-induced.

Abstract
A model of the effects of distribution density on evaluations
of attribute values is proposed in which biases created by
language-expressible magnitude comparisons (e.g., “I waited
longer for the bus today than I did yesterday”) serve as the
mediating mechanism. The biases created by comparisons as
well as the mechanisms by which comparison-induced biases
could produce density effects are described. Simulation data
demonstrate signature characteristics of comparison-induced
density effects. An experiment found preliminary evidence in
support of the view that some density effects might be
comparison-induced.

Density Effects
Evaluations of attribute values such as grades (Wedell,
Parducci, & Roman, 1989), taste (Riskey, Parducci, &
Beauchamp, 1979), visual velocity (Sokolov, Pavlova, &
Ehrenstein, 2000), prices (Niedrich, Sharma, & Wedell,
2001), income (Hagerty, 2000) and so forth often depend
upon the density—or frequency—of the distribution from
which judged values are drawn (Krumhansl, 1978; Parducci,
1965, 1995).
In particular, evaluation functions are
typically concave (downward) for positively skewed
distributions and convex (concave upward) for negatively
skewed distributions. Values drawn from positively skewed
distributions are also often judged larger than are values
drawn from negatively skewed distributions.
Several explanations for these effects have been proposed.
Parducci’s (1965) Range-Frequency Theory assumes that
people are aware of and use percentile rank information to
evaluate attribute values. Range-Frequency Theory explains
the finding that evaluation functions are often concave for
positively skewed distributions, because the density at the
lower end of positively skewed distributions gives low
values larger percentile rank scores than they would have
had otherwise. The slope of the function becomes shallow
at the sparse upper end of the distribution where percentile
rank scores increase at a slower rate. The reverse pattern of
changes in percentile rank scores in negatively skewed
distributions explains the finding that evaluation functions
are often convex for negatively skewed distributions.
Haubensak (1992) suggested an alternative explanation
for density effects on evaluations of sequentially presented
values. He argued that since people do not know the
distribution density and range in advance, they tend to
assume that early values are typical or average and assign
them intermediate verbal labels or category ratings. After
these initial labels or category ratings have been assigned,
people are obliged to use them consistently. Since early
values are most likely to come from the dense portion of
skewed distributions, the portion of the range at the dense

Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory
The basic idea behind Comparison-Induced Distortion
Theory (Choplin & Hummel, 2002) is that languageexpressible magnitude comparisons suggest quantitative
values. To investigate the meanings of English age
comparisons Rusiecki (1985) gave his participants sentences
such as “Mary is older than Jane” and “Martin’s wife is
older than Ken’s wife” and asked them to report the ages
they imagined. Rusiecki found considerable agreement in
the values imagined by his participants. In response to the
comparison “Mary is older than Jane” participants imagined
Mary to be 20.2 years on average and Jane to be 17.9 years
on average. In response to the comparison “Martin’s wife is
older than Ken’s wife” participants imagined Martin’s wife
to be 37.2 years on average and Ken’s wife to be 33.0 years
on average.
Of particular interest to the current discussion, the age
differences imagined by Rusiecki’s (1985) participants were
remarkably similar. Regardless of the particular ages they
imagined, participants imagined a difference between the
ages of approximately 2 to 5 years (slightly larger for larger
values)—not 1 month or 30 years. Inspired by these results,
Rusiecki argued that comparisons suggest quantitative
differences between compared values. I will henceforth call
221

these quantitative differences “comparison-suggested
differences,” because they are the differences suggested by
comparisons. In the case of age comparisons, for example,
Rusiecki’s results demonstrate that comparison-suggested
differences are approximately 2 to 5 years (for ease of
discussion I operationally define the comparison-suggested
difference implied by age comparisons to be 3.5 years).
Choplin and Hummel (2002) proposed a model of
attribute evaluation in which magnitude comparisons (like
those investigated by Rusiecki, 1985) bias evaluations of
magnitude values. In particular, they suggested that
evaluations of magnitude values might be vulnerable to bias
whenever values differ from the values suggested by
comparisons. For example, if the actual age difference
between two people were 1.5 years (i.e., less than the
comparison-suggested difference of 3.5 years), then a
comparison would tend to bias evaluations of their ages
apart—toward a difference of 3.5 years. The younger person
would be evaluated younger than she or he would have been
evaluated otherwise and the older person would be
evaluated older than she or he would have been evaluated
otherwise. If the actual age difference between two people
were 5.5 years (i.e., more than the comparison-suggested
difference of 3.5 years), then a comparison would tend to
bias evaluations of their ages together—again toward a
difference of 3.5 years. The younger person would be
evaluated older than she or he would have been evaluated
otherwise and the older person would be evaluated younger
than she or he would have been evaluated otherwise.
Formally, the comparison-suggested value of the smaller
of two compared values (ES; E for Expected) and the
comparison-suggested value of the larger of two compared
values (EL) can be calculated from the comparisonsuggested difference, D:
ES = SL – D
(1a)
(1b)
EL = SS + D
where SL and SS (S for Stimulus values) are the values of
the larger and smaller values unbiased by comparisons
respectively. Represented values are assumed to be a
weighted mean of the values unbiased by comparisons and
the comparison-suggested values:
RS = wES + (1-w)SS
(2a)
RL = wEL + (1-w)SL
(2b)
where w is the relative weights of the two values, is bound
between 0 and 1, and is constrained so as to prevent
impossible values (e.g., negative years or sizes of geometric
figures) from being represented. For example, assuming a
comparison-suggested difference, D, of 3.5 years, a
comparison between a 22-year old and a 28-year old would
bias evaluations of their ages toward each other. If the
weight given to comparison-suggested values were .2, then
the represented age of the 22-year old would be 22.5 years
and the represented age of the 28-year old would be 27.5
years. That is, the age of the 22 year old would be evaluated,
i.e., treated, as if it were half a year older and the age of the
28 year old would be evaluated as if it were half a year
younger.

Comparisons Might Create Density Effects
Comparison-induced biases like those just described might
produce density effects. Consider, for example, the
positively skewed distribution of ages presented in Figure 1
which might be approximately representative of the ages of
students in a typical undergraduate classroom. Filled-in
arrows represent biases created by comparisons between
values that are closer together than the comparisonsuggested difference and that are, therefore, biased apart by
comparisons. Outlined arrows represent biases created by
comparisons between values that are farther apart than the
comparison-suggested difference and that are, therefore,
biased together by comparisons. Values in dense regions
(i.e., 18 – 22 years in Figure 1) are more likely to be closer
together than the comparison-suggested difference and as a
result comparisons will more likely bias evaluations apart.
Values in sparse regions (i.e., 22 – 28 years) are more likely
to be farther apart than the comparison-suggested difference
and as a result comparisons will more likely bias
evaluations together. I propose that this difference in the
effects of comparisons within dense regions versus the
effects of comparisons within sparse regions might produce
comparison-induced density effects.

18

20

22

24

26

28

Ages

Figure 1: Comparison-induced biases that might occur in a
positively skewed distribution of ages.

Modeling Density Effects
To model comparison-induced density effects, ComparisonInduced Distortion Theory requires several assumptions.
First, an operational definition of the comparison-suggested
difference (D) is required. In the preceding sections, for
example, an adequate operational definition of the
difference suggested by age comparisons was obtained from
Rusiecki’s (1985) study in which he queried his participants
as to the differences they imagined. Alternatively, an
adequate operational definition might be obtained from
common real-world differences.
Second, because the number of comparisons people could
hypothetically articulate as well as the sequences in which
they could hypothetically articulate them is—in most
cases—indefinite, assumptions about which comparisons
get articulated are required. Almost any comparison scheme
would produce density effects. Comparing each value to the
value presented one item back, for example, would produce
density effects. In the modeling presented below, I assumed
that the to-be-judged item is only compared to one other
item. Additionally, I assumed two constraints on the
selection of this comparison item: the similarity between the
to-be-judged item and candidate comparison items and the
sequence in which values were presented. Although these
assumptions were optional, I utilized them because they are
222

simulations, only the most recent 7 values were candidates
for comparison. Recalled values were biased by the
comparison on the trial on which they were judged, but were
not biased further by subsequent comparisons.
To model comparison-induced distortions, the
comparison-suggested difference, D, was set at 0.38 and the
weight given the comparison-suggested values, w, was .5.
As suggested in Figure 1, values from the dense region were
more likely to be compared to values that were less than a
comparison-suggested difference away than were values
from the sparse region. The values that were smaller than
1.5 (the dense lower region) were most similar to a value
that was less than a comparison-suggested difference away
86.1% of the time (329/382). By contrast, the values that
were larger than 1.5 (the sparse upper region) were most
similar to a value that was less than a comparison-suggested
difference away 40.2% of the time (47/117).
The results are presented in Figure 2. Generated values
are plotted along the horizontal axis. The value of each item
is plotted on the vertical axis. The filled-in squares represent
comparison-biased values and the outlined circles represent
unbiased values.

psychologically realistic and they have a long history in
models of categorization and the psychology of judgment
(see, for example, Haubensak, 1992; Nosofsky & Palmeri,
1997; Smith & Zarate, 1992).
To model the constraint of similarity on the selection of
comparison items, I (along with Shepard, 1987) assumed
that similarity is an exponentially decreasing function of the
distance between item values. For every recently presented
item j, it’s similarity to i, the to-be-judged item, (ηij) is
calculated as:
− cd
(3)
η = e ij
ij

where c is a sensitivity parameter and dij is the weighted
distance between i and j in similarity space across all
relevant dimensions weighted by the importance of each
dimension (see, for example, Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997).
To model the constraint provided by the sequence in
which items are presented, I calculated the activation (aij) of
each candidate comparison item j as:
(4)
a =M η
ij

j

ij

where M is the memory strength of exemplar j and is given
by: Mj = αt(i) – t(j) where α represents the memory decay on
each trial and is bound between 0 and 1 and where t(i) and
t(j) are the trials on which i and j were presented
respectively (see Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997). Selection of
the item to which the to-be-judged item is compared could
be accomplished a number of different ways. The choice
axiom might be used to make selection stochastic. In the
simulations below, maximum activation (aij) was used to
make selection deterministic.

Log-Normal Positively Skewed Distribution (σ = 0.9)
5.00
values

4.00

0.00

The purpose of this simulation was to demonstrate how the
model proposed above might create density effects and to
point out signature characteristics of comparison-induced
density effects that differentiate them from density effects
created by other mechanisms. To demonstrate how the
model presented above would create density effects, a
computer-generated sequence of 500 values drawn from a
log-normal distribution was created from equations 5 and 6.
(5)
V
= − 2 log R sin( 2πR )

Vlog − normal = e

1

σVnormal

2.00
1.00

Simulation Using Artificial Values

normal

3.00

0

1

2

3

4

5

generated values
unbiased values
comparison-biased values

2

Figure 2: Simulation Results.

(6)

As shown in Figure 2, comparisons between each value
and the most recent similar value created biases. Consistent
with previous research using category ratings as the
dependent measure, these biases produced a concave
evaluation function. Seemingly contrary to previous
research, however, comparisons had a tendency to bias
values downward instead of upward.
This seeming contradiction can be reconciled by noting
that category ratings depend not only upon representations
of values but also upon the function mapping
representations to category ratings. A number of functions
could produce high category ratings. For example, if people
were to use the range of values to make category ratings as
proposed by Volkmann (1951), then even if comparisons
biased representations in one direction (perhaps, as

where R1 and R2 are random, computer-generated values
between 0 and 1. Equation 5 produced a normally
distributed sequence and Equation 6 changed that sequence
into a log-normally distributed sequence. To skew the lognormal distribution, σ was set at .9.
To model recall of the item to which the to-be-judged
item was compared, the parameter α, representing memory
decay, was arbitrarily set at .985 thereby minimizing
memory losses. The parameter c, representing sensitivity to
differences, was set at 0.3. Within the sequence, the second
value was compared to the first value; the third value was
compared to whichever of the first or the second value had
the highest activation (a; see Equation 4); the fourth value
was compared to whichever of the first, second, or third
value had the highest activation, and so forth. In these
223

measured by reproduction), category ratings could be biased
in the other direction (see Biernat, Manis, & Kobrynowicz,
1997).
To demonstrate this possibility, range scores (i.e., [value
on trial t minus smallest value up to trial t] divided by
[largest value up to trial t minus smallest value up to trial t])
were calculated from the comparison-biased values. The
results—after the initial 35 trials in which the range was
established—are plotted in Figure 3. Filled-in squares
represent comparison-biased range scores. The range
transformation makes comparison-biased values comparable
to the predictions of Range-Frequency Theory and so rangefrequency compromise values (with the weight given to
frequency set at .35) are also plotted in Figure 3 and
represented as outlined triangles (see Parducci, 1965). The
comparison-biased range scores mirrored the unbiased
range-frequency compromise scores, suggesting that in
some cases the effects of density on people’s category
ratings might be comparison-induced.

This modeling points out several signature characteristics
of comparison-induced density effects that differentiate
them from density effects produced by other mechanisms
(e.g., range-frequency compromise). The comparisoninduced biases in this simulation depended solely upon the
model’s knowledge of the comparison-suggested difference
(D), the importance of the comparison (w), and the value
retrieved for comparison. The model has no knowledge of
the density of the distribution or of the percentile ranks of
values and so the percentile ranks of values do not affect the
model’s judgments on individual trials. Rather, density
affects aggregate data, because values in dense regions are
more likely to be compared to values that differ from them
by less than a comparison-suggested difference (and less
likely to be compared to values that differ from them by
more than a comparison-suggested difference) than are
values in sparse regions. By contrast, Range-Frequency
Theory assumes that people have implicit knowledge of
percentile rank information and use that knowledge in
making judgments on individual trials. Due to this
difference, Range-Frequency Theory predicts that density
effects ought to be observable on individual trials and
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory predicts that they
ought not to be.

Log-Normal Distribution (σ = 0.9)
1

scores

0.8

Experiment

0.6

The purpose of this experiment was to investigate whether
the signature characteristics of comparison-induced density
effects demonstrated in the modeling presented above could
be observed empirically. Participants imagined that they
were spending 25 days in rural Minnesota during the middle
of winter and had to rely upon public transportation. The
length of time they had to wait for the bus varied each
simulated day and they indicated how aversive the wait
would be. Half of the participants judged wait times drawn
from a negatively skewed distribution and the other half
judged wait times drawn from a positively skewed
distribution.

0.4
0.2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

generated values

range scores of unbiased values

Method

range-frequency compromise scores of unbiased values

Participants. Seventy-three people volunteered to
participate after being approached by the experimenter on
the University of California, Los Angeles campus or in the
surrounding community (36 in the positively skewed
condition and 37 in the negatively skewed condition).

range scores of comparison-biased values

Figure 3: Simulation Data. Range scores on
comparison-biased values mirror Parducci’s (1965)
range-frequency compromise scores.

Materials and Procedure. A random sequence of 10 wait
times drawn from a negatively skewed (7, 10, 13, 16, 16,
16, 19, 19, 19, and 19 minutes) or a positively skewed (7, 7,
7, 7, 10, 10, 10, 13, 16, and 19 minutes) distribution was
created for each participant. Each participant’s sequence
was presented twice. An initial sequence of 5 days was
inserted at the start of the sequence to control for primacy
effects, introduce participants to the range of values they
would see in the experiment, and to measure participants’
baseline evaluations prior to being exposed to the density
manipulation. The wait times on these 5 days were 7, 19,

Mirroring range-frequency compromise scores, the
generated values in this simulation had comparison-biased
range scores that were larger than their unbiased range
scores 97.4% (487/500) of the time. I have successfully fit
the model of comparison-induced density effects presented
here to the results of several published density effect studies
(e.g., Riskey et al., 1979) under the assumption that the
comparison-biased represented values are mapped to
category ratings using Volkmann’s (1951) range function.
224

density effects not on individual trials, but rather only in the
aggregate and it does so only because the values to which
judged values are compared differ across distributions.
The predictions of Range-Frequency Theory and
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory were tested by
concentrating on differences between successive wait times
of 3 minutes. At 3-minute differences the stimulus one back
will likely be the most similar recent value, although
occasionally the identical value 2 trials back may be the
most similar recent value. To-be judged values drawn from
the negatively skewed distribution were preceded by a value
that was 3 minutes away 41.5% of the time (292/703). Of
these to-be-judged values, 69.9% (204/292) were larger than
13, i.e., were in the dense region, and 14.7% (43/292) were
smaller than 13, i.e., were in the sparse region. The to-bejudged values drawn from the positively skewed distribution
were preceded by a value that was 3 minutes away 40.6% of
the time (278/684). Of these to-be-judged values, 72.7%
(202/278) were smaller than 13, i.e., were in the dense
region, and 12.2% (34/278) were larger than 13, i.e., were in
the sparse region.
Contrary to the predictions of Range-Frequency Theory
and consistent with the predictions of Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory, differences between successive
judgments (when actual differences were 3 minutes) were
not correlated with differences in percentile rank. These
correlations were not significant for descending (r = .065, F
< 1) or ascending (r = -.030, F < 1) pairs from the positively
skewed distribution or for descending (r = -.047, F < 1) or
ascending (r = -.050, F < 1) pairs from the negatively
skewed distribution.
Consistent with the predictions of Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory and not predicted by Range-Frequency
Theory, the differences between judgments of successive
wait times that were different by 3 minutes were biased
apart, i.e., larger than their rightful proportion of 25% of the
range (using participants’ responses on trials 4, the large end
of the range, and 5, the small end of the range, as the
baseline). The differences between judgments of values that
differed by 3 minutes were 33.2% of the range on average
(SD = 25.1%) in the positively skewed distribution [which
was significantly larger than their rightful proportion of
25%, t(277) = 5.46, p < .01] and were 44.6% of the range on
average (SD = 49.6%) in the positively skewed distribution
[which was also significantly larger than their rightful
proportion of 25%, t(291) = 6.77, p < .01]. Further analyses
did not find differences between the two distributions or
between regions within the two distributions, or interactions
between them. The differences between judgments of values
that differed by 6, 9, and 12 minutes did not differ from
their rightful proportions of the range (all t’s < 1), perhaps
because more similar recent items were recalled instead.

13, 19, and 7 respectively and were the same for all
participants. On each simulated day (simulated within a
single session), the experimenter verbally told participants
how long the fictitious wait for the bus was that day.
Participants indicated how aversive they imagined that wait
would be using a line-analogue measure in which they
placed a tick at the spot along the line that was analogous to
how aversive the wait was (see Schifferstein & Frijters,
1992). A stop mark on the left-hand side of the line was
labeled 0=not bad and a stop mark on the right-hand side of
the line was labeled 10=extremely bad. The 25 lines were
presented on a single, one-page experimental handout and
labeled Day 1 through Day 25.

Results and Discussion
To reduce variance caused by idiosyncratic reactions to wait
times, participants’ judgments during the initial sequence
were used as a baseline. Each participant’s judgments on
trials 6 through 25 were divided by the average of her or his
judgments on trials 4, 5, and 6.
Distribution density effects were revealed by differences
between judgments in sparse regions versus differences
between judgments in dense regions. Among participants
whose wait times were drawn from the negatively skewed
distribution, the difference between judgments of 7-minute
wait times and judgments of 13-minute wait times (i.e., the
sparse region) was reliably smaller than the difference
between judgments of 13-minute wait times and judgments
of 19-minute wait times (i.e., the dense region), t(36) = 3.99,
p < .01. Among participants whose wait times were drawn
from the positively skewed distribution, the difference
between judgments of 7-minute wait times and judgments of
13-minute wait times (i.e., the sparse region) was
approximately the same size as the difference between
judgments of 13-minute wait times and judgments of 19minute wait times (i.e., the dense region), t < 1. A 2
(distribution) x 2 (region) Mixed-Factors ANOVA found
that this interaction was significant [F(1,71) = 6.11, MSE =
0.22, p = .01].
Because the initial sequence of 5 days inserted at the start
of the experiment introduced participants to the entire range
of wait times and was the same for all participants,
Haubensak’s (1992) model is not a viable model of the
observed density effects (but note that the density effects
observed in this experiment were smaller than the density
effects often observed). Range-Frequency Theory and
Comparison-Induced Distortion Theory remain as viable
models of the observed density effects.
Range-Frequency Theory assumes that people have
implicit knowledge about the percentile ranks of stimulus
values and use that knowledge to judge stimulus values on
particular trials. It, therefore, predicts density effects on
individual trials. By contrast, Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory assumes that comparisons produce the
same biases regardless of the type of distribution from
which values are drawn (as long as D, w, and the values to
which they are compared remain constant). It predicts

General Discussion
A model of distribution density effects in which verbal
comparisons such as “I waited longer for the bus today than
I did yesterday” create the observed biases was proposed.
225

Modeling demonstrated that comparisons might produce
density effects. An experiment found preliminary empirical
support for this proposal.
Future research will investigate density effects using
reproduction dependent measures and investigate the
predicted disassociation between representations of values
(perhaps as measured by reproduction, see Figure 2) and
category ratings (see Figure 3, Biernat et al., 1997). Future
work will also investigate effects of distribution density on
recall of values from memory. Comparison-Induced
Distortion Theory predicts density effects on recall of values
from memory and Range-Frequency Theory does not (see
Choplin & Hummel, 2002, for a discussion).
Although in my view many density effects are likely to be
comparison-induced, I do not assume that all density effects
are comparison-induced. Density effects observed when all
values are presented simultaneously in ascending or
descending order (e.g., Wedell et al., 1989) strike me as
cases where density effects are particularly likely to be
categorization-induced as Parducci (1965) suggested.
Additionally, even if density effects are found to be
comparison-induced, the equations used to formalize
Range-Frequency Theory will likely still provide a useful
heuristic for predicting effects of density on judgment.

Krumhansl, C. L. (1978). Concerning Applicability of
Geometric Models to Similarity Data:
Interrelationship between Similarity and Spatial
Density. Psychological Review, 85, 445-463.
Niedrich, R. W., Sharma, S., & Wedell, D. H. (2001).
Reference price and price perceptions: A
comparison of alternative models. Journal of
Consumer Research, 28(3), 339-354.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. J. (1997). An exemplarbased random walk model of speeded
classification. Psychological Review, 104, 266-300.
Parducci, A. (1965). Category judgments: A rangefrequency model. Psychological Review, 72, 407418.
Parducci, A. (1995). Happiness, pleasure and judgment:
The contextual theory and its applications.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Riskey, D. R., Parducci, A., & Beauchamp, G. K. (1979).
Effects of context in judgments of sweetness and
pleasantness. Perception & Psychophysics, 26,
171-176.
Rusiecki, J. (1985). Adjectives and Comparison in English.
New York: Longman.
Schifferstein, H. N. J., & Frijters, J. E. R. (1992).
Contextual and sequential effects on judgments of
sweetness intensity. Perception & Psychophysics,
52, 243-255.
Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science,
237, 1317-1323.
Smith, E. R., & Zarate, M. A. (1992). Exemplar-based
model of social judgment. Psychological Review,
99, 3-21.
Sokolov, A., Pavlova, M., & Ehrenstein, W. H. (2000).
Primacy and frequency effects in absolute
judgments of visual velocity. Perception &
Psychophysics, 62, 998-1007.
Volkmann, J. (1951). Scales of judgment and their
implications for social psychology. In J. H.
Roherer & M. Sherif (Eds.), Social psychology at
the crossroads (pp. 279-294). New York: Harper &
Row.
Wedell, D. H., Parducci, A., & Roman, D. (1989). Student
perceptions of fair grading: A range-frequency
analysis. American Journal of Psychology,
102(233-248).

Conclusions
Some density effects might be comparison-induced.
Comparisons of values in dense regions will tend to bias
values away from each other, while comparisons of values
in sparse regions will tend to bias values toward each other.
These biases could produce density effects.

Acknowledgments
I thank Allen Parducci, Doug Wedell, and Gordon Logan
for helpful conversations and Deborah Moradi for running
the experiment.

References
Biernat, M., Manis, M., & Kobrynowicz, D. (1997).
Simultaneous assimilation and contrast effects in
judgments of self and others. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73(2), 254269.
Choplin, J. M., & Hummel, J. E. (2002). Magnitude
comparisons distort mental representations of
magnitude. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131(2), 270-286.
Hagerty, M. R. (2000). Social comparisons of income in
one's community: Evidence from national surveys
of income and happiness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78, 764-771.
Haubensak, G. (1992). The consistency model: A process
model for absolute judgments. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18, 303-309.
226

