UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Variation in Language and Cohesion across Written and Spoken Registers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7d8631cr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Louwerse, Max M.
McCarthy, Philip M.
McNamara, Danielle S.
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Variation in Language and Cohesion across Written and Spoken Registers
Max M. Louwerse (mlouwers@memphis.edu)

Department of Psychology / Institute for Intelligent Systems, 202 Psychology Building
Memphis. TN 38152

Philip M. McCarthy (pmmccrth@memphis.edu )
Department of English, Patterson 467
Memphis. TN 38152

Danielle S. McNamara (dsmcnamr@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Building
Memphis. TN 38152

Arthur C. Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Building
Memphis. TN 38152

Abstract

Table 1. The 23 registers used in Biber (1988)
Corpus
Register
Press reportage, editorials, press reviews,
LancasterOslo-Bergen religion, skills and hobbies, popular lore,
biographies, official documents, academic
corpus
prose, general fiction, mystery fiction,
science fiction, adventure fiction, romantic
fiction, humor

This paper investigates the variation in cohesion across
written and spoken registers. The same method and corpora
were used as in Biber’s (1988) study on linguistic variation
across speech and writing; however instead of focusing on 67
linguistic features that primarily operate at the word level, we
compared 236 language and cohesion features at the textlevel. Variations in frequencies across these features provided
evidence for six dimensions: (1) speech versus writing, (2)
informational versus declarative, (3) factual versus situational,
(4) topic consistency versus topic variation, (5) elaborative
versus constrained, (6) narrative versus non-narrative. Our
cohesion and linguistic analysis showed most variation in
speech and writing, whereas the linguistic feature analysis
operating at the word level did not yield any difference.

LondonLund corpus

(Additional)

Introduction

Face-to-face
conversation,
telephone
conversation, public conversations, debates,
and interviews, broadcast, spontaneous
speeches, planned speeches
Personal letters, professional letters

In Biber’s study the normalized frequencies of these
features in each of the registers were then entered in a factor
analysis, from which six factors emerged. These factors can
be seen as dimensions on which registers can be placed.
Biber’s analysis showed that no single dimension comprised
a difference between speech and writing; As such, Biber
defined the sets of relations among texts as follows:
1. Involved versus informational production
2. Narrative versus non-narrative concerns
3. Explicit versus situation dependent reference
4. Overt expression of persuasion
5. Abstract versus non-abstract information
6. On-line informational elaboration.
For example, registers such as romantic fiction, mystery
fiction and science fiction were positioned high on the
second dimension (narrative); whereas registers such as
academic prose, official documents, hobbies, and broadcasts
scored low (non-narrative).
Biber’s
(1988)
study and
the
multi-feature,
multidimensional approach have become a standard in
corpus linguistics (McEnery, 2003), leading to various
extensions (Biber, Conrad & Reppen, 1998; Conrad &

One way to investigate similarities and differences between
speech and writing is by using corpus linguistic methods.
The most common and largest investigation of this kind is
Biber (1988). Biber used 23 spoken and written registers.
These registers are language varieties mediated by social
situations and are similar to genres. Biber took these
registers from the Lancaster-Oslo-Bergen (LOB) corpus and
the London-Lund corpus, and computed the frequency of 67
linguistic features in these registers (see Table 1 for an
overview of registers).
The linguistic features used for Biber’s analysis primarily
operate at the word level (e.g., parts-of-speech) and can be
categorized as (1) tense and aspect markers, (2) place and
time adverbials, (3) pronouns and pro-verbs, (4) questions,
(5) nominal forms, (6) passives, (7) stative forms, (8)
subordination features, (9) prepositional phrases, adjectives
and adverbs, (10) lexical specificity, (11) lexical classes,
(12) modals, (13) specialized verb classes, (14) reduced
forms and dispreferred structures, and (15) coordinations
and negations.

843

Biber, 2001), as well as to assessments of the validity,
stability, and meaningfulness of the approach and its
findings (Lee, 2004).

database (Coltheart, 1981) is used for psycholinguistic
information; WordNet (Miller, Beckwith, Fellbaum, Gross
& Miller) for underlying lexical concepts; Latent Semantic
Analysis (Landauer & Dumais) for the semantic similarities
between words, sentences and paragraphs; the ApplePie
parser (Sekine & Grishman, 1995) and the Brill (1995) partof-speech tagger for a variety of syntactic categories.
Spatial restrictions do not make it possible to discuss all
of the measures Coh-Metrix makes available. As such, a
brief summary of key measures will have to suffice,
whereas Graesser et al. (in press) has a more complete
overview.
1. Word information includes word familiarity, word
concreteness, word imageability, meaningfulness, and age
of acquisition.
2. Word frequency includes four corpora-based standards:
CELEX from the Dutch Centre for Lexical Information
(Baayen, Piepenbrock & Van Rijn, 1993); the KuceraFrancis norms (Francis & Kucera, 1982); Thorndike-Lorge
norms (Thorndike & Lorge, 1942) and the Brown norms
(Brown, 1984).
3. Part of speech categories are adopted from the Penn
Treebank (Marcus et al., 1993) and the Brill (1995) POS
tagger.
4. Pronoun density is computed by taking the ratio of
pronouns and nouns.
5. Logical operators are the incidence score of logical
operators or, and, not, and if-then phrases
6. Interclausal relationships are the additive, temporal
and causal cohesion based on connectives between clauses.
These can be positive (extending) and negative
(adversative), as outlined in Louwerse (2001).
7. Type-token ratio refers to the number of unique words
divided by the number of tokens of the words.
8. Polysemy and hypernym: Polysemy is measured as the
number of senses of a word in WordNet; whereas the
hypernym count is defined as the number of levels in a
conceptual taxonomic hierarchy that is superordinate to a
word.
9. Concept clarity is a composite of multiple factors that
measure ambiguity, vagueness, and abstractness.
10. Syntactic complexity refers to the noun-phrase density,
the mean number of modifiers per noun phrase, the number
of high-level constituents per word and the incidence of
word classes that signal logical or analytical difficulty.
11. Readability scores are computed according to the
Flesch Reading Ease formula and the Flesch-Kincaid Grade
Level formula, the standard readability formulas.
12. Coreference: Three forms of coreference between
sentences are computed, namely noun overlap between
sentences, stem overlap, and stem-noun overlap.
13. Causal cohesion is interpreted as the ratio of causal
particles to causal verbs.
14. Latent semantic analysis: LSA is a statistical, corpus
based, technique used to represent world knowledge that
computes similarity comparisons for terms and documents
by taking advantage of word co-occurrences. LSA scores

Measuring cohesion
Texts obviously consist of a large variety of linguistic
features, many of which can be identified at a word level
(e.g. morpho-semantics, syntactic category, frequency).
Biber’s study has shown that these linguistic features are
powerful determiners of similarities and differences
between registers. But despite these impressive results, the
theoretical question that remains lurking is to what extent
these linguistic features fully capture the nature of a text and
thereby the nature of a register.
Although linguistic features operating at the word level
may identify several register characteristics, we also know
that one of the key features of a text is that it is not just a
concatenation of words and sentences. Instead, there is a
structure in the text that glues the various text components
together. In comprehending the text, the reader or listener
constructs a coherent, mental representation of the situations
which have been cohesively described by the text. We have
used the term “coherence” for the representational
relationships and “cohesion” for the textual indications
through which coherent representations should be built
(Louwerse & Graesser, 2004). Cohesion, it should be noted,
cannot be captured only by linguistic features at the word
level. Instead, cohesion stretches to the inter-clause, intersentence and inter-paragraph level.
But if a key component in the nature of text consists of
cohesion, a practical issue related to the theoretical question
needs to be addressed. Linguistic features that operate at a
word level can currently be reliably identified by regular
expressions, part-of-speech taggers, and syntactic parsers.
However, there is the practical question of whether
automated techniques can also capture the cohesion of text.
Recent landmark progress in computational linguistics has
indeed allowed us to go far beyond surface level
components into automating deeper and global levels of text
and language analysis (Jurafsky & Martin, 2001). This
progress has resulted in the cohesion and coherence
measurement tool Coh-Metrix.

Coh-Metrix
Coh-Metrix was initially developed in order to replace
readability formulas that exclusively focus on simple and
shallow metrics. Instead, Coh-Metrix is sensitive to a
broader profile of language and cohesion characteristics. It
analyzes texts on 236 types of cohesion relations and
measures of language, text, and readability (McNaramara,
Louwerse, & Graesser, 2002; Graesser, McNamara, &
Louwerse, in press). For this paper, we will only focus on
the textual features (cohesion) of the tool.
The modules of Coh-Metrix use lexicons, part-of-speech
classifiers, syntactic parsers, templates, corpora, latent
semantic analysis, and other components that are widely
used in computational linguistics. For example, the MRC

844

Dimension 1: Speech versus writing. This dimension
significantly accounts for 53.5% of the variance, (F (1, 22)
= 35.61, p < .001, MSE = .721). When looking at the
grouping of the registers, it immediately becomes apparent
that spoken registers are distinct from written registers. In
addition, the registers clearly show the degree to which the
registers are speech-dependent. For example, fiction
includes, or more closely reflects, spoken discourse,
whereas this is far less likely to be the case with press
reviews or professional letters.
The linguistic features with positive loadings are
presented in the first data row of the table, signifying the
higher presence in the register. They consist of
concreteness, imageability, meaningfulness, polysemy, and
frequency in the spoken discourse. Negative loadings relate
to ambiguous quantification, pronoun density, argument
overlap, and semantic similarity between sentences and
paragraphs. Registers with a higher score on this dimension
(like public conversations and face-to-face conversations)
are characterized by frequent occurrences of concrete,
imaginable, and meaningful language, together with higher
pronoun density and ambiguous quantification. At the same
time, occurrences of argument overlap and semantic
similarities between text units are less prevalent. Registers
with negative scores, presented in the second data row, have
the opposite characteristics.
In Table 2 results are given for the Dimension 1. The first
column presents the registers ranked by total scores and the
second column presents the linguistic features ranked by
factor loadings. Row separators mark the difference
between positive and negative factor loadings. The same
format is used for the remaining five tables representing the
remaining five dimensions.

can be computed for sentence to paragraph, sentence to text,
paragraph to paragraph and paragraph to text. These
measures can be used for measuring the local and global
cohesion of the text (see Kintsch, 2002; Landauer &
Dumais, 1997).
The advantage of the use of this wide range of
computational linguistic tools is that Coh-Metrix is sensitive
to variations in language, discourse, and cohesion. Such an
analysis may not only help us to determine text difficulty,
but may also help us with determining variations across
registers.

Multi-dimensional study on cohesion
In our multi-feature, multi-dimensional approach we
carefully followed Biber’s study to allow comparison of his
findings. We used the same fifteen written registers from the
LOB corpus and the same six spoken registers from the
London-Lund corpus. Two further non-published registers
(professional and personal letters), which Biber had
generated himself, were substituted with the Compilation of
Messages and Letters of the Presidents Richardson
(2003/1801) and The Upton Letters from Christopher
Benson (1905), both downloaded from the Gutenberg text
archives.
All textual coding other than alphanumeric characters and
punctuation was removed. The 23 spoken and written
registers were then processed through Coh-Metrix and the
normalized frequencies for each of the 236 cohesion,
language, and discourse features were saved. We followed
Biber’s approach in standardizing all frequencies to a mean
of 0.0 and a SD of 1.0 and entered them in a factor analysis
using the Promax rotation. Whereas Biber used a principal
factor analysis to account for the shared variance, we opted
for a principal component analysis to account for all the
variances. Loadings with an absolute value of less than .35
were excluded from the analysis (Biber, 1988; Comrey &
Lee, 1992). The scree plot of eigenvalues, illustrating the
amount of variance accounted for by each factor, showed a
clear break after six factors, explaining 88.3% of the total
variance.
In order to translate the factor scores to the registers, we
followed Biber by adding together the standardized scores
of all linguistic features responsible for a factor in a
particular text. This provides a measure of register’s
salience on a particular dimension given the presence of the
linguistic features in that register. We deviated from Biber’s
approach in one important way: Whereas Biber removed the
linguistic features from subsequent factors once it was used
by a previous factor, we preferred to include these linguistic
features in additional factors to account for the interactions
between language, discourse, and cohesion features.

Table 2: Distribution registers and summary Coh-Metrix
Dimension 1 (speech versus writing)
public conversations, face to frequency, concreteness,
imageability, meaningfulness,
face conversation,
polysemy, Flesch Reading
spontaneous speeches,
Ease, ambiguous
telephone conversations,
planned speeches, broadcast, quantification, pronoun
density, higher level
mystery fiction
constituents per word, abstract
nouns, hypernym, polysemy
Personal letters, general
LSA sentence to sentence,
fiction, romantic fiction,
ratio of causal particles to
religion, adventure fiction,
causal verbs, LSA paragraph
skills and hobbies, official
to paragraph, paragraph to
documents, humor, academic text, vague adverbs, typeprose, editorials, popular lore, token ratio for nouns,
biographies, science fiction, concreteness, argument
press reportage, press reviews, overlap, average paragraph
length, age of acquisition,
professional letters
average syllables per word,
mean number of modifiers per
noun-phrase, stem overlap,
Flesch Kincaid Grade Level

Dimensions
Space limitations dictate us to summarize the findings by
presenting tables in which we have translated the ratio scale
to an ordinal scale, thereby not serving full justice to the
actual differences between the 23 registers.

845

Dimension 2: Informational versus declarative. The
second dimension accounts for 16.3 % of the variance, but
without significant differences between the registers (F (1,
22) = .93, p = .56, MSE = .968). This dimension shows
many similarities with Biber’s Dimension 6, with the
majority of the registers positioned similarly along the axis
in both studies. Biber tentatively labeled this “on-line
informational elaboration marking stance” with registers
such as planned speeches and public conversations being
informational in focus and conveying the speaker’s attitudes
and beliefs. We come to a similar conclusion, interpreting
the difference as informational and subjective versus
declarative and objective. Informational registers are
characterized by a higher occurrence of temporal cohesion,
imageability, and concreteness, but a low occurrence of
causality, whereas the opposite characterizes declarative
registers.

factual side of the dimension (F(1, 22) = 5.88, p < .001,
MSE = .871). The labels “factual” and “situational” refer to
the presentation, rather than the content. For instance,
religion is located high on the factual dimension because
this register is generally presented as factual. On the other
hand, press reviews, reportages and fiction are presented in
a less transparent way, often requiring the reader to imagine
a situation.
Table 4: Distribution registers and summary Coh-Metrix
Dimension 3 (factual versus situational)
Clarification connectives,
academic prose, official
causal particles, negative
documents, religion, skills
causal connectives, noun
and hobbies, popular lore,
overlap, ratio of causal
biographies, spontaneous
particles to causal verbs,
speeches, personal letters,
vague adjectives, negative
face to face conversation
additive connectives, positive
causal connectives,
ambiguous quantification,
argument overlap, vague
verbs, vague nouns,
polysemy, imageability,
telephone conversations,
causal verbs, mean hypernym
humor, editorials, public
conversations, press reviews, of verbs
press reportage, professional
letters, planned speeches,
general fiction, broadcast,
mystery fiction, romantic
fiction, adventure fiction,
science fiction

Table 3: Distribution registers and summary Coh-Metrix
Dimension 2 (informational versus declarative)
Positive temporal
mystery fiction, religion,
skills and hobbies, romantic connectives, polysemy
(adjectives), meaningfulness,
fiction, spontaneous
speeches, official documents, LSA paragraph to paragraph,
general fiction, popular lore, familiarity, LSA sentence to
sentence, negative temporal
telephone conversations,
connectives, paragraph
adventure fiction,
length, argument overlap,
biographies, face to face
LSA sentence to paragraph,
conversation, broadcast,
LSA paragraph to text, ratio
humor
of causal particles to causal
verbs, LSA paragraph to
paragraph, type-token ratio
for nouns, LSA paragraph to
text, imageability,
concreteness, LSA sentence
to sentence, LSA sentence to
sentence, concreteness
Negative causal connectives,
planned speeches, public
frequency, (verbs), causal
conversations, academic
particles, average syllables
prose, personal letters,
per word, positive causal
editorials, science fiction,
connectives, age of
professional letters, press
acquisition
reportage, press reviews

Dimension 4: Topic consistency versus topic variation.
This dimension explains 4.6% of the variance with
significant differences between the registers (F(1, 22) =
3.76, p < .001, MSE = .870). It marks the consistency of
topics across and within instances of a particular register.
For instance, personal and professional letters often have a
similar set of topics that are used, as do biographies and
spontaneous
speeches.
Face-to-face
conversations,
interviews, public debates, press reportages and editorials
on the other hand, have more topics and are less predictable,
often switching between different instances. In the registers
located high in the topic consistency (e.g. personal letters
and professional letters), semantic similarities marking
global cohesion and local cohesion are higher, but noun
density and type-token ratio are lower than the topic
variation registers (e.g., reportages and editorials).

Dimension 3: Factual versus situational. This dimension,
explaining 7.7 % of the variance, shows similarities with
Biber’s Dimension 3: “explicit versus situation-dependent
reference.” Biber argues that the situation-dependent site of
the dimension refers to places and times outside of the text
(imaginary and real world), whereas the opposite side of the
dimension has registers with elaborated explicit reference.
Although we do not find evidence for the time or place
reference, we do find a higher frequency of imageability and
a lower frequency of clarification and causal connectives,
with the opposite trend evident for the registers on the

846

Dimension 6: Narrative versus non-narrative Although
significant differences were found between registers (F (1,
22) = 1.64, p = .037, MSE = .991) only 2.5 % of the
variance was accounted for by this dimension. Dimension 6
is virtually identical to Biber’s Dimension 2. In registers
such as fiction and biographies, a narration of events is
prominent, whereas narration is less obvious in press
reviews and professional letters. Linguistic features like
temporal connectives are primarily responsible for this
dimension. Despite the similarities with Biber’s dimension,
there are also some important differences. For instance, in
our findings, science fiction scores low on narrative but
face-to-face conversations score high, whereas in Biber’s
analysis the opposite is the case. The clear similarities
between the two studies (e.g., the clustering of the fiction
texts) support this interpretation of the dimension.

Table 5: Distribution registers and summary Coh-Metrix
Dimension 4 (topic consistency versus topic variation)
personal letters, spontaneous frequency conditionals,
speeches, professional letters, frequency negations, causal
verbs, positive additive
biographies, broadcast,
connectives, polysemy, LSA
academic prose, religion,
official documents, skills and paragraph to paragraph,
positive causal connectives,
hobbies, romantic fiction,
LSA sentence to text, LSA
mystery fiction
paragraph to paragraph, LSA
paragraph to text
telephone conversations,
type-token ratio, noun density
general fiction, press reviews,
popular lore, planned
speeches, humor, adventure
fiction, science fiction, face
to face conversation, public
conversations, press
reportage, editorials

Table 7: Distribution registers and summary Coh-Metrix
Dimension 6 (narrative versus non-narrative)
ambiguous temporal
Romantic fiction, mystery
relation, vague nouns,
fiction, face to face
positive connectives,
conversation, general
temporal connectives
fiction, adventure fiction,
biographies, religion, public
conversations, telephone
conversations, official
documents
LSA sentence to text, LSA
Editorials, academic prose,
paragraph to text, LSA
press reportage, skills and
sentence to sentence
hobbies, humor,
spontaneous speeches,
popular lore, personal
letters, broadcast, planned
speeches, science fiction,
professional letters, press
reviews

Dimension 5: Elaborative versus constrained. This
dimension is harder to interpret and explains only 3.7 % of
the variance. Differences between registers (F(1, 22) = 3.55,
p < .001, MSE = .866) suggest that personal letters and press
reviews for instance are more opinion-based and have a
closer distance between writer and reader, whereas
professional letters and press reportages, are more fact and
evidence driven. It is almost as if there is more space in
personal letters and press reviews to compare ideas. This
conclusion is supported by the factor loadings of the
linguistic features, which show a prominent role for additive
cohesion, vague adjectives and adverbs, along with a high
type-token ratio and an accompanying low semantic
similarity in the case of the personal letters and the press
reviews. It is as if many ideas are juxtaposed within these
registers.

Discussion and conclusion

Table 6: Distribution registers and summary Coh-Metrix
Dimension 5 (elaborative versus constrained)
personal letters, press
type-token ratio, negative
reviews, biographies, skills additive connectives, vague
and hobbies, religion, humor, adjectives, vague verbs,
popular lore, academic prose, positive additive connectives
official documents, editorials,
general fiction
LSA paragraph to text, LSA
mystery fiction, science
paragraph to paragraph, LSA
fiction, romantic fiction,
sentence to text
telephone conversations,
broadcast, adventure fiction,
face to face conversation,
press reportage, planned
speeches, public
conversations, spontaneous
speeches, professional letters

The present study has investigated the multi-feature, multidimensional corpus linguistic approach initially outlined by
Biber (1988). We have used the same corpora and the same
methods as Biber, but instead of including linguistic
features that primarily operate at the word level, we have
included a large variety of language, discourse and cohesion
features. These features ranged from the word level, to
sentence, paragraph and discourse level. Six dimensions
emerged from a factor analysis: (1) speech versus writing,
(2) informational versus declarative, (3) factual versus
situational, (4) topic consistency versus topic variation, (5)
elaborative versus constrained, (6) narrative versus nonnarrative. Three of these dimensions (Dimension 2, 3 and 6)
show strong similarities with the distributions of registers as
well as the interpretations of dimensions in Biber’s study.
Results showed one crucial difference with Biber’s
finding. Whereas Biber was not able to find one single
dimension that determined the difference between speech
and writing, we found a very prominent difference in
linguistic features between spoken and written discourse
(Dimension 1). The most plausible explanation for this

847

result is the contrast between Biber’s focus on the linguistic
features operating at the word level and our study which
included a much wider range of language and discourse
characteristics that we have called cohesion.

Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J.H. (2000). Speech and language
processing: An introduction to natural language
processing, computational linguistics, and speech
recognition. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Kintsch, W. (2002) On the notions of theme and topic in
psychological process models of text comprehension. In
M. Louwerse & W. van Peer (Eds.) Thematics:
Interdisciplinary Studies. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to
Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Lee, D. Y. W. (2004). Modeling variation in spoken and
written English. London/New York: Routledge.
Louwerse, M.M. (2002). An analytic and cognitive
parameterization of coherence relations. Cognitive
Linguistics, 291–315.
Louwerse, M.M. & Graesser, A.C. (2004). Coherence in
discourse. In Strazny, P. (ed.), Encyclopedia of
linguistics. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn.
McEnery, T. (2003). Corpus linguistics. In: R. Mitkov (Ed.),
The Oxford encyclopedia of computational linguistics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M. & Graesser, A.C.
(2002). Coh-Metrix: Automated cohesion and coherence
scores to predict text readability and facilitate
comprehension. Technical report, Institute for Intelligent
Systems, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN.
Miller, G. A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C. , Gross, D. &
Miller, K. (1990). Five Papers on WordNet. Special Issue
of the International Journal of Lexicography, 3.
Richardson, J.D. (2003/1801). Compilation of the Messages
and Papers of the Presidents (Vol. 1, John Adams).
Retrieved January 2004 from the Project Gutenberg Text
Archives.
Sekine, S., & Grishman, R. (1995). A corpus-based
probabilistic grammar with only two nonterminals.
Fourth International Workshop on Parsing Technology.
Thorndike, E.L. and Lorge, I. (1944). The teacher's word
book of 30,000 words. New York: Teachers College,
Columbia University.

Acknowledgments
The research was supported by the Institute for Education
Sciences (IES R3056020018-02). Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the IES.

References
Baayen, R. H., R. Piepenbrock, and H. van Rijn (Eds.)
(1993). The CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM).
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (PA): Linguistic
Data Consortium.
Benson, A.C. (1905). The Upton letters. Retrieved January
2004 from the Project Gutenberg Text Archives.
Biber, D. (1988). Linguistic features: algorithms and
functions in Variation across speech and writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brill, E. (1995). Transformation-based error-driven learning
and natural language processing: A case study in part-ofspeech tagging. Computational Linguistics, 21, 543-566.
Brown, G.D.A. (1984). A frequency count of 190,000 words
in the London-Lund Corpus of English Conversation.
Behavioral Research Methods Instrumentation and
Computers, 16, 502-532.
Comrey, A. L. & Lee, H. B. (1992). A first course in factor
analysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Conrad, S. & Biber, D. (2001). Variation in English: MultiDimensional Studies. Harlow: Longman
Francis, W.N., & Kucera, N. (1982). Frequency analysis of
English usage. Houghton-Mifflin.
Graesser, A.C., McNamara, D.S., Louwerse, M.M. (in
press). Coh-Metrix: Analysis of text on cohesion and
language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers.
International Computer Archive of Modern and Medieval
English (2000). Lancaster/Oslo/Bergen Corpus of British
English (CD-ROM).
International Computer Archive of Modern and Medieval
English (2000). The London-Lund Corpus of Spoken
English (CD-ROM).

848

