UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Cues to Reduce Errors in a Routine Procedural Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44t771nz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Chung, Philip H.
Byrne, Michael D.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Cues to Reduce Errors in a Routine Procedural Task
Phillip H. Chung (Pchung@Rice.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 6100 Main Street
Houston, TX 77005 USA

Michael D. Byrne (Byrne@Rice.Edu)
Department of Psychology, 6100 Main Street
Houston, TX 77005 USA
Abstract

possesses the correct knowledge necessary to execute the
task, usually performed frequently and correctly. Yet, for
even operators highly familiar with the task, the isolation of
a postcompletion step within the task structure makes
omissions there not unlikely. This is particularly true when
the actor is further affected by external factors such as a
working memory load and/or fatigue, as well as internal
tendencies such as hillclimbing (Gray, 2000; Polson &
Lewis, 1990).
Some commonplace examples include forgetting to
remove the original after making a photocopy, leaving a
card in the ATM after withdrawing cash, and failing to
replace the gas cap after filling up a car. Byrne and Bovair
(1997) hypothesized that these errors were due to excessive
working memory load leading to goal loss, or an omission
of a step from the task at hand. Since with postcompletion
errors the actor omits a specific subgoal rather than
forgetting what to do altogether (the overlying main task
goal), the source of the error was thought to more likely be
working memory than long-term memory. A more recent
study by Reason (2002) examined the photocopy example in
detail, finding postcompletion errors to be the most common
type of omission in that task (Figure 1).

This paper reports an experiment designed to evaluate the
efficacy of visual cues as error “interventions” in computerbased routine procedural tasks. Using two separate tasks with
a well-documented error prone step, the effects of several
visual cues were compared. The findings provide support for
goal selection driven by environmental cues in routine
procedural tasks. The importance of cue timing and
movement and meaningfulness characteristics, particularly in
dynamic tasks with external pressures, is demonstrated.

Introduction
History and Motivation
With the introduction of automation and computers, an
outstanding arena for human error has been established.
Subsequently, much effort has been given to categorize
errors occurring in such situations, yet for the most part
understanding of this very human phenomenon remains
fairly nebulous. As John and Kieras (1996) stated in the 90s,
“No methodology for predicting when and what errors users
will make as a function of interface design has yet been
developed and recognized as satisfactory…even the
theoretical analysis of human error is still in its infancy.”
Over the years, several elaborate models and taxonomies
of human error have been developed for the purpose of
qualitative diagnosis (e.g., Reason, 1990). Although useful
for post hoc explanations, the predictive power of these is
quite limited. Results from controlled studies with various
error “interventions” may extend our understanding of why
such cognitive errors arise, helping us not only evaluate
(post hoc) but also design (predict) safer machines.
Application areas to benefit abound, from aerospace to
medicine.

Postcompletion Errors
Noting the general lack of specificity in the existing
theories of human error, Byrne and Bovair (1997) moved to
develop a computational theory for one widely cited (e.g.,
Rasmussen, 1982; Young, 1994) omission error,
postcompletion error. Postcompletion errors can be broadly
defined as errors that occur when the task structure demands
“that some action…is required after the main goal of the
task…has been satisfied or completed,” (Byrne & Bovair,
1997, p. 32). With this particular class of error, the actor

Figure 1: Photocopy task structure.
Three high-level explanatory observations were provided:
1.

227

The emergence of the last copy generates a strong
but false completion signal since the main goal of
copying is achieved before all necessary steps
(subgoals) are complete.

2.
3.

Previous Study

The proximity of this false signal to the end of the
main task allows for the attention to be
increasingly diverted to the subsequent task.
The emergence of the last copy indicates that it is
no longer necessary to put in another original
leaving it functionally isolated.

A previous experiment (Chung, 2004) examined the
effects of a simple visual cue (red singleton onset) and a
downstream error cost (in the form of a resultant mode
error) on postcompletion error commission. Although
neither was found to cause significant change in reaction
times or error commission at the postcompletion step, the
results did generate some valuable implications. First, the
fact that the visual cue did not significantly reduce the
number of postcompletion errors committed by the
participants suggested that the cue lacked sufficient salience
to prime the suspended postcompletion goal. While the
sudden onset of a large red dot (against a black and white
console) next to the button that needed to be pressed seemed
informative enough, omissions were made regardless.
Undoubtedly, participants had sufficient understanding of
the task and scenario, since they could not proceed to testing
without completing extensive training.
Neither did the downstream error cost (resulting in a
mode error) bring about a significant change in behavior at
the postcompletion step for participants. While it was
expected that the visual cue would be more effective
between the two treatments, it was also hypothesized that
the downstream error cost would cause a change in
behavior. However, the number of postcompletion errors in
this condition was not significantly different from the
control group, suggesting that it did not provide any
significant advantage (or disadvantage) for participants.
This perhaps follows findings by Serig (2001) that
demonstrated error commission to be relatively independent
of negative or positive feedback.

Hierarchical Control Structures and Goal
Management
Many of the assumptions behind the current theory of
postcompletion error reside on the foundational concept of
hierarchical control structures and their retention by skilled
operators. In previous studies by Byrne and Bovair (1997)
and Serig (2001), participants reliably generated errors at
the postcompletion steps both within subtasks as well as
within the larger task, in keeping with the idea of a
hierarchical task structure. Cognitive modeling work by
Kieras, Wood, and Meyer (1997) has also provided strong
evidence to suggest that even well practiced experts, such as
telephone assistance operators, do not abandon such task
hierarchies.
As Altmann and Trafton (1999) propose, the ability to
break down complex tasks and problems into hierarchies
and subgoals, “may be to complex cognition what the
opposable thumb is to complex action.” Traditionally, these
types of goal-based processing strategies have relied solely
on a “task-goal” stack that essentially predicts perfect
memory for old goals. However, their activation-based
model of memory for goals (MAGS) offers an alternative
account to this approach that provides a more
straightforward account for the types of errors found in
human behavior.
In essence memory and the environment (i.e., dual-space,
Rieman & Young, 1996; internal and external
representations, Zhang & Norman, 1994) are substituted for
a goal stack, and task goals are considered as ordinary
memory elements with encoding and retrieval processes that
must overcome noise and decay. Retrieval cues from the
environment dictate the reactivation of suspended goals
(e.g., Figure 1, in grey) with perceptual heuristics acting as a
substitute for the stack-native last in, first out rule. This
model makes several predictions about postcompletion
errors and the characteristics of a successful cue:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Experiment
Two tasks
Along with the original Tactical task introduced in the
study by Byrne and Bovair (1997), a separate Medical task
was added to distinguish the effects of the interventions.
The task also included a potential postcompletion step
(determined via task analysis) where the interventions could
be implemented, as with the Tactical task.

Intervention Implementation
Two different interventions were introduced in this
experiment: an enhanced visual cue (see Figure 2) and a
mode indicator (Figure 3). These were developed
specifically to address issues brought up by the findings in
previous work (Chung, 2004), help pinpoint the
characteristics of a successful intervention, and evaluate the
predictions of MAGS (Altmann & Trafton, 1999), should
one or both have a significant effect.

Any salient cue (e.g., a loud beep) should be
sufficient to prime a postcompletion action
(suspended goal).
It should n o t be necessary to put the
postcompletion action on the critical path.
Reminders at the start will not help a PCE at the
end (masked by other goals).
Just-in-time priming from environmental cues are
the only reliable reminder.

228

their individual effectiveness. Red, green, and yellow are
recommended as the optimal colors for status indicators,
each corresponding to its meaning on a traffic light. To draw
attention, white, yellow, and red are most effective,
although yellow offers the best visibility.
Based on these recommendations and the characteristics
of the failed cue from previous work (Chung, 2004),
alternating red and yellow blinking arrows (Figure 2) were
used for the visual cue. As per the Altmann and Trafton’s
(1999) predictions, the cue appeared “just-in-time” at the
postcompletion step. In contrast, the mode indicator
consisted of green and yellow highlighting on the
“Tracking” button along with other contextual indication
appearing before the postcompletion step. When combined
with the given if-then rule at training (i.e., “If you see a
mode indicator light and message, the system is on”), the
mode indicator was expected to prime the corresponding
goal (the postcompletion step) of turning off the Tracking
system. Once the participant finishes the intermediate steps
and hits the “Tracking” button a second time, the indicator
disappears to indicate that the Tracking mode has ended.
Exact placement of the interventions was determined
through pilot studies.

Figure 2: Tactical interface with cue (two arrows).

Method
Participants
Ninety-one undergraduate and graduate students from
Rice University aged 18 to 35 participated for course credit
in a psychology course and additional cash prizes ranging
from $10 to $40.

Figure 3: Mode indicator (highlighting on “Tracking”
and “Tracking Mode Enabled” message).

Materials
Materials consisted of a short paper-based quiz, paperbased instruction manuals for each of the four tasks
(Tactical, Medical, and two filler tasks), Apple iMac
computers running the Tactical and Medical applications
written in Macintosh Common Lisp, stereo headphones, and
a web-based general questionnaire for demographic
information.

Intervention Attributes
In a study by Monk (1986), auditory cues were employed
to drastically reduce the occurrence of mode errors. Monk
(1986) notes that display changes are similarly effective
when the person is required to look at the relevant parts of
the display at the appropriate moment in the dialogue. The
related automatic processing of novel peripheral cues
regardless of whether or not they are informative has been
well documented (e.g., Remington, Johnston, & Yantis,
1992). Colorful visual cues are known to be effective and
necessary in guiding individuals to select points of activity,
such as the push plate on a door (Norman, 1988).
Research (Sutcliffe, 1995) and real-world practice
indicates that the visual attributes most effective for
attracting attention (warnings and indicators) on a computer
interface, in order, are as follows: movement (blinking or
change of position), shape and size (character font, shape of
symbols, text size, size of symbols), color, brightness,
shading and texture (different texture or pattern), and
surroundings (borders, background color). Sutcliffe (1995)
advises that these should be applied sparingly, however, as
the presence of many conflicting stimuli can essentially dull

Design
This study used a two-factor between participants design
with two independent variables, task and intervention. Task
consisted of two conditions (Tactical and Medical) to
compare the effectiveness of the interventions across task
and interface. Intervention consisted of three conditions:
control (no intervention), visual cue (alternating red and
yellow blinking arrows), and mode indicator (mode
indication for the system state change). Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the six groups.
The primary dependent measure was the number of
postcompletion errors made during the Tactical and Medical
tasks. Other dependent measures of interest included the
overall number of errors per task and performance on a

229

concurrent working memory task (described in Byrne &
Bovair, 1997).

(Medical, cue condition). Groups broke down as shown in
Table 2 below.

Procedure

Table 2: Participants per group.

Participants were run in two sessions spaced two days
apart. The first session served as a training session using
written documentation for each of the tasks. The major steps
of the two target tasks (Tactical or Medical) are outlined in
Table 1 and essentially consist of a series of key presses and
mouse clicks and movements. Order of training and group
assignment were randomized for every participant. Once
participants successfully completed the training trial with
the manual and logged three subsequent error-free trials,
they were allowed to move on to the next task.

Condition
Tactical
Medical

Control
14
14

Cue
16
12

Mode
13
13

Postcompletion Error Frequency

Table 1: Steps in each task.
Tactical

Medical

Charge Phaser (5 substeps)

Insert Cassette (1 substep)

Set Focus (3 substeps)

Program Rate (2 substeps)

Track Target (3 substeps)

Program Vol (2 substeps)

Fire Phaser (4 substeps)

Start Flow (2 substeps)
Figure 4: Postcompletion error frequency (std. error bars).
Cue condition is 0% for both Tactical and Medical tasks.

Return to Main Control (1 substep)
Errors resulted in warning beeps and messages and
participants were returned to the main control to restart the
task. This was to prevent participants from completing
training without having gone through each of the tasks at
least four times with all steps done correctly and
completely. When training was complete, they were
reminded that they would compete for prizes in two days
and given a short quiz to ensure that they had accurate
working knowledge of the tasks.
The second session consisted of the test trials for both the
Tactical and Medical tasks. In random order, participants
completed seventeen trials of their assigned postcompletion
task (Tactical or Medical) and eleven trials for each of the
two filler tasks, for a total of thirty-nine trials on the test
day. At testing, the experiment program emitted beeps on
error commission to warn individuals but did not
immediately return them to the main control or provide
warning messages, as in training. Participants were
encouraged to work both accurately and quickly by means
of a scoring system, prizes, and an onscreen timer. A threeletter span auditory working memory task was introduced in
all task conditions at testing.

Our primary measure of interest was the frequency of
errors at the postcompletion step (out of seventeen trials) in
both tasks. This is the step immediately following
completion of the main task goal. For the Tactical task,
mean postcompletion error frequencies were 6.81%, 0%,
and 6.21% for the control, cued, and mode indicator
conditions, respectively (Figure 4).
Analysis of variance showed the effect of intervention to
be reliable, F(2, 76) = 4.061, p = .021, but not the
interaction of intervention by task, F(2, 76) = 1.86, p = .162.
Planned comparisons confirmed our hypothesis, as
participants made significantly less errors in the cued
condition versus the control, t(76) = 3.14, p = .002, and even
versus the mode indicator group, t(76) = 2.81, p = .006. In
comparison, the mode indicator failed to produce reliable
differences with the control group, t(76) = .263, p = .793.
In the simpler Medical task, mean errors at the
postcompletion step were very low: 0.82%, 0%, and 1.99%
for the control, cue and mode indicator conditions,
respectively. Again, none of the twelve participants in the
Medical cued condition made a single postcompletion error
in all seventeen of their trials. The same planned
comparisons done on the Tactical task revealed no reliable
differences across intervention and task.

Results
Data from 82 of the original 91 participants was used in
the final analysis. The primary reason for the loss of data
was participant failure to show up at their assigned testing
date. Only one participant was removed as an outlier

Total Errors
The average number of total errors (out of all possible
steps) was found to be higher for the Tactical task than the

230

Medical: 0.67 in the Tactical versus 0.28 in the simpler
Medical task, F(1, 76) = 14.60, p < .001. Differences across
intervention were not reliable, F(2, 76) = 2.24, p = .113,
although it should be noted that the total number of errors
was slightly higher for both the cue and mode indicator
conditions in both tasks.

These results support the idea of goal selection in tasks as
a product of environmental cues. Hence, it follows that
postcompletion errors are often generated by “false
completion signals” (Reason, 2002), such as the emergence
of the copy in the photocopy task. Likewise, the visual cue
implemented here, in the form of two blinking arrows, was
able to prime the postcompletion goal sufficiently to be
correctly retrieved.

Working Memory Task
Participants showed no reliable differences in working
memory task performance regardless of task F(1, 76) =
3.47, p = .07 or intervention, F(2, 76) = 1.09, p = .342.

Conclusion
Several guidelines for the design of safe interfaces used in
routine procedural tasks can be gleaned from this work.
Interventions should be made to appear “just-in-time,” as to
reduce demands on memory. Asynchronous cues like the
mode indicator place their own demands on memory, since
there are steps intermediate to the step they are meant to
prime. Even negative feedback (after the postcompletion
step), as a downstream error cost (Chung, 2004) or as a
reprimand from an “overseer” (Serig, 2001), has
demonstrated no reliable reduction in the frequency of
errors. Postcompletion errors cannot simply be willed away.
Also, it seems that movement and/or shape (meaning) are
strong determinates of whether or not a cue is attended to
(Sutcliffe, 1995). A cue (a simple red singleton) used in
previous work (Chung, 2004) appeared at the same exact
location as the just-in-time cue in this experiment, yet
generated no significant reduction in error frequency. The
mode indicator, which relied on static contextual cues, also
had no reliable effect. It was made static (as in most realworld applications) since the nature of such cues is that
there are intermediate steps between their onset and the step
they are meant to prime. Blinking would unnecessarily
attract visual attention to an inactive control.
Implementing a successful error intervention may not,
however, be so simple as merely adding visual cues with
these properties to the interface. Differences in task (e.g.,
length) and interface (e.g., background color) characteristics
also attenuate the effectiveness of these cues, as
demonstrated by the Medical task. Additionally, the fact that
our participants had explicit training on the meaning of the
cue must be considered. Simply placing blinking arrows or
other novel cues on the interface would affect naïve users
differently from those who had been trained.
The failure of a singleton onset (Chung, 2004) and
subsequent success of two blinking arrows in this
experiment may at least partially be explained by the speed
at which our visual attention shifts in procedural tasks with
medium to high level of skill and external pressures. Hence,
while the cue used in the previous experiment also appeared
in temporal conjunction with the completion of the previous
step and in spatial proximity to the targeting window, it was
overlooked. In contrast, the successful blinking cue
continued to generate attention-capturing movement until
the postcompletion step was satisfied. Moreover, it offered
immediate information (arrows pointing to the correct
button) about its meaning.

Discussion
Our findings generally corroborate our hypothesis for the
visual cue. As reported, all sixteen participants in the justin-time cue condition of the Tactical task exhibited errorfree performance at the postcompletion step on all seventeen
of their trials. In contrast, the control and mode indicator
groups showed mean postcompletion error frequencies
between six and seven percent. Given the lack of reliable
differences across intervention for overall error rates and
performance on the working memory task, there seems to be
no reason not to attribute the difference in postcompletion
error frequency to the success of the intervention.
Nevertheless, our expectations for the mode indicator
were not met. While the just-in-time cue reduced the
postcompletion error mean to nil, the mode indicator had
hardly any effect relative to the control. This was despite the
fact that all participants were given equal training and the
mode indicator was made as large, if not larger, than the
flashing arrows in the cued condition. With the additional
novel appearance of the crosshairs (Tactical) and display
information (Medical), the state change should have been
noticeable. Thus, its failure does not seem attributable to a
lack of knowledge or relative visibility.
The Medical task was ineffective as a parallel of the
Tactical task, perhaps primarily due to its substantially
shorter length (see Table 1). It took participants nearly one
quarter of the time taken to finish the Tactical task and
simply failed to generate sufficient error rates to prove
useful for comparing the effects of the interventions.
However, it is notable that the visual cue also completely
eliminated postcompletion errors in the Medical task as in
the Tactical task.

Validation of MAGS
Our findings generally fell in line with the predictions of
Altmann and Trafton (1999), given that the cue in the
previous experiment (Chung, 2004) failed from a lack of
salience. As claimed, the new (“just-in-time”) cue was
sufficient to prime the postcompletion step, making it
unnecessary to place the postcompletion action on the
critical path. Moreover, the mode indicator (a state change
“at the start”) did not sufficiently prime the postcompletion
step that followed. It was likely “masked” by the
intermediate steps or goals, as they explained.

231

Sutcliffe, A.G. (1995). Human-Computer Interface Design.
London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Young, R. M. (1994). The unselected window scenario:
analysis based on the SOAR cognitive architecture.
Proceedings of the Computer Human Interaction (CHI)
Conference, 1994.
Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in
distributed cognitive tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122.

Hence, these findings come as further empirical evidence
for cue-driven goal selection in procedural tasks. More
specifically, they highlight the importance of cue timing and
the visual properties of movement and meaningfulness.
Follow up inquiry is underway to determine the individual
strengths of these properties. Such data will be vital for any
truly predictive theory of human error.

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the support of the Office of
Naval Research under grant number N00014-03-1-0094.
The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the official policies or endorsements, either
expressed or implied, of ONR, the U.S. Government, or any
other organization.

References
Altmann, E. M. & Trafton, J. G. (1999). Memory for goals:
An architectural perspective. Proceedings of the twentyfirst annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 19-24). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Byrne, M. D., & Bovair, S. (1997). A working memory
model of a common procedural error. Cognitive Science.
21(1), 31-61.
Chung, P. H. (2004). Visual cues to reduce error in
computer-based procedural tasks. Masters thesis, Rice
University, Houston, TX.
Gray, W. D. (2000). The nature and processing of errors in
interactive behavior. Cognitive Science. 24(2), 205-248.
Monk, A. (1986). Mode errors: a user-centered analysis and
some preventative measures using keying-contingent
sound. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 24,
313-327.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The Psychology of Everyday
Things. New York: Basic Books.
Polson, P. G., & Lewis, C. H. (1990). Theory-based design
for easily learned interfaces. Human-Computer
Interaction, 5, 191-220.
Rasmussen, J. (1982). Human Errors: A taxonomy for
describing human malfunction in industrial installations.
Journal of Occupational Accidents, 4, 311-335.
Reason, J. (1990). Human Error. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Reason, J. (2002). Combating omission errors through task
analysis and good reminders. Quality and Safety in
Healthcare, 11, 40-44.
Remington, R.W., Johnston, J.C., & Yantis, S. (1992).
Involuntary attentional capture by abrupt onsets.
Perception & Psychophysics, 51, 279-290.
Rieman, J., Young, R. M., & Howes, A. (1996). A dualspace model of iteratively deepening exploratory learning.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 44,
743-775.
Serig, E. M. (2001). Evaluating Organizational Response to
a Cognitive Problem: A Human Factors Approach.
Doctoral dissertation, Rice University, Houston, TX.

232

