UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Working Memory and Inhibition as Constraints on Children’s Development of Analogical
Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7kq9x4t0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Richland, Lindsey E.
Morrison, Robert G.
Holyoak, Keith J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Working Memory and Inhibition as Constraints on Children’s
Development of Analogical Reasoning
Lindsey E. Richland (lengle@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563

Robert G. Morrison (robertmorrison@xunesis.org)
Xunesis
PO Box 269187, Chicago, IL 60626-9187

Keith J. Holyoak (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563

The process of constructing an analogy requires a
reasoner to represent source and target analogs, maintain
both representations in working memory (WM; Hummel
& Holyoak, 1997, 2003), and construct a mapping
between elements of the source and target based upon
correspondences between relations in each (Gentner,
1983; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989).
Critically, the
relational correspondences may compete with more
superficial perceptual or semantic similarities between
individual objects, requiring inhibitory control when
relational and more superficial responses conflict
(Gentner & Toupin, 1986; Morrison et al., 2004;
Viskontas et al., in press).

Abstract
We developed a picture-mapping task (Richland Picture
Analogies, RPA) to examine the roles of inhibition and
working-memory load on children’s development of
analogical reasoning. Children of ages 3-4, 6-8, and 1314 were instructed to use relational correspondences
between source and target pictures to select the target
object corresponding most directly to a specified source
object. The study examined age trends in children’s
proficiency with analogical reasoning. Relational
complexity and perceptual distraction were manipulated
to investigate how maturational constraints interact with
each other and with age. Results indicate that children’s
development of the capacity to reason analogically
interacts with increases in working-memory capacity and
inhibitory control.

Proposed Developmental Mechanisms
Researchers have proposed three developmental
mechanisms to explain age-related changes in children’s
performance on analogical reasoning tasks: increased
domain knowledge, a relational shift, and increased WM
capacity for manipulating relations.
Goswami (1992, 2001) proposed domain knowledge as
the primary mechanism underlying developmental
changes in analogical reasoning. According to her
relational primacy hypothesis, analogical reasoning is
available as a capacity from early infancy, but children’s
analogical performance increases with age due to
increased knowledge about relevant relations. This
hypothesis was developed in reaction to Piagetian studies
suggesting that children are unable to reason analogically
prior to achieving formal operations, approximately at age
13 or 14 (Piaget, Montangero & Billeter, 1977). Piaget’s
tasks frequently involved uncommon relations, such as
“steering mechanism”, which would likely have been
unfamiliar to younger children. In contrast, research has
since shown children can reason analogically at much

Children’s higher-order reasoning skills are central to
their ability to transfer knowledge from an initial learning
context to future environments. This process enables
children to understand novel situations and contexts, to
build on their everyday learning experiences and to
develop a flexible body of knowledge (Gentner, Holyoak
& Kokinov, 2001; Gentner & Rattermann; 1991;
Holyoak, Junn & Billman, 1984). Following Gentner
(1983), analogy is defined as a conceptual strategy in
which a source object is represented as similar to a target
object, and correspondences are mapped between the two
analogs. Although there is wide agreement that this
conceptual process is central to children’s everyday
learning, the mechanisms underlying and constraining the
development of analogical reasoning are not yet well
understood.
1149

(e.g. “if rabbit... here” and “if boat...here”). Children ages
3-4 were successful on these sorting tasks when
performing them separately, but failed when required to
integrate these two within a higher-order rule.
Halford (1993; Andrews & Halford, 2003; Halford et.
al, 2002) has argued that relational complexity is more
generally a constraint on the number of distinct units of
information that must be processed in parallel while being
maintained in WM in order for a reasoner to complete a
task. Using this metric of relational complexity, Halford
has argued for a developmental continuum in children’s
relational complexity capacity such that until
approximately age four, children can process binary
relations (a relationship between two objects) but not
ternary relations (relationships among three objects,
equivalent to the integration of 2 binary relations).
The three hypotheses are not mutually exclusive, and
the relationships among the empirical factors emphasized
by each model have not been fully examined. The present
project examines the interactions among the constraints at
the heart of the three models: the role of domain
knowledge, inhibition of perceptual distraction, and
relational complexity.

younger ages (e.g. Gentner 1977, Holyoak et al., 1984).
Goswami and Brown (1989) argued that children as
young as 3 years old were successful on analogical
reasoning tasks when they demonstrated knowledge about
the relevant relations. Goswami and Brown presented
children with complex versions of analogy tasks in which
two physical, causal relations (e.g., cutting and wetting)
were imposed on a source object “a” to become source
object “b.” Children were required to map on the basis of
these relations to complete an analogy of the form
a:b::c:d. The investigators found that children were fairly
competent on these problems with 2 relational changes
when they showed knowledge of the relations.
These data provided some evidence that domain
knowledge is related to successful analogical reasoning,
but the methodology of this study has been criticized.
Rattermann and Gentner (1998) found that when a
substantial perceptual distractor was included in the
Goswami and Brown stimuli, children younger than age
five were likely to select a perceptual match in spite of
knowledge of the relations and explicit analogy
instructions. Gentner and Rattermann (1991; Rattermann
& Gentner, 1998) posited that a “relational shift” occurs
between the ages of four and five. Before the relational
shift, they argue that children primarily attend to
perceptual similarity and will reason on the basis of
perceptual features if available. Following the relational
shift, children can and do reason on the basis of relational
features even when faced with perceptual distractors. The
authors suggest that domain knowledge is integral to the
relational shift, though the mechanism is not explicitly
postulated.
An alternative explanation for the relational shift is that
children younger than age five were unable to inhibit their
responses to perceptual similarity, although they were
aware that the task required attention to relational
similarity. It is well-established that children’s inhibition
capacity develops with age (Diamond, Kirkham & Amso,
2002), and follows similar age-related patterns as does
analogical reasoning.
Accordingly, development of
children’s inhibitory capacity, one aspect of the human
working memory system, may underlie children’s patterns
of success and failure on analogical reasoning tasks.
Finally, WM constraints have been proposed to explain
developmental change in analogical reasoning.
In
particular, relational complexity has been argued to
constrain children’s performance on analogical reasoning
tasks (Halford, 1993). Two primary definitions of
relational complexity have been advanced. Zelazo et al,
(2003, 1998; Frye & Zelazo, 1998; Frye et al., 1996)
define complexity as the number of hierarchical rules that
must be maintained in working memory in order to
accomplish a task, a view proposed as Cognitive
Complexity and Control (CCC) theory. For example, in
the Dimensional Change Card Sort (DCCS) task, children
were asked to follow a rule to sort by color (e.g., “if red ...
here” and “if blue ... here”) and a rule to sort by shape

Picture Analogy Task
We developed a set of materials for a picture-analogy
task suitable for children across a wide age range. The
general structure of the stimuli was modeled after those
developed by Markman and Gentner (1993), with
inclusion of additional controls and using content
accessible to young children. Our picture set (Richland
Picture Analogies, or RPA task; available from first
author upon request) was designed to examine the impact
of relational complexity and perceptual distraction (i.e.,
need for inhibition) on children from age 3 yrs, while
controlling for domain knowledge. The RPA stimuli
depict relational motion verbs of the type learned early in
children’s vocabulary acquisition (e.g., Golinkoff et. al.,
1996; Golinkoff et al, 1995; Gentner, 1978). Relations
were motion verbs with perceptually available meanings
that are familiar to young children by the age of 3 (e.g.,
“kiss”, “chase” and “feed”). The objects used to represent
these relations were items regularly encountered by
preschool age children, including humans, animals, and
dolls. Counterbalanced versions of each picture set
factorially varied number of relevant relations (1 or 2) and
presence vs. absence of a perceptual distractor in a 2x2
design. Perceptual distractors were either exact matches
to the source object located within the target picture or
were slight variations of the same object (e.g., a cat
chasing and a cat sitting). In the no distractor conditions,
a neutral object replaced the featural match. The spatial
location was held constant. Unlike in the Markman and
Gentner stimuli, distractors were never placed in key
relational roles (allowing perceptual and relational errors
to be coded separately), and the number of objects in each
picture was controlled.
1150

choices, and participants would be expected to perform at
a 50% level at best. In this example the boy is the correct
relational response because he (uniquely) is both being
chased and is chasing. Making this determination requires
integration of two binary relations in each picture.

Method
Participants
The participants were 68 children: 22 aged 3-4 years,
21 aged 6-8, and 25 aged 13-14. They were enrolled in
preschool, elementary, and junior high school programs in
the New York City and Los Angeles areas.
Materials and Design
The RPA task consists of 20 pairs of source and target
pictures in which objects in the paired pictures depict the
same relationship using unique objects. On a single page,
participants viewed the two pictures in a set. An arrow
pointed to a source object in the top picture, and the
participant was asked to select the corresponding object in
the bottom picture (cf. Markman & Gentner, 1993). For
the example in Figure 1, the top picture represents “dog
chasing cat chasing mouse” and the bottom picture
represents “woman chasing boy chasing girl”. If an arrow
pointed to the cat, the correct relational response would be
the boy in the bottom picture. All pictures contained
extra items not depicting the relevant relationship, and the
number of total objects was standardized across pictures
per condition. Most image sets contain a total of five
objects.
Four versions of each picture set were constructed in
order to manipulate two variables in a 2x2 design. The
first variable was the presence or absence of a perceptual
distractor in the target picture, defined by strong featural
similarity to an object in the source picture. The featural
distractor was either an identical match to an object in the
source picture or was the same object in a slightly
different position. For example, in Figure 1 (top) the cat
is depicted sitting in the target picture but is not involved
in the chase. The featural distractor is never involved in
the relational structure of the target picture. In Figure 1
(bottom), the correct relational response is the boy;
however the participant must inhibit the featural match to
make this choice. When present, the featural distractor
spatially replaces an alternative object in the target
picture. As a control to ensure that the featural distractors
were indeed perceptually distracting, ten undergraduates
were asked to select the most perceptually similar object
to the target in the 2R-D version of each stimuli.
Participants selected the intended featural match 96% of
the time, indicating that the manipulation of perceptual
similarity is valid.
The second variable was the number of relations, one or
two, that participants were required to process
simultaneously in order to accurately select a target
object. When two relations were involved, the correct
target object was both agent and recipient of a relation.
For example, in Figure 1 the top picture represents “dog
chases cat” and “cat chases mouse”, whereas the bottom
picture depicts “mom chases boy” and “boy chases girl”.
If the participant only considered one of the relations in
each picture, there would be two equally plausible answer

Problem 2-2a

Figure 1. Sample stimuli, two relations with distractor
(R2-D). The cat in the top picture (both chaser and
chased) maps relationally to the boy in the bottom picture.
The 2x2 repeated-measures portion of the design
generated four conditions: one relation, no featural
distractor (R1-N), one relation with featural distractor
(R1-D), two relations, no featural distractor (R2-N), two
relations, featural distractor (R2-D). Packets of picture
pairs for each participant were organized such that five
examples of each condition were included in a random
order. The assignment of specific picture pairs to each of
the four conditions was counterbalanced across
participants in each age group. The three age groups
constituted an additional between-subjects factor. The
dependent variable was participants’ object choice within
target pictures.
Procedure
The task was administered to participants in paper
form. All participants were given two sample problems,
1151

interaction between these variables, F(1, 20) = 2.71, p =
.116. Data for the 13-14 yr olds revealed a main effect of
relational complexity, F(1, 24) = 17.66, p< .001 but not of
distraction, F(1, 24) = 2.21, p= .15, nor was there a
reliable interaction, F(1, 24) = 1.67, p=.21.
These data reveal that young children responded
correctly well above chance on the one relation, no
distractor condition; however, their accuracy fell when
either a distractor or an added level of relational
complexity (or both) was added. With age this pattern
remained similar for 6-7 year olds, but as children reached
adolescence, the negative effects of distractor and
relational complexity were minimized.
Chance was calculated conservatively as the percent
likelihood that a subject would select the correct relational
match within the set of reasonable choices. These
included relational errors and featural errors, but not
extraneous objects. With this criteria, chance differed by
condition reflecting the differential number of potential
errors ranging from 50% (2 relevant possible answers) for
1R-N to 25% (4 relevant possible answers) for 2R-D.
Paired t-tests revealed that the youngest children were
above chance on all conditions (1R-N: t(21) = 2.71, p<
.05; 2R-N: t(21) = 2.43, p< .05; 2R-D: t( 21) = 2.35, p<
.05) except for the 1R-D condition (t(21) = 1.10, p=.29).

one involving one relation and the other involving two
relations. The instructions stated that “a certain pattern
exists in both the top picture and the bottom picture, and
the child’s job is to find this pattern.” Following the first
sample problem, (a 1R-D problem), it was explained that
“some pictures have two parts of the pattern like that one,
and others have three parts” (demonstrated subsequently
in the 2-relation sample problem). The child was taught
that an object in the top picture would be highlighted by
an arrow, and they were to point or draw an arrow to the
corresponding object in the bottom picture. For both
sample problems, children were asked to point to the
correct answer and then were given feedback. Feedback
was repeated until they gave the correct answer. If they
failed initially on both sample problems, their
performance on the first 5 problems was used as criteria
for exclusion. If participants failed on more than 3
problems, their data was excluded from analysis.
The problems were presented in random order
following the sample problems.
The task was
administered to the 13-14 year old participants in groups;
all other children were tested individually by a single
experimenter.

Results
Figure 2 presents the proportion of correct relational
responses for each of the four picture conditions as a
function of age. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
performed to examine the effects of age, relational
complexity, and distractor condition on children’s
proportion of correct relational choices. The ANOVA
revealed main effects of age, F(2, 65) = 78.15, p<.001,
featural distraction, F(1, 65) = 26.07, p<.001, and
relational complexity, F(1, 65) = 24.83, p< .001. These
results establish that the RPA task is sensitive to age, that
the picture manipulations were effective at creating
distraction and increasing WM load, and that these
constraints actively impede children’s analogical
reasoning.
Interactions were examined among age, relational
complexity, and distraction. The interaction between age
and distractor condition was reliable, F(2, 65) = 3.15,
p=.05, whereas that between age and relational
complexity was not, F(2, 65) = .57, p= .57. Importantly,
the 3-way interaction was significant, F(2, 65) = 3.28, p<
.05.
The pattern of interaction was investigated using
repeated-measures ANOVAs for each age group
separately. Results show that for the youngest children,
ages 3-4, there was a main effect of relational complexity,
F(1, 21) = 4.44, p< .05, a main effect of distractor, F(1,
21) = 14.08, p<.01, and a significant interaction between
relational complexity and distraction, F(1, 21) = 4.21,
p=.05. For the 6-7 yr old children there was a main effect
of relational complexity, F (1, 20) = 10.43, p< .01 and of
distraction, F(1, 20) = 10.31, p< .01, but no reliable

Mean Relational Responses

100
90
80
70
60

3-4 yr

50

6-7 yr

40

13-14 yr

30
20
10
0
1R-N

1R-D

2R-N

2R-D

Figure 2. Proportion correct relational responses as a
function of distraction and number of relations across age
groups.
Error analysis
Children’s responses were categorized into four types
(see Table 1). Reponses were coded as either (1)
relationally correct; (2) relational errors (an object in the
correct relation but wrong role); (3) featural errors (the
featural match in distractor conditions, or an unrelated
object in the corresponding spatial location in nodistractor conditions); or (4) other errors. A repeatedmeasures ANOVA was performed to examine the
relationship between age and participants’ featural errors
across the four picture conditions. Children’s choice of
1152

development based on relational complexity and the
relational shift.
Conversely, because the 3-4 year olds’ performance on
the 1R-N condition was high, their subsequent increases
in errors in conditions with featural distraction or
relational complexity provide support against the theory
that domain knowledge alone is the mechanism
underlying age-related development of children’s
analogical reasoning.
Interactions between age, distraction, and relational
complexity indicate that in spite of children’s capacity to
perform analogical mapping based on these relations, as
evidenced by their success on the R1-N condition,
maturational factors may interact to constrain children’s
capacity to perform successfully on picture analogies that
require more WM or perceptual inhibition.
Further, the error patterns suggest that perceptual
distraction may be a primary constraint on children’s
reasoning and relational complexity a secondary
constraint. Error analysis provided support for the claim
that participants’ patterns of failure were associated with
age-related inhibition and relational complexity
constraints. Participants were likely to make featural
errors when the perceptual distractor was present,
highlighting the validity of the distraction manipulation
within the task. Supporting the relational shift hypothesis,
at 3-4 yrs children were more likely to make featural
responses when available than relational errors, even for
the 2R-D condition, suggesting that inhibition was a more
powerful constraint than relational complexity. However,
relational errors were also made by children of all age
groups, in highest numbers in the 2R-N condition,
indicating that relational complexity is an important
constraint on young children’s analogical reasoning but
may operate secondarily to featural distraction. One
possible explanation for this is that inhibition is a core
mechanism necessary for the WM system to operate on
multiple relations (see Viskontas, in press)
The mechanism underlying featural distraction
proposed by Rattermann and Gentner (1998; Gentner &
Rattermann, 1991) is domain knowledge; however, this
hypothesis is not supported by the current data, as the
pictures were simple and counterbalanced across all
conditions. The alternative explanation based on an
inhibition mechanism is supported by the great difference
between children’s performance on the R1-N and R1-D
conditions, as well as the similarity between the R1-D and
R2-D conditions.
In sum, the RPA task provides a new paradigm for
using children’s interpretations of picture analogies to
gather information about children’s development of
analogical reasoning, and specifically reveals interactions
between the roles of perceptual inhibition/ distraction and
relational complexity across age.

the featural match on the distractor conditions was
compared with their choice of a non-featural, matched
object in the same spatial location for the no distractor
conditions. The main effect of age was reliable, F(2, 65)
= 49.78, p < .001, as was the main effect of distractor,
F(1, 65) = 126.54, p < .001, confirming that the featural
match was an effective distractor. There was also a
significant interaction between age and distractor, F(2,
65) = 20.15, p< .001, supporting the hypothesis that
perceptual inhibition is a developmental constraint on
analogical reasoning. No other interactions were reliable.
Table 1. Proportion of each response type across age and
condition.
Age
3-4
6-7
13-14
Featural
3-4
Errors
6-7
13-14
Relational 3-4
Errors
6-7
13-14
Other
3-4
Errors
6-7
13-14
Correct
Relational

R1-N
65
82
97
8
0
0
15
13
2
9
5
2

R1-D
38
64
95
46
25
5
9
7
1
4
5
0

R2-N
46
61
90
11
4
0
6
19
4
21
15
4

R2-D
36
55
90
46
27
8
9
8
4
6
10
5

A separate repeated-measures ANOVA was performed
on relational errors. Note that there was one possible
relational error choice in the R1 conditions, and two such
possible error choices in the R2 conditions. The ANOVA
revealed main effects of age, F(2, 65) = 23.41, p< .001, as
well as relational complexity, F(1, 65) = 59.56, p< .001.
There was also a significant interaction between the
presence of a distractor and age on children’s relational
errors, F(2, 65) = 5.85, p< .01. At younger ages children
made relational errors more frequently when there was no
perceptual distractor available as an option. This finding
suggests that young children unsure about the correct
answer first attempted to make a feature-based selection;
if no perceptually similar choice was available, then they
made a guess among objects participating somehow in the
relevant relation.

Discussion
Data from the RPA task at ages 3-4, 6-7 and 13-14
provide insight into the roles of relational knowledge, the
relational shift, and maturational capacity in children’s
development of analogical reasoning.
Patterns in
participants’ correct relational responses revealed main
effects of age, distraction, and relational complexity,
supporting the validity of the task manipulations. These
main effects support theories of analogical reasoning
1153

Golinkoff, R. M., Jacquet, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., &
Nandakumar, R. (1996). Lexical principles may
underlie the learning of verbs. Child Development, 67,
3101-3119.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Mervis, C. B.,
Frawley, W., & Parillo, M. (1995). Lexical principles
can be extended to the acquisition of verbs. In M.
Tomasello & W. Merriman (Eds.), Beyond names for
things: Young children's acquisition of verbs (pp. 185222). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Holyoak, K. J., Junn, E. N., & Billman, D. (1984).
Development of analogical problem-solving skill. Child
Development, 55, 2042-2055.
Holyoak, K., Novick, L., & Melz, E.R. (1994).
Component processes in analogical transfer: Mapping,
pattern completion, and adaptation. In K. J. Holyoak &
J. A. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and
neural computation theory, Vol 2: Analogical
connections (pp. 113-180). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hummel, J.E., & Holyoak, K.J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: a theory of analogical
access and mapping. Psychological Review, 104,
427-466.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2003). A symbolic
connectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Morrison, R. G., Krawczyk, D. C., Holyoak, K. J.,
Hummel, J. E., Chow, T. W., Miller, B. L., &
Knowlton, B. J. (2004). A neurocomputational model
of analogical reasoning and its breakdown in
Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 260-271.
Piaget, J., Montangero, J., & Billeter, J. (1977). La
formation des correlats. In J. Piaget (Ed.) Recherches
sur l'abstraction reflechissante I (pp. 115-129). Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France.
Ross, B. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 629-639.
Viskontas, I.V., Morrison, R.G., Holyoak, K.J., Hummel,
J.E., & Knowlton, B.J., (in press) Relational
integration, inhibition and analogical reasoning in older
adults. Psychology and Aging. Zelazo, P. D., & Frye,
D. (1998). Cognitive complexity and control: The
development of executive function. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 7, 121–126.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the Spencer Foundation
(Dissertation Fellowship: Lindsey Richland), the National
Institute of Mental Health (MH-64244-01A1; Robert
Morrison), Xunesis (www.xunesis.org; Robert Morrison)
and the Institute of Education Science (R305H030141;
Keith Holyoak) for their generous support. We also thank
Ann Fink for drawing the pictures used in the RPA
materials. The RPA task is available from the first author
upon request.
.References
Bassok, M. (2001). Semantic alignments in mathematical
word problems. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N.
Kokinov (Eds.), The analogical mind: Perspectives
from cognitive science (pp. 401-433). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Brown, A. L., & Kane, M. J. (1988). Preschool children
can learn to transfer: Learning to learn and learning
from example. Cognitive Psychology, 20, 493-523.
Frye, D., & Zelazo, P. D. (2003). The development of
young children’s action control and awareness. In J.
Roessler & N. Eilan (Eds.), Agency and self-awareness:
Issues in philosophy and psychology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Frye, D., Zelazo, P. D., Brooks, P. J., & Samuels, M. C.
(1996). Inference and action in early causal reasoning.
Developmental Psychology, 32, 120–131.
Frye, D., Zelazo, P. D., & Burack, J. A. (1998). Cognitive
complexity and control: Implications for theory of mind
in typical and atypical development. Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 7, 116–121.
Gentner, D. (1977). If a tree had a knee, where would it
be? Children’s performance on simple spatial
metaphors. Papers and Reports on Child Language
Development, 13, 157-164.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and
the career of similarity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and thought:
Inetrrelations in development (pp. 225-277). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and
surface similarity in the development of analogy.
Cognitive Science, 10, 277-300.
Gentner, D., Holyoak,, K., & Kokinov, B. (2001). The
analogical mind: Perspectives from cognitive science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. (1997). Reasoning and
learning by analogy: Introduction.
American
Psychologist, 52, 32-24.
Gick, M.L., & Holyoak, K. L. (1980). Analogical
problem solving. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 306-355.
Gick, M.L. & Holyoak, K. L. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
1154

