UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Workload is Bad, Except when it’s Not: The Case of Avoiding Attractive Distractors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0vr0j15h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Myers, christopher W.
Gray, Wayne D.
Schoelles, Michael J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Workload is Bad, Except when it’s Not: The Case of Avoiding Attractive Distractors
Christopher W. Myers, Wayne D. Gray, & Michael J. Schoelles
Cognitive Science Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
[myersc, grayw, schoem] @rpi.edu
Abstract

information is all that is necessary for consistent saccades.
The two effects taken together suggest that the saccadic
mechanism relies on spatial properties of stimuli when
determining saccadic endpoints.
The amount of influence deliberate, top-down strategies
have on saccadic endpoint location is still unclear. However,
it is unlikely that humans solely rely on purposeful, topdown strategies when determining saccadic endpoints. He
and Kowler (1991) propose a serial, two-stage process for
determining saccadic endpoints that incorporates both
automatic processes and intentional strategies. The twostage process involves an initial intentional target selection,
followed by an automatic weighted averaging of the shape
or stimuli to determine the saccadic endpoint.
Shen, Reingold, and Pomplun (2000) demonstrated that in
a conjunctive search task visual search is also affected by
the cost structure of the search environment. When few
same-color distractors were present, saccadic selectivity was
biased towards color. However, as the number of samecolor distractors increased, saccadic selectivity shifted from
same-color to same-shape stimuli. This suggests that visual
search may be sensitive to the soft constraints of the search
space. Hard constraints arise from the types of stimuli built
into the search environment, and the types of interactive
behavior permitted (such as searching by color or shape).
Hence, hard constraints determine which microstrategies are
possible (Gray & Boehm-Davis, 2000). In contrast, soft
constraints determine which of the possible microstrategies
are most likely to be selected (Gray & Fu, 2004). When
selection is non-deliberate or automatic the least effort
microstrategy is chosen. Searching same-color targets when
they are the majority distractor leads to higher movement
latencies, higher manual response times, and more fixations
than searching the minority, same-shape distractors (Shen et
al., 2000).
Our research has focused on where a participant is likely
to initially fixate. Initial fixations are the dwells located at
the endpoint of the initial saccade. This work has uncovered
an effect of stimuli density on initial fixation locations, or
the pro-density effect (Myers, Gray, & Schoelles, 2003,
2004). As the density of stimuli increases (inter-stimulus
distances become smaller), the probability of initially
fixating the dense group also increases. Our work in
conjunction with Shen et al. (2000) makes it apparent that
stimulus features are not the only aspects of the search space
considered. Rather, we have found that stimulus
configurations are also important. It is likely that the results
of Shen et al. (2000) and Myers et al. (2003; 2004), are
solely attributable to neither data–driven nor purposeful,

Increased cognitive workload is typically considered to hinder
task performance. The current study presents an example
where increased workload aided a visual search task.
Increased workload, via a secondary task, provided
participants extra time to avoid distracting stimulus
configurations. Furthermore, initial fixations on distracting
densities occurred at higher frequencies when initial saccades
lasted less–than 400 milliseconds. We conclude that the
combination of the primary visual search task and the
secondary task create an environment where the secondary
task was beneficial to the visual search task.

Introduction
There is a rich literature demonstrating how visual stimuli
affect visual search patterns (Findlay, 1982, 1997; He &
Kowler, 1991; McCarley, Kramer, & Peterson, 2002;
Pomplun, Reingold, & Shen, 2003; Rayner, Liversedge,
White, & Vergilino-Perez, 2003; Wolfe, Cave, & Franzel,
1989; Zelinsky, 1996). However, few studies have focused
on how stimulus configurations influence eye movements.
An example of a stimulus configuration is differences in
inter-stimulus distance, or density. Stimulus density can be
easily manipulated. Increasing the inter-stimulus distance
decreases density, and vice-versa. There is also little
research describing the effects of increased workload on
visual search. Do visual search strategies change as a
function of workload? In this paper, we address workload
and stimulus configuration effects on visual search.
Previous research suggests that saccades are programmed
and targeted in an automatic, data-driven fashion. Datadriven processes shape overt behavior via environmental
factors, and are typically considered unconscious processes.
There are two striking examples that suggest data-driven
processes determine saccadic endpoints. The first example
is the global effect (Findlay, 1982, 1997). The global effect
occurs when saccadic endpoints land at intermediate target
positions during abrupt onset tasks containing at least two
stimuli. That is, when two stimuli appear to the right or left
of an initial fixation point, saccadic endpoints tend to be
located between the stimuli. The global effect provides
evidence that global target configurations influence saccadic
amplitude. It appears that saccadic processes use stimulus
attributes such as spatial properties in determining
endpoints.
The second example is the center–of–gravity effect (He &
Kowler, 1991). The center–of–gravity effect indicates that
saccades directed toward a shape land at consistent locations
near the center of the shape, and that the shape’s contour

993

top–down search strategies, but are attributable to a
combination of both processes.
If the determination of saccadic endpoints and initial
fixation locations are not the exclusive result of top-down,
purposeful processes, then taxing top-down processes in
order to eliminate any purposeful search strategy will allow
automatic, data-driven processes greater influence in overt
behavior. Our research has demonstrated that the prodensity effect is heightened with increased workload. The
pro–density effect doubled with an added auditory task
(Myers et al., 2004). This result suggests a data–driven
component when determining where to initially fixate or
saccade.
In the studies conducted by Myers et al. (2003; 2004),
target and density locations were completely orthogonal; as
a result, dense clusters of stimuli provided no useful
information of the target’s whereabouts. Therefore, there
was no incentive to avoid dense clusters of stimuli.
Having found a pro-density effect in previous work, the
current study attempted to determine the robustness of this
effect by establishing a negative correlation between dense
clusters and the probability of a target being located in a
dense cluster. If initial fixations still land on the dense
cluster, this would suggest that the effect is determined by
low–level, bottom–up process that are drawn to certain
configural properties. On the other hand, if initial saccades
resist the dense cluster or show an aversion to the dense
cluster, this “anti-density” effect would suggest target
location information provided by dense clusters might be
incorporated into a conscious, top–down strategy such as
deliberately avoiding the dense cluster. However, Myers et
al. (2003; 2004) demonstrate that dense clusters are initially
fixated more than chance and the number of initial fixations
increases with the degree of density and added workload.
Therefore, a dense cluster of stimuli is an attractive
distractor in the current study. Workload was manipulated
between participants as a dual task condition and a single
task condition. Participants in the dual task condition
performed two tasks simultaneously, thereby increasing
cognitive workload. The single task group performed one
task.
If participants were able to resist initially fixating a dense
cluster, the pro-density effect would drop to at most chance
levels in the single task group. This would suggest that
deliberate processes are overriding the influence of
unintentional, data-driven processes on overt behavior in the
task environment. We also predicted no effect of degree of
density (moderate vs. strong) in the single task group. For
the dual task group, we predicted an increase in the prodensity effect as demonstrated in Myers et al. (2004). This
would suggest that data–driven processes begin to peer
through deliberate strategies in dual task, high load
situations. We did not predict the pro-density effect to
increase two–fold, rather that it would increase to levels
significantly greater than chance. Finally, we predicted that
there would be a significant effect of degree of density in
the dual task condition, specifically that strong densities

would be initially fixated more often than moderate
densities.

Method
Participants
A total of thirty-three undergraduate students volunteered to
participate. All participants had normal, or
corrected–to–normal vision. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of two groups. The single task group
performed a visual search task, and the dual task group
simultaneously performed the same visual search task and
an auditory letter classification task. There were 16
participants in the single task condition and 17 participants
in the dual task condition. The study lasted approximately 1
hour, and participants were run individually.

1. Fixation

2. Stimulus

3. Test
Figure 1. One visual search task trial, presented in order
of from top to bottom.

Apparatus
The data collection apparatus consisted of a PowerMac G4
Apple computer running MacOS Jaguar, a 17-inch flat panel
display with the resolution set to 1024 x 768, a chinrest, and
an Eyegaze eye-tracking system developed by LC
Technologies that measured gazepoint at a 60Hz rate.

994

task participants did not participate in the letter
classification task.

Visual Search Task
The visual search task was composed of three different
displays, each presented sequentially and in a fixed order.
Each display was composed of a window and a Found
button. An example of the task is depicted in Figure 1. The
initial display was composed of a single cross hair located in
the middle of the window. The cross hair was used as an
initial fixation point for each trial (top, Figure 1). Once the
eye tracking system determined cross hair fixation, the
stimulus display appeared. The stimulus display (middle,
Figure 1) contained a target (e.g., L) and distractors (e.g., T)
that were randomly rotated about their axes on each trial.
The stimulus display consisted of a 10x10 stimuli matrix,
enabling the display to be divided into four equal quadrants
of stimuli. The L was placed at the center of a randomly
chosen quadrant that did not contain a dense cluster of
stimuli.
The within-subject independent variable, stimuli density,
varied on 3 levels: strong, moderate, and weak with an interstimulus distance of 0.54°, 0.97°, & 1.94° of visual angle,
respectively. Each density level occurred on 33% of all
trials, with quadrant location randomized for each trial.
Quadrants not containing a dense cluster had an interstimulus distance equal to weak. (Hence, on weak density
trials, all four quadrants were of equivalent density.) The L
was never located in a dense cluster of stimuli.
Participants were instructed to find the target as quickly
as possible and were aware there were only four possible
target locations. On target discovery, participants clicked the
‘found’ button. After clicking ‘found’, the test display
appeared (bottom, Figure 1). The test display was divided
into four visible quadrants with the mouse pointer located at
the quadrants’ intersection. Participants were instructed to
click on the quadrant where the target was discovered. Once
the participant clicked on a quadrant, the pointer was
automatically relocated to the ‘found’ button and the
fixation display reappeared, beginning a new trial. Each
participant performed 4 blocks of 48 trials.

Dependent Measures
Our dependent measure was the initial fixation location for
each trial, where the initial fixation is the second dwell on
the stimuli display. The first dwell was a residual fixation
resulting from fixating the cross hair on the fixation display.
Fixations were determined using the eye tracking software’s
default fixation analysis. Initial saccades were defined as the
eye movement from the residual fixation to the initial
fixation.

Results
Comparisons are between the actual number of initial
fixations on a dense cluster and the number expected by
chance. Since there were four possible quadrants to fixate
within, there is a 25% chance that an initial fixation would
occur on the dense cluster. All t-tests reported are two-tailed
and measured at a 0.05 significance level. The first block
was removed to reduce any variance attributable to task
familiarization. Trials in which all four quadrants were of
equivalent density (weak density trials) were excluded from
the analyses.

Single Task Condition
The dense cluster was initially fixated on 23.63% of the
trials when a dense cluster was present. This rate of initial
fixation does not differ from chance [t(15)= –0.71; p =
0.485]. The planned comparison of degree of density
(moderate vs. strong) was not significant (p = 0.95). This
supports our hypothesis that for the single task there would
be no pro-density effect.

Dual Task Condition
The dense cluster was initially fixated on 17.44% of all
trials. The rate of initial fixation significantly differs from
chance [t(16) = –2.88; p = 0.01]. There was a marginally
significant effect between degrees of density [t(16) = 1.962;
p = 0.067] when comparing moderately dense clusters (M =
15.14, SE = 2.51) to strongly dense clusters (M = 19.86, SE
= 2.72).
In the dual task condition, we predicted a positive effect
of density on initial fixation locations. Instead, we found a
negative effect. Initial fixations on dense clusters of stimuli,
under dual task conditions, were less than would be
expected by chance. We term this the anti-density effect and
explore it in the following sections. We also found the
strong density was initially fixated more often than the
moderate density.

Auditory Letter Classification Task
Participants in the dual task condition were acoustically
presented random letters of the alphabet in four-second
intervals via the speaking software Victoria, developed by
Apple™. For each letter presented, the participant pressed X
if the current letter came before the previous letter or C if it
came after. For example, if the subject heard ‘A’ followed
by ‘G’ she would press C signifying ‘G’ occurs after ‘A’ in
the alphabet. If after four more seconds ‘B’ was presented,
she would press X signifying ‘B’ occurs before ‘G’. Letter
presentation occurred every four seconds throughout each
block of 48 trials. Participants were instructed to
simultaneously perform both the visual search task and the
letter classification task to the best of their ability. Each dual
task participant received accuracy feedback on the letter
classification task at the end of each block. No subject
scored below 85% accuracy in the last three blocks. Single

Initial Saccade Latencies (ISLs)
Initial Saccade Latencies were defined as the amount of
time the participant continued to fixate the cross hair
location after the stimuli display appeared. The eye tracker
used in the study sampled the eye position every 16.67

995

milliseconds. Each sample in the residual fixation was
counted and multiplied by 16.67 in order to determine each
subject’s ISL for each trial.

Perhaps participants learned to avoid the dense cluster in
the single task condition, but were unable to reduce the
effect below chance levels. However, in the dual task
condition, the pro-density effect is reduced to below chance
levels (17.44%, depicted in Figure 3). This was a significant
reduction from chance, and suggested the dense cluster was
avoided. It is apparent that something was aiding
participants to avoid dense clusters in the dual task group.
Initial saccade latencies provided a clue. Due to longer ISLs,
participants might have more time to implement a
conscious, deliberate strategy. We explore this possibility in
the upcoming sections.

ISL Analyses
Before analyzing the ISL data we removed outliers from the
data set. Outliers were identified for each group by
calculating the mean and standard deviation for each group
and removing any data point that exceeded the mean by +/–
3 standard deviations. This procedure resulted in removing
27 data points from the single task group and 41 data points
from the dual task group. All blocks were included.

30

400

23.63

Chance = 25%

25

Percent of Initial Fixations

Mean Initial Saccade Latency

350

300

250

200

.
150

100

17.44

20

15

10

5
50

0

0

Single Task

1

Single Task

Dual Task

1

Dual Task

Figure 3. Effects of density by task compared to chance,
error bars indicate 95% confidence interval.

Figure 2. Comparison between dual and single task ISLs.
The error bars represent standard error.

Post-Hoc Analyses

An independent groups t-test was performed between the
dual and single task conditions on mean ISL. The dual task
group had longer ISLs on average (M = 327.79, SE = 11.5)
when compared to the single task group (M = 289.53, SE =
11.3), and this difference was significant, t(31) = 2.37; p =
0.024 (see Figure 2). This result signifies that there was a
difference between the groups average ISL.

Our initial analyses suggested the letter classification task
aided dual task participants. Extra time might allow
participants to avoid dense clusters. Added time could result
from performing some aspect of the letter classification task
at stimuli display onset, such as making a comparison,
pressing a keyboard key, or even retrieving a memory of the
previous letter presented. Extra time was apparent in
participants’ initial saccade latencies (ISLs). Specifically,
dual task participants had significantly longer ISLs
compared to single task participants. Further analyses were
performed to determine if short ISLs led to a stronger prodensity effect and longer ISLs led to a weaker pro-density
effect (anti-density effect). All four blocks were included in
the analyses.
To determine if the pro-density and anti-density effects
occurred at different rates for different ISLs, we divided our
data into 5 bins. Each bin spanned 150 ms, and ranged from
100 ms to 550+ ms. The number of pro-density initial
fixations was derived for each bin and divided by the total
number of initial fixations for the same bin, creating a
percent of pro-density fixations (see Figure 4).
Figure 4 shows a reduction in the pro-density effect as
ISLs increase in duration. Figure 4 also shows that single
task participants followed the same general trend. The
separation between the single task curve and the dual task
curve is a result of the single task having a greater number
of pro-density fixations.

Discussion of Results
The single-task manipulation worked as predicted: the
density effect occurred at chance levels. However, our dualtask manipulation exhibited an anti-density effect. This
result is quite startling in the face of previous research that
consistently demonstrated dense clusters attracting initial
fixations (Myers et al., 2003, 2004). We also found a
marginally significant effect of degree of density in the dual
task condition.
When unintentional processes associated with dense
clusters are not producing an effect, dense clusters should
only be initially fixated at chance levels. However, if
participants were using implicit information provided by the
dense cluster (that the target was not located there), then
participants should avoid dense clusters. However, 23.63%
of initial fixations are located on a dense cluster of stimuli.
The results do not support dense cluster avoidance for the
single task. In the single task condition it is apparent that the
unintentional attraction of dense clusters has been
overridden by a different, possibly deliberate, strategy.

996

3.292; p = 0.045)] between the presence of the letter
classification task and ISLs (see Figure 6). There was also a
main effect of ISL on the percent of initial fixations on a
dense cluster [F(1,2) = 31.275; p < 0.0001)].

30

Percent of Pro-density Initial Fixations

25

Summary and Discussion

20

The results of our post-hoc analyses revealed a surprising
effect. Participants were aided in the dual task condition via
the auditory task. Generally, aid came in the form of not
initially fixating distracting dense clusters. As a result of
increased ISLs, the visio-cognitive system gained the
opportunity to acquire and use information relevant to the
task at hand. This analysis suggests that low-level strategies
are chosen based on the soft constraints inherent in the task
environment (Gray & Fu, 2004).
In previous research (Myers et al., 2003, 2004) dense
clusters were uninformative and we found that dual task
situations increased the pro-density effect. In the current
study, dense clusters were made informative and the
information was somehow used in a beneficial manner.
When dense clusters are uninformative, they should always
be considered as a possible target location. However, when
a dense cluster provides target location information, then it
becomes possible to reduce your search costs, and is akin to
differences in saccadic selectivity as a function of distractor
ratios discussed by Shen et al. (2000). Costs attributable to
the current experiment’s search space begin at very low
levels. However, when the opportunity arose to reduce cost,
providing benefit by reducing the search space, both dual
and single task participants seized the opportunity. This
occurred at greater rates as ISLs increased. It appears that
the visio-cognitive system is extremely sensitive to costbenefit tradeoffs, even when the cost is an average of one
extra fixation. Our data suggests a limit: enough time must
be provided in order to achieve a reduction.

15
Dual Task
Single Task

10

5

0
100-249

250-399

400-549

550+

Bins in milliseconds

Figure 4. Pro-density effect as a function of initial
saccade latency, by task.
It is important to note that the 550+ bin does not contain
much data, especially for the single task condition. In fact
these data points may be considered aberrant for the single
task condition, however they fell within the outlier cutoff.
Very few single task participants had ISLs that were 550 ms
or greater, as demonstrated in Figure 5.

1000
Dual Task
Single Task

800

600

50

400
Percent of Pro-density Initial Fixations

Amount of Initial Saccade Latencies

1200

200

0
100-249

250-399

400-549

550+

Bins in milliseconds

Figure 5. Frequency of initial saccade latencies for each
bin, by task

45

Dual Task
Single Task

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Figures 2 and 4 provide evidence that there was a
difference in mean ISLs between the dual and single task
conditions. Figure 4 demonstrates that as ISLs increased, the
likelihood of initially fixating a dense cluster reduced
dramatically. In order to test for significance, a 2 (single
task, dual task) x 3 (bins 100–249, 250–399, & 400–549)
repeated measures ANOVA was performed. The 550+ bin
was removed from the analysis due to insufficient data in
the single task group, as demonstrated in Figure 5. Results
indicate that there is a significant interaction [F(1,2) =

100-249

250-399

400-549

Bins in milliseconds

Figure 6. Interaction of initial saccade latency and task
condition. Error bars represent standard error.
The reasons for and ways in which purposeful, top-down
strategies interact with automatic, data-driven processes are
unclear; however our analyses do shed some light. The data

997

suggest that the pro-density effect is an automatic,
data–driven process. This is attributable to short ISLs
leading to high percentages of initial fixations on dense
clusters. This was observed in both task conditions when
ISLs were relatively short (see Figure 6). Dense clusters
were avoided on roughly 90% of all trials in both task
conditions when ISLs were ≥ 400 ms. This suggests more
time is necessary to impose deliberate, top–down strategies.
In addition, dense clusters were initially fixated more than
chance levels for short ISLs. This indicates that automatic,
data–driven processes have more influence in overt behavior
when ISLs were relatively short, and as ISLs increased the
ability to impose top–down strategies on the search task
increased. Soft constraints theory suggests that after initially
adopting a least-cost strategy, such as avoiding the dense
cluster, the number of initial fixations on dense clusters
should be reduced as the new microstrategy gains in success
over time. It is likely that participants do reduce initial
fixations from block 1 to block 4 for all ISL bins, and this
reduction would be an example of a learned, unconscious,
data-driven strategy.
Further support comes from the planned comparisons
between moderate and strong densities in the dual task
condition. When top-down processes are sapped by added
workload, there are differences between strong and
moderate densities. However, there was no difference in the
single task condition. When deliberate top–down strategies
are taxed, it is likely that bottom-up processes have an
opportunity to exert more control on overt behavior.
Pomplun, Reingold, & Shen (2003) have developed a
computational model (Area Activation Model) that predicts
where saccadic endpoints will be located. These locations
are based on information in the search space such as color
and shape. The current study points to areas in the model
where more work is needed; namely, that stimuli
configuration and cognitive workload are important aspects
of visual search that must be considered when developing
models of saccadic selectivity.
Although the experiment revealed surprising effects, we
did not design the experiment with these effects in mind.
We see this as a possible limitation in our study and feel that
more studies such as the one presented here need to be
completed to understand the true nature of the effects that
stimuli configurations and high levels of cognitive workload
have on visual search.

References
Findlay, J. M. (1982). Global visual processing for saccadic
eye movements. Vision Research, 22, 1033-1045.
Findlay, J. M. (1997). Saccade target selection during visual
search. Vision Research, 37(5), 617-631.
Gray, W. D., & Boehm-Davis, D. A. (2000). Milliseconds
matter: An introduction to microstrategies and to
their use in describing and predicting interactive
behavior. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 6(4), 322-335.
Gray, W. D., & Fu, W.-t. (2004). Soft constraints in
interactive behavior: The case of ignoring perfect
knowledge in-the-world for imperfect knowledge
in-the-head. Cognitive Science, 28(3).
He, P., & Kowler, E. (1991). Saccadic localization of
eccentric forms. Journal of Optical Society of
America: A, 8(2), 440-449.
McCarley, J. S., Kramer, A. F., & Peterson, M. S. (2002).
Overt and covert object-based attention.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 751-758.
Myers, C. W., Gray, W. D., & Schoelles, M. (2003). This
way or that: Determining where to look first.
Poster presented at the 25th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, Boston, MA.
Myers, C. W., Gray, W. D., & Schoelles, M. (2004). The
effects of stimulus configuration and cognitive
workload on saccadic selectivity. Poster presented
at the 4th Annual Meeting of the Vision Sciences
Society, Sarasota, FL.
Pomplun, M., Reingold, E. M., & Shen, J. (2003). Area
activation: a computational model of saccadic
selectivity in visual search. Cognitive Science, 27,
299-312.
Rayner, K., Liversedge, S. P., White, S. J., & VergilinoPerez, D. (2003). Reading disappearing text:
cognitive control of eye movements. Psychological
Science, 14(4), 385-388.
Shen, J., Reingold, E. M., & Pomplun, M. (2000). Distractor
ratio influences patterns of eye movements during
visual search. Perception, 29, 241-250.
Wolfe, J. M., Cave, K. R., & Franzel, S. L. (1989). Guided
search: An alternative to the feature integration
model for visual search. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
15(3), 419-433.
Zelinsky, G. J. (1996). Using eye saccades to assess the
selectivity of search movements. Vision Research,
36(14), 2177-2187.

Acknowledgments
The work reported was supported by a grants from the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research AFOSR #F49620-03-10143, as well as the Office of Naval Research ONR
#N000140310046.

998

