20-month-olds Use Social-Group Membership to Make Inductive Inferences
Megan A. Smith (msmith57@ucmerced.edu)
Rose M. Scott (rscott@ucmerced.edu)
Psychological Sciences, University of California Merced
Abstract
Previous research suggests that preschool children expect
members of social groups to share stable, inherent
characteristics (e.g., Waxman, 2013). Here we explored the
origins of these social-group based inferences by examining
whether infants generalize food preferences across members
of an arbitrary social group. Experiment 1 demonstrated that
infants expected two individuals to share food preferences
when they belonged to the same social group, but not when
they belonged to two different social groups. Experiment 2
replicated and extended these findings to social groups that
were labeled with adjectives instead of nouns. These results
suggest that by 20 months of age, infants use social-group
membership to make inductive inferences about the behavior
of group members.
Keywords: social groups; inductive inference; psychological
reasoning; social cognition

Introduction
Categorization is vital to human cognition. Category
representations provide an efficient way of organizing our
knowledge about the world, and they enable generalization
of prior knowledge to novel entities and situations (Gelman,
1988; Medin, ojalehto, Waxman, & Bang, 2015). Upon
identifying that a novel entity belongs to a familiar category
(e.g., dog), one can infer that it likely possesses common
properties of that category (e.g., it is alive, wags its tail,
etc.). Categories also aid in reasoning about kinds of people:
Adults tend to assume social categories (e.g., doctors,
women) capture fundamental, inherent similarities amongst
collections of individuals and thus use prior knowledge
about a social category to make inductive inferences about
the physical, psychological, and behavioral properties of
novel group members (e.g., Agerström, Björklund,
Carlsson, & Rooth, 2012).
The tendency to use social-group membership to make
inductive inferences about category members is well
established by the preschool years. (e.g., Bigler, Jones, &
Lobliner, 1997; Birnbaum, Deeb, Segall, Ben-Eliyahu, &
Diesendruck, 2010; Diesendruck & HaLevi, 2006; Waxman,
2013). For example, 5-year-old children expect that
members of the same social category will prefer the same
activities (Diesendruck & HaLevi, 2006) and preschoolers
expect that members of the same, but not the opposite, sex
will prefer the same toys (Martin, Eisenbud, & Rose, 1995).
When and how does this tendency to make social-group
based inferences emerge? As early as 3 months, infants
notice visual and auditory features that are associated with
social-group membership (e.g., Bar-Haim, Ziv, Lamy, &
Hodes, 2006; Howard, Henderson, Carrazza, & Woodward,
2015; Shutts, Kinzler, McKee, & Spelke, 2009). Evidence

for this comes primarily from tasks that assess whether
infants demonstrate preferences for individuals who are
similar to themselves. For example, by 3 months infants
living in primarily own-race environments prefer to attend
to own-race over other-race faces (Bar-Haim et al., 2006).
By 19 months, infants prefer to accept toys and foods
endorsed by a speaker of their native language over a
speaker of a foreign language (Kinzler, Dupoux, & Spelke,
2007; Shutts et al., 2009) and are more likely to imitate
actions produced by a native-language speaker (Howard et
al., 2015). By 11.5 months, infants also attend to food
preferences and clothing as potential markers of group
membership (Mahajan & Wynn, 2012).
There is also some evidence that infants spontaneously
categorize individuals into social groups instead of merely
detecting features correlated with group membership
(Powell & Spelke, 2013; Liberman, Kinzler, & Woodward,
2014; Liberman, Woodward, Sullivan, & Kinzler, 2016;
Rhodes, Hetherington, Brink, & Wellman, 2015). These
findings come from “third-party” tasks in which the infant is
not a member of the groups in question. For example,
Liberman et al. (2016) examined whether 14-month-old
infants expect individuals who affiliate to share food
preferences. In a violation-of-expectation task, infants were
first introduced to two actors who either affiliated with one
another by smiling and saying “Hi”, or disengaged from one
another by turning away, crossing their arms, and saying
“Hmph.” Next, Actor-2 watched as Actor-1 ate one of two
foods and emoted positively. In the test trial, Actor-2 ate the
same food and emoted negatively, actively disagreeing with
Actor-1’s preference. Infants who saw the actors affiliate
expected them to prefer the same food, and looked longer if
they disagreed. In contrast, infants did not expect actors that
had previously disengaged to share food preferences.
Together with the results of several additional conditions,
these findings suggested that infants can use social
relationships to predict and interpret the behavior of agents.
However, it remains unclear whether infants expect that
members of a social category will share stable, inherent
characteristics. This is because in prior studies, such as the
one just described, the target character always acted in the
presence of its group members. Infants’ responses may
therefore have reflected an expectation that the target
character would conform to social pressures or imitate
group members, rather than expectations about the inherent
properties and tendencies of the individual. The present
research thus asked whether infants use social group
membership to make inductive inferences about the
properties of an individual, even when that individual is
acting in the absence of other group members.

3203

To address this question, we examined whether 20month-old infants expected members of a social group to
share food preferences. Several decades of research suggest
that by this age, infants attribute preferences to agents (e.g.,
Woodward, 1998). Moreover, by 18 months infants assume
that an agent’s preference is specific to that individual
unless given indication otherwise (Egyed, Király, &
Gergely, 2013). This allowed us to test whether social-group
membership overrides this default assumption. We focused
specifically on food preferences because foods are culturally
relevant and thus likely to be shared amongst members of a
social group (Cashdan, 1998; Rozin & Siegal, 2003).
Infants were tested in a violation-of-expectation task
involving arbitrary social groups, Topids and Brinkos.
Arbitrary social groups were used in order to ensure infants
had equal amounts of experience with the social groups
being tested. The groups were identified using both shared
appearance and noun labels because previous research
suggests that infants might not form social categories based
on physical appearance alone (e.g., Powell & Spelke, 2013).
In the familiarization trials, infants saw a member of one of
the social groups (a Topid) demonstrate a preference for one
of two novel foods. In the test trial, infants saw a single
agent from either the same group (another Topid) or a
different group (a Brinko) choose between the two foods. If
infants use social group membership to make inductive
inferences about food preferences, then they should expect
members of the same social group to pick the same foods,
and should look longer if the Topid picks a different food
instead. In contrast, infants should not use the preferences of
one social group to make inferences about the preferences of
an individual from a different social group. Infants should
thus have no expectations about what the Brinko should
choose and look equally regardless of whether she chooses
the same or a different food.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants 36 healthy term infants participated (18
female; ages 18 months, 10 days to 21 months, 18 days, M =
20 months, 8 days). Another 12 infants were tested but
excluded because they were fussy (8), because of parental
interference (2), or because their test looking time was over
2.5 SD away from the mean of their condition (2). Half the
infants were randomly assigned to the same-group condition
(M = 20 months, 16 days) and half to the different-group
condition (M = 20 months, 0 days).

Figure 1: Familiarization trial 1 of the same-group
condition of Experiment 1.
Same-group familiarization trials At the start of the first
familiarization trial, three female actors sat around a table
(Figure 1). Two of the actors (Topid-A, Topid-B) wore
bright pink turtlenecks and decorated yellow visors while
the third (Brinko-A) wore a plaid shirt and a propeller hat.
All actors began the trial with their heads down. During
the 10-s initial phase of the trial, the actors looked at one
another and labeled themselves: Topid-A said “Hi, I’m a
Topid,” Topid-B said, “Hi, I’m a Topid too,” and Brinko-A
said, “Hi, I’m a Brinko.” As each actor labeled herself, she
looked back and forth between the other two actors. When
not labeling themselves, the actors looked at the speaking
actor as she spoke. After all actors had labeled themselves,
the actors looked down and paused. The infants viewed this
paused scene until the trial ended (see Apparatus and
procedure section for trial-ending criteria).
The infants then received three familiarization trials in
which Topid-A demonstrated her preference for one of two
foods. On each trial, Topid-A sat behind a table. In front of
her were two white plates (18 cm in diameter) placed 25 cm
apart. The plate on the right held purple pasta and the plate
on the left held blue cereal. During the 10-s initial phase of
the trial, Topid-A selected one of the foods
(counterbalanced across infants) and ate it while saying,
“Mmm!” She then looked down at the center of the table
between the two plates and paused until the trial ended.
Topid-A selected the same food on all three trials,
demonstrating that she preferred it to the other food.

Stimuli Stimuli consisted of digitized high-definition video
recordings of actors performing a series of actions. All
infants saw four familiarization trials and one test trial. A
separate video was played for each trial. Each trial consisted
of an initial phase followed by a final phase. The duration of
the initial phase was fixed and identical for all participants.
The duration of the final phase was infant-controlled. All
trials are described from the infants’ perspective.

3204

Figure 2: Test events shown in the same-group condition of
Experiment 1.

Same-group test trials The infants received either a samefood or different-food test trial (Figure 2). For ease of
description, the test trials are described from the perspective
of the infants who saw Topid-A choose blue cereal in the
familiarization trials.
At the start of the trial, none of the actors were present.
The plates of blue cereal and purple pasta again sat on the
table. During the 10-s initial phase of the trial, Topid-B
entered from the left, sat down, and then selected a piece of
blue cereal (same-food event) or purple pasta (different-food
event), raised it to her mouth, and ate the food. After eating
the food, she proceeded to say, “Mmm!” and smile,
displaying positive affect and indicating she enjoyed eating
the food. She then looked down at the center of the table
between the two foods and paused until the trial ended.

Figure 3: Familiarization trial 1 of the different-group
condition of Experiment 1
Different-group familiarization and test trials The
procedure for the different-group condition was identical to
that of the same-group condition with one exception: the
actor who played Topid-B in the same-group condition now
played Brinko-B throughout the experiment. In the first
familiarization trial, she wore the same costume as BrinkoA and labeled herself as a Brinko (Figure 3). In
familiarization trials 2-4, infants saw Topid-A establish her
food preference, as in the same-group condition. In the test
trial, the actor wore a Brinko costume, but her actions were
otherwise identical to those she performed in the samegroup condition. The infants in both conditions thus saw the
exact same actor in the test trial. All that differed was which
costume she wore and whether she had previously labeled
herself as a Brinko or a Topid. Any observed differences in
looking times across conditions could therefore not be due
to a preference for a particular individual.
Apparatus and procedure The infants sat on their parent’s
lap 91.5 cm in front of a large television screen (68.5 cm x
122 cm). The room was dimly lit. A camera hidden at the
base of the television (centered, 89 cm above the floor)
recorded the infant’s face during the experiment. Parents
were instructed to close their eyes or look down to avoid
biasing their infant’s responses.
The television was connected to a Macintosh computer
located to the left of the infant behind a sound-dampening

room divider. This computer controlled the presentation of
the experimental stimuli using custom software written in
Python (Peirce, 2007). The software selected the correct
version of each trial based on the infant’s condition and
presented the video in the center of the television screen
(each video measured 64 cm x 37 cm on screen). The
software also controlled the duration of each trial. An
experimenter observed the infant on a monitor and pressed a
button on the keyboard whenever the infant attended to the
video. The software separately computed looking times for
the fixed-duration and infant-controlled portions of each
trial; looking times during the infant-controlled portion of
the trial were used to determine when each trial ended. In
between trials, an attention-getter (a yellow smiley face
measuring 28 cm x 20 cm) was displayed on the screen for 4
seconds and a brief tone was played to attract the infant’s
attention back to the television screen.
At the start of the experiment, the attention-getter was
presented in the center of the television screen. When the
infant attended to the screen, the experimenter initiated the
presentation of the stimuli on the television screen. The
infants first viewed four familiarization trials appropriate for
their condition. Each familiarization trial ended when the
infant either (1) looked away for 2 consecutive seconds after
having looked for at least 4 cumulative seconds or (2)
looked for 60 cumulative seconds without looking away for
at least 2 consecutive seconds.
Finally, the infants viewed the test trial that was
appropriate for their condition; half the infants in each
condition saw the same-food trial and half saw the differentfood trial. This trial ended when the infant either (1) looked
away for .5 consecutive seconds after having looked for at
least 4 cumulative seconds or (2) looked for 30 cumulative
seconds without looking away for at least .5 consecutive
seconds.
Coding and analysis In order to present events with trial
duration contingent on the infant’s attention, online coding
was conducted by the experimenter (blind to condition and
test trial), as described above. All infants were then coded
offline from silent video by a trained coder who was naïve
to the condition and test trial that the infant received; the
looking times resulting from this coding were used in all
analyses. For each trial, the coder indicated the infant’s
direction of gaze (at the stimuli or away) for each frame of
the video. Another trained coder who was naïve to the
infant’s condition and test trial coded all sessions, and these
two coder’s agreed on the child’s direction of gaze for 96%
of video frames. Trials in which agreement was less than
90% (15/180) were resolved by a third naïve coder.
The infants were highly attentive during the initial phase
of the familiarization trials: averaged across the four
familiarization trials, the infants attended for 96% of the
initial phase. The infants were also highly attentive during
the initial phase of the test trial, attending for 97% of the
initial phase.
Preliminary analyses of the test data indicated no

3205

significant interactions of condition and event with sex or
which food Topid-A preferred (blue vs. purple), all Fs <
1.55, all ps > .22. The data were therefore collapsed across
these factors in subsequent analyses. In order to control for
baseline differences in attention, all analyses were run with
average looking time during the final phases of the
familiarization trials as a covariate.

Mean
time (s)
(s)
Mean Looking
looking time

Experiment 1

Experiment 2

*
*

Samegroup

Differentgroup

Samegroup

Differentgroup

Figure 4: Mean looking time (sec) of the infants during the
test trial of Experiments 1 and 2 as a function of condition
and event. Error bars represent standard errors, and asterisks
indicate a significant difference between events with a
condition (p < .05).

Results and Discussion
The infants’ looking times during the test trial (see Figure 4)
were analyzed using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)
with condition (same-group, different-group) and event
(same-food, different-food) as between-subjects factors.
There was a main effect of event, F(1, 31) = 14.20, p = .001,
ηp2 = .31, indicating that the infants who saw the differentfood event looked longer than those who saw the same-food
event in the test trial. However, this effect was qualified by
a significant interaction of condition and event, F(1, 31) =
9.03, p = .005, ηp2 = .23. There was no main effect of
condition, F < 1. Planned simple effect comparisons
revealed that in the same-group condition, the infants who
received the different-food event (M = 17.18, SD = 4.14)
looked reliably longer than those who received the samefood event (M = 7.94, SD = 2.29), F(1, 31) = 23.00, p <
.001, Cohen’s d = 2.76. In the different-group condition, the
infants looked about equally whether they received the
same-food event (M = 10.81, SD = 4.16) or the differentfood event (M = 12.15, SD = 5.80), F < 1.
As predicted, the infants in the same-group condition
looked reliably longer if they received the different-food
event than if they received the same-food event. This
suggests that the infants expected members of the same

social group to share food preferences, and they looked
longer if members of the same social group had different
food preferences. In contrast, the infants in the differentgroup condition looked equally regardless of whether
members of different social groups picked the same or
different foods.
However, a possible alternative explanation of these
results is that when Topid-A and Topid-B wore the same
outfit, the infants were unable to discriminate between them.
If so, then the infants in the same-group condition might
have thought that the agent in the test trial was the same
agent that they had seen in the familiarization trials and
hence looked longer at the different-food event because that
agent appeared to suddenly change food preferences. To
address this possibility, an additional group of 12 infants
were tested in an actor-discrimination condition (procedure
adapted from Buresh & Woodward, 2007). Infants first saw
the same familiarization trials as in the same-group
condition. Infants then viewed two test trials in which either
Topid-A (old-actor event) or Topid-B (new-actor event)
entered and ate the same food that Topid-A had chosen
during the familiarization trials (order of test events
counterbalanced across infants). The infants’ looking times
during the test trials were analyzed using an analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with test event (old-actor event, newactor event) as a within-subjects factor and event order (oldactor first, new-actor first) as a between-subjects factor. The
analysis yielded a main effect of event, F(1, 10) = 9.08, p =
.013, ηp2 = .48, indicating that the infants looked longer at
the new-actor test event (M = 11.44, SD = 4.58) than the
old-actor event (M = 7.34 SD = 2.24). No other effects were
significant, all Fs < 1. If the infants had not noticed the
change in actor, they would have looked equally to the newactor and old-actor events. However, the infants found the
new-actor event novel, suggesting that infants were able to
discriminate between the two actors.
Together, these findings provide additional evidence that
infants can reason about members of a group that they
themselves do not belong to (Powell & Spelke, 2013;
Liberman et al., 2016) and add to these prior findings by
demonstrating that infants expect members of social groups
to share inherent properties.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 had two goals. The primary goal was to
replicate the positive findings from the same-group
condition in Experiment 1. Our secondary goal was to
explore whether the noun labels in Experiment 1 were
necessary for children to establish social groups with
inductive potential. To investigate this question, infants
were assigned to an adjective condition that was identical to
the same-group condition of Experiment 1 except that the
actors labeled themselves with adjectives instead of nouns.
If infants require noun labels to identify social groups with
inductive potential, then when the social groups are labeled
with adjectives, infants will no longer generalize
preferences across members of a social group. If, however,

3206

infants can use adjectives to identify social groups with
inductive potential, then infants will expect members of the
same social category to pick the same foods, replicating the
results of the same-group condition of Experiment 1.

of the same social group had different preferences. In
contrast, infants had no expectation about whether members
of different social groups would share food preferences.
To investigate whether infants’ looking time patterns
were similar across experiments, infants’ looking times to
the test trial were analyzed using an ANCOVA with
Experiment (1, 2), condition (same-group, different-group),
and event (same-food, different-food) as between-subjects
factors, and infants’ average looking times during the final
phases of the familiarization trials as a covariate. Results
revealed a main effect of event, F(1, 57) = 12.33, p < .001,
ηp2 = .18. This effect was qualified by a significant
interaction of condition and event, F(1,57) = 13.93, p = <
.001, ηp2 = .20. No other effects were significant, all Fs <
2.3, ps > .14. The absence of any main effects or
interactions involving Experiment suggests that regardless
of whether the social groups were labeled with nouns or
adjectives, infants expected members of the same social
group to prefer the same foods.

Method
Participants 30 healthy term infants participated (16
female; ages 18 months, 3 days to 21 months, 29 days, M =
19 months, 16 days). Another 5 infants were tested but
excluded because they were fussy (3), or because of parental
interference (2). Eighteen infants were randomly assigned to
the same-group condition (M = 19 months, 27 days) and 12
to the different-group condition (M = 19 months, 0 day).
Stimuli, Apparatus, and Procedure The stimuli,
apparatus, and procedure were identical to Experiment 1
except that in the first familiarization trial the actors labeled
themselves with adjectives instead of nouns (e.g., “Hi! I’m
Topish.”).
Coding and analysis As in Experiment 1, all infants were
coded offline by a coder naïve to the condition and test trial
that the infant received. An additional naïve coder coded all
participants; agreement between the two coders was 97%.
Trials in which agreement was less than 90% (4/150) were
resolved by a third naïve coder
Infants were highly attentive during the initial phase of all
familiarization trials; averaged across all four trials, infants
attended for 98% of the initial phase. Infants were also
highly attentive during the initial phase of the test trial,
attending for 98% of the initial phase.
Preliminary analyses of the test data indicated no
significant interactions of condition and event with sex, or
which food Topid-A preferred (blue vs. purple), all Fs < 1.
The data were therefore collapsed across these factors in
subsequent analyses.

Results and Discussion
Infants’ looking times during the test trial were analyzed
using an ANCOVA with condition (same-group, differentgroup) and event (same-food, different-food) as betweensubjects factors, and infants’ average looking times during
the final phases of the familiarization trials as a covariate.
Results revealed a significant interaction between condition
and event F(1, 25) = 4.75, p = .039, ηp2 = .16. There were
no main effects of event or condition, both Fs < 1. Planned
simple effect comparisons revealed that in the same-group
condition, the infants who received the different-food event
(M = 19.90, SD = 8.40) looked reliably longer than those
who received the same-food event (M = 10.44, SD = 3.73),
F(1, 25) = 8.59, p = .007, d = 1.46. In the different-group
condition, the infants looked about equally whether they
received the same-food event (M = 14.54, SD = 5.43) or the
different-food event (M = 12.38, SD = 4.79), F < 1. These
results suggest that, similar to the results of Experiment 1,
infants in Experiment 2 expected members of a social group
to share food preferences and looked longer when members

General Discussion
By preschool, children expect members of a social group to
share characteristics and thus use social-group membership
to draw inductive inferences about the properties of novel
individuals. The current studies examined the origins of this
social-group based reasoning in infancy. Specifically, we
examined whether infants expect members of a social group
to share preferences. Infants were introduced to members of
two arbitrary social groups, Topids and Brinkos, and learned
that a particular Topid preferred one of two foods. Infants
later expected another Topid to prefer the same food and
looked longer if she did not. However, infants had no
expectations about whether members of different social
groups (i.e. a Topid and a Brinko) would share preferences.
Infants held similar expectations regardless of whether the
group members labeled themselves with nouns (Topid,
Brinko) or adjectives (Topish, Brinkish).
These findings expand our understanding of infants’
social-group based reasoning in several key ways. First,
these studies provide additional evidence that infants can
categorize individuals as members of a social group, even if
they themselves are not members of that group (e.g.,
Liberman et al., 2016; Powell & Spelke, 2013). Second,
these studies expand on prior work by providing the first
empirical evidence that infants as young as 20 months use
social-group membership to make inductive inferences
about the likely behavior of group members, even when
other group members are not present. In our experiments,
only one agent was present in the test trial, and that agent
did not see which food the other agent had selected during
the familiarization trials. Thus, infants’ expectations
regarding the agent’s behavior in the test trial are unlikely to
have been based on social pressures or imitation. Even
without the presence of other group members, infants
expected members of a social group to share stable, inherent
properties.
Together, the current studies begin to shed light on the

3207

circumstances under which infants treat social group
members as alike, and the age at which these expectations
emerge. Future studies should further explore the precise
nature of infants’ social-group based inferences. For
instance, we have discussed our results in terms of shared
preferences: when Topid-A selects blue cereal over purple
pasta, infants interpret this as signaling that Topids prefer
blue cereal and hence expect another Topid to share this
preference and also select blue cereal. However, perhaps
infants were instead reasoning about shared avoidance of
the food that Topid-A did not select – Topids do not eat
purple pasta – and hence expected another Topid to avoid
that food as well. Both shared preferences for and shared
avoidance of specific foods exist across cultures (i.e. some
cultural groups have a strong preferences for pork products,
whereas other groups prohibit consuming pork). Future
research should examine whether infants expect group
members to like the same foods, avoid the same foods, or
both. Additionally, future research should examine whether
infants were reasoning specifically about foods, or whether
infants could also have been reasoning about other features
of the event (i.e. reaching for a particular color). Such
studies will help clarify the characteristics that infants
expect social-group members to share.

References
Agerström, J., Björklund, F., Carlsson, R., & Rooth, D. O.
(2012). Warm and competent Hassan = cold and
incompetent Eric: A harsh equation of real-life hiring
discrimination. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 34,
359-366.
Bar-Haim, Y., Ziv, T., Lamy, D., & Hodes, R. M. (2006).
Nature
and
nurture
in
own-race
face
processing. Psychological Science, 17, 159-163.
Bigler, R. S., Jones, L. C., & Lobliner, D. B. (1997). Social
categorization and the formation of intergroup attitudes in
children. Child Development, 68, 530-543.
Birnbaum, D., Deeb, I., Segall, G., Ben‐Eliyahu, A., &
Diesendruck, G. (2010). The development of social
essentialism: The case of Israeli children’s inferences
about Jews and Arabs. Child Development, 81, 757-777.
Buresh, J. S., & Woodward, A. L. (2007). Infants track
action goals within and across agents. Cognition, 104,
287-314.
Cashdan, E. (1998). Adaptiveness of food learning and food
aversions in children. Social Science Information, 37,
613-632.
Diesendruck, G., & HaLevi, H. (2006). The role of
language, appearance, and culture in children's social
category‐based induction. Child Development, 77, 539553.
Egyed, K., Király, I., & Gergely, G. (2013). Communicating
shared knowledge in infancy. Psychological Science, 24,
1348-1353.
Gelman, S. A. (1988). The development of induction within
natural
kind
and
artifact
categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 20, 65-95.

Howard, L. H., Henderson, A. M., Carrazza, C., &
Woodward, A. L. (2015). Infants’ and young children's
imitation of linguistic in-group and out-group informants.
Child Development, 86, 259-275.
Kinzler, K.D., Dupoux, E., & Spelke, E.S. (2007). The
native language of social cognition. The Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104, 12577-12580.
Liberman, Z., Kinzler, K. D., & Woodward, A. L. (2014).
Friends or foes: Infants use shared evaluations to infer
others’ social relationships. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 143, 966-971.
Liberman, Z., Woodward, A. L., Sullivan, K. R., & Kinzler,
K. D. (2016). Early emerging system for reasoning about
the social nature of food. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(34), 9480-9485.
Mahajan, N., & Wynn, K. (2012). Origins of “us” versus
“them”:
Prelinguistic
infants
prefer
similar
others. Cognition, 124, 227-233.
Martin, C. L., Eisenbud, L., & Rose, H. (1995). Children's
gender-based reasoning about toys. Child Development,
66, 1453-1471.
Medin, D., ojalehto, b., Waxman, S., & Bang, M. (2015).
Relations: Language, epistemologies, categories and
concepts. In E. Margolis & S. Laurence (Eds.), The
Conceptual Mind: New Directions in the Study of
Concepts (pp. 349-378). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy—psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1), 8-13.
Powell, L. J., & Spelke, E. S. (2013). Preverbal infants
expect members of social groups to act alike. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, E3965-E3972.
Rhodes, M., Hetherington, C., Brink, K., & Wellman, H. M.
(2015). Infants' use of social partnerships to predict
behavior. Developmental Science, 18, 909-916.
Rozin, P., & Siegal, M. (2003). Vegemite as a marker of
national identity. Gastronomica, 3, 63-67.
Shutts, K., Kinzler, K.D., McKee, C., & Spelke, E.S.
(2009). Social information guides infants’ selection of
foods. Journal of Cognition and Development, 10, 1-17.
Waxman, S. R. (2013). Building a better bridge. In M.
Banaji & S. Gelman (Eds.), Navigating the Social World:
What Infants, Children, and Other Species can Teach Us
(pp. 292-296). Cambridge: Oxford University Press.
Woodward, A. L. (1998). Infants selectively encode the goal
object of an actor's reach. Cognition, 69, 1-34.

3208

