A Computational Model of the Role of Attention in Subitizing and Enumeration
Gordon Briggs (gordon.briggs.ctr@nrl.navy.mil)
Will Bridewell (will.bridewell@nrl.navy.mil)
Paul F. Bello (paul.bello@nrl.navy.mil)
Naval Research Laboratory
Washington, DC 20375 USA
Abstract
Recent studies in the perception of numerosity have indicated
that subitizing (the rapid and accurate enumeration of small
quantities) requires attention. We present a novel computational model of enumeration in which attention unifies distinct processes of numerosity approximation, subitizing, and
explicit counting. We demonstrate how this model accounts
for both the reaction time results from the subitizing literature
and the effects of attentional load on subitizing accuracy.
Keywords: attention; subitizing; enumeration; perception of
numerosity; counting; inattentional blindness

Introduction
The perception of numerosity is one of the core faculties underlying much of the human ability to represent, reason, and
communicate about number (Dehaene, 2011), and the precision and accuracy of this “number sense” is highly dependent
on the amount of attention devoted to it. Imagine that you are
asked to report the size of a small crowd gathered around a
performer in a public park. Glancing at the crowd might suffice to obtain a rough figure (e.g., about thirty), but obtaining
an exact number with high confidence would require looking at individual people and counting them. Converging lines
of evidence suggest that numerical cognition is supported by
two types of representations of numerosity (Feigenson, Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004). The first is an approximate representation that can be quickly perceived through estimation. The
second is a precise representation, associated with linguistic representations of number (Gelman & Butterworth, 2005)
that are usually generated through a slower process of explicitly fixating on and counting individual objects.
Yet, a simple dual-system account of numerosity judgment
is incomplete. Since the 19th century, scientists have observed that the enumeration of small quantities of objects (under five) was both rapid and accurate (Jevons, 1871). This
phenomenon is called subitizing (Kaufman, Lord, Reese, &
Volkmann, 1949). Within the subitizing range, each additional object requires only 40–100 ms more time to enumerate on average, whereas in the post-subitizing range, each additional object requires 250–350 ms to enumerate (Trick &
Pylyshyn, 1994). Previous work has proposed that subitizing is the result of a parallel and pre-attentive process (Trick
& Pylyshyn, 1994; Mandler & Shebo, 1982) that transitions
into slower, serial counting.
In contrast with this account, recent studies provide a
body of evidence demonstrating that attentional manipulations, such as attentional blink or increased attentional load,
adversely affect subitizing performance (Railo, Koivisto,

Revonsuo, & Hannula, 2008; Olivers & Watson, 2008;
Egeth, Leonard, & Palomares, 2008; Vetter, Butterworth,
& Bahrami, 2008). Therefore, subitizing has an attentional component, and an account of the processes underlying subitizing must explain both (a) why subitizing is significantly more rapid than explicit counting and (b) why it
requires attention.
We claim that numerosity judgments of all types are subject to constraints on attention and that attention flexibly integrates the results of multiple number-processing capacities.
Both classical and newer results in the subitizing literature
can be explained by combining a capacity-limited, objectbased view of attention with a capacity for approximation that
operates independently of attention. In this paper, we present
a computational model of enumeration in which attention unifies distinct processes of numerosity approximation, subitizing, and explicit counting. We begin by introducing a computational cognitive modeling system, ARCADIA (Bridewell &
Bello, 2016b), in which attention features centrally. We then
proceed to present a computational account of enumeration,
proposing a model of rapid, serial subitizing in which the numerosity of objects encoded in visual short-term memory can
be quickly established. We then demonstrate how this model
of subitizing accounts for both the reaction time and the effects of attentional load. Finally, we discuss the various processes involved in the perception of numerosity and the role
of attention in enabling and integrating them.

ARCADIA’s Architectural Features
ARCADIA provides a system in which attention is the primary organizing mechanism for perception, cognition, and
action. In this section, we provide a brief overview of the
key concepts necessary to understand ARCADIA models and
point to a more detailed introduction by Bridewell and Bello
(2016b). Each ARCADIA model consists of a set of components, which carry out all the processing for the model,
that can read from or write to accessible content, a temporary
buffer where components share their output on each cycle.
Whereas representations inside of individual components can
take arbitrary form, every component is designed to read from
and express its results in a common representation called the
interlingua. This shared language pulls together data in different formats so that they can be exchanged among components.
ARCADIA operates in discrete, cognitive cycles, each corresponding to 25 ms intervals (Bridewell & Bello, 2016a).
During each cycle, an attentional strategy selects an element

1672

out of accessible content to be the focus of attention. Some
components can respond to the focus of attention, while others operate independently of the focus. In this way, ARCADIA has natural resources for distinguishing processes that
require attention from those that do not.

that should be enumerated and mask objects that represent the
end of a trial.

Enumeration Components

Model of Enumeration
In this section, we present an ARCADIA model of numerosity judgment that includes both estimation and counting processes. The core processes within this model are illustrated
in Figure 1. We model counting such that differences in enumeration speed result from the attentional and temporal constraints necessitated by maintaining count information in different memory stores. The model proposes that a count of the
first set of seen objects can be calculated from visual shortterm memory (vSTM) and represents the subitized count. After this, an explicit, symbolic representation of the current
count is maintained that requires rehearsal via subvocalization (i.e., inner speech) supported by a phonological loop.
The connection between subvocalization and slow counting has been previously established (Dehaene, 2011), and evidence has shown that articulatory suppression adversely affects counting performance (Logie & Baddeley, 1987). Likewise, vSTM capacity-limits have been proposed as an explanation of subitizing (Railo et al., 2008), and there is evidence that vSTM load affects subitizing performance (Cutini
& Bonato, 2012).

Visual Processing
For the sake of brevity, our discussion of these components
is abridged. A more detailed walkthrough of visual processing mechanisms in ARCADIA can be found in Bridewell and
Bello (2016a).
Early Vision: At the first stage of visual processing, image
segmentation produces a set of segments, corresponding to
hypotheses about object locations that we call proto-objects
(Rensink, O’Regan, & Clark, 1997). [Step 1].
Fixation Generation: Highlighter components produce candidate fixations on either individual proto-objects or a group
of proto-objects. When a candidate fixation on a single protoobject becomes the focus of attention, an object-binding process begins [Step 2a]. If a candidate fixation for a group of
proto-objects becomes the focus of attention, an estimation
process is triggered [Step 2b].
Object Binding and Storage (vSTM): When a candidate
fixation containing a single proto-object is focused on, a (visual) feature-binding process occurs, creating an object representation containing size, shape, color, and location information. This object representation can in turn be focused
on, which updates vSTM. The ARCADIA model of vSTM
has a maximum capacity of four objects (Bridewell & Bello,
2016b).
Task Knowledge (Visual Cues): Task knowledge includes
object property information used as visual cues to identify
and distinguish between different types of task-relevant objects. This includes size and shape information about objects

Various components are responsible for subitizing and subvocal counting, estimation, and then merging these results into
a single numerosity report.
Subitized Numerosity: When vSTM is full, or a mask object is detected, or when there are no more uncounted objects,
then the number of objects to be enumerated in vSTM is returned. Note, this may be based on a subset of the objects
in vSTM. Evidence supports the notion that people are able
to selectively enumerate objects in vSTM based on various
object properties (Chesney & Haladjian, 2011).
Lexical Count: For precise numerosity representations to
be remembered, they first must be converted into a lexicalized form (e.g., “one,” “four,” “eight”). This happens when
a subitized numerosity representation is focused on [Step
3]. When a lexicalized count representation already exists
in working memory, and a new object is focused on, the next
lexicalized number in the count sequence is returned [Step 5].
The presence of lexicalized number representations triggers
subvocalization in the phonological loop.
Phonological Loop: The phonological loop is implemented
with a component that generates a series of subvocalization
actions over multiple cycles, ensuring that the number of sequential subvocalization actions corresponds to a model of
subvocalization time. Currently, the number of ARCADIA
cycles required to subvocalize a word is calculated based on
the approximation from Huss and Byrne (2003): 150 ms per
syllable and one syllable per three characters in a lexeme. For
example, “seventeen” would have three estimated syllabes for
a total subvocalization time of 450 ms.
Approximate Number System (ANS): The ANS responds
when the focus is a fixation on a group of proto-objects, by
producing a noisy number-sense representation [Step 4]. The
result is a normal distribution with a mean of ne (the number
of proto-objects in the group fixation region) and standard
deviation of w · ne , where w is the model’s Weber fraction
parameter (Halberda & Feigenson, 2008).
Numerosity Reporter: The numerosity reporter is responsible for merging both the results from the ANS and the serial
count into a single numerosity judgment. If time allows for
an explicit count to be fully generated, the explicit count is
recorded. Otherwise, an educated guess is made:
p
Guess(nc , ne , w) = nc + sample(N (ne − nc , w · (ne − nc )))
where nc denotes the number of explicitly counted objects.
This reflects the basic phenomenon that enumeration error
decreases gradually in conjunction with the number of items
able to be explicitly counted (e.g., Mandler & Shebo, 1982;
Railo et al., 2008). Whether this can be fully explained by approximation on uncounted fixation candidates or approximate
mathematical operations on partial results (e.g., Gallistel &
Gelman, 2000) is a topic for further investigation.

1673

(1)

(3)
Lexical
Count
Task
Knowledge

Subitized
Numerosity
WM

(5)

Image
Processing

(1)

(2a)
Fixation
Generation

(2b)

P
H
O
N
O
L
O
G
I
C
A
L

Object
Binding +
Storage
(vSTM)

(4)
Approx.
Number
Sense
(ANS)

(2a)

+

(2b)

vSTM

Numerosity
Reporter

(3)
(5)

L
O
O
P

(4)

“four”
“five”

(5)

6

“six”

Numerosity Reporter

Figure 1: Information flow within the ARCADIA model of enumeration. Red lines indicate information flow that requires
focus of attention.

Modeling Rapid vs. Slow Counting
In this section, we demonstrate the application of the ARCADIA numerosity perception model to a basic enumeration
task (the enumeration of one to eight objects with no effective time limit). Our goals in examining this base case are
to investigate and account for the origins of the bilinear reaction time curve found in the subitizing literature. To evaluate
the model, we generated 40 videos, each containing a randomized, irregular pattern of one to eight (non-overlapping)
circles. There were five videos for each number of circles,
and the model was run 10 times for each video.

Attentional Strategy
Attentional strategies in ARCADIA determine which element
from accessible content becomes the focus of attention on a
given cognitive cycle. The attentional strategy for the enumeration model embodies two constraints and prioritizes selection to jointly satisfy them. First, each task-relevant object
must be counted. As such, after a new candidate proto-object
is focused on, priority is given to processing that updates the
count. Second, objects must not be counted more than once.
Candidate proto-object fixations are ordered in a left-to-right
manner, and the position of the last counted object is tracked.

Results
Figure 2 provides a plot of the simulated reaction times from
the ARCADIA model of counting (25 ms per cycle) with human subject results from Trick and colleagues (1996) . The
simulated RTs from the model are consistent with human subjects from the 22 year-old group, r2 = .990, p < .001.
The model predicts that enumerating a single object requires at least 375 ms (or 15 ARCADIA cycles). The first
seven cycles are needed to generate a lexicalized representation of numerosity for report. The first cycle is needed for

image processing to occur and fixation candidates to be generated [Step 1]. The first fixation candidate is focused on in
the second cycle [Step 2a]. The third cycle is required for
object binding, and the fourth cycle is required to encode the
object representation into vSTM. The fifth cycle is required
for the subitized numerosity process to determine that there
are no more unvisited candidate fixations. Finally, the sixth
and seventh cycles are required for the subitized numerosity process to produce an object count from vSTM [Step 3]
and for this numerosity representation to be converted into
lexicalized form. The remaining eight cycles are required for
subvocalization and generation of the final numerosity report.
When vSTM is below capacity (not filled to its four item
limit) only 50 additional milliseconds are required for each
additional item to be enumerated, which is consistent with
the 40–100ms per additional item result from the subitizing
literature (Trick & Pylyshyn, 1994). During subvocalized
counting each new enumerated object necessitates updating
the last enumerated point in working memory (to keep track
of which points were counted) and an explicit subvocalization
of the updated count. This additional attentional requirement
adds roughly 250–350 ms per item (75 ms for object binding and inhibition updating and 175–275 ms for subvocalization and number report). Simulated RTs from the ARCADIA
model are more consistent with previous human studies that
the Peterson and Simon (2000) ACT-R model of subitizing
(SUBIT-R), which predicts enumerating one to two objects
as taking roughly 200 ms and over 1000 ms for four objects.

Modeling Enumeration: Attentional Effects
As a second test of the model, we replicate the results from
Railo and colleagues (2008). In that study, the authors used a
paradigm originally applied to study inattentional blindness
(Rock, Linnett, Grant, & Mack, 1992). Subjects had two

1674

Model Configuration
We generated 36 videos to serve as stimuli for our simulation
of the task environment with six videos for each number of
peripheral dots. Each video consisted of a fixation cross presented for 1500 ms followed by a 200 ms stimulus interval
with a centrally located cross and peripheral dot cluster. After the stimulus interval in each video, a mask was displayed
for 500 ms. The model was run on each video 20 times.
Additional Components Bridewell and Bello (2016a)
present a computational model of inattentional blindness applied to similar stimuli. The current stimuli use the same
paradigm, and as such many of the components from that
early model are reused.1
Attentional Strategies As in the previous enumeration
model, ARCADIA follows a left-to-right prioritization of
candidate fixations for enumeration. However, in the inattention and divided attention conditions, peripheral fixations
are inhibited until a length comparison result is encoded in
working memory (ensuring enumeration processing occurs
after the primary task is complete). After this, in the divided attention condition, group fixations are given prece1 Specifically, the previous model possessed six components used
to achieve the primary cross-dimension comparison task: the object
height reporter and object length reporter; the length comparator,
which compared the results from the object height/length reporters;
comparison recorder; and the center highlighter and orientation inhibitor, which generated a fixation on the center proto-object and
inhibition on peripheral proto-objects, respectively.

Enumeration Speed

2.4
2.2
2

Mean Reaction Time (s)

potential tasks: (1) report which line of a centrally located
cross is longer and (2) report the number of dots clustered in
a quadrant outside the central cross. Videos consisted of a series of trials in which the cross appeared, with a critical trial
in which a peripheral dot cluster appeared for the first time
(and subjects were unaware of the enumeration task).
There were three experimental conditions (for more detail
see Bridewell and Bello, 2016a). First, the inattention condition consisted of the critical trial. Subjects were asked first to
report the results from the length comparison task. After the
third, critical trial, subjects were asked whether they noticed
any dots and, if so, to report their quantity. Next, the dividedattention condition consisted of trials in which subjects were
asked to perform both tasks. Finally, the full-attention condition consisted of trials in which subjects were told to ignore
the length comparison task and focus only on enumeration. In
the inattention condition, subjects who were not inattentionally blind to the dots (∼80%) had enumeration accuracy close
to 100% for up to two dots, after which accuracy dropped to
under 25%. In the divided attention condition, enumeration
accuracy was at or near 100% for one and two dots, after
which accuracy more gradually declined. In the full attention condition, enumeration accuracy was at or near 100%
for up to three dots before beginning a decline. Because the
attentional manipulation is the result of a dual task, additional
components are necessary to allow the model to produce results for both, which we outline below.

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

22-YO Group: Trick, Enns, Brodeur (1996)
72-YO Group: Trick, Enns, Brodeur (1996)
ARCADIA Model

0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of Dots

Figure 2: Simulated RT for ARCADIA enumeration model
compared with human data from Trick and colleagues (1996).
dence over individual fixations (until an ANS result is memorized), whereas in the inattention case, group fixations are not
prioritized (reflecting lack of awareness of the dot clusters
and the time limited enumeration task). In the full attention
condition, peripheral inhibition is absent, length comparison
task elements are not prioritized, and group fixations are prioritized over individual fixations.

Results
Bridewell and Bello (2016a) analyzed focus traces generated
by ARCADIA to demonstrate the precise effect attentional
and temporal constraints had on the processing of inattentional blindness stimuli. In Figure 3, we present similar focus traces for each experimental condition in the dual task.
Because the stimulus interval for the dual task was 200 ms,
only eight ARCADIA cycles were available for completing
both tasks. The primary (length comparison) task required
four cycles to accomplish, leaving only four cycles for any
enumeration or secondary processing. The amount of enumeration processing in these four cycles (or eight in the case
of the full attention condition) influences how accurate the
numerosity judgment could be.
In the inattention condition, after the primary task is accomplished, there is time to fixate on and encode two dots
into vSTM. However, these fixations are incidental, and because the attentional strategy in the inattentional case does not
prioritize focus on any group fixations, there are no resulting
estimation results from the ANS. As such, there is no basis for
an educated guess. If there were only one or two dots, then a
correct numerosity judgment would be made. Otherwise, the
system would generate an incorrect report. In constrast, the
system generates an estimate when the attentional strategy
is configured for the divided attention condition. However,
there is time to generate and memorize the ANS estimate only
and not to begin a serial estimation process. Therefore, accuracy begins to drop after one item, which corresponds to
the increased noise associated with the ANS judgment (and
subsequent guess inaccuracy). Finally, in the full attention
condition, estimation can occur in the time that would have

1675

F = fixation
GF = group-fixation
O = object
C = length-width comparison
NS = number-sense (estimation)
M = memorize

i

Inattention

Divided Attention

Full Attention

F

= critical dot
cluster
= i-th critical dot

O

F

O

GF

NS

C

M
(C)

F

C

M
(C)

GF

NS

M
(NS)

F

O

F

O

M
(NS)

1

1

1

O
1

2

F
2

2

Enumeration Performance
1
0.9
0.8

Mean Accuracy (%)

= task-cross

O
2

...

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

...

Inattention
Divided Attention
Full Attention

0.1
Stimulus Cycle #

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

Number of Dots

Figure 3: Focus traces from ARCADIA model of Railo et al.
(2008) dual-task in different attentional conditions.

Figure 4: Mean model accuracy in different attentional conditions.

otherwise been required for the primary task. This provides
time for two dots to be fully encoded in vSTM and explicitly
enumerated. As such, performance does not begin to significantly decline until there are four dots or higher.2
The resulting performance curve can be found in Figure 4.
A Weber fraction w of 0.13 was used, which is consistent
with the range observed in normal adults (Halberda & Feigenson, 2008). Fischer’s exact tests showed that accuracy in the
full attention condition was significantly higher than in the divided attention condition for dot numbers of two (p = .002),
three (p < .001), four (p < .001), five (p < .001), and six
(p < .001). Qualitatively, this matches the previously described attentional effects from the human subjects, with exception of the two dot results. Railo and colleagues did not
find significant differences in performance for three or five
dots, but ascribed this to potential perceptual difficulties in
their stimuli. Our model may underestimate accuracy for two
dots in the absence of other sources of numerosity information (i.e., pattern recognition, which we discuss in the next
section).

wise, there would be no significant performance differences
between the divided and full attention conditions. In other
words, subitizing (at least for arbitrary, irregular patterns) is
unusually rapid, serial counting. The results also support the
notion that even enumeration processes like the ANS have an
attentional dependence, as subject performance in the divided
and full attention conditions declined more gradually than in
the inattention condition. In the inattention case, subjects attended incidentally to one or two dots, but in the absence of
an intention to enumerate, they likely did not engage in approximation. As such, performance did not gradually decline.
Attention, therefore, is a necessary feature of any unified account of numerosity perception.
The contrast between parallel and serial processes in enumeration may better be characterized by a distinction between
a weak and strong sense of attentional involvement (rather
than “pre-attentive” vs. “attentive”). Enumeration, in general, requires an intention to report on the absolute or relative
quantity of objects in a visual scene. Therefore, there is at
least the need to attend to the results of a parallel mechanism
of numerosity judgment (the weak sense). In contrast, precise
enumeration via counting requires attentional focus on each
individual object to be enumerated (the strong sense).3

Discussion
The boundary between the subitizing range and the postsubitizing range is commonly found to be four objects
(Atkinson, Campbell, & Francis, 1976). Trick and Pylyshyn
(1994) proposed that the four-object subitizing range (and
the rapid enumeration within this range) emerges out of the
limited capacity of “pre-attentive” individuation mechanisms.
This “pre-attentive” characterization of subitizing stands in
contrast to the serial, attention-bound enumeration mechanisms of explicit counting. However, in light of studies showing attentional effects within the subitizing range (e.g., Railo
et al., 2008), the pre-attentive characterization must be reevaluated.
The results from Railo and colleagues (2008) support two
key points about the role of attention in enumeration. First,
subitizing requires serial focus on individual objects. Other2 When there are three dots, only one dot goes uncounted, which
is approximated with high accuracy.

Other Subitizing Processes Regular and common patterns
of objects (e.g., such as patterns found on dice) enable rapid
and accurate numerosity beyond four objects (Mandler &
Shebo, 1982), suggesting that pattern recognition may play
a role in subitizing performance for certain spatial arrangements of objects. We view the reported model of subitizing as a complementary rather than competing account to
pattern-recognition based ones (Peterson & Simon, 2000). A
pattern-recognition component could be subsumed into the
ARCADIA model as an alternate (and attentionally prioritized) number sensor that responds to focus on groups of
proto-objects. This addition would enable us to make and
model the following prediction: regular patterns such as those
3 Our usage of the terms serial and parallel in this paper align with
this strong and weak sense of attentional dependency, respectively.

1676

presented by Mandler and Shebo (1982) would show minimal performance differences between the divided-attention
and full-attention conditions in the dual task from Railo and
colleagues (as compared to the irregular patterns used in the
original study and in this paper).
As such, we view the perception of numerosity as a potentially four-part phenomenon. Estimation provides a rapid,
parallel, but imprecise source of numerosity information,
whereas subvocal counting provides a serial, slow, but accurate enumeration procedure. Subitized counting and pattern
recognition provide both a serial and parallel mechanism, respectively, to achieve rapid and accurate enumeration.
To summarize, we have presented a novel computational
model of numerosity perception in which attention unifies
processes of subitizing, subvocal counting, and estimation.
Attention is the glue that enables and binds these separate
numerosity faculties together. The limits of attention-bound
processes such as object-binding and subvocalization determine how quickly subjects can report numerosity judgments.
Likewise, serial attentional focus to individual objects and the
need for explicit attention to estimation is necessary to account for the accuracy of enumeration in dual-task settings.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Research Council Research Associateship awards to GB, and by grants
N0001417WX00574 and N0001417WX00153 by the Office
of Naval Research. The views expressed in this paper are
solely those of the authors and should not be taken to reflect
any official policy or position of the United States Government or the Department of Defense.

References
Atkinson, J., Campbell, F. W., & Francis, M. R. (1976).
The magic number 4±0: A new look at visual numerosity judgements. Perception, 5, 327–334.
Bridewell, W., & Bello, P. F. (2016a). Inattentional blindness
in a coupled perceptual–cognitive system. In Proceedings
of the thirty-eighth annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 2573–2578). Philadelphia, USA.
Bridewell, W., & Bello, P. F. (2016b). A theory of attention
for cognitive systems. In Proceedings of the fourth annual
conference on advances in cognitive systems (pp. 1–16).
Evanston, USA.
Chesney, D. L., & Haladjian, H. H. (2011). Evidence for
a shared mechanism used in multiple-object tracking and
subitizing. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 73,
2457–2480.
Cutini, S., & Bonato, M. (2012). Subitizing and visual shortterm memory in human and non-human species: A common shared system? Frontiers in Psychology, 3, 129–133.
Dehaene, S. (2011). The number sense: How the mind creates
mathematics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Egeth, H. E., Leonard, C. J., & Palomares, M. (2008). The
role of attention in subitizing: Is the magical number 1?
Visual Cognition, 16, 463–473.

Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 307–314.
Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (2000). Non-verbal numerical cognition: From reals to integers. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 4, 59–65.
Gelman, R., & Butterworth, B. (2005). Number and language: How are they related? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
9, 6–10.
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental change
in the acuity of the “number sense”: The approximate number system in 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds and adults. Developmental Psychology, 44, 1457.
Huss, D., & Byrne, M. (2003). An ACT-R/PM model of the
articulatory loop. In Proceedings of the fifth international
conference on cognitive modeling (pp. 135–140). Boston,
USA.
Jevons, W. S. (1871). The power of numerical discrimination.
Nature, 3, 281–282.
Kaufman, E. L., Lord, M. W., Reese, T. W., & Volkmann, J.
(1949). The discrimination of visual number. The American Journal of Psychology, 62, 498–525.
Logie, R. H., & Baddeley, A. D. (1987). Cognitive processes
in counting. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 310–326.
Mandler, G., & Shebo, B. J. (1982). Subitizing: An analysis of its component processes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 111, 1–22.
Olivers, C. N., & Watson, D. G. (2008). Subitizing requires
attention. Visual Cognition, 16, 439–462.
Peterson, S. A., & Simon, T. J. (2000). Computational evidence for the subitizing phenomenon as an emergent property of the human cognitive architecture. Cognitive Science, 24, 93–122.
Railo, H., Koivisto, M., Revonsuo, A., & Hannula, M. M.
(2008). The role of attention in subitizing. Cognition, 107,
82–104.
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see
or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes in
scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368–373.
Rock, I., Linnett, C. M., Grant, P., & Mack, A. (1992). Perception without attention: Results of a new method. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 502–534.
Trick, L. M., Enns, J. T., & Brodeur, D. A. (1996). Life span
changes in visual enumeration: The number discrimination
task. Developmental Psychology, 32, 925–932.
Trick, L. M., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1994). Why are small and
large numbers enumerated differently? a limited-capacity
preattentive stage in vision. Psychological Review, 101,
80–102.
Vetter, P., Butterworth, B., & Bahrami, B. (2008). Modulating attentional load affects numerosity estimation: Evidence against a pre-attentive subitizing mechanism. PLoS
One, 3, 1–6.

1677

