A transfer advantage of learning diagrammatic representations of mathematics
Jennifer A. Kaminski (jennifer.kaminski@wright.edu)
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Wright State University
3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy, Dayton, OH 45435 USA

Abstract
This study examined learning and transfer of a simple
mathematical concept when learning a symbolic sentential
format versus learning a diagrammatic format. Undergraduate
college students learned an instantiation of a cyclic group and
were then given a test of a novel isomorphic group of the
same order followed by a test of a novel non-isomorphic
group of a higher order. The results were that both the
sentential and the diagrammatic formats led to successful
learning and transfer to the novel isomorphic group.
However, only learning from the diagrammatic representation
produced successful transfer to the non-isomorphic group.
These findings suggest that learning a diagrammatic
representation of a mathematical concept can have transfer
advantages over learning strictly sentential formats.
Keywords: Learning; Transfer; Mathematics; Diagrams.

Introduction
Mathematical concepts are often difficult for students to
acquire. Part of this difficulty may be related to the fact that
mathematics is generally expressed with abstract symbols,
such as variables. Mathematical symbols can be challenging
for students to interpret and use, leading to misconceptions
and obstacles to learning. For example, many algebra
students believe that if x is an integer, then y is the next
larger integer (Wagner, 1981, 1983). Another common
misconception is that equivalent equations with different
variables, such as 7×𝑤 + 22 = 109 and 7×𝑛 + 22 = 109,
have different solutions (Wagner, 1981, 1983).
Other evidence for the difficulty of using symbols comes
from comparing performance on purely symbolic tasks to
analogous contextualized tasks and finding an advantage for
reasoning and problem solving in the contextualized formats
(e.g. Saxe, 1988; Koedinger & Nathan, 2004; Koedinger,
Alibali, & Nathan, 2008). For example, students are
frequently more successful solving simple algebra problems
when presented as story problems than when presented as
symbolic expressions (Koedinger & Nathan, 2004;
Koedinger, et al, 2008). The advantage of contextualized
situations may be that when contexts are familiar to
students, they can derivate mathematical structure from the
context itself (Bassok, 1996, 2003). For instance, given a
situation involving 12 tulips and 3 vases, students tend to
divide 12 by 3 instead of performing another arithmetic
operation because a group of flowers is typically divided
between a number of vases. Familiar contextualization may
also facilitate learning of new concepts (e.g. Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2013).

Although contextualized representations of mathematics
may sometimes facilitate reasoning, problem solving, and
initial learning, such representations can hinder transfer of
mathematical knowledge to novel situations (Kaminski,
Sloutsky, & Heckler, 2008, 2013). When college students
learned an algebraic system through a familiar context that
facilitated initial learning, they were unable to transfer
knowledge to a novel analogous domain. However, students
who learned the same concept through a generic symbolic
format successfully transferred knowledge. Transfer failure
may be due to the fact that contextualized real-world
instantiations of mathematics communicate more
nonessential
information
than
simple
symbolic
instantiations (Kaminski et al, 2013). This nonessential
information is often salient and may divert attention from
the less salient mathematical structure, making it difficult to
recognize the mathematical structure in novel, superficially
dissimilar situations (Kaminski, et al, 2008, 2011, 2013).
However, an important question remains. Does all
extraneous information hinder transfer? Perhaps some
representations of mathematics have extraneous information
that can facilitate transfer.
One possible type of
representation is a visual display that helps communicate the
relevant global relational structure. Such displays are
diagrams, and include graphs, matrices, tables, as well as
some nonstandard representations. These visual displays
instantiate a system with minimal extraneous information,
but contain perceptual information that helps spatially
organize the elements of the system according to the
relevant relational structure. Previous research has
demonstrated that diagrams may have advantages over
sentential representations for reasoning and problem solving
(e.g. Cheng, 2002; Lakin & Simon, 1987), analogical
transfer (e.g. Gick & Holyoak , 1983; Pedone, Hummel, &
Holyoak, 2001), and non-isomorphic transfer (Novick &
Hmelo, 1994).
The advantage of an effective diagram over a sentential
representation may be increased salience of the relations
between elements and an ability to accommodate a different
number of relevant elements. Consider the example of
probability.
A sentential format would list relevant
probabilities of events 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, as 𝑃 𝐴 , 𝑃 𝐵 , 𝑃(𝐴 𝐶), etc.
A tree diagram could visually highlight the relationships
between events and could be modified to include additional
events. By doing so, diagrams may help to communicate
higher-order structure, which may allow the learner to
transfer knowledge not only to isomorphic situations (i.e.
structurally analogous situations) but also to non-isomorphic
situations of the same structural class.

2356

For pedagogical reasons, it is important to examine
conditions that promote both isomorphic and nonisomorphic transfer because application of mathematical
knowledge involves both isomorphic transfer (e.g. transfer
of solution strategies to analogous story problems) as well
as non-isomorphic transfer (e.g. solution techniques for
systems of two variables applied to systems of more than
two variables). From a theoretical perspective, it is
important to understand how both types of transfer
processes are related. Many theories of analogical transfer
posit that successful transfer requires alignment of structure
across a familiar domain and an isomorphic target domain;
this alignment places analogous elements in a one-to-one
correspondence across domains (e.g. Gentner, 1983, 1988;
Gentner & Holyoak, 1997; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989,
1997). From multiple instances, learners may form abstract
schematic representations that reflect commonalities of the
instances (Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Novick & Holyoak,
1991; Reed, 1993). These theories can account for transfer
of mathematical knowledge across isomorphs. However, it
is unclear how they can account for transfer across nonisomorphic domains in which structure cannot be aligned
across instances. If learning of diagrams allows transfer to
non-isomorphic situations, do learners align structure when
transferring to an isomorphic situation?
The goal of the present research was to examine learning
and transfer of a novel mathematical concept from a strictly
sentential symbolic representation versus a diagrammatic
representation. This study examined both isomorphic
transfer (transfer to another system with the same relevant
structure and the same number of elements) and nonisomorphic transfer (transfer to another system with the
same relevant structure but a different number of elements).
When learning the strictly sentential representation,
participants may acquire only knowledge of isolated
relations between elements and may not gain insight into the
higher-order mathematical structure. When learning the
diagrammatic representation, participants may learn more
than isolated relations between individual elements. They
may acquire a structural representation of the concept that
can be modified to include more elements than initially
learned.
As such, the diagram may help communicate
higher-order structure, and learning this diagram may
facilitate recognition of this structure in novel isomorphic
domains as well as non-isomorphic domains of the same
type of structure. Therefore, it is hypothesized that both the
sentential and diagrammatic representations will result in
successful learning and isomorphic transfer, but only the
diagrammatic representation will result in successful nonisomorphic transfer.
The concept under consideration was that of a cyclic
group (defined in the Method section). Participants learned
an instantiation of a cyclic group of order 3 (i.e. three
unique elements) with or without the inclusion of a diagram.
Participants were then tested on a novel cyclic group of
order 3 to examine isomorphic transfer. They were also
asked to match analogous elements across domains to

investigate whether there are differences in structural
alignment when learning a strictly sentential versus a
diagrammatic representation. Afterward participants were
tested on a novel cyclic group of order 4 (i.e. four unique
elements) to examine non-isomorphic transfer.

Experiment
Method
Participants Fifty-eight undergraduate students from a
large Midwestern university participated in the experiment
and received partial credit for an introductory psychology
course.
Materials and Design The experiment included three
phases: (1) training and testing in a learning domain, (2)
testing in an isomorphic transfer domain, and (3) testing in a
transfer domain of the same structure as the learning domain
but higher order. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of three conditions (Diagram, No Diagram, or
Baseline). Participants in the Diagram and No Diagram
conditions learned different instantiations of a cyclic group
of order 3 during the first phase of the experiment.
Participants in the Baseline condition proceeded directly to
phase 3, omitting phases 1 and 2. The purpose for the
Baseline condition was to measure spontaneous
performance in the non-isomorphic transfer domain, without
prior instruction on the concept. The isomorphic transfer
domain (phase 2) was used in several previous studies
(Kaminski, et al, 2008, 2013); without first learning an
isomorphic domain, participants were unable to score above
chance on this transfer domain.
The learning domain and two transfer domains were
artificially constructed instantiations of the concept of a
cyclic group. The learning domains and the first transfer
domain were of order 3 (i.e. had three unique elements), and
the second transfer domain was of order 4 (i.e. had four
unique elements). A Cyclic Group of Order n is a set of n
elements, or equivalence classes, and an associated binary
operation over which the following algebraic properties
hold: associativity, commutativity, existence of identity,
and existence of inverses. This means that if the operation
is denoted by “+”, then the following are true. The
Associative Property states that for any elements, x, y, z, of
the set, (x + y) + z = x + (y + z). The Commutative
Property states that for any elements x, y of the set, x + y =
y + x. Also, there is an element, I, in the set called the
Identity Element, such that for any element, x, x + I = x.
Finally, for any element, x, there exists an Inverse Element,
y, such that x + y = I. In addition, a cyclic group is a group
that can be generated by a single element. This concept is
equivalent to addition modulo n.
The concept of a cyclic group can be instantiated in an
unlimited number of ways. The instantiations used for both
the Diagram and No Diagram conditions involved three
arbitrary symbols,
,
, and
. Participants learned
the principles of a cyclic group instantiated as associations

2357

between the symbols. The difference between the conditions
was the presence or absence of a diagram, the procedure for
using the diagram, and the associated cover stories.
In the No Diagram condition, the instantiation was
described to participants as rules of a symbolic language in
which combinations of two or more symbols yield a
predictable resulting symbol. Statements were expressed as
symbol 1 symbol 2 à resulting symbol. Table 1 shows the
symbols, the specific rules, and examples. In the Diagram
condition, the cyclic group was described to participants as
rules for a code-breaking device that can be used to decode
sequences of symbols. The decoding device appeared as a
circle with three equally spaced positions marked. One
symbol was placed at each position. Given a sequence of
two or more symbols, the decoder could be used to
determine a resulting symbol by starting at the first symbol
and moving clockwise around the dial shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1 also presents the procedure for using the decoder,
the specific rules, and an example.
In both conditions, participants were taught the same
associations between sequences of symbols and saw the
same sentential statements, symbol 1 symbol 2 à resulting
symbol.
The rules, examples, and test questions were
identical in both conditions. Aside from different cover
stories, the only difference between the conditions was the
inclusion of the diagrammatic representation (i.e. the
decoding device) and its associated procedure in the
Diagram condition. At the end of phase 1, participants were
tested with a 24-question multiple-choice test.
The second phase of the experiment was testing of an
isomorphic transfer domain. This transfer domain was
identical for both conditions and was also a cyclic group of
order 3 involving three images of perceptually rich objects.
It was described as a children’s game where children
sequentially point to objects and “the winner” points to a
final object (see Transfer Domain 1 in Table 1).
Participants were told that the correct final object is
specified by the rules of the game (which were the rules of a
cyclic group). Furthermore, in both conditions they were
told that the rules were like those of the system they just
learned. No explicit training in the transfer domain was
given; instead, participants were shown a series of examples
from which the rules could be deduced (see operands and
results for Transfer Domain 1 in Table 1). Participants were
asked to figure out the rules of the game by using their
knowledge of the learned system. Then they were tested
with a 24-question multiple-choice test, isomorphic to the
test in the learning phase of the Diagram and No Diagram
conditions, but using the elements of the transfer domain.
Following the test, participants were asked to match
analogous elements across the learning and transfer
domains. Correct matching of elements was taken as an
indicator of correct structural alignment between the
learning and transfer domains. For cyclic groups of order 3,
there are two possible correct mappings between groups.
The identity element is unique; therefore a correct mapping
must align these two elements across domains. However,

the mapping between remaining two elements is not unique.
Therefore, a response was considered correct if (a) the
mapping was one-to-one and onto (i.e., each learning
element corresponded to a single transfer element and each
element of the transfer elements were used) and (b) the
mapping preserved the identity element. In other words, if a
participant used each of the group elements and mapped the
identity element correctly, then the response was correct.
Because the critical aspect was correctly choosing the
identity element and most participants were expected to
form mappings that were onto, 33% accuracy was used as a
conservative measure of chance for a group of participants.
The third phase of the experiment was testing of a nonisomorphic domain of the same structure as the learning
domain (i.e. a cyclic group of order 4). Participants were
given a paper and pencil ten-question multiple-choice test
(see Table 2) and told that the knowledge of the system they
learned first can help them figure out the new system. They
were also given five example statements (the operands and
results shown in Table 2) from which the complete set of
rules could be deduced.

2358

Table 1: Stimuli for the learning and isomorphic transfer
domains.
Learning Domain

Transfer Domain 1

Cyclic group of order 3

Cyclic group of order 3

(Presented as rules)

(Presented as examples)

Elements
Identity
Associations
between
elements

Operands

Result

Operands

Result

C

Example
Test
Question

Find the resulting
symbol.

If children pointed to
these object,

à ___

what object did the
winner point to?

Answer:

Answer:

,

Table 3. Mean accuracy (percent correct) on learning and
isomorphic transfer. Note: Standard deviations are presented
in parentheses. Chance performance is 37.5%

Figure 1: Diagram used in the Diagram Condition

Table 2: Stimuli for non-isomorphic transfer domain.
Transfer Domain 2
Cyclic group of order 4
Elements
Identity
Associations
between
elements

S ★ ¤ £
S
(Presented as examples)
Operands

S,★

★

S,¤

¤

★,★

¤

¤,¤

S
£

★,¤
Example
Test Question

Result

Find the resulting symbol.

S, ★, ¤,£ à ?
Answer:

¤

Procedure Participants were seen individually in a lab on
campus. Phases 1 and 2 were presented on a computer.
Participants proceeded at their own pace, with their
responses recorded by the computer. The learning phase
consisted of approximately 80 slides and required
approximately 15 minutes to complete. The transfer phase
(phase 2) consisted of 48 slides and took on average 10
minutes to complete. The second transfer phase (phase 3)
took participants approximately 8 minutes to complete. All
material in phase 3 was presented on paper.

Results
Four participants (two Diagram and two No Diagram)
were removed from the analysis because they failed to learn

Learning

Transfer

No Diagram

78.9 (14.5)

78.5 (17.8)

Diagram

85.2 (8.95)

74.5 (22.1)

the concept in phase 1; their learning scores were less than
11 and no different than the chance score of 9 (i.e. 37.5%).
Note that for the following analyses, learning scores and
isomorphic transfer scores were not normally distributed in
the Diagram condition; the distributions were negatively
skewed (SWs <.89, dfs = 18, ps < .04). In addition, nonisomorphic transfer test scores had bimodal distributions in
both conditions. Therefore, non-parametric analyses were
done to examine each of these scores.
Participants in both conditions successfully learned the
concept (see Table 3). Learning scores were above chance
in both conditions, Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test, Zs > 3.72,
ps < .001. There were no significant differences in learning
levels between conditions, Mann-Whitney U test, U = 123.5,
p = .22.
In phase 2 (i.e. testing of an isomorphic transfer domain),
participants also performed well in both conditions (see
Table 3). Scores were above a chance score of 37.5%, in
both conditions, Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test, Z s > 3.63, ps
< .001. Note that previous research demonstrated that
without initially learning an isomorphic domain,
participants were unlikely to score above chance on this
transfer task (Kaminski, et al, 2008, 2013). Therefore, it
appears that participants in both conditions successfully
transferred structural knowledge acquired in phase 1 to
answer questions about the isomorphic domain in phase 2.
No significant difference in transfer scores between the two
conditions was found, Mann-Whitney U test, U = 151.0, p =
.74.
In addition, most participants in both conditions
accurately matched analogous elements across the learning
and isomorphic transfer domains (83% in the Diagram
condition and 78% in the No Diagram condition),
suggesting that they successfully aligned analogous
structure across the two domains.
The percent of
participants in both conditions was well above chance of
33% and not different between conditions, Fisher Exact test,
ps = 1.00.
While there were no differences in performance levels
between conditions for phases 1 and 2, there were
significant differences in performance in phase 3 (i.e. testing
on a non-isomorphic domain of similar structure). Scores in
the Diagram and No Diagram conditions had bimodal
distributions; Table 4 presents the frequency of scores at
different levels. Transfer scores were higher in the Diagram
condition (M = 67.8, SD = 9.69) than in the No Diagram
condition (M = 41.1, SD = 7.79), Mann-Whitney U test, U =

2359

Table 4. Percent of participants in each condition scoring
at different levels on the non-isomorphic transfer task.
Accuracy Level
Low

Middle

High

(0-40%)

(50-70%)

(80-100%)

Baseline

61

33

6

No Diagram

61

17

22

Diagram

39

0

61

97.5, p < .04. Furthermore, scores in the Diagram condition
were higher than scores in the Baseline condition (M =
41.1%, SD = 19.1%), Mann-Whitney U test, U = 107.0, p <
.04, one-tailed. However, scores in the No Diagram condition
were not significantly different than those in the Baseline, U
= 144.5, p = .58. This finding suggests that the majority of
participants in the Diagram condition were able to transfer
knowledge of the cyclic group order 3 to the non-isomorphic
cyclic group of order 4, but the majority of participants in the
No Diagram condition were not able to do so.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to investigate transfer of
mathematical knowledge when learning a strictly sentential
representation
versus
learning
a
diagrammatic
representation. This study considered transfer to a novel
isomorphic domain as well as transfer to a novel nonisomorphic domain of the same structural class. Both
formats resulted in equally successful learning and
isomorphic transfer. However, participants who learned the
diagram were more successful at non-isomorphic transfer
than those who learned only the sentential format. These
findings suggest that although the diagram added nonessential information, this information did not hinder
learning or isomorphic transfer. Moreover, the inclusion of
this information resulted in a clear advantage for nonisomorphic transfer.
Previous research has demonstrated that learning
instantiations that include extraneous information hinder
transfer of mathematical knowledge to novel isomorphs
because the extraneous information is generally salient and
likely diverts attention from the relevant structure
(Kaminski et al, 2008, 2011, 2013). Compared to strictly
sentential representations, diagrams also communicate
nonessential information to the learner. For example, in the
present study, it is not necessary to include the diagram; the
same rules and associations were learned equally well in the
No Diagram condition. Clearly standard diagrams such as
tree diagrams, matrices, and graphs also communicate
nonessential information. However while the information
added by a diagram is nonessential, it is not necessarily
irrelevant. Effective diagrams use visual information to
spatially organize elements of a system in a way that

highlights relations and relevant structure and does not
divert attention from the structure. Such diagrams may help
to communicate global structure of the system in manner
that can be modified if necessary to incorporate a different
number of elements.
In the current study, the diagram was circular and likely
helped to communicate the cyclic nature of the group and
the fact that any element can be obtained as a result of
operations involving the other elements. It is more difficult
to recognize the cyclic nature of the relationship between
elements in the strictly sentential format. Even if learners
had constructed a schematic representation of the concept
from the sentential format without the diagram, the schema
appears to reflect only local associations between three
elements and not a more global structure that can be
modified and applied to non-isomorphic situations.
With regard to structural alignment, participants in both
conditions were equally accurate at matching analogous
elements, possibly suggesting structural alignment.
However it is not clear that this element-level matching is
necessary when learning the diagram or whether global
structure can be mapped from learned to target domains
without one-to-one correspondence of elements.
Successful non-isomorphic transfer from learning the
diagram suggests that participants have formed a more
sophisticated internal representation of a structural class of
mathematical entities, in this case cyclic groups of different
orders. Recognizing that different mathematical entities can
fall into the same structural categories is an important part
of advancing mathematical knowledge. For example,
algebra students should be able to modify techniques for
solving systems of equations of two variables to solve
systems of equations of more than two variables. Similarly,
college students should recognize that slope of a line is an
instance of derivative of a function. An effective diagram,
if available, may help illuminate structure in a way that
allows modification of the number of elements. Standard
mathematical diagrams such as matrices, graphs, networks,
and Venn Diagrams do precisely this.
At the same time, there may be limitations to the benefit
of diagrams. The inclusion of diagrams may not always
facilitate initial learning. Correct interpretation and use of
diagrams requires additional learning beyond learning
standard sentential representations. For some combinations
of concepts, diagrams, and learners, such as those
considered in this study, a diagram is easily learned.
However, this is not always the case. For example, in
middle school students, diagrams provided a benefit for
solving algebraic word problems only for older students and
high-achieving students, but not for younger students and
lower-achieving students (Booth & Koedinger, 2012). Some
concepts may be simple enough to be learned without such
additional representations. For more difficult concepts,
some learners may be unable to fully learn the diagram and
the relationship between the diagram and standard sentential
formats such as equations.

2360

It is also important to note that while a diagram is a visual
representation of the elements and relations of a system, it is
meaningless without knowledge of how to interpret it. The
diagram used in the present study involved the visual
representation in Figure 1 along with the procedure of how
to use it. The same is true for common mathematical
diagrams such as multiplication tables and Cartesian graphs.
These well known diagrams easily communicate
information to us only because we have been explicitly
taught procedures for constructing and interpreting them.
Learning diagrams in addition to standard sentential
mathematics may require additional effort. For some
learners and some diagrams, this may be challenging.
However, the benefit of well-designed diagrams is likely
worth the effort. Once learned, diagrams likely can provide
advantages for transfer to isomorphic situations and many
non-isomorphic situations.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
(#R305A140214).

References
Bassok, M. (1996). Using content to interpret structure:
Effects on analogical transfer. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 5, 54-58.
Bassok, M. (2003). Analogical transfer in problem solving.
In J. E. Davidson & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.) The
psychology of problem solving (pp. 343-369). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Booth, J. L, & Koedinger, K. R. (2012). Are diagrams
always helpful tools? Developmental and individual
differences in the effect of presentation format on student
problem solving. British Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82, 492–511
Cheng, P. C. H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for complex representational systems,
Cognitive Science, 26, 685–736.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155–170.
doi:10.1207/s15516709cog0702_3
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59, 47–59.
doi:10.2307/1130388
Gentner, D., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Reasoning and
learning by analogy. American Psychologist, 52, 32–34.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.52.1.32
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1–38.
doi:10.1016/0010-0285(83)90002-6
Herscovics, N., & Kieran, C. (1980). Constructing meaning
for the concept of equation. The Mathematics Teacher,
73(8), 572-580.

Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical mapping
by constraint satisfaction. American Psychologist, 52, 3544.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. (1997). The analogical mind.
American Psychologist, 52, 35-44.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2008).
The advantage of abstract examples in learning math.
Science, 320, 454-455.
Kaminski, J. A., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2011). Representation
and transfer of abstract mathematical concepts in
adolescence and young adulthood. In V. Reyna (Ed.) The
Adolescent Brain: Learning, Reasoning, and Decision
Making (pp. 67-93). Washington, DC: APA.
Kaminski, J. A., Sloutsky, V. M., & Heckler, A. F. (2013).
The Cost of Concreteness: The Effect of Nonessential
Information on Analogical Transfer. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 19, 14-29.
Koedinger, K. R., Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. M. (2008).
Trade-offs
between
grounded
and
abstract
representations: Evidence from algebra problem
solving. Cognitive
Science,
32(2),
366-397.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03640210701863933.
Koedinger, K. R., & Nathan, M. J. (2004). The real story
behind story problems: effects of representations on
quantitative reasoning. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
13, 129-164.
Larkin, J. H., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth then thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-100.
Novick, L. R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1991). Mathematical
problem solving by analogy. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17, 398415.
Novick, L., & Hmelo, C. E. (1994). Transferring symbolic
representations across nonisomorphic problems. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning. Memory, and
Cognition, 20, 1296-1321.
Pedone, R., Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (2001). The
use of diagrams in analogical problem solving. Memory
and Cognition, 29, 214-221.
Reed, S. K. (1993). A schema-based theory of transfer. In
D. K. Detterman & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.) Transfer on
Trial: Intelligence, Cognition, and Instruction. Norwood,
NJ: Alex Publishing.
Saxe, G. B. (1988). The mathematics of child street vendors.
Child Development, 59, 1415-1425.
Wagner, S. (1981). Conservation of equation and function
under transformations of variable. Journal for Research
in Mathematics Education, 12, 107-118.
Wagner, S. (1983). What Are These Things Called
Variables? The Mathematics Teacher, 76(7), 474-479.

2361

