Action and actor gaze mismatch effects during spoken sentence processing
Dato Abashidze (dato.abashidze@hu-berlin.de)
CITEC, Department of Linguistics, Bielefeld University, Germany
Psycholinguistics, Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany

Pia Knoeferle (pia.knoeferle@hu-berlin.de)
Psycholinguistics, Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany
Abstract
Eye tracking research on situated language comprehension has
shown that participants rely more on a recent event than on a
plausible future event during spoken sentence comprehension.
When people saw a recent action event and then they listened
to a German (NP1-Verb-Adv-NP2) past or futuric present tense
sentence, they preferentially looked at the recent event target
over another plausible target object (that might be involved
in a future action) independent of tense. This preferential inspection persisted even when future events and futuric present
sentences were much more frequent within the experiment,
or when a gaze cue biased towards the future action target.
The present experiments extend this line of research by introducing incongruence (in Experiment 1 a past tense verb mismatched the recently seen action and in Experiment 2 an actor
gaze cue mismatched the past tense sentence condition). Can
the verb-action and the gaze-sentence mismatches eliminate
the recent-event inspection preference? Would participants recall information in post-experimental memory tests better for
matches (the futuric present tense condition) than mismatches
(the past tense condition)? Results revealed inspection of the
recent event target as participants processed the verb-action
mismatch (Exp 1) and actor gaze incongruence (Exp 2). However, the gaze (but not the verb-action) incongruence eliminated the overall recent event preference in the NP2 region.
The memory tests also showed some evidence for a reversal of
the recent-event preference.
Keywords: Eye-tracking; spoken sentence comprehension; visual world paradigm; recent-event preference; eventsentence incongruence; actor gaze mismatch

Introduction
Every day people see or hear about events in the world and
effortlessly integrate language with what they see. Although
previous research has examined how people understand language referring to events, little is known about how we interpret reference to a preceding event context in relation to
language about future events. Previous research has revealed
that both visual and linguistic context can rapidly guide the
listeners’ visual attention (e.g., Chambers, Tanenhaus, Eberhard, Filip, & Carlson, 2002; Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton,
Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995) and expectations about events.
For example, cues to event tense provided by the utterance
can help comprehenders in developing expectations about future events (e.g., Altmann & Kamide, 1999; Kamide, Scheepers, & Altmann, 2003). At the same time, listeners tend
to prioritize recently inspected event depictions (Knoeferle
& Crocker, 2007), or real-world event portrayals (over expectations of future events) when both recent and future
events could, temporarily, relate to an utterance (Abashidze,
Knoeferle, Carminati, & Essig, 2011; Knoeferle, Carminati,
Abashidze, & Essig, 2011). We present two eye-tracking ex-

periments that are situated in the context of these extant findings. The present experiments examine to which extent the
priority accorded to recent (vs. future) events in interpreting
an utterance holds up when we weaken the congruence between the recent event and the unfolding utterance. To this
end, we created mismatches between the recent event context
(the action) and (the verb in) an unfolding utterance (Experiment 1) / an actor’s gaze behavior (Experiment 2).

The robustness of the recent-event preference
A number of studies have provided evidence for an attentional behaviour that has been dubbed the ‘recent event preference’ (e.g., Abashidze et al., 2011; Knoeferle & Crocker,
2007): In Experiment 2 by Abashidze et al. (2011) participants saw a person performing an action (e.g., sugaring strawberries) and then they listened to either a past tense sentence
(Der Versuchsleiter zuckerte kürzlich die Erdbeeren, ‘The experimenter recently sugared the strawberries’) or a futuric
present tense sentence (Der Versuchsleiter zuckert demnächst
die Pfannkuchen, ‘The experimenter will soon sugar the pancakes’). During the sentence they saw the person in a static
position and two objects on the table in front of him (e.g., pancakes and strawberries, i.e., Fig 1-B). After the sentence presentation a second event showed again a sugaring action (the
‘future’ action) but this time on the other object (e.g., sugaring pancakes). While participants listened to the sentence,
their eye gaze to the two potential targets (of the recently seen
action, and of a potential future action) were monitored. Results showed that participants preferentially inspected the recent event target (i.e., the strawberries) over the other plausible future event target. This happened even during the futuric present tense sentence, and they shifted gaze to the pancakes (the plausible future event target) only as it was mentioned. Follow-up studies examined this issue by increasing
the number of the future events and of futuric present tense
sentences up to 88% (Abashidze, Carminati, & Knoeferle,
2014), by having the actor gaze at the targets before their
mention (Abashidze, Knoeferle, & Carminati, 2015), and by
moving linguistic cues that could bias against the recent-event
preference to the sentence beginning (Abashidze & Chambers, 2016). Despite these strong visual and linguistic cues in
favor of the future event target, these experiments replicated
the overall recent event preference.

The impact of incongruence and gaze cues
In language processing research, many studies have employed picture-sentence incongruence and verification as a

1483

method. Experiments using this method have found that
participants are sensitive to the incongruence, so that they
responded faster to congruent than incongruent picturesentence pairs (Carpenter & Just, 1975; Underwood, Jebbett,
& Roberts, 2004). In an eye-tracking study by Knoeferle
and Crocker (2005) participants were presented with depicted
scenes and either matching or mismatching np1-verb-advnp2 sentences. The authors found an incongruence effect
in the verb and adverb regions. Participants were faster
reading these sentence regions in the congruous than incongruous condition (see also related findings on gender
stereotype effects in a picture-sentence verification task by
Rodrı́guez, Burigo, & Knoeferle, 2015). Further studies
used the sentence-picture verification procedure while participants were presented with positive and negated sentences
(Glenberg, Robertson, Jansen, & Johnson-Glenberg, 1999).
Results showed that pictures matching the presented sentences (even when the sentences were negated) elicited faster
responses than pictures mismatching the sentences. In addition, another cue that has been shown to rapidly influence
comprehension (and guide participants’ visual attention even
when it was incongruous with language) is a speaker’s gaze
(e.g., Hanna & Brennan, 2007; Kreysa & Knoeferle, 2013;
Staudte, Crocker, Heloir, & Kipp, 2014).
The present experiments relied on incongruence in verbaction relations and an actor’s gaze (to the future target) as a
way to stress-test listeners’ preference of inspecting the target of a recent action. The causes underlying the preferential
inspection of the recent event are unclear. Perhaps the preferential inspection is guided by the verb. The verb could be
linked to representations of the recently inspected action and
its location, prompting participants to shift gaze to the location of the action when they encounter the verb. If so, then
a match between the recent event and the sentence referring
to it could boost the attention towards the recent event. By
contrast, a mismatch between the visual and linguistic information could reduce the recent event preference. Alternatively, what we see is a general recency effect (i.e., participants inspect the object that is the target of the recent action,
independent of verb meaning). If this were the case, then a
mismatch between the recent action and the verb should not
interfere with the recent-event preference but a gaze cue (e.g.,
the actor shifting gaze during the verb to the future target object) might diminish a recency effect and direct the listener’s
attention to the future target object.

preferential inspection of the recent event target during the
verb. At this point people could realize that the verb does not
match the action they saw in Exp 1 and notice that the actor
shifts his gaze towards the future target from the verb onset
while the past tense sentence refers to the recent event target
in Exp 2. In both experiments the experimental trials were
incongruent in the past tense condition only. These experiments used the design from Abashidze et al. (2011, Exp 2),
presented above, with one factor, viz. tense (past vs. futuric
present). If the recent event preference is sensitive to the incongruence between the recent event and either the past tense
sentence (Exp 1) or the actor’s gaze (Exp 2), then we should
see a decrease in looks to the recent event target starting from
the verb region. Can the congruence in the futuric present
tense increase the inspections towards the future event target
and override the preferential inspection of the recent event?
The incongruence in the past tense might strengthen the congruence in the futuric present tense condition (e.g., Glenberg
et al., 1999).
After the eye-tracking session, participants took part in a
gated-memory (Exp 1) and a memory (Exp 2) test. Previous
studies reported a better recall of the future event (Abashidze
et al., 2015, Exp 1) which was not in agreement with the gaze
data; however, other findings revealed a better recall of the recent events (Abashidze et al., 2014, Exp 1 and 2), and a better
recall of the past tense sentence (Abashidze et al., 2015, Exp
2) underscoring the recent-event preference in the gaze data.
If the incongruence affects the recent-event preference and
the incongruence effects are long-lasting, then we might see
a reduced recall performance for recent compared with future
events in the memory test. Alternatively, the incongruence
does not affect the recent-event preference and / or its effects
are short-lived, in which case we might see better recall of
recent than future events.

The present experiments

The current experiments used the experimental sentences
from Abashidze et al. (2014, see Table 1). All sentences
(N=24) had the structure NP-VERB-ADV-NP and two native
German speakers recorded them. The sentences were in two
tense conditions and referred either to a recently seen event
or a plausible future event. In one condition, the verb was in
the present tense and a time adverb (demnächst, ‘soon’) indicated the futuric present tense condition (Table 1b). In the
other condition, the verb was in the simple past, and a time
adverb (kürzlich, ‘recently’) indicated the past tense condi-

Given that incongruence has been shown to influence participant’ eye-movements and their reaction times during picturesentence verification tasks, two eye-tracking studies examined to which extent incongruence could bias against the
recent-event preference. In Experiment 1, the verb of the past
(but not futuric present) tense sentences mismatched the recent action. In Experiment 2, the actor began to inspect the
future target object at verb onset in the past tense sentences.
We tested to what extent these incongruences will reduce the

Experiments 1 and 2: Methods
Participants
Thirty-two native German University students in each experiment (aged 18 to 32) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision gave informed consent and received 6 Euros each for
their participation. The study was approved by an ethics vote
(Experiment 1: Bielefeld University ethics committee, Experiment 2: DGfS).

Materials and design

1484

tion (Table 1a). The critical sentences employed only regular
German verbs in which the verb was tense ambiguous up to
but excluding the word-final phoneme which disambiguated
towards the simple past in the past tense condition. As we can
see in Table 1, the experiments used two sentences for each
tense condition. With this counterbalancing we ensured that
each object was once the target of the recent and once the target of the future event. The critical words in a sentence were
matched for spoken syllables and lemma frequency within an
item (Baayen, Piepenbrock, & Gulikers, 1995).
Experiment 1 also used the videos from Abashidze et al.
(2014) for futuric present tense sentences. These videos
(M duration =5015) showed an actor sitting at a table in front
of two objects (e.g., strawberries and pancakes, one on the
left and one on the right; both of the objects can be sweetened). We additionally recorded new videos (for the recent
events). For example, instead of sugaring strawberries, a first
video presented the actor tasting the strawberries (see Fig 1A), and the verb in the past tense sentence (translated literally:
‘The experimenter sugared recently the strawberries’) never
matched the recent action. By contrast, the futuric present
sentence always matched the future event (see Fig 1-C).
In Experiment 2, for each experimental trial, participants
saw a short video before and after hearing a sentence about
a person performing an action. For the incongruence, we
used the gaze videos from Experiment 2 by Abashidze et
al. (2015). For instance, when participants listened to a past
tense sentence they saw a video of the actor shifting his gaze
towards the future event target (i.e., pancakes) from the onset
of the verb, where it remained until the end of the sentence
(the gaze cue mismatched the referential past tense sentence).
By contrast, in the futuric present tense condition no gaze cue
was present. Participants saw a snapshot from the last frame
of the first video showing the actor in a static position looking straight ahead (i.e., see Fig 1-B). In both experiments the
incongruence biased against the recent event preference.
In addition to the experimental items we created 36 filler
sentences. To balance the incongruence across/within experiments, 12 fillers in Experiment 1 featured an incongruence
between the futuric present verb and future event. Similarly,
12 fillers in Experiment 2 showed the actor looking at the recent event target during a futuric present sentence. In both
experiments, recent and future events appeared equally often.
Thus, both experiments manipulated 1 factor: sentence
tense (past vs futuric present); in half of the trials the sentence was in the past tense and in the other half in the futuric
present tense (see Table 1 for counterbalancing). The resulting four lists used a Latin square design. Each experimental
list contained every critical item in only one condition and all
fillers. Each subject saw an individually pseudo-randomized
version of one of the four experimental lists.

Figure 1: Sequence of events of a typical experimental trial
for Experiment 1
A Video of recent action for ca. 5sec

time

B Static photo, dur=700ms
sentence dur +700ms

C Video of future action for ca. 5sec

or

1a The experimenter sugared
recently the strawberries
1b The experimenter sugars soon
the pancakes

and to listen carefully to the sentences. As in the previous
studies by Abashidze et al. (2011), on a given trial, a participant first saw a video of a person (the actor) performing
one action before the sentence (e.g., tasting strawberries for
Exp 1 and sugaring strawberries for Exp 2); then participants
saw a static photo (see Fig 1-B). 700 ms after the onset of
the static photo, a sentence was presented via the loud speakers either in (a) the past tense or (b) the futuric present tense
(see Table 1). In Experiment 1 (experimental items), the past
tense verb did not match the recent event; but the verb of the
futuric present matched the future event (shown after the sentence had ended). In Experiment 2, during the past tense sentence the actor directed his gaze towards the future event target from verb onset (the gaze cue mismatched the past tense
sentence and its NP2 referent). However, during the futuric

Table 1: Example experimental sentences. The indices (’)
indicate counterbalancing versions
Tense condition &
counterbalancing
1a past tense

1a’ past tense

1b futuric present

1b’ futuric present

Procedure
An Eyelink 1000 eye-tracker recorded participants’ eye
movements. After a successful 9-point calibration, the experiment began. Participants were asked to inspect the scene

1485

Sentences
Der Versuchsleiter zuckerte kürzlich
die Erdbeeren
‘The experimenter recently sugared
the strawberries’
Der Versuchsleiter zuckerte kürzlich
die Pfannkuchen
‘The experimenter recently sugared
the pancakes’
Der Versuchsleiter zuckert demnächst
die Pfannkuchen
‘The experimenter will soon sugar
the pancakes’
Der Versuchsleiter zuckert demnächst
die Erdbeeren
‘The experimenter will soon sugar
the strawberries’

present sentence participants saw the actor in a static position
throughout the sentence (as in Experiment 1, see Fig 1-B).
700 ms after the sentence had ended, participants saw a video
of the actor performing the second action event (e.g., sugaring pancakes, Fig 1-C, both experiments). Post-experiment,
participants completed a gated memory test in Experiment 1
and a memory test in Experiment 2 (Fig. 2). At the end, they
were debriefed. Each experiment lasted approximately 50-55
minutes.

Memory tests
Experiment 1 tested participants’ later memory of the linguistic information and Experiment 2 examined participants’ later
memory of the visual information. Experiment 1 shows an
example sentence as presented in the gated memory test in a
3-stage procedure (Fig 2, Exp 1). At the first stage, participants saw only the first noun phrase and the verb stem and had
to verbally complete the verb tense. The second stage added
the temporal adverb, and they had to recall the second noun
phrase. If they were unable to do so, they received a further
prompt at the third stage and had to select the correct referent
out of three objects. Two of these were from that sentence
trial and the third was a distractor from another filler item.

Figure 2: An example of a sequence of stages in the gated
memory test, Exp 1 and display for the memory test, Exp 2
$%&'(#+#

2 1
Exp

$%&'(#)#

!"#

$%&'(#*#

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/$0$
1+,2$34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#$0=$

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/,"$>"#:?"$0$
34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#"?$#"("8,*@$0=$$

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/$0$
1+,2$34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#$0=$

!"#$%"#&'()&*"+,"#$-.#/,$?"78A()&,$0$
34)"$"56"#+7"8,"#$9:;<#&$&<<8$0=$$

1
Exp
2

For the memory test in Experiment 2, we created two
snapshots of the first and second video of each experimental
item, i.e., showing the experimenter performing one of the
two actions (Fig 2, Exp 2). The two snapshots associated
with each item were combined into one display and shown
to participants. Two versions were created in which the
respective location of the two pictures was counterbalanced
and participants responded with a button press. Above the
picture, one of two questions appeared:
(a) Welche Aktion wurde VOR dem Satz durchgeführt?
“Which action was performed before the sentence?”
(b) Welche Aktion wurde NACH dem Satz durchgeführt?
“Which action was performed after the sentence?”

Experiments 1 and 2: Analyses and results
Eye tracking
For the eye-tracking data we divided each experimental sentence into three time regions, (the verb, the adverb and the
NP2). Each word region lasted from its onset to the onset
of the following word region and NP2 ended at sentence offset. The measure of interest was inspection of the recent and
future target objects. Because looks to one of the objects implied fewer looks to the other target objects, we computed
mean log gaze probability ratios for the recent relative to the
future target (ln (P(recent target)/P (future target))). A score
of zero indicates that both targets are inspected equally often;
a positive value means more looks to the recent event target; a
negative value means more looks go to the future event target
(see Knoeferle et al., 2011).
For the inferential analyses, we performed separate
ANOVAs on the mean log ratio averaged for each condition
(past vs. futuric present) and word region by participants and
by items respectively. The independent variable was tense,
with two levels, past and future tense. We tested the significance of the intercept overall (a positive intercept represents
a preference of inspection of the recent event target).
In Figure 3, the dotted lines indicate the past tense condition and the solid lines indicate the futuric present tense condition. As we can see, the incongruence influenced target
inspection during sentence comprehension. In Experiment
1, participants decreased their attention towards the recent
event target at the end of the verb region (i.e., following the
mismatch); however both lines (in the mismatching past and
matching futuric present tense) remain above zero, meaning
that people continued to preferentially inspect the recent (vs.
future) event target. In Experiment 2, the preferential looks
towards the recent event target lasted until the middle of the
adverb region in both tense conditions. Interestingly, despite
the incongruent gaze in the past tense condition, participants’
attention towards the recent event target persisted until sentence end but decreased as the target was mentioned.
A noticeable difference between Experiment 2 and Experiment 1 is thus that the gaze incongruence (but not the verbaction incongruence) seems to have prompted participants to
decrease their attention to the recent target object during NP2.
At the end of the NP2 (the name of the recent event target), participants inspected the recent and future event targets
equally often in the past tense condition (unlike in Experiment 1).
ANOVAs revealed a tense effect in the NP2 region in Experiment 1 and in the Adverb and NP2 regions in Experiment
2, reflecting that tense modulated the listeners’ looks to the
recent (vs. future) event target. The grand mean (i.e., the
mean of both conditions / the intercept) was positive in all regions in Experiment 1 and in the Verb and Adverb regions in
Experiment 2, which indicates an overall recent-event preference (significant intercept in all the ANOVAs by region).
Thus, Experiment 1 replicated the overall preference to look
at the recent event target in all three word regions indepen-

1486

Figure 3: Mean log gaze probability rations (ln (P(recent target)/P (future target))) by condition from verb onset for Exps
1 and 2
ln(P(recent target)/P(future target))

2

Exp 1

Recent target object
preference

1.5

1

0.5

Past
Futuric present

0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

2200

2400

2600

2800

3000

3200

-0.5

-1

-1.5

ln(P(recent target)/P(future target))

2

Exp 2

1.5

1

0.5

Past
Futuric Present

0
0
-0.5

-1

-1.5

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

2200

2400

2600

2800

3000

3200

Future target object
preference
Verb onset 0 ms

Adv onset 1148 ms

NP2 onset 2480 ms

NP2 offset 3190 ms

Time in ms

dent of tense condition, whereas Experiment 2 did not reveal
a significant intercept in the last word region (NP2), suggesting the gaze incongruence eliminated the overall recent
event preference in the NP2 region. Furthermore, a post-hoc
two-way ANOVA on the mean log gaze ratios of the NP2
region revealed a tense effect and a marginal experiment effect but no interaction. This experiment effect suggests that
the gaze incongruence not only eliminated the overall recent
event preference but also marginally decreased participants’
attention towards the recent event target in Experiment 2 compared with Experiment 1.

Memory tests
Gated memory test We calculated the percentage of correct responses by conditions. Participants correctly answered
questions from all three stages on average with 61%. They
correctly recalled 54% at stage one, which is more accurate
than at stage two with 40%. Importantly, the highest accuracy emerged at stage three (89%). Subjects recalled the futuric present sentence (match) better than the past tense sentence (mismatch). Logistic linear mixed effect (LME) analyses showed a marginal tense effect at stage 1 (p < .08) and
a fully significant tense effect at stage 2 (p < .02), indicating
higher accuracy for the futuric present than past tense sentence condition. Memory test In Experiment 2 we calculated
the percentage of correct answers in indicating the event targeted in the image. Participants correctly answered questions
on average with 61%. They were slightly more accurate in
recognizing the future (matching) events (60%) than the recent (mismatching) events (59%). The LME analyses did not
reveal any significant difference in recalling the recent versus
future events.

Discussion
Across two experiments, we examined the recent-event preference (e.g., Abashidze et al., 2014; Knoeferle et al., 2011)
and stress-tested it with two types of incongruence (verbaction and the actor’s gaze to the future target in the past tense
condition).
We had predicted that if the recent event preference were
guided by the verb, then participants’ overall preference to
inspect the recent event target should disappear when they realize that the recent action mismatched the verb in meaning
(this did not happen, Exp 1). Analyses of the data from both
eye-tracking experiments did not show an early preferential
inspection (during the verb and adverb) of the future event
target but rather corroborated participants’ preference to gaze
at the recent event target. It is possible that the effect of the
verb-action incongruence was weak since the past tense sentence, while mismatching at the verb, did mention the correct
event target. Perhaps for this reason, inspection of the recent
event target persisted during the Adverb and increased during
NP2 in the past tense sentences of Experiment 1.
Furthermore, if a recency effect underlies the recent-event
inspection preference and more generally object inspection,
then an incongruent actor’s gaze to the future target (as the
most recent cue) should have guided the listeners’ attention
to that target during the verb and adverb for the past tense
sentences, which did not happen; rather participants preferentially inspected the target of the past event i.e., in line with
the sentence tense and the recent-event preference.
While previous studies revealed an immediate gaze effect
in a congruent environment (at around 300-500 ms after its
onset, e.g., Kreysa & Knoeferle, 2013), participants in Experiment 2 fully decreased their inspection of the not-gazedat recent event target only at sentence end (i.e., after mention
of the target), thus ignoring that the actor gazed at the future
target from verb onset. This suggests a strong reliance on
the recently-seen event and a relatively slow effect of the actor’s gaze when it had to compete with the preceding action
event referenced by the verb. Although the gaze mismatch
eliminated the overall recent event preference in the NP2 region of Experiment 2, a between-experiment comparison of
the same word region did not reveal a fully significant experiment effect between Experiment 1 and 2. The two types
of incongruence hence did not differ reliably in the extent to
which they disrupted the recent event preference at sentence
end. For the Adverb region, however, between-experiment
analyses clarified that participants were more likely to inspect
the recent event target in Experiment 2 than 1, corroborating that gaze did not immediately modulate this inspection
preference. Tense effects in the Adverb and NP2 regions in
Experiment 2 (compared with only the NP2 region in Experiment 1) revealed that the gaze incongruence (and the actor’s
attention to the future event target) did boost the integration
of tense after the verb in Experiment 2 compared with 1.
The post-experiment memory tests results in Experiment 1
did not agree with the overall recent event preference in the

1487

gaze data (recall was reliably better for the futuric present
tense sentences, in conflict with the recent event inspection
preference (see also Abashidze et al., 2015)). In Experiment
2, no reliable difference in recall emerged for the recent versus future events, suggesting short-lived effects of the gaze
mismatches. The better recall of the futuric present condition
in Experiment 1 could be explained if we assume that the congruent recent events and linguistic information evoked more
in-depth processing and increased attention to the stimuli that
then also benefitted the later recall of event information.
In conclusion, the incongruences in the past tense sentences did not reduce the overall recent event preference immediately (during the verb and adverb in both experiments);
but at least actor gaze incongruence did eliminate the overall preference eventually, in the NP2 region of Experiment 2
and it boosted the tense effects. What these results suggest
is that the recent-event inspection preference it robust, and
that it is not entirely dependent upon verb reference or cue
recency. The recall accuracy in Experiment 1, by contrast,
suggests that the verb-action mismatches affected short-term
memory of the events. Gaze mismatches, by contrast, seem
to have had immediate effects in the sense that they boosted
tense effects but they neither reduced the overall inspection
preference more than verb-action mismatches at NP2, nor did
they modulate recall of the stimuli.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Center 277 (German Research Foundation, DFG). We thank Johanna Bokelmann, David Nothdurfter and Luise Henneberg for help in conducting Experiment 2.

References
Abashidze, D., Carminati, M. N., & Knoeferle, P. (2014).
How robust is the recent event preference? In Proceedings
of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 92–97). Cognitive Science Society.
Abashidze, D., & Chambers, C. G. (2016). The role of early
linguistic cues in the recent event preference. In Proceedings of the Conference on Architectures and Mechanisms
for Language Processing.
Abashidze, D., Knoeferle, P., & Carminati, M. N. (2015).
Eye-tracking situated language comprehension: Immediate
actor gaze versus recent action events. In Proceedings of
the 37th Aannual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 31–36). Cognitive Science Society.
Abashidze, D., Knoeferle, P., Carminati, M. N., & Essig, K.
(2011). The role of recent real-world versus future events
in the comprehension of referentially ambiguous sentences:
Evidence from eye tracking. In Proceedings of the EuroCogSci. New Bulgarian University Press.
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247–264.

Baayen, R., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
celex lexical database philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania. Linguistic Data Consortium.
Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (1975). Sentence comprehension: A psycholinguistic processing model of verification.
Psychological Review, 82(1), 45.
Chambers, C. G., Tanenhaus, M. K., Eberhard, K. M., Filip,
H., & Carlson, G. N. (2002). Circumscribing referential
domains during real-time language comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 47(1), 30–49.
Glenberg, A. M., Robertson, D. A., Jansen, J. L., & JohnsonGlenberg, M. C. (1999). Not propositions. Cognitive Systems Research, 1(1), 19–33.
Hanna, J. E., & Brennan, S. E. (2007). Speakers’ eye
gaze disambiguates referring expressions early during faceto-face conversation. Journal of Memory and Language,
57(4), 596–615.
Kamide, Y., Scheepers, C., & Altmann, G. T. M. (2003).
Integration of syntactic and semantic information in predictive processing: cross-linguistic evidence from German
and English. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 32, 37–
55.
Knoeferle, P., Carminati, M. N., Abashidze, D., & Essig, K.
(2011). Preferential inspection of recent real-world events
over future events: Evidence from eye tracking during spoken sentence comprehension. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. (2005). Incremental effects
of mismatch during picture-sentence integration: Evidence
from eye-tracking. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1166–1171).
Knoeferle, P., & Crocker, M. W. (2007). The influence of
recent scene events on spoken comprehension: evidence
from eye-movements. Journal of Memory and Language,
75, 519–543.
Kreysa, H., & Knoeferle, P. (2013). Reference-related
speaker gaze as a cue in online sentence processing. In
D. Kluge A. & Söffker (Ed.), Mensch Teams Systeme und
Automaten. Duisburg: DuEPublico.de.
Rodrı́guez, A., Burigo, M., & Knoeferle, P. (2015). Visual
gender cues elicit agent expectations: different mismatches
in situated language comprehension. In Proceedings of the
Euro Asian Pacific CogSci (pp. 234–239).
Staudte, M., Crocker, M. W., Heloir, A., & Kipp, M. (2014).
The influence of speaker gaze on listener comprehension:
Contrasting visual versus intentional accounts. Cognition,
133(1), 317–328.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 632–634.
Underwood, G., Jebbett, L., & Roberts, K. (2004). Inspecting
pictures for information to verify a sentence: Eye movements in general encoding and in focused search. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A, 57(1),
165–182.

1488

