Action Understanding in High-Functioning Autism: The Faux Pas Task Revisited
Joanna Korman (joanna.korman.ctr@nrl.navy.mil)
Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence
Naval Research Laboratory, 4555 Overlook Ave SW, Washington, DC 20375

Tiziana Zalla (tiziana.zalla@ens.fr)
Institut Jean Nicod-CNRS, Pavillon Jardin
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 29, rue d'Ulm, 75005, Paris, France

Bertram F. Malle (bertram_malle@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, & Psychological Sciences
Brown University, 190 Thayer St. Providence, RI 02912
Hence, autism researchers have developed more “advanced”
ToM tasks to highlight the persistence of broader theory of
mind deficits in more naturalistic settings.
Although
researchers have succeeded at demonstrating that
individuals on the autism spectrum struggle with these novel
tasks (Baron-Cohen, 1999; Zalla, Sav, Stopin, Ahade &
Leboyer, 2009), the precise mechanisms underlying these
struggles have gone largely unexplored. The present paper
explores these mechanisms by examining a modified
version of one such task.

Abstract
Individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are said to
have deficits in “theory of mind.” The present paper explores
two main accounts of the mechanisms underlying these
deficits. On one account, high-functioning adults with ASD
struggle to infer others’ mental states. On another account,
they lack an ability to integrate those mental states into a
coherent understanding of action. We tested these two
accounts by making several modifications to the Faux Pas
task—a commonly used advanced theory of mind task—
including the presentation of explicit mental state information.
Surprisingly, in contrast to previous work, individuals on the
autism spectrum exhibited both intact integration and intact
inference.

The Faux Pas Task: Revealing Deficits in
Adults with ASD

Keywords: Theory of mind; intentional action; autism spectrum
disorder; mental state inference

Autism and Theory of Mind: Belief and Action
Understanding
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental
disorder characterized by deficits in reciprocal social
interaction and communication (DSM-V, American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). In contrast to typically
developing children, autistic children are widely described
as having deficits in “Theory of Mind” (ToM), or the ability
to represent the mental states of other people. Characteristic
of these deficits have been ASD children’s early failures to
pass false belief tasks at the normative age of four years
(Baron-Cohen, 1985). But by the time they reach adulthood,
many high-functioning adults on the autism spectrum
succeed at traditional false belief tasks (Bowler, 1992).
Because ASD individuals require higher verbal ability than
typically developing adults to pass such tasks, researchers
have proposed that ASD individuals do so by using
deliberate, conscious calculation (Happé, 1995) and by
relying on specific features of language, such as
complement syntax (Lind & Bowler, 2009).
However, high-functioning autistic adults who pass
classic ToM tasks persist in their social deficits (e.g., Klin,
Jones, Schultz, & Volkmar, 2003). Therefore, such tasks
cannot be capturing these social deficits’ core features.

The “faux pas” task (Baron-Cohen, O’Riordan, & Jones,
1999; Zalla et al., 2009) presents a context in which one
character (the speaker) makes a statement that is
unintentionally offensive to the listener because the speaker
has a false belief. For example, in one story, Jane moves
into a new apartment and purchases new curtains for the
windows. When her best friend Lisa comes over, she says to
Jane, “Oh, I hope you’re going to get new curtains! These
ones are awful!” Typically developing individuals recognize
that Lisa’s comment is offensive to Jane, but when asked
why Lisa said that, infer that Lisa did not know the curtains
were picked out by Jane herself. In contrast, while
individuals with ASD can detect that something was “wrong”
or “awkward” with Lisa’s comment, they struggle to detect
that Lisa made the comment unintentionally – that she had a
false belief and made the statement out of a positive or
neutral desire (e.g., to be helpful with decorating). The
outcome is not just an unfortunate side effect of an
otherwise fulfilled intention; the complete falsity of the
agent’s belief actually precludes the fulfillment of the
speaker’s desire. Unlike controls, adults with ASD
demonstrated mixed success in detecting the character’s
false belief and positive desire. They sometimes
acknowledged that the speaker had a positive desire but
often failed to correctly infer the speaker’s belief state. And
in a small number of cases (10% of all responses), they even
incorrectly attributed a negative intention to the speaker

2451

(e.g., Lisa wants to insult Jill’s taste in décor) (Zalla et al.,
2009).

The Faux Pas Task: What Does it Measure?
What explains the struggles that high-functioning
individuals with ASD encounter on these tasks? The faux
pas task has previously been described as a more naturalistic
and more robust way than ‘false belief’ tasks of measuring
mental state understanding. But understanding the mental
states behind the kinds of actions presented in the Faux Pas
task can be broken down into several distinct subtasks,
outlined below and in Figure 1.
Conceptual integration First, achieving a holistic
understanding of the depicted complex behavior requires an
understanding of the concept of intentional action. This
concept requires the social perceiver to grasp more than just
individual mental state concepts of belief and desire: rather,
it requires understanding how these individual concepts are
integrated to support the understanding of an action as
intentional. That is, an action is performed intentionally
only if the agent had a desire for the action’s outcome and a
belief that her action would lead to (serve as a means to
achieving) that particular outcome (Malle & Knobe, 1997).
In the present example, for instance, understanding what
action was intentional (making a certain remark) and what
outcomes were unintentional (the remark offended Jane)
requires understanding both that Lisa had a false belief (that
the curtains were bought by the previous owner) and that
she wanted to be critical only of the previous owner, and
that she therefore could not have offended Jane intentionally.
Mental state inference In addition to requiring participants
to have a concept of intentional action, the faux pas task
requires another capacity: the ability to infer the specific
contents of the character’s mental states. For example, it is
not explicitly stated in the story that Lisa has a false belief
about who bought the curtains or that she wanted to be
critical of the previous owner; the social perceiver must
infer this belief and this desire from the story. Further, there
are at least two different mechanisms by which individuals
with ASD could be failing to correctly infer the characters’
mental states (see Figure 1). On the consensus account, the
faux pas task is simply an “advanced” way of revealing
enduring deficits in theory of mind – the ability to generate
the contents of specific mental states, most particularly,
belief – that are already revealed in simpler false belief tasks
earlier in life. We refer to this account as the enduring
“theory of mind” deficit account.
On an alternate account, however, individuals may
struggle on the faux pas task not because they have an
enduring deficit in generating the contents of mental states,
but because the faux pas task contains an increase in
complexity over traditional false belief tasks, thereby
disallowing the use of familiar (linguistic) compensation
strategies. For example, individuals with ASD may struggle
on the faux pas task because this task presents stories in
which it is necessary to make a rich suite of background

assumptions about the agent’s social roles and context (e.g.,
the idea that friends normally do not insult their friends’
curtains). Such a task does not allow for the use of simple
rules (such as “perception leads to knowledge”) to generate
mental state contents; it instead requires social perceivers to
draw productively on their general knowledge to produce
accurate inferences. Since individuals with ASD also have
documented deficits in this type of knowledge-based
inferential generativity (Loth, Gómez, & Happé, 2008), it is
possible that struggles on the faux pas task are due to a
general knowledge-based inference deficit, and not any
deficit in theory of mind per se.

Figure 1. Capacities required for action understanding in
the Faux Pas task.

The Present Study: Which Hypothesis Explains
Low Performance?
To distinguish between the mental state inference hypothesis
and the conceptual integration (or intentional action
understanding) hypothesis, we developed 8 novel vignettes
based on the faux pas task (Zalla et al., 2009; Baron-Cohen
at al., 1999) and created four conditions of varying
information availability. In the “No Information” condition,
we presented participants with no explicit mental state
information, as in the original Faux Pas task. In three
additional conditions, we presented them with either the
character’s belief only (Belief condition), the character’s
desire only (Desire condition), or both the character’s belief
and desire (Full Information condition). A sample story in
the Full Information formulation follows. In the “No
Information” condition, the underlined text would be
omitted:
Clara is very short and dresses plainly. One day she goes to
pick up her son James from school early for a medical
appointment. Clara enters the school and spots James’s
teacher, Mrs. Hayes. Mrs. Hayes thinks that Clara is a
student lost in the hallway. [Belief] Mrs. Hayes wants to
help [Desire]. Before Clara can ask after James’
whereabouts, Mrs. Hayes looks at Clara and says, “Have
you lost your class, honey?”
Mental State Inference vs. Conceptual Integration By
comparing stories in the three explicit mental state
information conditions with the No Information condition,
we can broadly distinguish between the inference and

2452

integration hypotheses. If adults with ASD are capable of
conceptually integrating mental state information for action
understanding but are not capable of inferring this
information, they should show improved performance in the
presence of explicit mental state information over the “No
Information” case. In contrast, if they are not capable of
integrating mental state information for intentional action
understanding, they should struggle to accurately interpret
the meaning of the agents’ actions as depicted in the stories
even when mental state information is explicitly presented
to them.

integration capacity, individuals with ASD must be able to
see how a story character’s mental states relate to her action
and its outcomes.
Most centrally, in the presence of both a belief and a
desire (Full Information condition), the ability to correctly
understand that the action is intended to be a positive one,
was caused by the story character’s false belief, and has a
negative outcome, demonstrates intact integration capacities.
In addition, the inclusion of conditions in which either a
belief or a desire alone was presented allowed us to test
integration abilities under somewhat more difficult
conditions.1

Two Mechanisms of Mental State Inference In addition to
distinguishing broadly between mental state inference and
conceptual integration, we also sought to distinguish two
possible mechanisms of mental state inference deficit: the
commonly cited theory of mind deficit and a nonspecific
general knowledge deficit. In previous versions of the Faux
Pas task, pieces of general knowledge (such as the fact that,
in the above sample story, Clara probably appears to be
younger than she really is) were not included in the story
and instead had to be inferred – in addition to mental state
information. Low performance on the task may thus have
been a result of failed general knowledge inferences, not a
result of failed ToM inferences. In the present task, we
sought to mitigate this ambiguity by explicitly providing
such background information in every condition (e.g.,
“Clara is very short and dresses plainly”) and requiring
participants to infer only the missing mental state
information (e.g., that, in light of Clara’s appearance, Mrs.
Hayes falsely believed Clara to be a student). If participants
continue to struggle to produce belief inferences in the No
Information condition in spite of these additions of
inference-ready background information, then we can be
confident that the present faux pas stories indeed measure
only mental state inference (or “theory of mind”)
capabilities, and not any additional abilities.
Conceptual Integration Apart from inference, by explicitly
presenting mental state information, we can test ASD
individuals’ abilities to integrate this information in the
service of intentional action understanding. To demonstrate
integration capacity, individuals on the autism spectrum
must go beyond understanding the fact that Lisa had a false
belief. They must also show understanding of how her false
belief is relevant to the action and its outcome: that it was
because she had a false belief that she made the remark, and
that the remark resulted in offense because of that false
belief (Lisa didn’t realize that it would lead to a negative
outcome when she said it) (Figure 2).
Similarly,
understanding that Lisa had a positive desire is not
sufficient for a full conceptual understanding of the action.
In the presence of a positive desire, individuals with ASD
must recognize that the action (utterance) still may have
caused a negative outcome, even though the desire
motivating it was a positive one. In summary, to show

Figure 2. Conceptual integration requires the social
perceiver to recognize the relevance of the story character’s
mental states to the action’s meaning and outcome.

Study
Procedure and Measures
We presented control and ASD participants with eight faux
pas stories each: two of each in each of the four mental state
information conditions (No Information, Belief only, Desire
only, Full Information). Participants also received six
control stories. Participants read each story and then
answered several forced-choice and open-ended questions
about the story (detailed below), which served both as
measures of inference and integration depending on
information condition: in the No Information condition,
measures of belief understanding, explanations for the
action, and description of the action were a measure of
inferential abilities, and in the explicit mental state
information condition, these same measures demonstrated
participants’ abilities to integrate provided mental states into
a coherent understanding of action.
Participants 20 participants with Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD), as confirmed on the ADOS-2 (Lord, Rutter,
DiLavore, Risi, Gotham, & Bishop, 2012), were recruited in
partnership with the Rhode Island Consortium for Autism
Research and Treatment (RI-CART), MAge = 31.90 years; 5
Female; mean score on Ravens Progressive Matrices, 9-item
short form intelligence test (Bilker at al., 2012), M =
45.94/60, SD = 8.0. 20 typically developing controls were
1

Each of these two single-mental state conditions involves more
specific tests of integration capacity. For example, in explicit
desire (alone) condition, the participant’s ability to produce a false
belief indicates that she can recognize the relevance of the
provided desire to an action that produces an unforeseen outcome.

2453

recruited to match the ASD group on age, gender, and
intelligence (MAge = 30.35; 6 Female; MRavens = 49.75, SD =
14.29).
Interpretation of the Utterance After reading each story,
participants were first prompted to describe the main
character’s utterance. They were instructed to “check all that
apply” among four options: “It was awkward,” “It was nice,”
“It was mean,” and “It was neutral.”
Belief Question Participants answered whether the
character who made the utterance possessed a false belief
(e.g., “Did Mrs. Hayes believe that Clara was James’s
mother?)
Explanation Question Participants then answered in a text
box the “explanation” question, which simply asked, “Look
back at what [character] said. Why did [s/he] say that?”
These open-ended responses were content coded for
explanatory quality. Two coders classified each response
into a single numbered category, 0-3. To receive a perfect
score of 3, the participant had to give an explanation that
directly stated or otherwise implied that the speaker’s action
was caused by that character’s false belief. Incorrect
responses, such as those that cited a negative intention on
the part of the speaker, received a score of “0”.

Results and Discussion
Interpretation of the Utterance To achieve a data
reduction of the 32 cells represented (4 descriptors for each
of 4 information conditions, rated by two different
participant groups), responses for each of the four variables
were first aggregated across each cell of the 2 (autism vs.
control) X 4 (mental state information) design. Values on
each variable were aggregated across participant group and
information condition, yielding one variable for each
descriptor, and entered into a principal components analysis.
Two orthogonal components were extracted. Component
loadings for each of the four variables are provided in Table
1.

four constituent variables, and ranged in value from -2 to 2.
A score close to +2 on the Unintentional component
indicated that “awkward” was checked for both stories in
that condition (and that the slight was therefore
unintentional), while a score close to -2 indicated that the
utterance in that story had instead been classified as
intentional. On the Motive component, scores closer to +2
indicated less endorsement of the “mean” descriptor and
more endorsement of the “nice” or “neutral” descriptors.
For this and subsequent measures, we performed two
main analyses. To test the inference hypothesis, we
compared the two participant groups with t tests in the No
Information condition only.
To test the integration
hypothesis, we performed ANOVAs on the four conditions
for both participant groups. Of primary interest to the
integration hypothesis were interactions between participant
group (Autism vs. Control) and information condition
(primarily, the three explicit information conditions vs. the
No Information condition).
On the Unintentional component (Figure 3), controls
recognized the utterance as “awkward” with greater
frequency in the No Information condition than did ASD
participants, t(34.72) = 2.04, p < .05. In addition, there was
an interaction between Autism and Information condition,
but it did not reach significance, F(1, 38) = 3.14, p = .08.
On the Motive component (Figure 4), there were no group
differences in the No Information condition, nor were there
significant main effects or interactions of information
condition with participant group.

Table 1. Principal components analysis of four utterance
interpretation options results in two components
Descriptor
Awkward
Nice
Mean
Neutral

Unintentional
0.65
-0.48
-0.32
-0.08

Motive
0.33
0.35
-0.61
0.45

The two components can be best interpreted as capturing (1)
whether the utterance was classified as awkwardly
unintentional (awkward) vs. intentional (nice or mean) and
(2) whether the motive behind the action was classified as
nice (or neutral) vs. mean. Component scores for each
participant were computed from linear combinations of the

Figure 3: Unintentional Component
Implications for Inference Hypothesis Compared to control
participants, ASD participants were less capable of
recognizing that the speaker’s utterance could be described
as awkward. However, the two groups did not differ in any
of the explicit mental state information conditions with
respect to this recognition, suggesting that the noinformation difference may be spurious or not due to a
deficit on the part of ASD participants. When assessing the
possible motives of the speaker, ASD participants exhibited
no difficulties identifying the positive desire (lack of ‘mean’
intent) underlying the speaker’s utterance.

2454

Implications for Integration Hypothesis In spite of some
differences with controls in the No Information condition,
ASD individuals performed similarly to controls in the
presence of explicit mental state information, identifying the
utterance’s awkwardness with similar frequency and the
story character’s positive desire with similar frequency.

Implications for Inference Hypothesis In our No Information
condition, all general knowledge was made explicit, and
ASD participants performed as well as controls. By contrast,
in comparable no-information conditions, previous Faux pas
studies did not make such background knowledge available
and documented performance decrements for ASD
participants. This pattern of results supports the hypothesis
that previously documented inferential deficits may not be
due to deficits in “theory of mind” per se, but may instead
have been caused by the inability to draw inferences from
general knowledge.
Implications for Integration Hypothesis Neither participants
with ASD nor control participants performed at ceiling in
the No Information condition, leaving room for
improvement (and a demonstration of integration capacities)
in the presence of explicit mental state information.
Although there was a main effect of information condition,
there was no difference between ASD and control
participants. Thus, ASD participants appear to be as capable
as control participants at integrating explicitly presented
belief and desire information.

Figure 4: Motive Component
Belief Question Correct responses to the belief question
were aggregated across the two stories comprising each of
the four information conditions, yielding a score of 0 to 2
per condition (see Figure 5).

Explanation Question Once more, there was no difference
between ASD and control participants in the No Information
condition, Welch’s t(36.52) = .40, p = .70. We also found no
main effects or interactions involving the comparison
between ASD and control participants across all four
conditions (all ps > 0.36). There were, however, significant
main effects of information condition, with all participants
providing higher-quality explanations when receiving
explicit information about both mental states than in the No
Information condition, F(38) = 3.71, p = .06, and higherquality explanations when receiving explicit information
about both a belief and desire than when receiving
information about either one of these mental states alone,
F(38) = 4.44, p < .05.

Figure 5: Belief Question
To examine the inference hypothesis, we compared
performance of ASD participants (M = 1.65 stories correct)
and Control participants (M = 1.80) in the No Information
condition. There was no difference in performance, Welch’s
t(36.88) = 1.05, p = 0.30.
To test the integration hypothesis, we examined whether
adding mental state information affected the accuracy of
correctly recognizing the belief, again performing a 4
(Information condition) X 2 (Autism vs. Control) mixed
ANOVA. There was a main effect of information condition:
Participants as a whole exhibited improved performance in
the presence of explicit mental state information (in the
three explicit mental state information conditions) as
compared to the No Information condition, F(1, 38) = 4.36,
p = .04. No interactions between Autism and Information
conditions reached significance.

Implications ASD and control participants provided equally
accurate explanations in all information conditions,
including the most challenging one (where no explicit belief
or desire information was provided). Moreover, like control
participants, ASD participants improved their explanation
quality in response to explicit mental state information,
suggesting in particular that integration capacities held by
control participants are also held by those with ASD. Thus,
we may conclude once more that previously documented
deficits for ASD individuals – in both inference and
integration – may have been caused by other aspects of the
task, such as the requirement of general knowledge
recruitment.

General Discussion
We considered two main hypotheses that could explain
deficits for individuals with ASD in demanding theory of
mind tasks such as the Faux Pas task. One suggests that
individuals with autism struggle to generate the contents of
mental states (inference), while the other suggests that they

2455

struggle to integrate mental state information to reach a full
understanding of action (integration). Both hypotheses fall
short of explaining our data.

Mental State Inference Deficits?
Contrary to previous studies of the Faux Pas task (Zalla et al.
2009, Baron Cohen et al., 1999) as well as other similar
advanced theory of mind tasks (e.g., Happé, 1994), ASD
participants in our study performed comparably to control
participants, even when receiving no explicit mental state
information. This performance spanned a number of
measures, including correct inferences of the story
character’s false belief and positive desire. It appears that, in
the presence of enriched background information to afford
inferences from general knowledge, ASD participants more
capably inferred mental states than they did in previous
studies in which stimuli lacked such enriched background
information. Although the present study did not directly
compare background-enriched stories with unenriched
stories, this finding is suggestive: previously documented
deficits on advanced theory of mind tasks may depend on a
suite of inferential capacities, of which mental state
inference, per se, or “theory of mind,” is only one, and
perhaps a less influential one.

Integration Deficits?
In addition to demonstrating intact inferential abilities in the
presence of enriched background information, ASD
participants in our study also demonstrated intact abilities to
integrate provided mental state information into a coherent
understanding of intentional action. Even in response to a
challenging, open-ended question about the character’s
utterance– “Why did he say that?” –participants with ASD
accurately linked mental states with action as well as
controls did.
With the addition of (1) enriched background information
and (2) explicit mental state information, high-functioning
adults with ASD exhibited a remarkable ability to
comprehend the meaning behind a story character’s
complex intentional action. This finding is notable in light
of previous work suggesting that individuals with ASD
struggle to reach the requisite mental state inferences (Baron
Cohen et al. 1985, Happé 1994), and to integrate a
character’s mental states with her action’s outcome to reach
a full comprehension of that action (Moran, Young, Saxe,
Lee, O’Young, Mavros, & Gabrieli, 2011).

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Corey Cusimano, Baxter DiFabrizio, Stuti Thapa
Magar, Lindsay Oberman, Stephen Sheinkopf, and all the
staff of the Rhode Island Consortium for Autism Research
and Treatment (RICART).

References

Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M., & Frith, U. (1985). Does
the autistic child have a “theory of mind”? Cognition,
21(1),
Baron-Cohen, S., O’Riordan, M., & Jones, R. (1999). A new
test of social sensitivity: Detection of faux pas in
normal children and children with Asperger syndrome.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 29,
407-418.
Bilker, W. B., Hansen, J. A., Brensinger, C. M., Richard, J.,
Gur, R. E., & Gur, R. C. (2012). Development of
abbreviated nine-item forms of the Raven’s standard
progressive matrices test. Assessment, 19(3), 354–369.
Bowler, D. M. (1992). “Theory of Mind” in Asperger’s
Syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,
and Allied Disciplines, 33(5), 877–893.
Happé, F.G.E. (1994). An advanced test of theory of mind:
Understanding story characters' thoughts and feelings
by able autistic, mentally handicapped and normal
children and adults. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 24, 1-24.
Happé, F. G. E. (1995). The role of age and verbal ability in
the theory of mind task performance of subjects with
autism. Child Development, 66(3), 843–855.
Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R., & Volkmar, F. (2003). The
enactive mind, or from actions to cognition: lessons
from autism. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences,
358(1430), 345–360.
Lind, S. E. & Bowler, D. M. (2009). Language and theory of
mind in autism spectrum disorder: The relationship
between complement syntax and false belief task
performance. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 39(6), pp. 929-937.
Lord, C., Rutter, M., DiLavore, P.C., Risi, S., Gotham, K., &
Bishop, S. (2012). Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule, Second Edition (ADOS-2) Manual (Part I):
Modules 1–4. Torrance, CA: Western Psychological
Services.
Loth, E., Gómez, J. C., & Happé, F. (2008). Event schemas
in autism spectrum disorders: the role of theory of mind
and weak central coherence. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 38(3), 449–463.
Malle, B. F., & Knobe, J. (1997). The Folk Concept of
Intentionality. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 33(2), 101–121.
Moran, J. M., Young, L. L., Saxe, R., Lee, S. M., O’Young,
D., Mavros, P. L., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2011). Impaired
theory of mind for moral judgment in high-functioning
autism. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(7), 2688–2692.
Zalla, T., Sav, A.-M., Stopin, A., Ahade, S., & Leboyer, M.
(2009). Faux pas detection and intentional action in
Asperger Syndrome. A replication on a French sample.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 39(2),
373–382.

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual (5th ed). Washington, D.C.

2456

