Adapting to a listener with incomplete lexical semantics
Sadhwi Srinivas (sadhwi@gmail.com)
Cognitive Science Department, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Barbara Landau (landau@jhu.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Colin Wilson (colin.wilson@jhu.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
Abstract
Speakers involved in a communicative exchange construct an
internal model of their addressees and draw upon the model to
craft utterances that are likely to be understood. In many realworld situations (e.g., when talking to a non-expert, non-native
speaker, or a child), this process of audience design involves
identifying gaps in the lexical-semantic knowledge of the
listener and selecting alternative expressions. We examine
speaker adaptation to a listener with incomplete lexical
knowledge in the spatial domain, specifically a failure to
comprehend the basic terms left/right. Experimental and
modeling results provide evidence of rapid adaptation that is
modulated by the availability of alternative spatial terms. We
consider how our approach relates to recent work in
computational pragmatics, and suggest that adaptation to the
lexical knowledge of the addressee is an important but
relatively understudied topic for future research.
Keywords: language adaptation; audience design; spatial
language; lexical semantics; computational pragmatics

Introduction
Speakers choose referring expressions on the basis of several
factors, including their beliefs about the linguistic and
conceptual knowledge of addressees (e.g., Pate & Goldwater,
2015; Brennan & Clark, 1996). For example, speakers tend
to avoid or supplement proper names that, in their judgment,
listeners do not know (e.g., Isaacs & Clark, 1987; Fussell &
Krauss, 1992; Wu & Keysar, 2007; Kutlak et al., 2016). This
is part of a more general pattern of audience design (Clark &
Murphy, 1982) in which speakers construct internal models
of specific addresses and use these models to facilitate
communication. Another example of audience design is the
formation of partner-specific conceptual pacts during a
conversation. Speakers also show some ability to adapt their
descriptions to a listener’s viewing perspective when it is
different from their own, presumably making it easier for the
listener to identify intended referents in a scene (e.g.,
Schober, 2009). These adjustments to the needs of particular
listeners in specific circumstances are analogous to the wellknown Lombard effect, in which people tend to talk louder in
the presence of ambient noise (Lombard, 1911), suggesting
that audience design is a fundamental phenomenon that
occurs at many linguistic and conceptual levels.

Empirical and computational work on audience design has
largely adopted the assumption that discourse participants
share knowledge of basic vocabulary items. For example, the
Rational Speech Acts framework (Frank & Goodman, 2012)
assumes that speakers and addressees have the same literal
meanings for lexical expressions, and derives pragmatic
usage from literal semantics through iterated probabilistic
inference. However, the assumption of common word
knowledge is not completely valid for many real-world
scenarios. In the same way that experts addressing novices
should avoid overly technical jargon, speech tailored to nonnative or child listeners must regularly work around basic
lexical-semantic gaps.
Recently, Ferrara et al. (2016) closely investigated the
linguistic choices that parents made when communicating
spatial information to their 3-4yo. children. The language
used by parents to describe the location of items in simple
spatial arrays differed significantly from that of adults
addressing other adults in the same task. Most notably,
parents avoided the horizontal axis terms left/right—terms
that are known to be acquired relatively late by children in
general, and that were not reliably understood by many of the
particular children in the study—while they used many other
spatial terms (e.g., the vertical axis terms above/below) in
essentially the same way that adults do when taking to one
another. These findings support the claim that parents have
well-tuned internal models of their children’s lexicalsemantic knowledge and can design utterances for them by
circumventing their lexical gaps.
In this study, we investigated whether adaptation to gaps in
spatial language would occur in a minimal communicative
setting. The parents in Ferrara et al.’s study had developed
internal models of their children through extensive
interaction with them. Here we sought to determine whether
calibration to the addressee’s lexical knowledge could
develop much more rapidly, perhaps after only a few
instances of communicative breakdown. Furthermore,
parents presumably have access to a variety of top-down and
bottom-up cues to gaps in children’s spatial lexicons (e.g.,
general experience with child spatial language, instances
where children explicitly ask for clarification of spatial
descriptions). Here we sharply restricted the interaction

3235

among interlocutors, providing only ambiguous, bottom-up
cues to the addressee’s knowledge of the spatial lexicon.
Following Ferrara et al. (2016), our study took the form of
a referential communication task. Participants provided
spatial descriptions to a listener who had either full
knowledge of lexical-semantics or full knowledge except for
a gap in the horizontal terms left/right. This is the same gap
observed in young children, and indeed comprehension of
left/right can be demanding even for typical adults (Sholl &
Egeth, 1981). If audience design is operative in this setting,
participants should more often supplement or employ
alternatives to the basic horizontal terms when addressing the
listener who does not accurately comprehend them.
We further investigated whether and how accommodation
of the listener’s lexical gap was modulated by the stimulus
array. For example, in describing the location of the object
marked by the arrow in Fig 1A, alternatives other than
left/right may not be obvious to the speaker. Contrast this
with the arrangements of Fig 1B and 1C, in each of which a
non-horizontal spatial relation is available to identify the
target (i.e., inside the box, below a triangle). For
arrangements such as Fig 1C, speakers might even prefer to
refer to the vertical axis independently of any particular
addressee (e.g., Logan, 1995; Ferrara et al., 2016).

speaker described the spatial location of a target object in a
visual array (see examples in Fig 1). The listener responded
by selecting one of the objects, and the participant was then
shown the listener’s choice alongside the original display.
Apart from this minimal communicative interaction,
participants were provided no information about or feedback
from the listener.
There were two conditions that differed by listener type.
In the Full knowledge condition, the listener comprehended
all English spatial expressions without error. In the Partial
knowledge condition, the listener was identical except that
comprehension of left/right and minor variants of those terms
was at chance. We varied the spatial arrangements across the
stimulus arrays to elicit a range of linguistic expressions and,
most importantly, to provide varying opportunities for
adaptation in the Partial condition. We were further interested
in whether adaptation would involve primarily avoiding
left/right or supplementing those terms with other spatial
information, as well as in the coarse-grained time course of
adaptation. Rapid avoidance of the lexical-semantic gap
would provide evidence of an adaptation mechanism that is
quite sensitive to bottom-up feedback and that inhibits
expressions that have resulted in communication errors.

Participants
This experiment was part of a series conducted online using
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service. There were 48
participants (Mage = 33.9 years, 25 males), 24 in each
condition (Full vs. Partial knowledge). Individuals received a
small monetary compensation for participating.

Materials
Figure 1: Examples of array types used in the
spatial communication task
Finally, we were interested in whether the adaptation found
experimentally could be accounted for with a simple
inhibitory mechanism: one that penalizes the use of terms that
have resulted in communication errors, leaving unchanged all
other aspects of the speaker’s system for generating referring
expressions. We formalize this mechanism in a high-level
computational model of referential communication, show
that it matches the detailed pattern of spatial language with
minimal free parameters, and discuss how it relates to and
extends previous work in computational pragmatics. The
detailed empirical findings presented here contribute to the
understanding of the form and limitations of lexical audience
design, and our model delineates a way by which previous
computational models may be augmented to account for
lexical differences among interlocutors.

Spatial communication experiment
Our experiment involved communication between speakers
(the participants) and a simulated listener. In each trial, the

The stimuli consisted of 32 spatial arrays similar to those of
Ferrara et al. (2016). Target objects, marked by red arrows in
the display, could not be uniquely identified by intrinsic
properties such as shape and color. For example, yellow circle
would not be a uniquely identifying description of the target
in Fig 1C, but yellow circle on the bottom or yellow circle
below a triangle would both be sufficient.
In all stimuli, the target could be identified by its position
on the horizontal axis (e.g., yellow circle on the right). This
maximized the potential contrast between participants in the
Full condition, who could in principle describe all targets
with left/right, and those in the Partial condition, who would
have to employ other terms to communicate successfully.
The arrays varied in the alternative spatial descriptions that
they afforded. In the Horiz type (10 items), the target could
be identified only by its relative position on the horizontal
axis (Fig 1A). Under the assumption that left/right are
generally the most accessible or preferred terms for
horizontal position, these arrays would be expected to
provide the greatest challenge for adaptation.
All other array types contained alternative spatial relations
that could be used in identifying descriptions: proximity of
the target to another object; containment of the target within
a bounding box (see Fig 1B); internal vertical or horizontal
orientation of the target (e.g., a pencil pointing up or down);

3236

or a vertical relation between the target and another object.
We grouped the proximity, containment, and vertical/
horizontal orientation arrays into a single type called
Horiz+Other (18 total items). For such arrays, adaptation
could involve using horizontal terms other than left/right or,
perhaps more simply, reference to the other spatial relation
(e.g., circle in the box instead of circle on the left).
The Horiz+Vert array type (4 items; see Fig 1C) was
separated from the others on the basis of extensive evidence
that reference to the vertical axis is both linguistically and
non-linguistically privileged relative to the horizontal axis
(e.g., Logan, 1995; Carlson-Radvansky & Logan, 1997;
Fitneva & Song, 2009). Speakers could prefer vertical terms
for these arrays, not because of any specific beliefs about the
experimental addressee, but as a reflection of this general
privilege (as was observed in Ferrara et al., 2016). Adaptation
would then be difficult to measure for these arrays, as
left/right may be independently dispreferred by participants
in both the Full and Partial knowledge conditions.

report below the vast majority of responses were felicitous
and identifying. In the rare instance that a description
contained no spatial term, the Full knowledge listener
selected the target or the distractor with equal probability.
The simulated listener in the Partial knowledge condition
behaved identically except when the description contained
left/right (or variants such as leftmost/rightmost) without any
other spatial terms. For such responses, the listener randomly
selected the target or matched distractor with equal
probability (i.e., the listener responded as if no spatial term
was present in the description).
Three practice trials at the beginning of the experiment
emphasized the goal of providing complete, unambiguous
descriptions (e.g., yellow circle at the bottom instead of
simply circle or yellow circle for Fig 1C). Each stimulus array
was repeated 4 times over the course of the experiment,
resulting in 128 trials per participant. The order in which the
arrays appeared was pseudo-randomized by participant, with
the constraint that there were an equal number of Horiz trials
in each half of the experiment (20 per half). This ensured that
a participant who consistently used left/right for this array
type would receive, on average, at least ten instances of
negative feedback during the first half of the experiment.

Results

Figure 2: Proportion of responses using left/right only (i.e.,
without any additional spatial expression) produced by
participants and predicted by the adaptation model.
Errors bars show standard error of the mean.

Procedure
In each trial, the participant was presented with a single
spatial array and asked to describe the target so that it could
be uniquely identified by the listener. Participant descriptions
were typed into a text box; no restrictions were placed on the
terms used (i.e., responses were completely free). Following
a brief delay, participants were provided feedback about the
object selected by the listener (marked with a blue arrow in a
copy of the array): this was either the target or the distractor
object of the same shape and color.
In the Full knowledge condition, the simulated listener
selected the target whenever the description contained at least
one word from a large list of spatial expressions (determined
through pilot testing). While participants in this condition
could in principle have communicated “successfully” by
using spatial terms that did not pick out the target, as we

Descriptions tended to be brief, containing a single spatial
expression (average number of words per utterance: 2.83 in
the Full condition, 3.13 in the Partial condition). Two manual
coders determined that more than 95% of the responses
across both conditions were sufficient to uniquely identify the
target (given complete knowledge of spatial terms). The rare
insufficient responses were produced sporadically across
participants (i.e., not concentrated on any particular speaker).
Statistical analysis was performed on the sufficient
descriptions. For these, communication errors could occur
only in the Partial condition and only when left/right was
used without any other spatial term. Accordingly, we focused
on the way in which the rate of ‘left/right-only’ descriptions
(i.e., left/right alone or combined with only shape or color
terms) varied across conditions and array types (see Fig 2).
A mixed-effects logistic regression was performed with
left/right-only as the dependent variable and fixed factors of
condition (Full vs. Partial), array type (Horiz, Horiz+Other,
Horiz+Vert), and three experimental ‘phases’ (with
approximately one-third of the total trials in each phase).
Phase was included as a rough estimate of the time course of
adaptation, which we informally gauged to occur quite
rapidly (i.e., after only a few instances of negative feedback).
All fixed effects were weighted sum-coded, and the model
included random intercepts for participants and stimuli. In
light of the number of comparisons involved and the relative
novelty of our research question and design, a conservative
level for significance was chosen (p < .01).
As anticipated earlier, the left/right-only rate was higher
overall for the Horiz array type (β = 2.24, p = .006), with the
rate for the Horiz+Other type effectively equal to the mean
across all types (β = 0.05, p > .8). Note that this implies a

3237

much lower rate for the Horiz+Vert arrays (as expected from
the vertical bias discussed earlier). There were no significant
main effects of experimental condition or of phase. However,
condition and array type interacted significantly, reflecting
the fact that the difference in left/right-only rate for Horiz vs.
Horiz+Other was much larger in the Partial condition
(Condition × Horiz: β = -0.28, p < .01; Condition ×
Horiz+Other: β = 0.39, p = .01). In the Full condition, the rate
of left/right-only descriptions was high for both Horiz and
Horiz+Other. The Partial condition showed adaptation to the
listener for the Horiz+Other array type that did not fully
generalize to the Horiz arrays.
Finally, condition and phase interacted significantly
(Condition × Phase1: β = -0.5, p < .01). This accords with the
numerical finding that left/right-only rate increased slightly
across phases in the Full condition (phase1: 69%, phase2:
71%, phase3: 73%) but decreased across the first two phases
in the Partial condition (phase1: 57%, phase2: 47%, phase3:
42%). The small increase in the Full condition may be due to
the sufficiency of left/right for all arrays: implicit selfpriming may have elevated the frequency of these terms, or
participants may have explicitly realized that there was little
need to generate alternative expressions. The decline after the
first phase in the Partial condition, and indeed the difference
in the first phase across the two conditions, indicates that
adaptation to the listener occurred rapidly (i.e., within
approximately 43 trials, after an average of 12 instances of
unsuccessful communication).
In summary, we observed fine-grained adaptation to the
addressee with a lexical-semantic gap in the spatial domain.
There was little opportunity to find adaptation in the case of
Horiz+Vert arrays, given the general bias to use vertical
expressions. But for Horiz+Other arrays, participants in the
Partial knowledge condition began to avoid left/right-only
descriptions, responding to listener errors and performing
differently than participants in the Full knowledge condition,
within the first third of the experiment. Adaptation in the
Partial condition was significantly lower for the Horiz arrays,
which did not provide an alternative spatial relation that could
be used to identify the target.
The preceding analysis does not reveal whether
participants in the Partial condition attempted to avoid using
left/right altogether, or continued to use the problematic
terms but supplemented them with additional spatial
expressions. For the Horiz+Other arrays, we found that
avoidance was the primary strategy. For the Horiz+Vert
arrays, we observed more of a tendency to produce redundant
descriptions (e.g., top right or bottom left). However, this
tendency was observed in both the Full and Partial
conditions, suggesting that it may reflect lexicalization o
spatial collocations rather than any adaptation strategy.
A major remaining issue is why the Partial condition
participants found it relatively difficult to avoid (or
supplement) left/right for the Horiz arrays. Replicating
Ferrara et al. (2016), we found that when participants did
switch to alternative expressions these were mostly ordinal
terms such as first/second/last. Ordinals would in fact have

been sufficient to identify the target in all of the array types,
making their relative infrequency as alternatives to left/right
all the more striking. One hypothesis is that, when exposed to
errors on left/right, participants (implicitly) concluded that
the listener has imperfect understanding of reference to the
horizontal axis in general. If correct, this hypothesis would
imply that adaptation occurred at the level of spatial relations
or axes rather than at the level of spatial expressions.
An alternative hypothesis is that ordinals—in contrast to
proximity, containment, etc. terms—are strongly dispreferred
relative to left/right for the purpose of describing our stimulus
items. Under this hypothesis, the difficulty of adaptation for
the Horiz arrays in the Partial condition should be mirrored
by avoidance of ordinals in the Full condition. More
generally, the probability of switching from left/right to
another spatial expression in the Partial condition may
closely track independently-established relative frequencies
of terms used to describe our arrays. We formalized this
hypothesis in the computational model of spatial language
use and adaptation developed below.

Computational model of adaptation
The model has two main components: baseline (or preadaptation) preferences for spatial term usage, and a
mechanism for modifying the preferences in response to
errors made by the listener. Our goal in this paper is not to
explain the baseline preferences, but rather to estimate them
from empirical usage frequencies. The estimates take the
form of numerical (dis)preferences (or ‘weights’) assigned to
various spatial and non-spatial term types (or ‘attributes’).
Once the baseline has been established, we show that a single
inhibition parameter (i.e., a penalty for using left/right)
suffices to closely match the detailed adaptation pattern of the
experiment. A uniform penalty for left/right has different
effects across the array types because the viable alternative
attributes for each type vary independently in their weights.

Baseline preferences
The baseline model assigns probabilities to a large set of
array-specific sufficient descriptions. Each description
contains one or more binary-coded attributes indicating the
presence of spatial and other terms. Specifically, the spatial
attributes we considered are horizontal (horiz: left/right),
vertical (vert: above/below/up/down/top/bottom), proximity
(prox: close to/next to/near/far/beside), containment (cont:
inside /outside/within), vertical orientation (v.o.: pointing
up/down, facing up/down), horizontal orientation (h.o.:
facing towards/ away from), and ordinal (ord:
first/second/last). The non-spatial attributes are shape
(circle/pencil) and color (yellow/green) and. This coding
abstracts away from minor syntactic permutations (e.g.,
circle to the right vs. right circle) and lexical variation (e.g.,
the circle on the right vs. rightmost circle). The set of
sufficient descriptions for each array was formed by
considering the spatial relations that could be used to identify
the target and fully crossing these with one another and all

3238

possible shape and color combinations (e.g., Table 1 lists the
relations that are relevant for the Horiz+Other arrays).
Relative frequencies of the sufficient descriptions for each
array were determined, in part, from the results of the Full
knowledge condition above. However, because all targets in
that condition could be successfully identified with left/right,
it is plausible that this data overestimates the frequency of
horiz (e.g., due to participant self-priming). More generally,
we were concerned that Full condition data may provide a
somewhat skewed estimate of the relative accessibility of
different sufficient descriptions. Therefore, we conducted an
additional experiment in which each participant provided up
to five descriptions of an array. This experiment was
performed by 19 undergraduates at the Johns Hopkins
University, each completing 32 trials (one per array) for a
small amount of course credit. The total frequency of a
description for a given array was equal to the sum of its
frequencies in the Full condition and in this experiment.
A conditional log-linear (or maximum entropy) probability
distribution over descriptions was defined by assigning a
weight wi to each binary attribute fi (e.g., Jurafsky & Martin,
2009). The conditioning information was the array, which
determines the set of alternative sufficient descriptions.
Weights were tied across array types and fit by maximum
likelihood to the array-specific description frequencies. The
resulting weights were as follows: horiz (-1.14), vert (-0.43),
prox (-2.73), cont (-2.3), v.o. (-2.57), h.o. (-5.78), ord (3.06), shape (1.0) and color (-0.68), where a higher weight
indicates a greater preference for the attribute. Note that the
model assumes independence of attributes, an idealization
that we show to be largely effective but which is not inherent
to the maximum entropy formalism.

Detailed results
We examined the predictions of the model in more detail for
the four subtypes of Horiz+Other arrays. Using the weights
and horiz penalty above, we generated predicted frequencies
of the sufficient descriptions for each subtype by sampling
responses for 24 simulated participants.
Collapsed over shape and color, the predicted frequencies
of the various spatial attributes were highly correlated with
the actual frequencies across the subtypes (r=0.96). In
particular, for the Horiz+Other arrays offering containment,
proximity and vertical orientation as alternatives to the
horizontal relation, the experiment revealed that participants
adapted by switching to these alternatives in the Partial
condition, thereby increasing the frequencies of these
features over the horizontal. However, in the arrays where
horizontal orientation of the target was available as an
alternative, participants continued to use left/right for
identifying the target. Table 1 shows that the model captured
this difference and other variations in attribute frequency.
Table 1: Proportion of responses containing each relevant
spatial attribute (in bold) produced by participants in the
Partial knowledge condition, and predicted by the adapted
model (in parentheses), for the Horiz+Other array subtypes.
Proximity
.48±.08 (.53)

ord
prox

.20±.08 (.21)
.21±.06 (.20)

vertical orientation
.33±.09 (.45)
horiz

Modeling adaptation
Prior to experience with the listener, participants in the Partial
condition should have the baseline attribute weights. After
failed instances of communication with left/right, the weights
could in principle be modified in various ways (e.g., by large
changes after single errors, or much more gradually over the
course of the entire experiment). Given the rapid adaptation
found in the experiment, and in order to restrict the number
of free parameters, we implemented adaptation as a single
array- and speaker- independent decrease in the weight of
horiz subsequent to the first listener error.
The error-driven penalty against horiz was fit by maximum
likelihood to the Partial data, with the weights of all other
attributes fixed at their baseline values. The best-fitting
penalty (≈ -0.70) was sufficient to make alternative spatial
expressions more probable than left/right in the Horiz+Other
arrays. However, left/right remained the most probable
expression for Horiz arrays. Because the penalty was uniform
across all array types, this and other asymmetries must reflect
the relative frequencies of alternative spatial expressions in
the baseline data. In this sense, the model derives the nuanced
pattern of audience design in the Partial condition from
independently-established usage patterns and a minimal
assumption about the mechanism of adaptation (see Fig 2).

horiz

ord
v.o.

.17±.07 (.19)
.36±.09 (.28)

horiz
ord
cont

containment
.44±.08 (.39)
.13±.06 (.16)
.26±.06 (.34)

horizontal orientation
.73±.08 (.69)
horiz
ord
h.o.

.23±.08 (.25)
.00±.10 (.02)

Model limitations
While highly successful relative to our original goals, the
model contains a number of simplifications that could be
addressed in future iterations. The attribute weights and horiz
penalty were assumed to be identical for all participants (and
trials), but there may be substantial individual (or even triallevel) variation in preferences for referential descriptions.
The assumption of independent attribute weights was for the
most part viable, but some form of interaction is required to
account for frequent vert+horiz collocations (e.g., top right).
Our focus was on spatial expressions, but use of shape and
color terms would also be of interest, especially when these
are used redundantly. The assumption that the inhibition of
horiz applies after the first communication error, rather than
coming into effect more gradually, was also an idealization.
Finally, no attempt was made to predict the baseline
preferences for spatial terms or attributes (e.g., the strong
preference for left/right over first/last in the Full knowledge
condition). This raises the more general question of what
cognitive representations and processes lead speakers to
select particular utterances from a set of sufficient referential

3239

descriptions, only some aspects of which are due to audience
design.

General discussion
In this paper, we experimentally tested whether speakers
adapt their language to listeners with a lexical-semantic gap.
Such situations may arise commonly, both when experts talk
to novices and when adult speakers of a language address
second language learners or children. Inspired by previous
work with children, we focused on the case in which the
listener commands all spatial terms other than left/right.
We found that participants were able to rapidly identify the
listener’s lexical gap, and to avoid it in cases where other
alternatives were readily available. Specifically, when the
target object could be identified with another spatial relation,
participants mostly switched to using that relation. However,
adaptation occurred to a lesser extent when the target could
only be identified by its horizontal relation. This pattern of
results suggests that spatial language elicited in the
experiment was shaped by audience design, but that other
factors prevented complete adaptation to the listener.
We formalized those factors with a computational model
that assigns probabilities to sufficient descriptions with
independent attribute weights. The weights were fit to
utterances from the Full knowledge condition, supplemented
by data in which participants provided multiple descriptions
of each array. This model may reflect the endpoint of iterative
pragmatic reasoning, as in the RSA framework (Frank &
Goodman, 2012), but is closer in practice to the approach of
Monroe & Potts (2015), who remedy limitations of that
framework by setting attribute weights empirically.
Adaptation was then modeled in a simple form, as an errordriven inhibition of left/right that applied uniformly to all
array types (and participants). Despite its simplicity, the
model correctly predicted the different types and degrees of
adaptation observed across arrays in the experiment.
While some previous models have addressed adaptation
from bottom-up information about the listener (e.g.,
Janarthanam et al., 2010), none have considered gaps in basic
lexical knowledge. Indeed, much work in theoretical and
computational pragmatics assumes a generic addressee with
the same lexical semantics as the speaker. The model
developed here could be applied to other cases in which
listeners have idiosyncratic gaps in technical or non-technical
vocabulary. Adaptation to the lexical knowledge of the
listener is an important aspect of cooperative communication.

References
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Logan, G. D. (1997). The
influence of reference frame selection on spatial template
construction. Journal of Memory and Language, 37(3),
411-437.

Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in
meaning and reference. Advances in Psychology, 9, 287299.
Ferrara, K., Silva, M., Wilson, C., & Landau, B. (2016).
Spatial language and the Embedded Listener Model in
parents’ input to children. Cognitive Science, 40, 18771910.
Fitneva, S. A., & Song, Y. (2009). The comprehension of
“left” and “right” in a referential communication task. In
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2687-2691). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting
pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science,
336(6084), 998-998.
Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Coordination of
knowledge in communication: effects of speakers'
assumptions about what others know. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 62(3), 378-391.
Isaacs, E. A., & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in
conversation between experts and novices. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 116(1), 26-37.
Janarthanam, S., & Lemon, O. (2010, September). Adaptive
referring expression generation in spoken dialogue
systems: Evaluation with real users. In Proceedings of the
11th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue (pp. 124-131). Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jurafsky, D., & Martin, J. (2009). Speech and Language
Processing : An Introduction to Natural Language
Processing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech
Recognition. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Kutlak, R., van Deemter, K., & Mellish, C. (2016).
Production of referring expressions for an unknown
audience: A computational model of communal common
ground. Frontiers in Psychology, 7: 1275.
Logan, G. D. (1995). Linguistic and conceptual control of
visual spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology, 28(2), 103174.
Lombard, É. (1911). Le signe de l’elevation de la voix.
Annales Maladies de l'Oreille et du Larynx, 37, 101-119.
Monroe, W., & Potts, C. (2015). Learning in the rational
speech acts model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.06807.
Pate, J. K., & Goldwater, S. (2015). Talkers account for
listener and channel characteristics to communicate
efficiently. Journal of Memory and Language, 78, 1-17.
Schober, M. F. (2009). Spatial dialogue between partners
with mismatched abilities. In K.R. Coventry, T. Tenbrink,
& J.A. Bateman (Eds.), Spatial Language and Dialogue
(pp. 23-39). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sholl, M. J., & Egeth, H. E. (1981). Right-left confusion in
the adult: A verbal labeling effect. Memory & Cognition,
9(4), 339-350.
Wu, S., & Keysar, B. (2007). The effect of information
overlap on communication effectiveness. Cognitive
Science, 31(1), 169-181.

3240

