Analogical Inferences in Causal Systems
Matthew Myers (matthewmyers2020@u.northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract

description of analogical reasoning.

Inference and Similarity

Analogical and causal reasoning theories both seek to explain
patterns of inductive inference. Researchers have claimed that
reasoning scenarios incorporating aspects of both analogical
comparison and causal thinking necessitate a new model of inductive inference (Holyoak, Lee, & Lu, 2010; Lee & Holyoak,
2008). This paper takes an opposing position, arguing that features of analogical models make correct claims about inference patterns found among causal analogies, including analogies with both generative and preventative relations. Experiment 1 demonstrates that analogical inferences for these kinds
of causal systems can be explained by alignment of relational
structure, including higher-order relations. Experiment 2 further demonstrates that inferences strengthened by matching
higher-order relations are not guided by the transfer of probabilistic information about a cause from base to target. We
conclude that causal analogies behave like analogies in general—analogical mapping provides candidate inferences which
can then be reasoned about in the target.
Keywords: analogy; causality; structure mapping theory; inductive inferences

Similarity plays an important role in SMT. While simple
physical or property-based similarities can serve as cues to
engage in analogical comparison, relational matches are more
central to the content of analogical inferences (Gentner &
Markman, 1997). Relational similarity is assessed by a process of structural alignment in which components of the
two analogs are placed in correspondence based on a maximal (or near-maximal) match in relational structure. Alignments with deeply embedded relational structures—in which
higher-order constraining relations govern lower-order relations—are perceived as more similar than those with shallow structures (Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus, 1993) and
provide a better basis for candidate inferences to the target
(Clement & Gentner, 1991). Thus, the perceived structural
similarity and inferential strength between two analogs typically exhibit a positive correlation.

Introduction
The current paper challenges recent claims that standard theories of analogy (such as structure-mapping theory; Gentner,
1983, 1989) cannot explain analogical inferences that incorporate causal relations. Holyoak and colleagues (Holyoak et
al., 2010; Lee & Holyoak, 2008) contend that causal analogies require a different kind of process from typical analogies. Specifically, they claim that structure-mapping theory (SMT)—and more broadly, all extant models of analogy—fail to predict people’s inferences for causal analogies
that involve both generative and preventative causal relations.
In their view, causal analogies require models of analogy
that incorporate the basic elements of causal models (Lee &
Holyoak, 2008).
We maintain that in causal analogies, the mapping between
analogs is done by the same structure-mapping processes as
in other domains. Assuming that the mapping yields candidate inferences in the target, normal causal reasoning processes then occur in the target to arrive at further conclusions.
Specifically, we show that this division of labor holds for the
kinds of materials used by Holyoak and colleagues (Holyoak
et al., 2010; Lee & Holyoak, 2008): analogical processes inform the construction of causal models in the target analog,
after which causal reasoning processes are used to draw further inferences in the target. We believe our account provides
a better explanation of people’s reasoning at the level of representation and, more broadly, offers a more parsimonious

Figure 1: The causal systems in Lee & Holyoak (2008). G
and P represent generative and preventative causes. The effect is the outcome feature. Dotted elements in the targets
represent information not given. In descending order, similarity ratings between base and target was G1 G2 P1 , G1 G2 ,
and G1 P1 . The order of inductive strength ratings was G1 G2 ,
G1 G2 P1 , and G1 P1 .
However, Lee and Holyoak (2008) found that these mea-

835

sures can be disassociated. In Experiment 1, they presented
participants with a description of a fictional animal with four
notable features. Three of the four features were described
as causally related to the fourth: two were generative causes
while the other was a preventative cause (G1 , G2 , and P1 ).
This animal served as the base analog (see Figure 1). Participants were further given a description of a secondary target
animal that possessed one of three combinations of the antecedent features described in the base (i.e., G1 G2 P1 , G1 G2 ,
and G1 P1 ); however, they were given no information about
how those features affected the outcome. The base animal
(Animal A) and target animal (Animal B) were described in
the following manner:

Arguing that the inductive strength of an analogy should be
measured by all of its candidate inferences, and not solely a
single effect inference, Colhoun and Gentner (2009) used Lee
and Holyoak (2008) original stimuli and asked participants to
rate their confidence in each of the required inferences in the
target (G1 tends to produce E, etc.). The result was that the
ordering of inductive strength ratings for inferences within
the target closely matched the ordering of perceived similarity. In sum, this experiment showed that when the appropriate
inferential questions are asked, there is no conflict between
perceived similarity and perceived inferential strength.

Inference and Structure
The second claim against SMT is that it would require the
transfer of non-relational properties of higher-order relations,
such as propensities for causal antecedents to produce or prevent an effect (as in G1 tends to produce E). Lee and Holyoak
(2008) claim that avoiding such a violation of systematicity
would require a model to incorporate a kind of mapping process in which degrees of belief in the inferred property of a
target are mutually informed by both analogical mapping procedures and causal strength assessments.
However, Colhoun and Gentner (2009) proposed an alternative solution. They suggest that the pattern of relations in
the base allows people to infer that the pattern of G1 , G2 and
P1 is sufficient to produce E. Specifically, participants are
told that the base contains G1 , G2 , and P1 , that G1 and G2
both tend to produce E, that P1 tends to prevent E, and that E
is present. Thus in encoding the base, the presence of the effect E allows people to infer that the combined causal strength
of G1 and G2 exceeds that of P1 . To test this, in Experiment
2, they presented participants with a base analog consisting
of generative and preventive causes (G1 tends to produce E,
etc.), but varied whether the effect E was actually stated to
be present in the base. Participants’ task was to generate effect inferences for different targets. The result was that participants gave stronger effect inferences in the target when
given a base analog in which the effect was clearly stated to
be present than when given a base in which the effect might
or might not be present.
Colhoun and Gentner (2009) argue that the presence of an
effect in the base provides evidence of the relative strength of
the antecedent causes. In other words, people are attending
to and transferring a higher-order qualitative relation—that
G1 and G2 are causally stronger than P1 . This suggests that,
as in other areas of analogical reasoning, encoding processes
occur in the base, followed by structure-mapping processes
that align the base relational structure with that of the target
and project candidate inferences to the target. Once these
new inferences are projected, causal reasoning processes in
the target can produce further inferences.
But there is an alternative account. Perhaps, consistent
with the idea that causal propensities are intertwined with
the analogical mapping process (Holyoak et al., 2010), the
differences in observed inference ratings might simply have
been the consequence of a probability calculation computed

Animal A has dry flaky skin, muscular forearms, a weak
immune system, and blocked oil glands.
For Animal A, dry flaky skin, tends to PRODUCE
blocked oil glands; muscular forearms tend to PRODUCE blocked oil glands; a weak immune system tend
to PREVENT blocked oil glands.
Animal B has dry flaky skin, muscular forearms, and a
weak immune system.
Participants’ task was to either rate the similarity of the
base and target, or to estimate the likelihood that the effect
would occur in the target. Lee and Holyoak reported that
while participants’ similarity ratings roughly corresponded
with the number of structural relations shared by base and
target (G1 G2 P1 was highest), their inferences did not. In
descending order, the observed strength of the effect inference in the target was G1 G2 , G1 G2 P1 , and G1 P1 . The authors contend that these results are problematic for SMT and
other models of analogy, for two reasons. First, SMT cannot account for the systematic non-correspondence observed
between similarity and inference strength; and second, SMT
cannot account for the transfer of probabilistic information
from the base because it does not permit the transfer of nonrelational properties of the higher-order relations1 .
In response to the first issue, Colhoun and Gentner (2009)
note that the measure of inductive strength used in the previous experiment focused on a single variable: people’s belief about the likelihood of the effect. This ignores a large
number of other inferences that must be made between the
analogs. Participants are told only that certain factors (e.g.,
G1 , dry flaky skin) exist in the target, but they are not told
that these factors are causally connected to the effect E; these
causal links must all be inferred from the base.
1 Holyoak and colleagues (Holyoak et al., 2010; Lee & Holyoak,
2008) at points extend this claim even further, suggesting that SMT
establishes analogical inferences “solely on the logical form of representations and not on their meaning” (Lee & Holyoak, 2008 p
1120). This however would suggest that SMT is insensitive to the
content of the higher-order relations that bind predicates. This is
incorrect. SMT distinguishes higher-order constraining relations
that confer systematicity (such as cause and prevent) from nonconstraining relations (such as and), which do not. (Falkenhainer,
Forbus, & Gentner, 1989; Gentner, 1983). Here we focus on the aspects of their argument that would prove challenging for the theory.

836

in the base and subsequently mapped to a matching target.
For example, people may have derived a series of probabilistic propensities for the causal antecedents to bring about
the effect. Participants would then project those probabilistic
properties of the higher-order predicate relations onto the target (e.g., predicates related by CAUSE-10%, CAUSE-50%,
CAUSE-93%, etc.). We explore this possibility in the following two studies.

But suppose instead that participants use the base to generate a local posterior calculation (considering only the relations that match with those in the target)—e.g., P(Effect —
G1 P1 ). In this case, they have no basis for a difference in
inference ratings between G1 G2 P1 and G1 P1 P2 . Because the
strength of the individual causal antecedents is unknown, they
would have no information about the degree to which the unmapped cause in the base either prevents (P2 ) or contributes
(G2 ) to the effect. Therefore there is no reason to expect that
a systematic difference in effect strength estimates between
the two conditions.
In contrast, suppose participants utilize the type of encoding and structure-mapping techniques as described above. In
this case, when given the G1 P1 P2 → E base, participants
should recognize that the effect of G1 is stronger than that of
both P1 P2 and is therefore stronger than either of them alone.
This relative strength relation is a higher-order relation which
takes the causal relations as arguments. When this system is
projected to the target (G1 P1 ), participants should assume that
the effect E will occur. In contrast, when given the other base,
G1 G2 P1 → E, participants have no reason to infer that either
G1 or G2 is stronger than P1 (since generative relations outnumber preventative relations). Thus the prediction is that the
effect inference will be stronger for G1 P1 P2 than for G1 G2 P1
bases.

Figure 2: Base and target systems for Experiment 1 (Panel
A) and Experiment 2 (Panel B). G and P represent generative
and preventative causes. The experimental manipulations for
Experiment 1 and 2 were the bases and targets, respectively.

Methods
Participants 40 undergraduate students from Northwestern
University participated in the study for course credit. One student was excluded because of missing data points and seven
were excluded for failing a comprehension check. In all, 32
participants were analyzed in this study.

Experiment 1
Hypothetically, there are two ways people may calculate
probabilistic likelihoods for an effect in a base analog: a
global posterior calculation, in which all causal antecedents
are factored into a probabilistic estimate; and a local posterior
calculation, in which only those antecedent causes that occur
in the target are analyzed in the base. Experiment 1 examines a scenario where predictions for global or local posterior
calculations are pitted against predictions made by standard
mapping theory. Figure 2A illustrates the scenario used in
this experiment. In this study, we varied the causal structure in the base, keeping the target (G1 P1 ) constant in both
conditions. Further, in both conditions, participants are told
that the effect E occurs in the base. If participants generate a global posterior calculation for the effect in either the
G1 G2 P1 condition [i.e., P(Effect | G1 G2 P1 )] or the G1 P1 P2
condition [P(Effect | G1 P1 P2 )], then we should see no difference in inference ratings between conditions. Since people’s
probability estimates are calculated conditionally on the aggregate influence of all causal antecedents, there is no unitary
piece of information that can inform them as to how likely the
effect will be when transferred to a G1 P1 target2 .

Materials and Procedure The animal features and structures were those used in Experiment 1 by Lee and Holyoak
(2008). Participants were given information about the two animals, a G1 G2 P1 animal and a G1 P1 P2 animal, which served
as the different bases. They were also given a target, a G1 P1
animal (Figure 2A). The bases were described using different sets of features, and therefore the target’s features were
unique to the given base. In both conditions, participants
rated the likelihood of the effect in the target. Inferences
were framed as suppositional queries asking participants to
predict the number of animals that would exhibit the effect
given 100 instances of the target. Furthermore, for the sake of
completeness, similarity ratings between base and target were
also obtained. These were assessed on a scale of zero to ten,
with zero indicating “completely different” and ten indicating “identical”. Similarity ratings always preceded inference
ratings.
The experiment was conducted on a PC using the software
program Qualtrics. Each participant received both G1 G2 P1
and G1 P1 P2 conditions. The order of the two base conditions
were counterbalanced. Participants were first given the de-

2 One alternative way participants could implement a global strategy would be to generate a posterior probability for the system of
base relations, and either increase or decrease their estimate contingent upon which cause is absent in the target. For example, if
participants are given G1 P1 P2 as a base and G1 P1 as a target, dropping a preventative relation (e.g., P2 ) may lead them to boost their
probability estimate. However, while this is certainly possible, we

believe that such an explanation is far less parsimonious than an account based on higher-order relational mapping (i.e., G1 >P1 P2 ).

837

base gave information about the relative strength of G1 in
the G1 P1 target. This was not the case for the G1 G2 P1 base.
In conjunction with the findings of Colhoun and Gentner
(2009), our results suggest that mapping of relational structure, including higher-order relations computed in the base,
can account for inferential strength ratings made among analog causal systems.

scription of a single base and the target animal. Similarity and
inference question were placed directly below the description
on the same page. Once participants had recorded an answer,
they were prompted to continue to the next page. After leaving the page, participants were unable to review the content
and answers from the previous page.

Experiment 2
The previous study leaves open another possibility. Perhaps
when given the base G1 P1 P2 → E, participants recognized
that G1 was stronger than the combined P1 P2 , but simply inferred the absolute strength of G1 . That is, they inferred that
G1 was extremely likely to produce effect E. To test this,
we use the same G1 P1 P2 → E base condition that had previously elicited increased inference ratings in Experiment 1.
However, this time, the base is constant while the targets vary
(see Figure 2B). In both conditions, participants receive the
same generative cause (i.e., G1 ) observed in the base analog,
but also an additional preventative cause that differs by condition. In the Familiar P condition (G1 P1 ), they receive the
same P1 feature found in the base. In contrast, in the Novel
P condition (G1 P3 ), they receive a novel preventative feature
(i.e., P3 ) that has no corresponding relation in the base. If participants simply infer extremely strong causal strength for G1
(i.e., G1 overpowers the preventative causes), then we should
observe no difference between the two conditions. However,
if participants are transferring a higher-order relational structure from the base to target, then we should find that people
rate the effect to be more probable in the Familiar P condition
compared to the Novel P condition.

Figure 3: Mean outcome (effect) inferences and similarity
ratings between target and base. The base categories represent the type of causes each cause had. Error bars represent 1
standard error of the mean.
All participants in Experiment 1 also participated in Experiment 2, which directly proceeded Experiment 1. At the
end of the Experiment 2, all participants were given a multiple choice comprehension test that consisted of two questions
about the content of stories they were given. If either question
was answered incorrectly, that participant’s data was removed
from analysis for both experiments.

Results and Discussion

Method

The mean results for both similarity and inference ratings can
be seen in Figure 3. The analysis consisted of a paired-sample
t-test for each rating type. There was a significant difference
in mean inference ratings between the conditions: the target in the G1 P1 P2 condition (M=62.28, SD=19.84) was rated
as significantly more likely to exhibit the effect E compared
to the target in the G1 G2 P1 condition (M=47.28, SD=17.49),
t(31)=3.44, p<.005. This suggests that participants’ inferences were informed by the higher-order relation observed in
the G1 P1 P2 base. There was no significant difference in similarity ratings between the G1 P1 P2 (M=6.25, SD=1.59) and
the G1 G2 P1 (M=5.78, SD=1.75) condition t(31)=1.54, p=.13.
However, the relative similarity ratings were in the same direction as ratings for inferential strength.
These results show that if we assume that people inferred
a higher-order relation of relative strength among the causal
relations while encoding the base analog, then this relation
will be mapped to the target, where it can be used to make
causal inferences about the effect E. As previously discussed,
this pattern of results would be highly unlikely if participants
were mapping either a global or local posterior calculation
from the base to target. Thus, a higher-order relationship between the generative and preventative causes in the G1 P1 P2

Participants The same 40 Northwestern students who participated in Experiment 1 also participated in Experiment 2.
Furthermore, the same eight participants whose data was removed from analysis were likewise removed for Experiment
2. A total of 32 participants were therefore analyzed.
Materials and Procedures The animal features for Experiment 2 were taken from Colhoun and Gentner (2009). All
participants were run in both the Familiar P and Novel P
conditions; order was counterbalanced between participants.
They were given the same similarity and inference tasks as in
Experiment 1. As before, similarity queries always preceded
inference ratings. Participants began the experiment immediately after finishing Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Figure 4 shows the mean inference and similarity ratings. As
before, a paired-sample t-test was conducted for both measures. Consistent with the hypothesis, mean inference ratings
for the likelihood of effect E were significantly greater in the
Familiar P condition (M=62.31, SD=21.18) than in the Novel
P condition (M=48.59, SD=17.59), t(31)=3.71, p<.001. Indeed, in the Novel P target, the estimates of likelihood of E

838

a domain-general process that applies across physical causality (Goldwater & Gentner, 2015), mathematics (Mix, 2008;
Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007), politics (Spellman & Holyoak,
1992), spatial scenes (Doumas & Hummel, 2013; Kurtz &
Gentner, 1993; Richland, Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006; Richland et al., 2006; Markman & Gentner, 1993; Sagi, Gentner,
& Lovett, 2012), and scientific reasoning (Gentner, 2002;
Pearl, 1992). Our findings here support the idea that analogy is a domain-general process that supports alignment and
inference both within and across domains.

Acknowledgments
Figure 4: Mean outcome (effect) and similarity ratings between target and base. The target categories represent the
type of preventative cause present in the target. Error bars
represent 1 standard error of the mean.

We thank Erin Anderson, Kensy Cooperride, Nathan Couch,
Christian Hoyos, Sandy LaTourrette, Francisco Maravilla,
Ruxue Shao, and Nina Simms for their comments and suggestions. This research was supported by a grant from the
Office of Naval Research [award number N00014-16-1-2613]
to Dedre Gentner.

did not differ from chance (50%). Similarity ratings were also
significantly greater for the Familiar P condition (M=6.44,
SD=1.54) than for the Novel P condition (M=4.19, SD=1.67),
t(31)=6.95, p<.001. This is to be expected, because in the Familiar P condition, there are two shared factors (G1 and P1 ),
while in the Novel P condition only one factor is shared (G1 ).
These findings run contrary to the idea that participants are
simply transferring absolute information about the strength of
G1 from the base to target. Had people simply transferred the
strength of the generative relation, the effect inference would
have been equally strong in both targets. Instead, participants
only inferred that the effect occurs in the target when they
could map higher-order relative strength relations from the
base to the target. In sum, these findings suggest that participants’ inferential strength ratings for the effect in a target can
be accounted for by standard analogical mapping models.

References
Clement, C., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical mapping. Cognitive Science,
15.
Colhoun, J., & Gentner, D. (2009). Inference processes in
causal analogies. In New frontiers in analogy research:
Proceedings of the second international conference on
analogy (p. 82-91). Sofia, Bulgaria: New Bulgarian University Press.
Doumas, L., & Hummel, J. (2013). Comparison and mapping
facilitate relation discovery and predication. PLOS One, 8,
e63889.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure-mapping engine: Algorithm and examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41, 89-132.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2002). Analogy in scientific discovery: The case
of johannes kepler. In L. Magnani & N. Nersessian (Eds.),
Model-based reasoning: Science, technology, values. New
York: Kluwer Academic/ Plenum Publisher.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M., & Forbus, K. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability from
inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Goldwater, M., & Gentner, D. (2015). On the acquisition of
abstract knowledge: Structural alignment and explication
in learning causal system categories. Cognition, 137, 137153.
Holyoak, K., Lee, H., & Lu, H. (2010). Analogical and
category-based inference: A theoretical integration with
bayesian causal models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 702–727.
Kurtz, K., & Gentner, D. (1993). Detecting anomalous features in complex stimuli: The role of structured compar-

General Discussion
Holyoak and colleagues (Holyoak et al., 2010; Lee &
Holyoak, 2008) argue that causal analogies cannot be modeled in the same way as other analogies and instead require
the creation of a specialized system. Specifically, they believe
that most existing models, including SMT, cannot accommodate the probabilistic dynamics of causal systems. The
evidence provided here suggests otherwise. Across two experiments, we demonstrate that the pattern of analogical inferences observed among various causal systems correspond
with predictions made by SMT. Experiment 1 found that
stronger effect inferences occurred when the causal relations
in the base were united by a higher-order relation that took
causes as arguments. In Experiment 2, we tested whether the
results could be predicted by assuming the transfer of the individual causal strength of the generative relation from the
base to target. On the contrary, the results suggest that a consistent relational structure is required in order for people to
infer the effect in the target.
There has been immense progress in analogy research in
the last few decades. The evidence suggests that analogy is

839

ison. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 19,
219-232.
Lee, H., & Holyoak, K. (2008). The role of causal models in
analogical inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 1111-1122.
Markman, A., & Gentner, D. (1993). Structural alignment
during similarity comparisons. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
431-467.
Mix, K.
(2008).
Children’s equivalence judgments:
Crossmapping effects. Cognitive Development, 23, 191203.
Pearl, J. (1992). Conceptual revolutions. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Richland, L., Morrison, R., & Holyoak, K. (2006). Childrens
development of analogical reasoning: Insights from scene
analogy problems. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 94, 249-273.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. (2007). Does comparing solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural knowledge? an experimental study on learning to solve equations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 561-574.
Sagi, E., Gentner, D., & Lovett, A. (2012). What difference
reveals about similarity. Cognitive Science, 36, 1019-1050.
Spellman, B., & Holyoak, K. (1992). If saddam is hitler then
who is george bush? analogical mapping between systems
of social roles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 913-933.

840

