Anticipatory Synchronization in Artificial Agents
Auriel Washburn (washbual@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics, Department of Music, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Rachel W. Kallen (rachel.kallen@uc.edu), Maurice Lamb (lambmi@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Nigel Stepp (ndstepp@hrl.com)
HRL Laboratories
Malibu, CA 90265 USA

Kevin Shockley (kevin.shockley@uc.edu) and Michael J. Richardson (michael.richardson@uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA
Abstract
By integrating theories and methodologies from a diverse
range of scientific disciplines (e.g., physics, neuroscience,
cognitive science, psychology and robotics engineering) the
present work is aimed at harnessing self-organized
anticipatory synchronization in order to advance humanrobotic interaction (HRI). This phenomenon is characterized
by the emergence of anticipatory behavior by one system
coupled to the chaotic behavior of another, following the
introduction of short self-referential delays in the coordinating
system. The current set of studies involved the creation of an
artificial agent based on a time-delayed, low-dimensional
dynamical model capable of behaving prospectively during an
interaction with a human actor performing complex,
unpredictable behaviors. By achieving characteristics similar
to those observed during natural human interaction and
coordination, the time-delayed modeling approached
advocated here provides the potential for considerable future
advancements in HRI.
Key words: human-robotic interaction; artificial agents;
dynamical
modeling;
virtual
reality;
anticipatory
synchronization; interpersonal coordination; chaos

Rapid advances in cyber-technologies and robotics present
increasing opportunities for the implementation of
interactive, artificial agents within contexts of human
behavior. This includes, but is not limited to, assistance
during the performance of everyday tasks and the
development of new skills. Work has already been done, for
example, on the development of virtual agents able to assist
elderly individuals with the organization of their daily
activities (Yaghoubzadeh et al., 2013), and to create a robot
whose structured interaction may help to improve
interpersonal coordination in children with autism spectrum
disorders (Palatinus, 2014). However, Lorenz and Hirche
(2014) have recently drawn attention to the fact that
engineers working to design virtual and robotic agents do
not always prioritize those aspects which will allow for

smooth, effortless human interaction, while psychologists
studying interpersonal or joint-action do not always take
into account technical realizability in describing what they
see as the fundamental elements of successful multi-agent
coordination.
One potential solution to this issue is to identify and
model the behavioral dynamics (Warren, 2006) of natural
human-human
interaction
using
low-dimensional
differential equations that can be easily implemented within
interactive robotic or machine systems. Recent work by
Dumas et al. (2014) and Zhai et al. (2014) has already
provided support for the idea that relatively simple selfsustaining, nonlinear dynamical systems can be used to
construct virtual interaction partners capable of successful,
flexible coordination with human actors. Both groups of
researchers used long-standing oscillator models of
biological coordination to develop virtual agent systems
capable of synchronizing with a selection of behaviors
exhibited by a human actor. For instance, Dumas et al.
(2014) have developed variations of their Human Dynamic
Clamp (HDC) system that can coordinate with continuous
and discrete finger movements of a human actor. Zhai et al.
(2014) have designed a similarly adaptive virtual agent that
is capable of coordinating with an individual during a
continuous, one-dimensional movement-mirroring task.
The development of these dynamical, artificial agents has
primarily focused on their ability to exhibit coordination
with periodic behaviors, or synchronize with fluctuating
movement speeds using a velocity estimation algorithm.
However, one only has to consider a pedestrian navigating a
busy city sidewalk to be reminded that people are often
capable of prospectively coordinating their behavior with
highly variable, seemingly unforeseeable events in an
effortless manner. Recent research in human motor control
and joint-action has demonstrated that small perceptualmotor feedback delays, such as those known to exist within
the human nervous system, may actually facilitate the ability

1321

to achieve anticipation of such continuous chaotic events
(Stepp, 2009; Washburn et al., 2015). This phenomenon,
referred to as strong anticipation or self-organized
anticipatory synchronization, has been found to emerge
when a unidirectional coupling exists between a “slave”
system and a chaotically behaving “master” system (e.g.,
Masoller, 2001; Stepp & Turvey, 2015; Voss, 2000).
Surprisingly, as the slave system begins to synchronize with
the chaotic behavior of the master system, the introduction
of small temporal feedback delays results in the slave
system anticipating the ongoing behavior exhibited by the
chaotic master system.
Of particular significance here, is that the dynamics of
chaotic anticipation during interpersonal coordination can
be captured using a low-dimensional dynamical model and
can be easily implemented in artificial agents. Such models
of self-organized anticipatory synchronization could
therefore provide an opportunity for significant
advancement in HCI and HRI through the development of
artificial systems capable of anticipating chaotic human
behavior during real-time interaction. In the current study,
two experiments were conducted to examine whether a
virtual, artificial agent, whose arm movements were
controlled by a time-delayed dynamical model, could not
only coordinate with the chaotic movements of human
actors in real time, but could do so in a self-organized
anticipatory manner akin to human-human perceptual-motor
coordination.

Method

position of a wired motion sensor attached to the first two
fingers of a participant’s right hand. A Polhemus Liberty
electro-magnetic motion capture system (~0.1 mm
accuracy) (Polhemus Liberty, Polhemus Corporation,
Colchester, VT) was used to record and track participants’
movements at 120 Hz. The horizontal and vertical
coordinates of participant movement were also recorded
from the magnetic tracking system at a sampling rate of 75
Hz for later analysis. The receiver for this system was
positioned approximately 10 cm in front of the fingers of a
participant’s right arm outstretched directly in front of their
body.
Experiment 1: Human (slave) – Avatar (master)
Experiment 1 was designed to establish the coordinative
dynamics exhibited by human actors coordinating with an
artificial agent via a novel VR setup. That is, we examined
whether small perceptual-motor feedback delays could
enhance a human actor’s ability to anticipate the chaotic
movements of the artificial agent system. Experiment 1 was
also conducted to assess the degree to which bidirectional
coupling (from master to slave) might influence the
emergence of anticipatory synchronization. At the beginning
of each experimental trial, the robot avatar began to move
its left arm with the index finger pointed in a continuous
trajectory. The participants’ task was to synchronize their
own arm movements with those of the moving stimulus (in
this case the robot avatar’s arm). The movements of the
robot avatar (master system) were defined online by means
of a chaotic spring system,

Participants
Twelve students were recruited from the University of
Cincinnati to take part in Experiment 1 along with four
individuals from the greater Cincinnati area, for a total of 16
participants. Participants ranged in age from 19 to 31 years.
Seventeen University of Cincinnati undergraduate
students participated in Experiment 2 (eight in the 1.5
coupling strength condition and nine in the 2.0 coupling
strength condition). Participants ranged in age from 18 to 31
years.
Procedure and Design
A virtual reality (VR) interface was employed in both
experiments as it afforded the opportunity to examine the
phenomenon of human-human and human-machine
anticipatory synchronization within a realistic, yet highly
controllable setting. A seated participant interacted with a
simple virtual environment created using Unity 3D and
viewed via a head-mounted Oculus Rift. Within the virtual
environment participants saw a robot avatar sitting directly
in front of them, and an additional avatar arm that moved
along with their own right arm movements. The movements
of this virtual participant arm were generated through the
inverse kinematics function available within Unity 3D by
coupling the pointer finger of the virtual arm to the real time

with the x3, x4 and x5 dimensions defining a standard Rössler
attractor (Stepp, 2009). This attractor generates the chaotic
dynamics used to define position of the ‘x’ and ‘y’
dimensions for a simple harmonic oscillator specified in x1
and x2. The resulting system maintains an elliptical
trajectory over time while exhibiting chaotic fluctuations in
amplitude and frequency. Nine sets of system parameters a,
b, c, α, β, 𝜔 and initial conditions x1, x2, x3, x4, and x5 were
selected for use based on support of the evolution of
bounded chaotic behavior.
Generating this behavior online allowed us to introduce a
coupling term, C, between the virtual robot avatar and the
behavior of the human participant. This system included an
influence of the ‘x’ coordinates of a participant’s arm

1322

movements, p1, on the ‘x’ coordinates of robot avatar arm
movements, x1, as well as a symmetrical influence of the ‘y’
coordinates of participant arm movements, p2, on the ‘y’
coordinates of the robot avatar arm movements, x2. The
weight of avatar-participant coupling was manipulated to
allow for more or less influence of the movement of the
participant on that of the robot avatar, resulting in three total
coupling strength conditions (0, .025, and .05). Feedback
delays of 26.671, 200, and 400 ms were introduced between
the participant’s movements and the movement of their
virtual arm. The average movement frequency exhibited by
the robot avatar for a given trial in this study was between
.23 and .30 Hz2. Trials lasted 60 s. The first 10 s and last 5 s
of each time series were discarded to remove transients.
Experiment 2: Human (master) – Avatar (slave)
Experiment 2 examined whether an artificial agent, as a
slave system, could anticipate the chaotic movements of a
human master system. Participants were initially asked to
complete two training trials in which they were to
synchronize with robot avatar movement defined by fully
chaotic, 2-D movement sequences generated ahead of time
(i.e., there was no influence of participant movements on
robot avatar master system behavior). The same two chaotic
robot avatar movement sequences 3 were provided to all
individuals. During these trials participants saw their own
virtual arm within the environment at the minimum delay
possible (i.e., 26.67 ms). Each sequence lasted 100 s. For
the remainder of the experiment participants were asked to
continue making the same kinds of movements they had
been making during the training period: “generally circular
and always in the same direction, but somewhat
unpredictable in terms of the speed and size of movements”.
They were also informed that they would be switching roles
with the robot avatar, so that they were now the leader and
the avatar would be coordinating with their movements. For
these test trials the system of equations specifying the
baseline slave behavior of the robot avatar consisted of a
harmonic spring oscillator4

1

Motion tracking (~5.32 ms) and data transfer (~5 to 8 ms) time,
plus screen refresh rate (~13.33 ms) resulted in a minimal delay
between a participant’s movement and rendering of 26.67 ms.
2
Individuals creating similar chaotic movement sequences
produced behavior with the average frequency for a given trial
between .14 and .57 Hz, and an overall average frequency of .32
Hz (Washburn et al., 2015).
3
Washburn et al. (2015) used these sequences to train individuals
to act as master systems during interpersonal anticipatory
synchronization and demonstrated that the training consistently led
to individuals producing chaotic movement behavior.
4
Harmonic spring systems are flexible with relatively few intrinsic
dynamics. For slave systems with inherently chaotic dynamics it
will be harder to evaluate whether anticipatory behavior of another
chaotic system is primarily a product of coordination.

As in the harmonic spring system used in the previous
experiment, this system includes a coupling term, C, here to
modulate the strength of coupling between the robot avatar
and the ‘x’, m1, and ‘y’, m2, dimensions of a 2-D master
system (i.e., human participant) behavior. This method of
delay-coupling results in a function that incorporates the ‘x’
and ‘y’ dimensions of its’ past behavior, x1d and x2d, into the
terms that reference the velocity of movement in each of the
‘x’ and ‘y’ dimensions, x3 and x4, effectively constituting a
feedback delay within the system (see Stepp & Turvey,
2015; Voss, 2000). Here the past behavior being referenced,
xd, is always that which occurred at a constant, set length of
time, τ, prior to the current time point, t,

The remaining terms in the system of equations responsible
for robot avatar movement include the variable specifying
spring stiffness, 𝜔, through interaction with the ‘x’ and ‘y’
position variables, x1 and x2. Two different values for the
slave-master coupling term, C, were introduced within this
system (1.5 and 2), and were treated as a between subjects
variable such that participants either interacted with the
avatar system coupled to them with the lower or higher
strength. Five different delay latencies were also introduced
within the robot avatar system as τ (26.67, 106.64, 199.95,
306.59, and 399.90 ms). These coupling strengths and delay
latencies were chosen based on preliminary simulations
using a chaotic spring master system and the current
harmonic spring oscillator slave system. Each delay latency
was instituted once per participant, with the order of
presentation randomized over the five test trials experienced
by each participant. Each trial lasted a total of 60 s. As in
Experiment 1, the first 10 s and last 5 s of each time series
were discarded for analysis.

Data Analysis & Results
Largest Lyapunov Exponent
Calculation of the largest Lyapunov exponent (LLE)
provided an initial measure of the chaotic dynamics within
master system movement time series (see Washburn et al.,
2015 for details). Average LLE values of robot avatar
movement sequences from Experiment 1 were all positive
(M = 0.024, SD = 0.008), indicating that the robot avatar
exhibited consistent chaotic movement dynamics even when
it was coupled to the coordinating behavior of the human
participant. LLE values associated with human participant

1323

behavior in Experiment 2 were also positive for all
combinations of feedback delay latency and slave-master
coupling conditions except one (feedback delay: 26.67 ms,
avatar-actor coupling: 2.0) (overall M = 0.034, SD = 0.046),
indicating that the participants produced reasonably
consistent chaotic movement dynamics when acting as the
master system.
Cross-Correlation and Phase Lead
To evaluate whether anticipatory synchronization occurred
between the slave and master systems in Experiments 1 and
2, we first performed a cross-correlation analysis. This
analysis indexes the degree of synchrony between two
behavioral time series across a range of possible temporal
relationships (Stepp, 2009). Of relevance for identifying
anticipatory synchronization is the maximum degree of
synchrony that occurred (indexed by the maximum observed
cross-correlation coefficient) and the corresponding time lag
(or lead) at which the synchrony occurred.

Figure 1: Average maximum cross-correlation (left) and
temporal lead/lag (right) between artificial agent and human
participant movements for Exp. 1 (top) and 2 (bottom). Line
graphs in this figure are presented as means ± SEM. *p<
.05; two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), using
Bonferroni post hoc comparisons.
The results of this analysis for Experiment 1 were very
similar to those found in previous studies of human
anticipatory synchronization (Stepp, 2009; Washburn et al.,
2015). Namely, that although overall coordination decreased
slightly with increases in perceptual-motor feedback delay,
anticipatory synchronization was observed for delays

between 200-400 ms (Fig. 1, top). Interestingly, no
significant differences in anticipation were observed for the
different coupling strengths employed. This is also
consistent with existing studies in agent-environment and
interpersonal human coordination, indicating that the VR
paradigm employed here is suitable for the continued
investigation of human anticipatory synchronization during
uni-directional and bi-directional slave-to-master coupling
situations.
In Exp. 2, maximum cross-correlation analysis also
revealed a decrease in coordination with increases in timedelay, here implemented within the artificial agent slave
system (Fig. 1, bottom left). More importantly, increases in
time-delay were associated with a progressive decrease in
lag latency between the artificial agent and human
participant, with the artificial agent achieving temporal
synchrony with the human participant for the 399.90 ms
delay latency (Fig. 1, bottom right).
Instantaneous Relative Phase
To gain further information about the anticipatory
coordination that occurred between the human and artificial
agent, an analysis of the relative phase between the
movements of the slave and master systems in each
experiment was conducted. Relative phase captures the
spatial-temporal patterning of the coordination that occurs
between two movement time-series. Of particular relevance
for the current study was the distribution of relative phase
angles that occurred for each feedback delay condition (i.e.,
how often a particular relative phase relationship was
observed between the coordinator and producer over the
course of a behavioral trial), with peaks in the distribution
indicative of the stability of the coordination (higher peaks
= higher stability) and the degree to which the slave system
led or lagged behind the movements of the master system
(Schmidt & O’Brien, 1997).
IRP distributions for participant with respect to avatar
movements in Experiment 1 consistently indicated the
occurrence of intermittent leading and lagging behavior,
with more frequent leading than lagging in all combinations
of coupling strength and feedback delay conditions (see Fig.
2). This kind of intermittent, or relative, coordination is
consistent with the coordinative dynamics exhibited during
interpersonal anticipatory synchronization (Washburn et al.,
2015), and characterizes weakly coupled physical or
biological limit-cycle oscillators (see Kelso & Ding, 1993),
including visually coupled rhythmic limb movements of coacting individuals (Schmidt & O’Brien, 1997). These
distributions look similar across conditions with some
decreased stability apparent in the 400 ms delay condition,
especially when there was no coupling from robot avatar to
participant. There also seemed to be less relative difference
in the frequency of leading to lagging in both of the bidirectional coupling conditions as compared to the no
coupling condition at the 26.67 ms feedback delay. There

1324

were very few differences in these distributions between the
low and high coupling strengths conditions examined.

anticipatory synchronization during human-human and
human-machine interaction. The findings of Experiment 1,
demonstrated that anticipation similar to that observed
during interpersonal interaction is also exhibited by human
actors with respect to a chaotically behaving virtual coactor. Experiment 2 used the same novel VR paradigm to
evaluate the anticipatory abilities of time-delayed artificial
agent during interaction with a human co-actor. The
movements of this artificial agent were defined by a low
dimensional, harmonic oscillator system, coupled to the
real-time behavior of the human co-actor. The results of this
experiment revealed that the addition of feedback delays
reduced the degree to which the avatar lagged behind the
human actor.

Figure 2: Distribution of average instantaneous relative
phase (IRP) values between artificial agent and human actor
as a function of the coupling strengths and delay conditions
examined in Experiment 1.
Consistent with the maximum cross-correlation results
above, when the artificial agent slave system was coupled to
the live human actor master system in Experiment 2, most
combinations of feedback delays and coupling strengths
were associated with the artificial agent lagging behind the
human actor (see Fig. 3). There was in fact relatively more
anticipation than lagging at the longest feedback delay in
Experiment 2 (i.e., 399.90 ms), but the overall stability the
phase relationships at this delay was reduced in comparison
to the shorter delays. It is important to keep in mind that
both the IRP frequency distributions and the maximum
cross-correlation analysis represent average phase and
temporal relationships between the artificial agent and the
master system to which it is coupled. Furthermore, a
participant-wise examination revealed that the artificial
agent achieved anticipation for three of the eight
participants in the 1.5 coupling strength condition, and five
of the nine participants in the 2.0 coupling strength
condition. This provides strong support for the idea that the
kind of artificial agent developed and tested here can
produce adaptive, prospectively coordinated behavior
during ongoing, bi-directionally coupled interaction with a
human actor.

Discussion

Figure 3: Distribution of average instantaneous relative
phase (IRP) values between human participant and robot
avatar for coupling strengths of 1.5 (left) and 2.0 (right) and
in each feedback delay condition examined in Experiment 2.

The current project extends a rapidly emerging line of work
investigating the process of coordination and self-organized

1325

It is important to appreciate that while the addition of
feedback delays in the artificial agent only, on average,
reduced the lag between artificial agent and the human coactor, this should not be taken to indicate that the current
agent is ill-suited to achieving self-organized anticipatory
synchronization during human-machine interaction. The fact
that human actors are intentional agents means they likely
exhibited some adaptation to the artificial agent during
interaction even though they were instructed to focus on
producing their own movements and simply allow the avatar
to follow them. This could account for the finding that the
artificial agent only consistently achieved more anticipation
than lagging of the human co-actor in the context of the
longest time-delay. Furthermore, the patterns of intermittent
anticipatory coordination observed in Experiment 2 were
still quite similar to those seen in instances of interpersonal
anticipatory synchronization, suggesting that small feedback
delays in artificial agents induce a coordinative dynamic
analogous to natural to human-human interaction.
Indeed, overall the current findings present a potentially
transformative advance in the development of artificial
agents and HRI. An agent defined by a low-dimensional
dynamical model was able to display adaptive, anticipatory
coordination during real time interaction with a human actor
performing complex, seemingly unpredictable movements.
The coordinative patterns exhibited by this agent were
analogous to those observed during the occurrence of
visual-motor
agent-environment
and
interpersonal
anticipatory synchronization in humans. This supports the
idea that the dynamical models employed in the current
research capture universal properties intrinsic to many
physical systems, including complex biological behaviors
like the human neural and movement processes that exhibit
the kind of unpredictable determinism characteristic of
chaos (e.g., Mitra et al., 1997). In displaying behavior that is
qualitatively similar to human individuals the artificial agent
developed here is likely capable of not only participating in
the kind of interpersonal coordination known to support the
successful completion of many everyday human tasks, but
also engendering some of the associated increases
interpersonal rapport and the facilitation of social awareness
found following behavioral coordination between
individuals (e.g., Miles et al., 2011). The current outcomes
therefore suggest that engaging in coordinated interaction
with such agents in the process of some higher order task
goal will not only allow for more successful and efficient
interactions during a wide variety of tasks, but may also
result in the kinds of positive social outcomes associated
with naturally occurring human interaction.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Institutes of
Health (R01GM105045).

References

Dumas, G., de Guzman, G. C., Tognoli, E., & Kelso, J. S.
(2014). The human dynamic clamp as a paradigm for
social interaction. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 111(35), E3726-E3734.
Kelso, J. A. S., & Ding, M. (1993). Fluctuations,
intermittency, and controllable chaos in biological
coordination. Variability and motor control, 291-316.
Lopresti-Goodman, S. M., Richardson, M. J., Silva, P. L., &
Schmidt, R. C. (2008). Period basin of entrainment for
unintentional visual coordination. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 40(1), 3-10.
Lorenz, T., & Hirche, S. (2014). Movement coordination in
repetitive joint action tasks: Considerations on humanhuman and human-robot interaction. From 2014 IEEE
International Conference.
Masoller, C. (2001). Anticipation in the synchronization of
chaotic
semiconductor
lasers
with
optical
feedback. Physical Review Letters, 86(13), 2782.
Miles, L. K., Lumsden, J., Richardson, M. J., & Macrae,
C.N. (2011). Do birds of a feather move together? Group
membership and behavioral synchrony. Experimental
brain research, 211(3), 495-503.
Mitra, S. S., Riley, M. A., & Turvey, M. T. (1997). Chaos in
human rhythmic movement. Journal Of Motor Behavior,
29(3), 195-198.
Palatinus, K. (2014). The Effects of Robot-Child
Interactions on Interpersonal and Intrapersonal
Coordination. Master’s thesis, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, Connecticut.
Schmidt, R. C., & O'Brien, B. (1997). Evaluating the
dynamics of unintended interpersonal coordination.
Ecological Psychology, 9(3), 189-206.
Stepp, N. (2009). Anticipation in feedback-delayed manual
tracking of a chaotic oscillator. Experimental brain
research, 198(4), 521-525.
Stepp, N., & Turvey, M. T. (2015). The Muddle of
Anticipation. Ecological Psychology, 27(2), 103-126.
Voss, H. U. (2000). Anticipating chaotic synchronization.
Physical review E, 61(5), 5115.
Warren, W. H. (2006). The dynamics of perception and
action. Psychological review, 113(2), 358-389.
Washburn, A., Kallen, R. W., Coey, C. A., Shockley, K., &
Richardson, M. J. (2015). Harmony from Chaos?
Perceptual-Motor Delays Enhance Social Anticipation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance.
Yaghoubzadeh, R., Kramer, M., Pitsch, K., & Kopp, S.
(2013, January). Virtual agents as daily assistants for
elderly or cognitively impaired people. In Intelligent
Virtual Agents (pp. 79-91). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Zhai, C., Alderisio, F., Tsaneva-Atanasova, K., & di
Bernardo, M. (2014, December). Adaptive tracking
control of a virtual player in the mirror game. In Decision
and Control (CDC), 2014 IEEE 53rd Annual Conference
on (pp. 7005-7010). IEEE.

1326

