Back to ABCs: Clustering Alphabetically, Rather than Semantically, Enhances
Vocabulary Learning
Jingqi Yu (jy45@umail.iu.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 East 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Veronica X. Yan (veronicy@usc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Southern California, 3620 South McClintock Ave. Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA

Elizabeth Ligon Bjork (elbjork@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, 502 Portola Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA

Robert A. Bjork (rabjork@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, 502 Portola Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA
Abstract

by Greek/Latin roots. Test preparation programs—and
hence, their students—often strongly promote one over the
other, yet there has been only minimal research testing the
relative efficacy of such methods.
The best way(s) to learn new vocabulary, therefore, is still
an open question, and what method yields the best learning
outcomes may in part depend on the characteristics of the
to-be-learned words. When it comes to learning new
vocabulary, for example, in preparation for the GRE or SAT
exams, there are two large sources of difficulty. First, these
tests require individuals to learn and distinguish between
many semantically related words (e.g., personality traits:
mendacious–callow). Second, there is a need to distinguish
between confusable but semantically distinct words, such
as words that are similar-looking and/or similarsounding (e.g., decry–descry).
While little to no research has been conducted on optimal
sequencing for the learning of confusable pairs, there has
been some research on semantic clustering, but evidence in
support of semantic clustering, however, has been mixed.
In the present studies, we specifically examine two popular
methods—clustering by semantic category or by
confusability, and alphabetically-clustered—and compare
them against a random sequence. We examine the
alphabetically-clustered sequence for a practical reason:
lists of words are often organized alphabetically, and for
this reason, there are many who may attempt to learn
words in that order, out of convenience. Indeed—at least
anecdotally—studying words alphabetically appears to be
common among Chinese students preparing for the SAT and
GRE exams. This alphabetical organization is not
necessarily a conscious, explicit strategy, but simply a
byproduct of how reading typically proceeds (i.e., start
on page 1 and work your way through to the end).
Studying words alphabetically does offer some structure,

Optimizing the study of vocabulary words for highstakes tests such as the SAT or GRE prep can be
problematic, given that many words are semantically,
orthographically, or phonologically confusable. Companies
marketing test preparation programs make multiple
recommendations, such as clustering words on some basis,
but little research has been carried out to examine what that
basis should be. Across two experiments, we compare the
efficacy of different types of clustering—categorical,
alphabetical, and confusable--for the learning of
semantically related words (Experiment 1) and confusable
words (Experiment 2). We demonstrate that, in contrast
to most learners’ intuitions, an alphabetical sequence yields
superior learning.
Keywords: memory, vocabulary learning, optimal
sequencing, semantic clustering, alphabetical clustering

Introduction
Vocabulary learning is a crucial component of learning
languages, not only because knowing some minimum
number of words is needed for a basic level of
communication in a new language, but also because
increasing one’s vocabulary in one’s own language can
be critical in the context of high-stakes testing of various
types. Applicants to undergraduate or graduate programs,
for example, often spend months preparing for standardized
examinations, such as the ACT, SAT, or GRE, and
memorization plays an essential role in such preparation.
Such vocabulary learning can be especially daunting for
international applicants from non-English speaking
backgrounds. To meet this demand from anxious testtakers, a huge test-preparation industry has sprung up, with
each different business promising a different set of
“secrets” to crack the SAT and GRE codes for a price.
Many of these organizations make recommendations for
how very large sets of new words may be learned,
including (a) using mnemonics (e.g., word imagery),
(b) grouping words by their category membership, and (c)

3615

we employed final criterion tests that were delayed by at
least 24 hours.
In Experiment 1, we examined the optimal sequencing
for learning semantically related words by comparing the
efficacy of alphabetical, categorical (i.e., semantic
clusters), and random sequences.
In Experiment 2, we examined the optimal sequencing
for learning confusable words by comparing the efficacy of
alphabetical, paired (confusable clusters), and random
sequences. Whether confusable clusters or random
sequencing creates more difficulties is unclear. Because
confusable pairs are similar-looking and/or similarsounding, similarities in orthography and/or phonology
could well interfere with performance during training, but
then might also enhance retention performance.
Alternatively, an alphabetical sequence resembles a hybrid
of random and paired schedules to some degree, and thus
might incorporate the best (or worst) of both worlds.

but unlike semantic clustering or clustering of confusable
words, clustering by initial letter appears somewhat
arbitrary. However, given that it is a strategy that is widely
used, and little is known as to whether this strategy is
truly beneficial for vocabulary learning, we examine it in
the present studies.

Semantic Clustering
“Semantic clustering” refers to the practice of grouping
vocabulary words into different categories based on their
meanings (Tinkham, 1993). Such clustering is believed to
be effective for several reasons, including that presenting
words in semantic clusters allows for intra-category and
inter-relational reinforcement (e.g., Seal, 1991), makes
the meanings of words clearer by enabling learners to
notice fine-grained distinctions between words (e.g., Gairns
& Redman, 1986), better reflects semantic networks in the
“mental lexicon” (e.g., Aitchison, 2002), and draws
attention to the semantics which may lead to deeper levels
of mental processing (Erten & Tekin, 2008). On the other
hand, Schneider, Healy, and Bourne (1998) found that while
clustering words semantically aided initial learning, it
appeared to hinder relearning a week later.
What constitutes a “semantic cluster” has, however,
differed greatly across researchers. Possible constructs
include, but are not limited to, near synonyms (e.g., man,
fellow, and guy; (Hippner-Page, 2000), topic-related items
(e.g., crime: smuggling, jury, and court; Papasanasiou,
2009), and exemplars that fall under a super-ordinate
category (e.g., fruit: apple, pear, and peach) (Waring,
1997). There is some, albeit limited, evidence supporting
the facilitating effects of semantic clustering (e.g.,
Finkbeiner & Nicol, 2003), but these conclusions have
largely been drawn from examination of acquisition during
training, rather than on the basis of long-term memory tests.
Considerable research, however, has demonstrated that the
manipulations that boost performance during training do
not always boost learning (see, e.g., Soderstrom & Bjork,
2015). Furthermore, conclusions are hard to draw because
the random and semantically clustered conditions compare
learning of different sets of words, making it unclear
whether it is the sequence that enhances learning or
whether a semantically related set of words is simply easier
to learn.

Experiment 1
The purpose of Experiment 1 is to address the first
challenge of vocabulary learning—the need to distinguish
between semantically related words.

Participants and Design
Participants were 152 undergraduates from the University
of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) who participated in the
experiment in exchange for course credit. Eight-two of
them were native English-speakers, and 70 spoke English as
a Second Language (ESL; M length of speaking English = 5.34 years).
ESL students were expected to be at a decent English level
due to the University’s requirements. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of three sequencing conditions:
categorical, alphabetical, and random.

Materials
A pool of 36 GRE word-synonym pairs was selected from
GREedge, a theme-based word list. This word list
contained six words from each of six different categories:
Communication, Crime & Law, Nature, Personality,
Thoughts & Ideas, and Time. College-level participants
were expected to know the meaning of each paired synonym.
Table 1 shows an example of the “Communication” related
words. Within each category, there was one word that
began with one of six initial letters—a, c, i, m, p, and s—
which allowed us to construct the six sets of words for the
alphabetical condition. Table 2 shows an example of the
words that begin with the letter a.

The Present Studies
We conducted two studies to examine the optimal
sequence of vocabulary learning. Although previous
studies have used separate lists for different conditions (e.g.,
Tinkham, 1993, 1997), we created one single set of GRE
words for each experiment, ensuring that only sequencing
would differ across conditions. Moreover, to test long-term
memory, rather than just performance during acquisition,

Table 1
Example of one of the six-word categorical sets: words
relating to “Communication”

3616

Category

Communication

Initial
a
c
i
m
p
s

GRE Word
acrimonious
circumlocution
importune
missive
prattle
sententious

answer with the same initial letter, and one was a random
lure selected from the other GRE words they had studied.
Finally, we collected information about participants’ GRE
preparation status and language fluency and number of
languages spoken.

Synonym
bitter
rambling
beg
letter
babble
pithy

Table 2
Example of one of the six-word alphabetical sets: words
beginning with the letter a
Initial

a

Category
Communication
Crime & Law
Nature
Personality
Thoughts & Ideas
Time

GRE Word
acrimonious
abjure
arroyo
abstemious
apotheosis
antediluvian

Synonym
bitter
withdraw
environment
restrained
exaltation
ancient

Figure 1: Example of a multiple-choice trial in Experiment
1. Participants were only shown contents inside the square.
The rest is only for illustration purpose .

Procedure

Results and Discussion

Participants were told that their task was to learn 36 GRE
words. Participants were presented one GRE wordsynonym pair at a time, and, for each pair, they were first
asked to generate the synonym (8 sec) before they were
shown the correct answer (3 sec). Therefore, the study phase
consisted of tests-with-feedback trials (for a discussion of
the benefits of testing and feedback on long-term retention,
see Roediger & Karpicke, 2006). The six pairs of a given
set (e.g., a random set, a category set, or an alphabetical set)
were always presented consecutively. Each set were
presented three times, with the order of pairs randomized
each time (hence, the alphabetical sequence was not strictly
alphabetical, but grouped words starting with the same
initial letter). Thus, any given pair was presented on an
average spacing interval of 5-5. Between individuals, the
order of the six sets was randomized.
After they completed studying all 36 pairs (3 times each),
participants were asked to predict how many of the 36 pairs
they would be able to answer correctly on the test the
next day. They were then informed of the three different
study sequences that had been used for different participants
and asked to judge which one they believed would be most
effective for learning vocabulary.
Twenty-four hours later, participants were emailed a
link to take the final test. The test phase consisted of two
portions: First, they were asked to complete a cued-recall
task in which they were presented with the GRE word and
asked to generate the synonym. Second, they were given a
multiple-choice in which they were given the synonym and
four options. The options, illustrated in Figure 1, were
constructed such that one was the correct answer, one was
a wrong answer from the same category, one was a wrong

Sixteen participants were removed from subsequent
analysis for the following reasons: five looked up answers,
seven reported serious technical issues with the experiment,
and four people indicated both. Among the remaining 136
participants, 74 were native English-speakers and 62 were
ESL students (M length of speaking English = 5.42 years).
Acquisition The increase in acquisition from the to the third
time a given pair was presented during the study phase is
shown in the left panel of Figure 2. By the end of the
final trial, there was a trend for a difference between the
three conditions, F(2,133) = .2.24, MSE = .07, p = .11.
Post-hoc analyses revealed that the random condition (M =
.73, SD = .18) was marginally worse than the alphabetical
(M = .79, SD = .18, p = .06) and categorical conditions
(M = .79, SD = .18, p = .08). No significant difference
between the alphabetical and categorical conditions was
obtained, p = .96.
Final test Performance on the final cued recall test,
illustrated in the right panel of Figure 2, suggested some
differences (although limited) between conditions, F(2,133)
= 3.105, MSE = .04, p = .048, but the pattern was
somewhat different from that of the acquisition pattern.
Post-hoc pairwise comparisons revealed that participants
in the alphabetical condition (M = .50, SD = .03)
performed significantly better than those in the random
condition (M = .40, SE = .03), p = .02), but neither was
significantly different from the categorical condition (M =
.44, SD = .21), ps > .10. No significant differences in
performance on the multiple-choice test among conditions
were observed, F(2,133) = 1.764, p = .18.

3617

Figure 2: Study phase acquisition curves and final cued
recall test in Experiment 1. Error bars represent one
standard error of the mean.
Metacognitive responses With respect to the question
“What sequence do you think is best for learning?” asked of
participants at the end of the acquisition phase, 94 (70%)
of the 134 participants responding reported believing that
categorical clustering would lead to the best learning, 35
(26%) reported believing that a random sequence would be
best, and only 5 (4%) reported believing that an alphabetical
sequence would be best. These metacognitive responses did
not differ by assigned condition, χ2 (4) =7.34, p = .12.
Overall, while Experiment 1 neither show evidence in
favor of nor against categorical sequencing, it surprisingly
suggested some benefits associated with an alphabetical
sequencing strategy. Participants’ metacognitive beliefs,
however, showed limited faith in this “new” strategy.

down into 18 confusable pairs. The words in nine of these
pairs shared the same initial letters (e.g., augur-bode and
auger- drill) and the remaining nine of these pairs did not
(e.g., astringent-bitter and stringent-strict). Across all the
GRE words, any initial letter was also made to appear at
least three times (e.g., three words that began with ‘a’).
College-level participants were expected to know the
meaning of each paired synonym.
In the random condition, one randomized sequence of
the 36 words was created for each participant. In the paired
condition, the confusable paired-GRE words were always
presented consecutively (e.g., augur-bode followed by
auger- drill, or vice versa), and the order of pairs was
randomized for each participant. In the alphabetical
condition, the GRE words were presented in alphabetical
order. Table 3 shows an example of two confusable pairs
in alphabetical order: One same-initial pair (veracious and
voracious) and one different-initial pair (pabulum and
vinculum). As demonstrated below, Same-initial pairs by
definition would still appear close to each other in
alphabetical order (not necessarily consecutively), but
different-initial pairs would for sure be shuffled.
Table 3
Example of two confusable pairs in alphabetical order: One
same-initial pair and one different-initial pair.
Initial
p
…

v

GRE Word
pabulum
…

Synonym
sustenance
…

veracious
vinculum
voracious

honest
bond
greedy

Procedure

Experiment 2

The procedure of Experiment 2 was similar to that of
Experiment 1 with three exceptions: (a) Instead of
repeating in sets of six, all 36 pairs were presented before
they were repeated, yielding an average spacing interval
of 35-35; (b) the alphabetical order here was strictly
alphabetical, so the order of words in each of the three
cycles of 36 trials was the same; and (c) the multiplechoice test used the GRE word as the cue and presented
four studied synonyms as the options (the correct answer,
the synonym of the confusable GRE word, a synonym
of a word sharing the same initial letter, and another
random synonym).

Experiment 2 aimed to address the second challenge in GRE
word learning: students’ ability to distinguish between
similar-looking and/or similar-sounding words.

Participants and Design
Participants were 112 undergraduates from UCLA who
participated in the experiment in exchange for course credit.
Sixty-five of those participants were native Englishspeakers, and 47 ESL students (M length of speaking English = 5.60
years). Despite being non-native English-speakers, these
ELS students were expected to be at a decent English level
due to the University’s requirements. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of three sequencing conditions:
paired, alphabetical, and random.

Results and Discussion
Sixteen participants were removed from subsequent analysis:
five looked up answers, and 11 reported serious technical
issues with the experiment. Among the remaining 96
participants, 57 were native English-speakers and 39 were
ESL students (M length of speaking English = 5.76 years).

Materials
As in Experiment 1, we selected 36 GRE word- synonym
pairs from several sites (e.g., Magoosh). However, each
GRE word was also matched with another GRE word that
was highly confusable. That is, 36 GRE words were broken

3618

Acquisition The increase in acquisition from the first to
the third time a given pair was presented during the study
phase is shown in the left panel of Figure 3. Participants in
different conditions exhibited a similar amount of
accuracy boost by the end of the study phase, and the
proportions of synonyms correctly recalled were not
different, although performance in the alphabetical
condition (M = .43, SD = .20) was numerically better than
that in the random (M = .39, SD = .18) and paired (M =
.37, SD = .18) conditions. Unlike in Experiment 1, the
curves were nearly linear with no indication of
deceleration in learning rates at the end of the 3rd
presentation. One interpretation of this finding was that
intrinsic confusion in confusable words made them
naturally more difficult to learn than regular ones (indeed,
accuracy rates were lower). Thus, three learning trials
still left space for learning to improve at an accelerating
rate before starting to slow down.

was no interaction between condition and pair type,
F(2,93) = 1.12, MSE = .01, p = .33.
Figure 4 shows multiple-choice test performance by
condition and pair type. A 3 (sequencing condition) x 2
(pair
type) mixed effects ANOVA performed on the
multiple-choice test performance revealed similar patterns
to that obtained for the cued-recall test performance. Again,
there was a trend-level effect of condition, F(2,93) = 2.22,
MSE = .10, p = .12. Pairwise comparisons revealed a
similar pattern as found with the cued-recall test: the
alphabetical condition (M = .77, SD = .03) was marginally
better than the paired (M = .70, SD = .03, p = .06) and the
random (M = .70, SD = .03, p = .08) conditions.
Again, a significant effect of pair type, F(1,93) = 53.03,
MSE = .01, p < .001, was observed, with the differentinitial letter pairs (M = .77, SD = .18) learned better
than the same-initial letter pairs (M = .67, SD = . 18).
Finally, there was no condition x pair type interaction,
F(2,93) = 1.57, MSE = .01, p = .21

Proportion Correct

0.9

Alphabetical

Paired

Random

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Different Initial

Shared Initial

Confusable Pair Type

Figure 4: Multiple-choice test performance on
Experiment 2 by condition and pair type. Error bars
represent one standard error of the mean.

Figure 3: Study phase acquisition curves and final
cued recall test in Experiment 2. Error bars
represent one standard error of the mean.

Metacognitive Responses When asked what sequence they
believed was best for learning, 42 (44%) participants
reported that they believed that pairing confusable words
would lead to the best learning, 39 (41%) a random
sequence would be best, and 15 (16%) believed that an
alphabetical sequence would be best. These metacognitive
responses did not differ by experienced
condition, χ2 (4) = 6.30, p = .18.
Overall, the findings of Experiment 2 demonstrate that
when trying to learn confusable words, contrary to many
people’s belief (a majority of 84% thought that either
random or paired order would be the best), an alphabetical
order led to the greatest learning.

Final test Performance on the final cued recall test is
illustrated in the right panel of Figure 3. A 3 (sequencing
condition) x 2 (pair type) mixed effects ANOVA
performed on the cued-recall test performance, revealed a
main effect of condition, F(2,93) = 3.45, MSE = .10, p =
.036. Additionally, post-hoc pairwise comparisons revealed
that the alphabetical condition (M = .53, SD = 25) yielded
significantly better learning than the paired condition (M =
.39, SD = .19, p = .01). The random condition (M = .44,
SD = .25) was not significantly different from either the
paired condition (p = .33) or the alphabetical condition (p
= .12).
A main effect of pair type was also observed, F(1, 93) =
50.55, MSE = .01, p < .001, with the GRE words from
the pairs having different initial letters (M = .50, SD = .23)
being learned significantly better than the words from pairs
sharing the same initial letter (M = .39, SD = .24). There

General Discussion
The current study is one of the very few instances where
the alphabetical order has been studied. Experiments 1 and
2 revealed some preliminary evidence on the merits of an

3619

alphabetical word learning sequence. There was some
suggestion that this strategy can be equally, if not more
effective than strategies that are traditionally considered
good (e.g., categorical or paired clustering).
It is worth pointing that while both being referred to as an
“alphabetical sequence,” the structures of the alphabetical
order in Experiments 1 and 2 were not identical. In
Experiment 1, the structure was not strictly alphabetical, but
rather grouped words beginning with the same initial
letter together. Participants went through an alphabetical
cluster three times, so they were only exposed to one initial
letter at any given time. Thus, it was more of an
“alphabet-informed grouping.” We speculate that one
possibility is that this grouping offers an optimal level of
support and difficulty: The support from the small degree
of structure (i.e., shared initial letters) may ease extraneous
cognitive processing load from the difficult word learning
task; the otherwise-random nature of the words maintains
a sense of difficulty to promote deeper processing. An
alternative explanation could simply be that clustering
alphabets gives learners another, redundant, cue to aid
learning. The initial letter is another cue to the context in
which words were learned. For example, the initials may
have already narrowed down the list from 36 to six words,
which may well require less cognitive effort to identify the
correct answer, given that words in the same initial cluster
are not too similar orthographically/phonologically.
Therefore, while shared categories may be a contextual cue
in categorical clustering, list position could be a contextual
cue in an alphabetical sequencing. Each clustering method
has its own advantage and both lead to respectable results.
In Experiment 2, the alphabetical sequence was truly
alphabetical, with half same-initial and half different-initial
confusable pairs. The advantage of this strategy was
primarily reported in learning different-initial than sameinitial pairs. Thus, the benefit of alphabetizing a confusable
word-list was observed at a global (the entire list with
multiple initials) rather than a local (same-initial pairs
grouped to the same alphabetical cluster) level.
Consequently, an alphabetical condition represents a hybrid
of randomization of the easier pairs (i.e., different-initial
pairs) and confusability- clustering of the more difficult
pairs (i.e., same initial pairs), which may have incidentally
created a degree of “desirable difficulty” (Bjork, 1994).
Alternatively, because learners in Experiment 2 learned all
36 words before repeating, those in the alphabetical
condition may have simply used list position as a contextual
cue to aid learning. For example, they may have linked tobe-learned words to some known knowledge (i.e., an
alphabetical list) to help memorize.
We have already demonstrated some caveats when
alphabetizing to-be-learned words. As suggested above,
there might be differences in the role of “alphabet-informed
grouping vs. alphabetical order. It is therefore unclear how
far the benefits of an alphabetical sequence would extend.
In the present studies, we presented participants relatively
difficult words in a language that they were familiar with

Hence, knowledge about word etymology (e.g., Latin roots) or
even passing familiarity with the to-be-learned words
themselves (note the large jump in performance between the
first and second trial of the study phase) may have supported
learning. It is unclear how the optimal sequence might
change for foreign language learning, where learners do not
have this type of background knowledge.
As part of a critical factor in high-stakes tests, GRE word
learning is a major concern of many students. The present
studies extend the literature by suggesting the powerful
potential of learning words in alphabetical order, a widely
used, yet under-investigated alternative to clustering or
random sequencing. Whether, however, the benefits of an
alphabetical sequencing might generalize to vocabulary
words that are less difficult and abstract than GRE words
remains to be seen. In the meantime, it appears that
generations of Chinese students who have been learning
English vocabulary words grouped alphabetically may not
have been engaging in what may seem, by some
arguments, to be a misguided practice.

References
Aitchison, J. (2002). Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the
Mental Lexicon (3rd Ed.). Blackwell Publishers: Great Britain.
Bjork, R.A. (1994). Memory and metamemory considerations in
the training of human beings. In J. Metcalfe & A. Shimamura
(Eds.), Metacognition: Knowing about knowing (pp. 185–205).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Erten, I.H., & Tekin, M. (2008). Effects on vocabulary acquisition
of presenting new words in semantic sets versus semanticallyunrelated sets. System, 36 (3), 407-422.
Finkbeiner, M., & Nicol, J. (2003). Categorical category effects in
second language word learning. Applied Psycholinguistics,
24(3), 369-383.
Gairns, R., & Redman, S. (1986). Working with words: A guide to
teaching and learning vocabulary. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Hippner-Page, T. (2000). Semantic clustering versus thematic
clustering of English vocabulary words for second language
instruction: Which method is more effective? Retrieved from
ERIC database. (ED445550)
Seal, B. D. (1991). Vocabulary learning and teaching. In M. Celce–
Murcia (Ed.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language
(2nd ed., pp. 296–311). Boston: Heinle & Heinle.
Schneider, V. I., Healy, A. F., & Bourne, L. E., Jr (1998). Contextual
interference effects in foreign language vocabulary acquisition
and retention. In A. F. Healy & L. E. Bourne, Jr. (Eds.), Foreign
Language Learning: Psycholinguistic Studies on Training and
Retention (pp. 77-90). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Soderstrom, N. C., & Bjork, R. A. (2015). Learning versus
performance: An integrative review. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 10, 176-199.
Tinkham, T. (1993). The effects of semantic clustering on the
learning of second language vocabulary. System, 21, 371–380.
Tinkham, T. (1997). The effects of semantic and thematic
clustering on the learning of second language vocabulary. Second
Language Research, 13, 138–163.
Waring, R. (1997). The negative effects of learning words in
semantic sets: A replication. System, 25, 261–274.

3620

