Behavioral Dynamics and Action Selection in a Joint Action Pick-and-Place Task
Maurice Lamb1 (maurice.lamb@uc.edu), Tamara Lorenz1,2,3 (lorenztr@ucmail.uc.edu), Stephen Harrison4
(steven.harrison@uconn.edu), Rachel Kallen1 (rachel.kallen@uc.edu), Ali Minai2 (ali.minai@uc.edu),
Michael Richardson1 (michael.richardson@uc.edu)
1

Department of Psychology, 4150 Edwards 1
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA
2Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 812 Rhodes Hall
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA
3
Department of Materials and Mechanical Engineering, 2600 Clifton Ave,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45221, USA
4
Department of Kinesiology, University of Connecticut, CT, USA

captured by extending a low dimensional behavioral
dynamics (Warren, 2006) model of individual environmental
route navigation (Fajen & Warren 2003) and pick-and-place
behavior (Lamb et al., under review, Washburn, et al. 2015).
Because the pick-and-place behaviors exhibited by the
proposed low dimensional model emerge from the physical
and informational dynamics of a given task context, the
proposed model may be developed as a simple artificial agent
system that can interact with human co-actors. An artificial
agent system based on the model would be able to interact
with human co-actors in the task without access to a coactor’s cognitive states, i.e. without a theory of mind.

Abstract
Many common tasks require or are made more efficient by
coordinating with others. In this paper we investigate the
coordination dynamics of a joint action pick-and-place task in
order to identify the behavioral dynamics that underlie the
emergence of human coordination. More precisely, we
introduce a task dynamics approach for modeling multi-agent
interaction in a continuous pick-and-place task where two
agents must decide to work together or alone to move an object
from one location to another. Our aims in the current paper are
to identify and model (1) the relevant affordance dynamics that
underlie the selection of the different action modes required by
the task and (2) the trajectory dynamics of each actor’s hand
movements when moving to grasp, relocate, or pass the object.
We demonstrate that the emergence of successful coordination
can be characterized in terms of behavioral dynamics models
which may have applications for artificial agent design.

Methods
Participants

Keywords: Behavioral Dynamics, Affordances, Multi-agent
Coordination, Dynamical Modeling, Joint action, Pick-andplace, Dynamical Systems Theory, Decisions

Introduction
Often, everyday tasks can be accomplished more quickly and
efficiently when individuals work together and coordinate
their actions to accomplish task goals. However, increasing
the number of individuals engaged in a task constructively
increases the complexity of the task by expanding the degrees
of freedom and interactions that define the task action space.
Computational approaches to dealing with the increased
complexity of joint action tasks largely focus on reducing
complexity by identifying representational or neural
structures that support successful joint action (Graf, SchützBosbach, & Prinz, 2009; Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004;
Sebanz & Knoblich, 2009). Equally important, however, is
understanding what aspects of successful multiagent
coordination naturally emerge from the physical and
informational dynamics of a given task context (Richardson
& Kallen, 2016; Richardson, Marsh, & Schmidt, 2010;
Richardson et al., 2015). The aim of the current project was
to identify these task dynamics for a simple joint action pickand-place task. Of particular interest, was the degree to which
the complex patterns of interpersonal movement coordination
and action (affordance) selection that emerge could be

20 University of Cincinnati students (aged 18 to 28 years)
were recruited to participate in the experiment. Participants
received credit as a part of a class requirement for an
undergraduate Psychology course. All participants provided
written consent prior to completing the study, with the
procedures and methodology employed reviewed and
approved by the University of Cincinnati Institutional
Review Board.

Materials and Apparatus
An illustration of the experimental task setup is provided in
Figure 1. Participants stood at a 1.65m x 0.89m x 0.995m
table in a laboratory room and completed a joint action pickand-place task in a virtual environment. The virtual
environment consisted of a room similar to the laboratory
room and a table that was isomorphic in size and location to
the table in the laboratory room. The virtual environment was
displayed to each participant using Oculus Rift DK2 virtual
reality headset (Oculus VR, Irvine, California). The physical
table acted as a solid surface limiting the participants’
movements within the virtual environment and creating a
surface on which the participants could move a hand-held
wireless Polhemus Latus motion-sensor (Polhemus Ltd,
Vermont, USA) that tracked their right hand movements
within the virtual environment at 96 Hz. The participants’

2506

head movements were also tracked using Oculus Rift DK2
head tracking system.
The virtual environment, task objects, and task controllers
were designed using the Unity 3D game engine (version
5.2.0; Unity Technologies, San Francisco, California) and
Sketchup 2015 (Tremble Navigation Technologies,
Sunnyvale, California). The maximum display latency
between the participants’ real-world movements and their
movements in the virtual environment was 33ms. The
experimental task states were continuously recorded at 70 Hz.
As indicated in Figure 1, Participant locations were
identified in terms of the “A” side or the “B” side of the table,
where the body of the participant on the A side of the table
(participant A) is nearer to the center of the appearance range
than the body of the participant on the B side (participant B).
Participant A was positioned on the A side of the table,
standing half way between the middle of the table and the
pickup location. Participant B was positioned such that their
right shoulder was directly across the table from the right
shoulder of participant A (see Figure 1).
Within the virtual environment, the participants were
represented as identical virtual avatars modeled after a crash

controller (model and controller supplied by Root Motion,
Tartu, Estonia) driven by the Polhemus motion sensor
movements and the head movements of the participants
controlled the right arm and body movements of the
participants’ virtual avatar, respectively. The resulting arm
and body movements were not identical to the real world arm
and body movements of the participants, but were close
enough to render any differences between the real and virtual
body postures of the participants unnoticeable or not
functionally relevant.

Experimental Task
The experimental task required participants to work together
to move virtual disc objects (henceforth disc) that appeared
on one end of a virtual tabletop to one of five evenly spaced
target locations on the other end of the table (see Figure 1).
The target location for a given trial was indicated by the color
of the disc. A trial involved successfully moving a disc to the
correct target location. Target colors and locations did not
change during the task. However, discs appeared in random
locations along the y table axis within the middle third of the
table (appearance range). Participants completed 2 blocks of
150 trials, 30 trials for each target color. Target colors were
randomly presented.
The participants were instructed to pick up the disc when it
appeared and attempt to move it to the target location. Either
participant could pick up the disc, but they were instructed
not talk or gesture to one another during the task. A pickup
occurred when a participant’s sphere came in contact with the
disc. When picked up, the disc moved with the participant’s
sphere until it reached the target or the participant passed the
disc. The participants were informed that if the target was
either too far away or uncomfortable to reach, they could pass
it to the other participant. A pass involved picking up the disc
and then releasing it somewhere on the table by lifting their
hand from the table. To complete a pass, the other participant
would pick up the disc and move it to the target. A trial was
completed when the disc reached the correct target.

Procedure

Figure 1: Illustration of experimental setup. At the
beginning of each trial a virtual disc would appear on the
left side of the table within the appearance range. Disc color
indicated target location for that trial. The targets squares
(M = magenta, Y= yellow, G = green, B = Blue, R = red)
were always visible on the right side of the table.
test dummy with a height of 1.8m. Both the participants’ right
hands were represented by a semi-transparent blue sphere at
the end of the dummy’s right wrist in order to simplify
interaction with the task environment. An inverse kinematics

Participants were told that the experiment was investigating
the dynamics of joint action pick-and-place behavior and that
they would be completing a simple pick-and-place task with
one another. The participants were then embedded within the
virtual environment using the HMD and viewing height and
sensor calibration was performed. Task instructions were
then provided to the participants and after participants
indicated that they understood the task procedure and goal,
they were given an opportunity to complete 2 practice blocks.
The first practice block consisted of 12 trials where the disc
always appeared in the center of the appearance region and
indicated the middle (green) target. Each participant took 6
turns picking up the disc and either passed it or took it to the
target. The second practice block involved 20 trials, 4 trials
for each target location. In this practice block, the pickup
location was randomly assigned within the appearance range
on each trial.

2507

As mentioned above, experimental trials were broken up
into 2 blocks of 150 trials. After the first experimental block
participants switched sides of the table, i.e. the participant on
side A moved to side B and the participant on side B moved
to side A. Participants switched HMDs and moved to the
other side of the lab room table to effect this switch.
Experimental blocks lasted between 10 and 15 minutes.

significantly increased pass prediction beyond that predicted
by actor resting location alone.

Results
In order to model the emergence of successful joint action
during the current pick-and-place task, the analysis was
directed towards answering two general questions. First,
what task variables determined the participants’ decision to
pickup and/or or pass. In other words, what were the
affordance (action opportunity; Gibson, 1979) based action
selection dynamics that characterized pickup and pass
behavior? Second, what were the trajectory dynamics of the
participant’s hand movements when moving to grasp,
relocate, or pass the disc within a two-dimensional task space.
Below we consider each of these questions in turn.

Decisions
For the pick-and-place task investigated here there were two
affordance based action selection decisions that we
examined. First, participants had to decide whether or not to
pick up the disc when it appeared. In order to understand the
basis for this decision we applied the C4.5 decision tree
algorithm (Quinlan, 1993) using a 10 fold cross validation to
participant pick decisions (n = 2998) in order to create a
decision tree with a minimum node size of 50 instances. This
analysis revealed that the only attributes used to build the tree
were the current location of each actor’s hand to the disc, with
the resulting decision tree able to correctly predict 87% of the
pick decisions. Attributes that were considered for each
participant included: hand’s current distance to the disc,
hand’s current distance to target, disc location, and target
location. These attributes were not considered relevant to
modeling the decision behavior if it was not included in the
decision tree produced by the C4.5 method or if its exclusion
resulted in a change in predictive success of < 3%.
The C4.5 decision tree algorithm was also applied using a
10 fold cross validation to a data set of 2998 passing decisions
in order to create a decision tree with a minimum node size
of 50 instances. When the only attribute used to build the tree
was the distance of the resting location of one of actor’s hand
to the disc the resulting decision tree was able to correctly
predict 79% of the pickup decisions. Resting hand location
for each side was defined as a position 0.15m from the edge
of the table directly in front of the participant’s right shoulder.
The same set of attributes considered for the pickup decision
were considered for the pass decision, with the addition of the
previous pass decision. None of these other attributes

Figure 2: Heat-maps of example participant (top) and
model simulation (bottom) trajectories during the
experimental task.

Movements
An example of the complete set of participant pair trajectories
are illustrated in figure 2 (top) as a heat map. This heat map
plot was created by dividing the table into 125x108 grid and
for each trial, the number of times a participant’s location was
recorded in a given grid cell was tallied to create a histogram
of trajectory locations in table coordinates. A greyscale value
was assigned to each cell from a scale of 64 shades. All
participants exhibited a qualitatively similar sideways
“spaghetti monster” heat-map, with concentrations of
trajectories (brighter areas), corresponding to discs (far left
side of heat-map plot), pass/rest locations (top and bottom left
of center on the heat-map plot), and target locations (5
distinct points across the right of the heat map plot). Because
of the number of subtask trajectories, trajectory heat maps
provide a relatively straightforward tool for comparing
qualitative similarities between both human participants and
between human data and simulation data.1
Participant trajectories tended to curve slightly away from
straight-line trajectories. This may be due to the fact that after
completing a subtask goal participants employed a simple
strategy of heading in the general direction of the next
subtask goal instead of taking an initial heading defined by
the straight-line angle from their current location to the goal
location.
Participant subtask movements exhibited a bell shaped
velocity profile with the peak velocity occurring around half

1 For each side of the table, subtask trajectories examined include:
rest-to-pickup, pickup-to-target, pickup-to-pass, rest-to-receive,
receive-to-target, pass-to-rest, and target-to-pickup.

2508

way through the trajectory. Across all subtask trajectories, the
average peak velocity was 1.231m/s (Mdn = 1.252m/s, Q1 =
0.924m/s, Q3 = 1.373m/s) and the peak velocity occurred on
average around 57% (SD = 15%) of any given subtask
trajectory. For the 14 subtask trajectories examined, average
peak velocity for each subtask trajectory was significantly
correlated, r(14) = 0.89, p<0.001, with the average straightline distance of each subtask trajectory. Shorter trajectories
had lower average peak velocities than longer trajectories.
In order to identify where participant’s passed the disc on
pass trials, cluster analysis was conducted, using the K-means
cluster analysis algorithm, which finds cluster centers that
minimize the sum of squared error (SSE) for a given number
of clusters, k. We analyzed the release/pass locations to
determine whether these locations typically clustered around
1, 2, or 3 cluster centroids. The optimal number of clusters
was defined as the value of k such that the difference of the
SSE for a reference distribution, determined by Monte Carlo
sampling of a reference distribution, was greatest compared
to the other values of k. For each pair, separate evaluations
were run for each side of the table. For side A, when a
participant on side A passed at least once during the
experiment (n = 8 pairs), the optimal number of clusters was
1 for all passes on this side of the table. Likewise, when a
participant on side B passed at least once during the
experiment (n = 9 pairs), the optimal number of clusters was
1 for most pairs (n = 7). When a participant on side A passed
during the experiment (n = 8), the passes clustered around an
average (x, y) table location of (0.24m, 0.62m). When a
participant on B side of the table passed (n = 9), the passes
clustered around an average (x, y) table location of (0.33m,
0.18m).

Model
The current study had two overall aims. The first aim was to
identify the behavioral dynamics that underlie a continuous
joint action pick-and-place task, in which two participants
had to move objects from one tabletop location to another
either alone or by passing the object to another co-actor. Our
second aim was to develop a behavioral dynamics model that
can characterize the joint action behaviors and choices
(pickup or not; pass or not) of the participants engaged in
during the joint action pick-and-place task. With respect to
this aim we developed a model of both the participant’s
movement in the task space and their decisions to both pick
up the object when it appears on a given trial and to pass the
object.

Movement Dynamics
In order to model the dynamics of each participant’s,
henceforth agent, hand movements throughout the task, a task
specific parameterization of the Fajen and Warran model of
human locomotory navigation was employed (Fajen &
Warren, 2003, 2004, 2007; Warren & Fajen, 2008). This
model has also been extended to model single actor pick and
place behavior (Lamb et al., under review). In the current
context, the model characterizes a heading direction or

angle, 𝜑𝑖 , of an agent’s hand or end-effector (where each
agent is indexed by 𝑖) during each task trial was defined by
𝜑̈ 𝑖 = −𝑏𝑔𝑖 𝜑̇ 𝑖 − 𝑘𝑔𝑖 (𝜑𝑖 − 𝜃𝑔𝑖 )(𝑒 −𝑐1𝑑𝑔𝑖 + 𝑐2 ),

(1)

where 𝜑̇ 𝑖 , and 𝜑̈ 𝑖 , correspond to the velocity and acceleration
of the agent’s end-effector heading angle, respectively, and b
and k are damping and spring/stiffness terms, such that
−𝑏𝑔𝑖 𝜑̇ 𝐴𝑖 acts as a friction force on turning rate, and the
function −𝑘𝑔𝑖 (𝜑𝑖 − 𝜃𝑔𝑖 ) operates to minimize the difference
between the current heading angle, 𝜑𝑖 , and the angle 𝜃𝑔𝑖 , of
the corresponding subtask goal/target location (i.e., the
pickup location for pickup movements, the release/pass
location for passing movements, and the target/drop-off
location for target movements). The distance of the agent i’s
end effector to the current goal location is defined by 𝑑𝑔𝑖 . The
presence of the factor (𝑒 −𝑐1𝑑𝑔𝑖 + 𝑐2 ) in the second addend of
the right-hand side introduces an exponentially decaying
function characterized by a constant offset parameter c2 and
an exponential decay rate, which is a function of the constant
parameter c1 and the Euclidean distance, dg, between an
agent’s current hand location and the current goal location.
The parameter c2 ensures that the rate of change in heading
direction never goes to zero (Fajen & Warren, 2003). Note
that the parameters 𝜃𝑔𝑖 and 𝑑𝑔𝑖 change continuously as the
position of the agent’s hand/end-effector moves through the
task space.
Finally, in order for to capture the non-constant velocity
profile observed in participants, 𝑣𝑖 is introduced to
characterize the movement velocity of the agent’s endeffector (hand). 𝑣𝑖 is defined by means of the additional 2nd
order differential equation
𝑣̈ 𝑖 = −𝑏𝑣𝑖 𝑣̇ 𝑖 − 𝑘𝑣𝑖 (𝑣𝑖 − 𝐶𝑣𝑖 (1 − 𝑒 −𝑑𝑔𝑖 )),

(2)

where 𝑏𝑣𝑖 and 𝑘𝑣𝑖 act as damping and stiffness terms on the
rate of change of 𝑣𝑖 , which increases and decreases as a
function of the target (goal) distance, 𝑑𝑔𝑖 . When the agent’s
end-effector or hand is far away from the target location (1 −
𝑒 −𝑑𝑔𝑖 ) ≈ 1 and 𝑣𝐴 increases. As the distance to the goal
location decreases, however, (1 − 𝑒 −𝑑𝑔𝑖 ) approaches zero
and 𝑣𝑖 decreases accordingly. 𝐶𝑣𝑖 is a constant parameter that
specifies the maximum velocity in m/s, such that the same
equation can be used for a wide range of different movement
distances, with differential peak velocities resulting for
shorter and longer distances (see Lamb et al., under review
for more details on this velocity function).

Action Selection Dynamics
In the experimental task there are two task defined choices.
First, one of the agents must choose to pick up the task object
while the other agent chooses to stay out of the way. Second,
once an object is picked up, the agent with the object must
decide to either take the object to the goal location or pass it
to their co-actor. In both cases, the decision can be

2509

characterized as a selection between action modes or
affordances, i.e. pick up the object or wait and take the object
to goal or pass. Moreover, previous research using a nonrandom pick-and-place task paradigm suggests that recent
action modes may affect the current action mode selection
(Lamb et al., Under Review). As a result, in the current
context the action mode selection dynamics may be captured
by
𝑥𝑖̇ = −𝛼𝑗 𝑖 + 𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑖3

(4)

where 𝑥𝑖 represents the state variable for action section (i.e.,
affordance mode) of the previous action selection process and
𝑥𝑖̇ is the action selection state variable for the current trial. 𝛼𝑗𝑖
corresponds to the specific subtask action mode and agentnormalized E/A ratio where the decision to pick up an object
can be defined for Agent 1 by
𝛼𝑠1 = (𝜎𝑠1 −

𝑑𝑔𝑠1
𝑅1

) 𝛿𝑠1 − (𝜎𝑠2 −

𝑑𝑔𝑠2
𝑅2

) 𝛿𝑠2

(5)

and for Agent 2 by
𝛼𝑠2 = (𝜎𝑠2 −

𝑑𝑔𝑠2
𝑅2

) 𝛿𝑠2 − (𝜎𝑠1 −

𝑑𝑔𝑠1
𝑅1

) 𝛿𝑠1

(6)

where 𝑑𝑔𝑠 is the distance from current location of the ith
𝑖
agent’s end effector to the disc’s location. Similarly, the
decision to pass was defined by
𝛼𝑝𝑖 = (𝜎𝑝𝑖 −

𝑑𝑔𝑝

𝑖

𝑅𝑖

) 𝛿𝑝𝑖

(7)

was initialized with the same pickup/target order used for a
participant pair. The passing location centers corresponded to
the observed passing location centers for each participant
pair. Cluster centers corresponding to each participant pair
were used to initialize the simulation sequence based on that
pair’s appearance/target order. Experimentally observed
within pair variability in pass locations was likely due to the
many complex interactions from which this passing behavior
emerges (Holden, 2002; 2005; Stephen & Mirman, 2010).
However, in our simulations this variability is produced by a
sequence of random values generated from a lognormal
distribution that were added to the passing location centers in
order to produce a pass location distribution that was similar
to the experimentally observed data.
For each action selection the pickup and passing solutions
to parameter equations, action selection dynamics, Eq. 4,
were integrated for 1500 steps using the MATLAB ODE45
function with the end state of the integration used to drive the
pickup and pass decisions (and return to rest position). The
output state of the action selection equation was stored as an
input for integration of the action selection equation in the
next trial (x = 0 for the first trial in a sequence). Heading
angles were initialized in the cardinal direction of the next
subtask goal, e.g. pick up to target trajectories initialized with
a heading angle of 0° heading directly to the right side of the
table. Random noise was added to the initial angle from a
uniform distribution with min/max values of ± 17°. The
movement dynamics, Eq. 1 and 2, were integrated for each
subtask movement using the Euler integration (.01 time step),
with integration terminated when the model location was
within 4 cm of the target location. Random noise was added
to the model heading direction, 𝜑𝑖 , at each time step of the
integration using a uniform distribution with min/max values
of to ± 1.14°.

𝑑𝑔𝑝 is the distance of the agent’s resting end-effector (hand)
𝑖

location to the target location, and 𝑅𝑖 is a measure of the
agent’s maximal preferred reach. In both equations equation,
𝜎𝑗𝑖 and 𝛿𝑗𝑖 are constant scaling factors. In Eq. 5, 6, and 7, d is
a subtask action mode parameter that identifies the state of
the subtask action relevant environmental property.

Model Simulation
To determine whether systems defined by the movement
trajectory dynamics (Eq. 1 and 2) and the action selection
dynamics (Eq. 4, 5, 6, and 7) of the current model could
complete the task independently complete the current pickand-place task, a MATLAB (2016a) simulation was
conducted. A flow diagram illustrating the structure of the
simulation is provided in Figure 3. The simulated
environment consisted of a 1.5m x 0.89m rectangular space
matching the experimental table’s dimensions. The
simulation target and disc locations were initialized in the
same manner as in the experimental task. 10 different
simulation sequences were conducted, with each simulation
sequence consisting of 400 trials. Each simulation sequence

Figure 3: Structure of simulation. Eq. 1 and 2 are
implemented in the upper loop and Eq. 4 through 7 are
implemented in the lower goal selection loop.
An example simulation run is illustrated by the bottom
heat-map in Figure 2. For all simulation runs, the simulation
agents successfully completed the pick-and-place task within
the task constraints. All simulation agent trajectories

2510

remained within the task space and subtask trajectories were
within the same regions as those produced by human
participants. Simulation agent trajectories exhibited less
variability as can be seen in figure 2, though the importance
of this variability for a human co-actor engaged in the task is
something that will require further research. To the extent
that it is relevant, this variability may be replicated in an
artificial agent implementation of the model by the addition
of noise terms, through coupling to the human agent, and
possibly by noise introduced by the agent’s hardware
instantiation (e.g. motor variability in a robotic system).
The simulation agents were also able to spontaneously
select between picking up the object or not and between
passing the object or completing the task alone in a manner
similar to the real participants. For pickup trajectories it is
notable that pickup decisions may be made and changed as
co-actors move or do not move throughout the task space. If
both simulation co-actors are roughly the same distance the
pickup location at the beginning of a trial, noise and velocity
profile variations still results in just one agent picking up the
object. If a simulation agent picked up an object, that agent
always passed for the farthest target and often did for the
second farthest, with the decision to pass for this target
fluctuating due to previous pass decisions and noise in the
system, matching experimentally observed participant
behaviors.

Conclusions
The current model is useful for providing insight into how
complex movement and decision dynamics might emerge
from a system given relatively simple information structures.
Notably, the model does not assume the need to understand
or predict co-actor intentions or beliefs. This makes the
model an ideal candidate for implementation in an artificial
agent system that can interact in real-time with human coactors but does not have access to sophisticated sensory or
computational systems for interpreting high level cognitive
states. We are currently in the process of implementing a
version of this model in virtual and robotic systems to test
with human co-actors in order to validate the capabilities of
behavioral dynamics models applied in this way.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by The National Science
Foundation (NSF#1513801) and National Institute of Health
(R01GM105045-01).

References
Fajen, B. R., & Warren, W. H. (2003). Behavioral dynamics
of steering, obstable avoidance, and route selection.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 29(2), 343.
Fajen, B. R., & Warren, W. H. (2004). Visual guidance of
intercepting a moving target on foot. Perception, 33, 689–
716.

Fajen, B. R., & Warren, W. H. (2007). Behavioral dynamics
of intercepting a moving target. Experimental Brain
Research, 180(2), 303–319.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Graf, M., Schütz-Bosbach, S., & Prinz, W. (2009). Motor
Involvement in Action and Object Perception Similarity
and Complementarity. In S. Semin & G. Echterhov (Eds.),
Grounding sociality: Neurons, minds, and culture. NY:
Psychology Press.
Lamb, M., Kallen, R. W., Harrison, S. J., di Bernado, M.,
Minai, A. A., & Richardson, M. J. (Under Review).
Behavioral Dynamics of Object Movement and Passing
During a Joint-Action Pick and Place Task.
Mark, L. S., Nemeth, K., Gardner, D., Dainoff, M. J.,
Paasche, J., Duffy, M., & Grandt, K. (1997). Postural
dynamics and the preferred critical boundary for visually
guided reaching. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 23(5), 1365–1379.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.23.5.1365
Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
Inc.
Richardson, M. J., & Kallen, R. W. (2016). SymmetryBreaking and the Contextual Emergence of Human
Multiagent Coordination and Social Activity. In
Contextuality from Quantum Physics to Psychology (pp.
229–286).
Richardson, M. J., Marsh, K. L., & Schmidt, R. C. (2010).
Challenging the egocentric view of coordinated perceiving,
acting, and knowing. The Mind in Context, 307–333.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27, 169–192.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230
Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2009). Prediction in joint action:
what, when, and where. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1(2),
353–367 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-765.2009.01024.x
Warren, W. H., & Fajen, B. R. (2008). Behavioral Dynamics
of Visually Guided Locomotion. In A. Fuchs & V. K. Jirsa
(Eds.), Coordination: Neural, Behavioral and Social
Dynamics (pp. 45–75). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Warren Jr., W. H., & Whang, S. (1987). Visual guidance of
walking through apertures: Body-scaled information for
affordances. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 13(3), 371–383.
Washburn, A., Evans, J., Lamb, M., Kallen, R. W., Harrison,
S. J., & Richardson, M. J. (2015). Behavioral Dynamics of
a Joint-Action Object Movement and Passing Task. Studies
in Perception and Action XIII: Eighteenth International
Conference on Perception and Action, 81.

2511

