Bridging a Conceptual Divide: How Peer Collaboration Facilitates Science Learning
Andrew Shtulman (shtulman@oxy.edu)
Andrew Young (ayoung2@oxy.edu)
Department of Psychology, Occidental College
1600 Campus Road, Los Angeles, CA 90041

Abstract
Collaboration is generally an effective means of learning new
information, but is collaboration productive in domains where
collaborators may hold qualitatively different conceptions of
the domain’s causal structure? We explored this question in the
domain of evolutionary biology, where previous research has
shown that most individuals construe evolution as the uniform
transformation of an entire population (akin to metamorphosis)
rather than the selective survival and reproduction of a subset
of the population. College undergraduates (n = 44) completed
an assessment of their evolutionary reasoning by themselves
(pretest), with a partner (dyad test), and several weeks later
(posttest). Collaboration proved ineffective for the higherscoring partner in each dyad, as their scores generally remained
unchanged from pretest to dyad test to posttest, but it proved
effective for the lower-scoring partner. Not only did lowerscoring partners increase their score from pretest to dyad test,
but they maintained higher scores at posttest as well. Followup analyses revealed that participants’ posttest scores were
predicted by their partners’ pretest scores but only for lowerscoring partners, and the relation was negative: the smaller the
difference between pretest score, the greater the gain from
pretest to posttest for lower-scoring partners. These findings
indicate that collaboration in domains characterized by
conceptual change is possible, but that learning from such
collaboration is asymmetric (i.e., individuals with low levels of
understanding benefit more than their partners do) and unequal
(i.e., individuals with low levels of understanding benefit more
if their partner’s understanding is only moderately higher).
Thus, bridging the gap between a novice’s view of a
conceptually complex domain and an expert’s view appears to
require instruction more aligned with the former than the latter.
Keywords: collaboration, conceptual development, science
learning, intuitive theories, evolutionary reasoning

Introduction
Some ideas are more difficult to learn than others. Ideas that
can be encoded in terms of preexisting concepts, like the
name of an unfamiliar animal or the function of an unfamiliar
artifact, are much easier to learn than ideas that require new
concepts for their encoding, like the reason the seasons
change or the reason projectiles fall to the ground in a
parabolic path. Learning the latter requires conceptual
change, or knowledge restructuring at the level of individual
concepts (Carey, 2009; Chi, 1992). Conceptual change is an
intrinsic part of science learning. Most domains of science
entail entities, properties, and mechanisms that defy our
intuitive knowledge of how the world works and can only be
represented if that knowledge is reorganized and restructured
(Nersessian, 1998; Vosniadou, 1994).
Conceptual change is empirically distinguishable from
other forms of knowledge acquisition in that it results in
systematic failures of teaching and learning. In domains

requiring conceptual change, individuals who have yet to
undergo that change exhibit misconceptions about the
domain’s content that are internally coherent and
developmentally widespread. These misconceptions are
robust in the face of counterevidence or counterinstruction,
and they create impasses in communication between those
who have achieved conceptual change and those who have
not (for reviews, see Carey, 2009; Shtulman, 2017).
Consider the domain of evolutionary biology—the domain
of choice in the present study. Evolution results from
differential survival and differential reproduction within a
population; the traits possessed by the most reproductively
successful individuals spread through the population over
time. Most people, however, view evolution as the uniform
transformation of an entire population, where every organism
is guaranteed to have offspring more adapted to the
environment than it was at birth (Bishop & Anderson, 1990;
Shtulman, 2006). This view is grounded in the commonsense
assumption that all members of a species share the same inner
nature, or essence, which determines their outward
appearance and behavior (Gelman, 2003; Shtulman &
Schulz, 2008). Evolution is thus seen as a kind of crossgenerational metamorphosis; selection plays no role in the
process. This essentialist view of evolution has been
documented in people of varying ages (Berti, Toneatti, &
Rosati, 2010; Shtulman, Neal, & Lindquist, 2016) and
educational backgrounds (Coley & Tanner, 2015; Gregory &
Ellis, 2009), and it characterizes how a person reasons about
several aspects of evolution, including variation, inheritance,
adaptation, domestication, speciation, and extinction
(Shtulman & Calabi, 2013).
The focus of the current study is a particular hallmark of
conceptual change: impasses in communication between
those who have achieved conceptual change and those who
have not. Such impasses have been observed in conversations
between children and adults (e.g., Carey, 1985), in
conversations between science students and science teachers
(e.g., Wiser & Amin, 2001), and in conversations between
scientists working within different theoretical paradigms
(e.g., Kuhn, 1977). Such impasses are often encountered in
the context of learning—e.g., a child learning about the
properties of living things from a parent or a student learning
about the properties of thermal systems from a teacher—but
it is unclear how they affect learning. Achieving conceptual
change requires overcoming the conceptual gap responsible
for the impasse, but how and with whom?
Conceptual impasses in communication are particularly
important to study in light of the finding that learning is often
facilitated through collaboration. For many types of inductive
problems, individuals who collaborate on those problems are

3149

more likely to solve them—and learn from them—than
individuals who work alone (Gauvain & Rogoff, 1989;
Laughlin, Vanderstoep, & Hollingshead, 1991; Leman,
Skipper, Watling, & Rutland, 2016). Collaboration is
effective for several reasons. It opens partners’ eyes to ideas
they would not have generated on their own, highlighting
alternative approaches to the same problem (Schwarz,
Neuman, & Biezuner, 2000; Young, Alibali, & Kalish, 2012)
or alternative explanations for the same phenomenon (Ames
& Murray, 1982; Howe, 2009). It forces collaborating
partners to articulate their reasons for endorsing a particular
hypothesis or favoring a particular solution strategy and
defend those reasons with evidence (Okada & Simon, 1997;
Teasley, 1995). And it introduces social incentives for
completing the task at hand, increasing partners’ motivation
to persist in the face of unexpected obstacles (Butler &
Walton, 2013).
Given the pedagogical benefits of collaboration, we sought
to determine whether collaboration is useful—or even
possible—in domains requiring conceptual change. The
answer to this question has both practical and theoretical
implications. From a practical point of view, educators who
instruct students on topics requiring conceptual change (e.g.,
evolution, microbiology, mechanics, thermodynamics,
fractions) would benefit from knowing whether collaboration
is an effective instructional strategy or a dead end. From a
theoretical point of view, models of conceptual change would
be further informed by research clarifying which kinds of
input foster conceptual change and which do not. Parent-child
conversation, for instance, is a form of collaboration that may
help foster conceptual change (Gunderson & Levine, 2011;
Jipson & Callanan, 2003), but it is unclear how beneficial this
activity is relative to other domain-specific activities (e.g.,
refutation-based instruction, inquiry-based instruction,
informal exploration).
Previous studies have found that collaboration in
conceptually complex domains can be successful. For
instance, Asterhan and Schwarz (2007) found that
undergraduates who collaborated on devising evolutionary
explanations for two instances of biological adaptation
(mosquitos developing resistance to an insecticide, cheetahs
acquiring the ability to run faster than any other mammal)
provided more sophisticated (selection-based) explanations
for biological adaptation from pre-collaboration to postcollaboration. Likewise, Loyens, Jones, Mikkers, and van
Gog (2015) found that undergraduates who collaborated on
determining the paths traced by three projectiles (a child
jumping from a swing, an object falling on someone’s head,
a coyote falling from a cliff) drew more accurate motion
paths from pre-collaboration to post-collaboration. In both
the domain of evolution and the domain of motion, learning
a correct, scientific view of the domain is difficult to achieve;
direct (lecture-based) instruction on these topics has typically
proven unsuccessful (see Shtulman, 2017, for a review).
These studies demonstrate that collaboration can facilitate
learning in domains characterized by conceptual change, but
they are limited in that they explored only one aspect of those

domains—explanations for adaptation in the study by
Asterhan and Schwarz (2007) and trajectories of projectile
motion in the study by Loyens et al. (2015). The present study
explored whether collaboration is effective for learning
several facets of a conceptually complex domain—namely,
the phenomena of variation, inheritance, adaptation,
domestication, speciation, and extinction within the domain
of evolutionary biology. We chose this domain because its
content is notoriously difficult to understand and because
individuals who are asked to reason about domain-relevant
problems would most likely hold different levels of
understanding. Collaboration under these circumstances thus
provides a stringent test of whether, and how, collaboration
can facilitate conceptual change.

Method
Participants
The participants were 44 college undergraduates, recruited
from introductory psychology and cognitive science courses
and compensated either with extra credit in those courses or
with a small stipend. They were taken from a larger dataset
of 174 participants, assigned to one of 87 dyads. All
participants in the larger dataset were invited to complete a
posttest (for a $12 Amazon gift card) but only 44 did. Those
44 came from 36 different dyads. Approximately half were
the higher-scoring partner in their dyad (n = 25) and half were
the lower-scoring partner (n = 19). In other words,
approximately half collaborated with a partner who
demonstrated a higher level of understanding prior to the
collaboration, and half collaborated with a partner who
demonstrated a lower level of understanding.
The 44 participants who completed a posttest earned
similar pretest scores to those who did not complete a
posttest. That is, the 19 low scorers who completed a posttest
scored similarly to the 68 who did not (M = 9.4 vs. M = 9.7,
t(85) = 0.22, p = 0.83), and the 25 high scorers who
completed a posttest scored similarly to the 62 who did not
(M = 17.1 vs. M = 15.9, t(85) = 1.13, p = 0.26). While there
may be motivational differences between those who opted to
complete a posttest and those who did not, there were no
reliable knowledge differences between the groups (relative
to participants’ classification as a low scorer or a high scorer).

Materials
Participants were assessed on their understanding of
evolution using an instrument developed by Shtulman
(2006). The assessment consisted of six sections, each
devoted to a different biological phenomenon (inheritance,
variation, adaptation, domestication, speciation, and
extinction). Participants’ understanding of the phenomenon
was assessed with five questions or tasks designed to elicit
either an essentialist interpretation or a selection-based
interpretation.
With respect to inheritance, for instance, participants were
asked to make predictions about parent-offspring
resemblance with questions like the following: “Imagine that

3150

biologists discover a new species of woodpecker that lives in
isolation on a secluded island. These woodpeckers have, on
average, a one-inch beak and their only food source is a treedwelling insect that lives, on average, one-and-a-half inches
under the tree bark. Compared to its parents, the offspring of
any two woodpeckers should develop: (a) a longer beak, (b)
a shorter beak, or (c) either a longer beak or a shorter beak;
neither is more likely.” The correct response is (c), because
offspring vary randomly from their parents, but most people
select (a), reasoning that offspring will inherit whatever traits
will help them survive—traits conferred by an underlying
essence that adaptively changes in response to the species’
current needs.
As another illustration, consider this task designed to probe
participants’ understanding of within-species variation:
“During the 19th century, England’s native moth species,
Biston betularia, evolved darker coloration in response to the
pollution produced by the Industrial Revolution. Imagine that
biologists gathered a random sample of Biston betularia once
every 25 years from 1800 to 1900. What range of coloration
would you expect to find at each point in time?” Participants
were given a five-by-five matrix of moth outlines and
instructed to shade the moths to reflect what the moths might
look like at 1800, 1825, 1850, 1875, and 1900. The two most
common response patterns are depicted in Figure 1. The
pattern on the left depicts a mutation for darker coloration
spreading through the population over time and is consistent
with a selection-based view of evolution. The pattern on the
right depicts the uniform transformation of the population,
such that variation occurs between generations but not within
generations, and is consistent with an essentialist view.

Procedure
The evolution comprehension assessment was administered
on a computer. It took between 30 and 45 minutes to
complete, and participants completed it twice by themselves
(pretest and posttest) and once with a partner (dyad test).
Participants were tested in pairs in a room in the Psychology
Department. They completed the pretest by themselves, and
they completed the dyad test together immediately following
the pretest. Participants typically did not know their dyad
partner, and they were given no instruction on how to
coordinate their responses. They were simply asked to
complete the survey as a pair, on a single computer. Their
conversations were recorded and transcribed at a later date.
(Data from the conversations are not reported here, for lack
of space).
The posttest was administered one semester (i.e., half a
year) after the dyad test. The average delay between dyad test
and posttest was 7.6 months, and the delay for the high
scorers was equivalent to the delay for the low scorers (M =
6.8 vs. M = 8.8, t(42) = 1.13, p = .138). Effects of
collaboration detectable after half a year arguably represent
long-term changes in understanding, as participants’ memory
for the episodic details of the collaboration session would
likely have faded.

Results
For the analyses below, we used linear mixed models
(LMMs) with random-effects structures specified according
to the procedure recommended by Bates and colleagues
(Bates et al., 2015). We used likelihood ratio-test (LRT)
comparisons and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for inference.

Evolution Scores at Pretest, Dyad Test, and Posttest
Overall assessment scores at pretest, dyad test, and posttest
are shown in Figure 2 (left panel). Dyads generated higher
scores than individuals at pretest, β = 2.16, 95% CI [.27,
4.05]. However, individuals’ posttest scores were similar to
their pretest scores, β = .91, 95% CI [-.98, 2.80].

Low- versus High-Scoring Partners

Figure 1: A selection-based response pattern (left) and an
essentialist response pattern (right) on the moth-shading
task of the evolution comprehension assessment.
The full battery of questions can be found in the Appendix of
Shtulman (2006), along with criteria for scoring each
question or task. Participants were assigned 1 point for every
correct. selection-based response and 0 points for every
incorrect, essentialist response. Responses too vague to be
counted as selection-based, were also assigned 0 points.
Participants’ scores thus ranged from 0 to 5 per section and
from 0 to 30 for the assessment as a whole.

An individual’s ability to profit from collaboration likely
depends on both their own prior knowledge and their
partner’s prior knowledge. For example, individuals paired
with partners that demonstrated greater conceptual
knowledge of evolution at pretest might have a greater
opportunity to learn from collaboration than those paired with
partners with less conceptual knowledge. To explore this
possibility, we categorized participants in terms of whether
they were the lower or higher scoring partner in their
respective dyads at pretest. Figure 2 shows pretest, dyad test,
and posttest scores for lower-scoring partners (middle panel)
and higher-scoring partners (right panel). There was an
interaction between scoring status and test, LRT χ2(2) =
20.13, p < .001. For high-scoring partners, pretest, dyad test,
and posttest scores were similar. However, for low-scoring
partners, dyad tests were greater than pretests, β = 6.53, 95%

3151

All Partners

Low Scorer

High Scorer

Total Score

20
15
10
5
0
Pre Test

Dyad Test

Post Test

Pre Test

Dyad Test

Post Test

Pre Test

Dyad Test

Post Test

Figure 2. Mean evolution score at pretest, dyad test, and posttest for all participants, low scoring participants, and high
scoring participants. Error bars represent ± SE.
CI [3.92, 9.13], and posttests were greater than pretests, β =
3.37, 95% CI [1.87, 7.08].

Low- versus High-Scoring Partners by Section
Only 5 of the 44 participants demonstrated consistently
greater or poorer pretest performance than their partner
across all six sections of the assessment. Categorizing
participants as low- or high-scoring by section potentially
provides a more nuanced view of performance than overall
pretest scores. Figure 3 shows lower- and higher-scoring
partners’ pretest, dyad test, and posttest scores for each of the
six sections. A three way interaction between scoring status,
test, and section suggested variation in low and high scorers’
learning across section, LRT χ2(10) = 19.10, p = .0317.
Scores for Inheritance and Speciation demonstrated little
pretest to posttest change for both low and high scorers. Most
consistent with the overall assessment, lower scorers
demonstrated pretest to posttest gains for Domestication, β =
1.50, 95% CI [.54, 2.46], and Extinction, β = .76, 95% CI [.02, 1.55], whereas high scorers had similar pretest and
posttest scores. Low scorers again demonstrated pretest to
posttest gains for the Adaptation, β = 1.71, 95% CI [.84,
2.57], and Variation, β = 1.43, 95% CI [.47, 2.38]. However,
high scorers surprisingly demonstrated pretest to posttest
losses for Adaptation, β = -1.50, 95% CI [-2.26, -.74], and
Variation, β = -1.21, 95% CI [-2.03, -.39].

Predicting Posttest Scores
For low scorers, collaborating with a more advanced partner
yielded pretest to posttest improvement in 4 out of 6 sections.
For high scorers, collaborating with a less advanced partner
yielded pretest to posttest decline in 2 out of 6 sections. These
results suggest that participants’ posttest performance was
influenced both by their own understanding of the domain
and by their partner’s understanding.
To explore this possibility further, we fit an LMM on
posttest scores (by section) with participant pretest scores,
partner pretest scores, scoring status (high vs. low within a
participant’s respective dyad), and their interactions as fixed
effects. Participant pretest score was a positive predictor of
posttest score, β = .38, 95% CI [.08, .67], and did not interact

with scoring status. In contrast, partner pretest score
interacted with scoring status, LRT χ2(1) = 3.86, p = .049.
Partner pretest scores were not predictive of posttest scores
for high scorers, β = .08, 95% CI [-.15, .31]. However, partner
pretest scores were negatively related to posttest scores for
low scorers, β = -.22, 95% CI [-.43, .00]. Thus, it appears that
low scorers learned more from partners with slightly greater
knowledge than themselves at pretest compared to partners
with much greater knowledge.

Discussion
Collaboration is an effective and efficient means of devising
new hypotheses (Okada & Simon, 1997) and learning new
problem-solving strategies (Schwarz et al., 2000), but is
collaboration possible in domains where individuals are
known to hold vastly discrepant views of the domain’s causal
structure? The answer appears to be yes. Individuals who
collaborated on tasks within the domain of evolutionary
biology—a domain characterized by qualitatively different
theories of what evolution is and how evolution works
(Shtulman, 2006)—demonstrated a higher level of
understanding together than they did individually. This
finding was far from guaranteed given the content of the task.
When partners disagreed, their disagreements typically
reflected fundamental differences in their understanding of
the task domain. Resolving those disagreements entailed
more than just recognizing who knew the answer. It entailed
recognizing which of two answers—a selection-based answer
and an essentialist answer—was more plausible or justifiable.
Collaboration not only facilitated more accurate
responding, it also facilitated learning, though the effects
were nuanced. Individuals who entered the collaboration with
lower levels of understanding demonstrated increased
understanding at posttest (several months later), whereas
individuals who entered the collaboration with higher levels
of understanding demonstrated no gains at posttest.
The learning exhibited by less-knowledgeable partners was
generally robust across different sections of the assessment,
as was the stasis exhibited by more-knowledgeable partners.
That said, there were some sections on which the lessknowledgeable partners exhibited no gains from pretest to

3152

Inheritence

Domestication

Adaptation

Speciation

Extinction

Variation

5
4
3

Section Score

2
1
0

Pre Test

5

Dyad Test
Post Test

4
3
2
1
0
Lower Scorers

Higher Scorers

Lower Scorers

Higher Scorers

Lower Scorers

Higher Scorers

Figure 3. Mean pretest, dyad test, and posttest scores for low scoring and high scoring partners by section. Error bars
represent ± SE.

posttest and some sections on which the more-knowledgeable
partners exhibited losses from pretest to posttest.
Collaboration in conceptually complex domains may thus
hinder learning for some individuals in some contexts. Still,
the net benefits of collaboration were positive, which is a
surprising finding given that (a) collaborators often had to
communicate across a conceptual divide and (b) the
collaboration itself consisted solely of discussion. There were
no opportunities to generate evidence or test hypotheses,
which suggests that such activities may not be necessary for
learning in cases where the primary intellectual challenge is
just interpreting what one’s partner is saying.
Perhaps the most provocative finding was that, among
participants who learned from collaboration (the low
scorers), those who learned the most collaborated with
partners who had moderately higher levels of understanding.
Individuals who collaborated with partners with substantially
higher levels of understanding benefited less, at least by
posttest. This finding, though tentative, may have resulted
from differential impasses in communication; the greater the
discrepancy between partners’ understanding of the domain,
the more likely they encountered impasses in communication
and the more strained their collaboration may have become.
Consider, for instance, the following conversation between a
participant who earned a pretest score of 19 (P1) and one who
earned a pretest score of 2 (P2) about the woodpecker
question presented above:
P1: Alright, for the first one I put either a shorter or longer
beak because it says compared to its parents, and compared
to its parents it pretty much has the same beak because it
has the same genes.
P2: Okay. Hmm. I put longer beak ... because, yeah, they
have to eventually evolve into the thing, but I can see what
you are saying about, like, it wouldn’t take one generation.

P1: Well ... the next generation would end up with a longer
beak, but this one particular woodpecker would have the
same [beak] as its parents, if you understand what I’m
saying. The generations would get longer beaks because
the ones with the shorter beaks will be killed off. [But] no
matter what, the offspring are gonna have beaks pretty
much the same as its parents.
P2: Okay, I see what you’re saying. Yeah, I guess I just
assumed that they would interbreed or they would have a
woodpecker from a different... Okay, I see what you’re
saying.
P2 claims to understand what P1 is saying, but P2’s attempts
to resolve the discrepancy—by acknowledging P2’s answer
as correct on the assumption that “it wouldn’t take one
generation” or that birds with different beak lengths did not
“interbreed”—do not actually address P2’s point that
evolutionary change occurs at the population level, not the
individual level. This type of impasse may be more common
in conversations between partners with discrepant levels of
understanding than in conversations between partners with
similar levels of understanding, though confirmation of this
pattern awaits further analysis of the conversational data.
The finding that participants benefited most from
collaborating with individuals who were only moderately
more knowledgeable about the domain helps answer the
question of how individuals are able to communicate across
a gap in conceptual understanding. Communication may be
possible only if the gap is not too wide; wider gaps may lead
to irreconcilable differences in how partners perceive or
analyze the problems at hand. We plan to test this idea
directly by analyzing the dynamics of participants’
conversations in relation to their score differences from
pretest to dyad test and from pretest to posttest. Previous
research on how domain experts converse with domain
novices suggests that the experts supply novices with

3153

specialized knowledge, in the moment, by adjusting how they
label or how they describe objects of shared attention (Clark
& Schaefer, 1989; Isaacs & Clark, 1987). However, such
studies have involved domains in which the difference
between a novice’s knowledge and an expert’s knowledge is
quantitative rather than qualitative (e.g., knowledge of New
York City landmarks). It remains an open question how
domain novices and domain experts are able to bridge
differences in knowledge, through discourse patterns, when
that knowledge entails conceptual change.

References
Ames, G. J., & Murray, F. B. (1982). When two wrongs make
a right. Developmental Psychology, 18, 894-897.
Asterhan, C. S., & Schwarz, B. B. (2007). The effects of
monological and dialogical argumentation on concept
learning in evolutionary theory. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 99, 626-639.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S. (2015).
Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal of
Statistical Software, 67, 1-48.
Berti, A. E., Toneatti, L., & Rosati, V. (2010). Children's
conceptions about the origin of species: A study of Italian
children's conceptions with and without instruction. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 19, 506-538.
Bishop, B. & Anderson, C.A. (1990). Student conceptions of
natural selection and its role in evolution. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 27, 415-427.
Butler, L. P., & Walton, G. M. (2013). The opportunity to
collaborate increases preschoolers’ motivation for
challenging tasks. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 116, 953-961.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Chi, M. (1992). Conceptual change within and across
ontological categories. In R. Giere (Ed.), Cognitive models
of science (129-186). Minneapolis: U of Minnesota Press.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Coley, J. D., & Tanner, K. (2015). Relations between
intuitive biological thinking and biological misconceptions
in biology majors and nonmajors. CBE: Life Sciences
Education, 14, 1-19.
Gauvain, M., & Rogoff, B. (1989). Collaborative problem
solving and children’s planning skills. Developmental
Psychology, 25, 139-151.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Gregory, T. R., & Ellis, C. A. (2009). Conceptions of
evolution among science graduate students. BioScience,
59, 792-799.
Gunderson, E. A., & Levine, S. C. (2011). Some types of
parent number talk count more than others: Relations
between parents’ input and children’s cardinal‐number
knowledge. Developmental Science, 14, 1021-1032.

Howe, C. (2009). Collaborative group work in middle
childhood. Human Development, 52, 215-239.
Isaacs, E. A., & Clark, H. H. (1987). References in
conversation between experts and novices. Journal of
Experimental Psychology , 116, 26-37.
Jipson, J. L., & Callanan, M. A. (2003). Mother-child
conversation and children’s understanding of biological
and nonbiological changes in size. Child Development, 74,
629-644.
Kuhn, T. S. (1977). The essential tension: Selected studies in
scientific tradition and change. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Laughlin, P. R., Vanderstoep, S. W., & Hollingshead, A. B.
(1991). Collective versus individual induction. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 50-67.
Leman, P. J., Skipper, Y., Watling, D., & Rutland, A. (2016).
Conceptual change in science is facilitated through peer
collaboration for boys but not for girls. Child Development,
87, 176-183.
Loyens, S. M., Jones, S. H., Mikkers, J., & van Gog, T.
(2015). Problem-based learning as a facilitator of
conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 38, 34-42.
Nersessian, N. J. (1989). Conceptual change in science and
in science education. Synthese, 80, 163-183.
Okada, T., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Collaborative discovery
in a scientific domain. Cognitive Science, 21, 109-146.
Schwarz, B. B., Neuman, Y., & Biezuner, S. (2000). Two
wrongs may make a right... If they argue together!
Cognition and Instruction, 18, 461-494.
Shtulman, A. (2006). Qualitative differences between naive
and scientific theories of evolution. Cognitive Psychology,
52, 170-194.
Shtulman, A. (2017). Scienceblind: Why our intuitive
theories about the world are so often wrong. New York:
Basic Books.
Shtulman, A., & Calabi, P. (2013). Tuition vs. intuition:
Effects of instruction on naïve theories of evolution.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 59, 141-167.
Shtulman, A., Neal, C., & Lindquist, G. (2016). Children’s
ability to learn evolutionary explanations for biological
adaptation. Early Education and Development, 27, 12221236.
Shtulman, A., & Schulz, L. (2008). The relationship between
essentialist beliefs and evolutionary reasoning. Cognitive
Science, 32, 1049-1062.
Teasley, S. D. (1995). The role of talk in children’s peer
collaborations. Developmental Psychology, 31, 207-220.
Vosniadou, S. (1994). Capturing and modeling the process of
conceptual change. Learning and Instruction, 4, 45-69.
Wiser, M., & Amin, T. (2001). “Is heat hot?” Inducing
conceptual change by integrating everyday and scientific
perspectives on thermal phenomena. Learning and
Instruction, 11, 331-355.
Young, A. G., Alibali, M. W., & Kalish, C. W. (2012).
Disagreement and causal learning: Others’ hypotheses
affect children’s evaluations of evidence. Developmental
Psychology, 48, 1242-1253.

3154

