Brief Mindfulness Meditation Improves Attention in Novices
Catherine J. Norris, Ph.D. (cnorris2@swarthmore.edu)
Department of Psychology, Swarthmore College, 500 College Avenue
Swarthmore, PA 19081 USA

Dan Creem (dancreem@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Swarthmore College, 500 College Avenue
Swarthmore, PA 19081 USA
Abstract
Past research has found that mindfulness meditation training
improves executive attention and that this effect could be
driven by more efficient allocation of resources on demanding
attentional tasks, such as the Flanker Task. However, it is not
clear whether these changes depend on long-term practice.
We sought to investigate the effects of a brief, 10-minute
meditation session on attention in novice meditators,
compared to a control activity. We also tested moderation by
individual differences in Neuroticism. We found that
participants randomly assigned to meditate for 10 minutes
showed improved performance on incongruent trials on a
Flanker task, with no detriment in reaction times, indicating
better allocation of resources. Neuroticism moderated this
effect, as only those low in Neuroticism showed improved
allocation of attentional resources following meditation.
Keywords: mindfulness meditation; attentional network test;
executive attention; neuroticism

Introduction
Mindfulness is often defined as a two component
process: (1) attention to present moment experience,
coupled with (2) an attitude that is open, non-reactive, and
accepting of things as they are (Bishop et al, 2004; Ludwig
& Kabat-Zinn, 2008). Over the past few decades a wealth of
research has emerged in both popular science and academic
journals on the benefits of mindfulness meditation for
cognitive performance (e.g., creativity; Ding, Tang, Tang &
Posner, 2014; attention; Sedlmeier et al., 2012), mental
health (Hofmann, Sawyer, Witt, & Oh, 2010), negative
mood (Goyal et al., 2014), treatment for addiction (Brewer
et al 2011a; Bowen 2014), prejudice and discrimination
(Lueke & Gibson, 2016), and many other psychological
processes. One premise in this area of research is that
becoming mindful of an internal state or physiological
function, such as one’s breath or heartbeat, can hone
abilities such as focused attention, working memory, and
acceptance. In turn, this is thought to have long-term
positive consequences when mindfulness is trained and
practiced over an extended period of time.
Much of the past research has focused on the effects of
mindfulness meditation training on attentional processes,
including alerting, orienting, and executive attention. For
example, Maclean and colleagues (2010) found that 3
months of intense meditative training can improve
performance on tasks of perceptual discrimination and
sustained visual attention. Elliott, Wallace and Giesbrecht

(2014) showed that a weeklong intensive meditation retreat
can improve both executive attention and alerting (but not
orienting). Jha, Krompinger and Baime (2007), however,
found that both an 8-week MBSR (i.e., mindfulness based
stress reduction) course and a 1-month intensive MBSR
retreat improved orienting but not executive attention. To
the contrary, Tang and colleagues (2007) used a slightly less
time-intensive approach and reported that 5 days of 20minute training sessions can improve executive attention
and a more recent empirical article also found that
mindfulness meditation increased executive attention
(Ainsworth et al., 2013). In a review article comparing
multiple forms of meditation, Lippelt, Hommel, & Colzato
(2014) conclude that there is good evidence to suggest that
focused attention meditation (such as mindfulness) increases
sustained attention (Carter et al., 2005; Brefczynski-Lewis
et al., 2007). Notably, all of these studies have utilized
extensive meditation training, including multiple hour-long
sessions administered over an extended period of time.
Clearly, the literature on the effects of meditation on
attention is both diverse and in some disarray, with different
approaches to meditation (e.g., MBSR retreats vs. daily selfguided sessions) having divergent effects on different forms
of attention. In addition, most of these studies have
examined the effects of intensive, longitudinal meditative
training composed of multiple sessions over weeks and/or
years, and often recruit meditation-motivated or experienced
individuals as participants.
Mindfulness meditation training takes many forms in
the literature, but most often involves either an extended
immersive experience (e.g., a 3-month retreat) or repeated
daily practice, either in the form of a multi-week course or
weeks (or months) of self-guided meditation. Indeed, the
vast majority of published work has been on the effects of 8
weeks of training or longer (e.g., Hofmann, Sawyer, Witt, &
Oh, 2010, Brewer et al 2011b). And, although these studies
have often documented beneficial outcomes of mindfulness
meditation practice, the relevance of such time-consuming,
extensive training is debatable for the average individual
who might be either unmotivated or unable to dedicate the
time and resources necessary to reap such benefits. This
relates to the questions of “dose” – once someone begins to
practice mindfulness, how soon can they expect to see
beneficial effects (e.g., Tang et al., 2015; Zeidan, 2015)? A
few recent studies have shown that 3-4 days of training are
associated with some beneficial effects (e.g., Zeidan et al.,

2803

2010a, 2010b). The current study focuses on meditationnaïve college students, to examine whether 10 minutes of
meditation may have an immediate impact on attention. This
approach represents an extreme test of the impact of
mindfulness meditation on attention, but also may greatly
expand our knowledge of the power of meditation, its
boundary conditions, as well as its potential for practice in
daily life. In the current studies we focus on whether a
single brief audio-guided meditation can have similar
benefits for attention in novice meditators.
` In an initial attempt to examine the effects of a brief
guided meditation on attention in novice meditators, we
asked participants to listen to an audio tape (mindfulness
meditation vs. control) and then subsequently complete a
version of the Flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974;
Eriksen, 1995), a measure of executive attentional control.
Participants also completed the Big 5 Personality
Dimension Inventory to allow for the investigation of
moderation by individual differences in Neuroticism.

Method
Participants. 40 (14 female) undergraduate students
between the ages of 17 and 22 (M = 19.48, SD = 1.18) were
recruited from Swarthmore College. Three participants were
omitted from final analyses because of scores greater than 3
SDs from the mean (i.e., outliers), leaving a final sample
size of 37 (12 female; Mage = 19.51, SD = 1.19).
Participants were entered into a raffle for one of two $25
prizes as compensation for completion of the study. All
participants gave informed consent, and the study was
conducted under the guidance of the Swarthmore College
Institutional Review Board.
Procedure. Upon arriving at the laboratory, participants
were told that the purpose of the study was to investigate the
effects of audio attention on visual acuity. Each participant
was seated in front of a desktop computer and was asked to
wear headphones and a blindfold, to allow a focus on the
audio recording. After the recording, the experimenter
returned, removed the blindfold, and provided verbal
instructions for the Flanker task. Participants completed
twelve practice trials and were given the opportunity to ask
questions before beginning the experimental trials.
Following the Flanker task participants completed the Big 5
Personality Inventory (John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991) and
a demographic survey. Finally, the experimenter and
participant engaged in a face-to-face funneled debriefing
interview.
Experimental Conditions. Participants were randomly
assigned to either listen to a 10-minute guided audio
meditation tape (meditation) or a 10-minute audio control
tape (control). The mindfulness meditation tape was
developed based on classic mindfulness instructions used in
MBSR, and in consultation with several meditation
teachers. This tape led participants through a breath-focused
mindfulness exercise oriented towards beginners. It included

instructions such as “please set the intention to observe your
experience with an accepting attitude,” “please notice and
begin to follow the natural and spontaneous movement of
the breath, not trying to change it in any way,” and “stay
open and curious about your experience.” The control tape
was a reading of a National Geographic article about giant
sequoias. Importantly, both recordings used the same
speaker, speed of speech, number of words, and had similar
word frequencies. In addition, both tapes began with
instructions on posture within the first few seconds, and
included pauses at approximately the same times and for
similar durations, throughout.
Flanker Task. The flanker task was delivered using EPrime 2.0 software on a Dell computer with a 22” LCD
monitor (refresh rate = 60 Hz). The flanker array consisted
of white arrowheads on a black background and was 4.5 cm
wide by 1.3 cm high. On average participants sat
approximately 70 cm from the screen, producing a visual
angle of the array width of 0.026 degrees and of the array
height of 0.091 degrees. Each trial consisted of a 500ms
white fixation cross in the center of the black screen,
followed by an array of five arrows, which remained on the
center of the screen until a response was made. Participants
pressed the “f” key with their left hand if the center arrow
was facing left, and the “j” key with their right hand the
center arrow was facing right. Flanking arrows were either
facing in the same direction (i.e., congruent trials) or in the
opposite direction (incongruent trials; Figure 1). There were
20 trials in each cell of the 2(direction: left, right) x 2(trial
type: congruent, incongruent) design, resulting in a total of
80 trials, presented randomly. Participants were told to
respond as quickly and accurately as possible. As soon as a
response was made, the next trial began (i.e., there was no
intertrial interval).
Big 5 Personality Inventory. After the flanker task,
participants completed the Big 5 Personality Inventory
(John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991), a self-report survey
consisting of 44 items designed to measure five personality
factors: Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion,
Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. Participants indicated the
degree to which they agreed or disagreed with each item on
a 5-point Likert scale, with endpoints labeled disagree
strongly (1) and agree strongly (5). Each item began with
the phrase “I see myself as someone who…”; sample items
for the Neuroticism subscale items include: “worries a lot”
and “is emotionally stable, not easily upset,” with the latter
reverse-coded.
Demographic Survey. Participants also completed a
standard demographic survey in which they reported their
age, gender (male, female), and self-reported their race and
ethnicity.
Debriefing. Finally, participants completed a funneled
debriefing interview in which they were given the

2804

opportunity to report any suspicion about the true purpose
of the study, as well as reporting any previous experience
with meditation, including duration and frequency of
practice.

Results
We conducted independent samples t-tests to examine
any differences between groups of participants randomly
assigned to listen to the meditation tape versus those
randomly assigned to listen to the control tape on variables
including: age, gender, race, Big 5 Personality traits, and
meditation experience. There were no significant group
differences on any of these measures.
Response times. RTs for correct trials only were subjected
to a 2(condition: meditation, control) x 2(trial type:
congruent, incongruent) general linear model (GLM), with
the first factor manipulated between-participants and the
second factor manipulated within-participants (collapsing
across arrow direction). The main effect of trial type,
F(1,35) = 129.32, p < 0.001, indicated that participants were
faster to respond on congruent trials (M = 427.05 ms, SE =
6.84) than on incongruent trials (M = 466.26, SE = 7.53), a
replication of past research. No other effects reached
traditional levels of significance.
Accuracy. Rates of accurate responding were subjected to a
similar 2(condition: meditation, control) x 2(trial type:
congruent, incongruent) GLM. The main effect of trial type,
F(1,35) = 35.123, p < 0.001, indicated that participants were
more accurate on congruent (M = 0.99, SE = 0.003) than on
incongruent (M = 0.93, SE = 0.01) trials, another replication
of past research. The main effect of condition was
marginally significant, F(1, 35) = 3.10, p = .087, and
indicated that participants in the mediation condition were
more accurate (M = 0.97, SE = 0.007) than were participants
in the control condition (M = 0.95, SE = 0.007).
Importantly, there was a significant interaction between trial
type and condition, F(1,35) = 5.24, p = 0.028. Pairwise tests
showed that whereas both groups of participants were more
accurate on congruent than on incongruent trials (ps < .05),
participants in the meditation condition performed better on
incongruent trials (M = 0.95, SE = 0.01) than did those in
the control condition (M = 0.91, SE = 0.01), p = .044
(Figure 2). Participants in the meditation condition (M =
0.99, SE = 0.004) and the control condition (M = 0.99, SE =
0.004) performed equally well on congruent trials, p = .39.
To further probe the effects of meditation on attention
on the Flanker task, we calculated difference scores to
capture the overall “Flanker effect” in correct RTs
(incongruent – congruent) and accuracy (congruent –
incongruent), separately. Two independent samples t-test
conducted on these difference scores showed no difference
between meditation and control conditions in correct RTs, p
= .48, and a significant difference in accuracy, t(35) = 2.29,
p = 0.028, such that participants in the meditation condition
(M = 0.04, SE = 0.06) exhibited a smaller Flanker effect

than those in the control condition (M = 0.08, SE = 0.06).
Thus, participants in the meditation condition showed a
decreased Flanker effect in accuracy – reflecting better
executive attentional control – as compared to those in the
control condition, due to their improved performance on
incongruent trials.
Moderation by Neuroticism. First, we conducted an
independent samples t-test to examine whether random
assignment to condition (i.e., meditation versus control tape)
affected self-reported Neuroticism. As expected,
Neuroticism did not differ between participants assigned to
the meditation tape (M = 0.03, SD = 0.97) and those
assigned to the control tape (M = -0.02, SD = 1.06), t(35) =
0.14, p = .89. Thus, Neuroticism scores can be assumed to
represent true, stable individual differences rather than an
unintended effect of random assignment to condition.
To examine moderation of the effects of meditation on
attention by individual differences in Neuroticism, RTs
were subjected to a 2(condition: meditation, control) x
2(trial type: congruent, incongruent) x z-scored Neuroticism
GLM, with the first factor manipulated betweenparticipants, the second factor manipulated withinparticipants, and Neuroticism entered as a continuous
between-participants covariate. This analysis allows for the
examination of main effects and the interaction between
condition and trial time holding Neuroticism constant, as
well as investigating the main effect of Neuroticism and its
interactions with all other variables. As expected, this
analysis merely revealed a main effect of trial type, F(1,33)
= 126.30, p < .001, such that participants were faster on
congruent than on incongruent trials even when controlling
for neuroticism.
A similar GLM was conducted on accuracy scores. As
expected, the main and interaction effects reported above
held when controlling for neuroticism, including the
condition x trial type interaction, indicating that individuals
in the meditation condition were more accurate on
incongruent trials than were those in the control condition.
However, we also found a condition x trial type x
Neuroticism interaction, F(1,33) = 3.72, p = .06. To better
understand this interaction, we examined accuracy estimates
at 1 SD above and below the mean Neuroticism score.
Those individuals lower in Neuroticism (-1 SD) generally
exhibited the overall pattern: individuals in the control
condition were more accurate to congruent than to
incongruent trials (p < .001), the two groups did not differ in
their accuracies to congruent trials (p = .30), but individuals
in the meditation condition performed better on incongruent
trials (M = 0.98, SE = .02) than did those in the control
condition (M = 0.91, SE = .02; Figure 3). Indeed, meditation
improved performance to such a degree that participants in
this condition performed as well on incongruent trials (M =
0.98, SE = .02) as they did on congruent trials (M = 0.99, SE
= .01), p = .78. Individuals higher in Neuroticism (+1 SD),
however, showed no effect of meditation: both groups were
more accurate on congruent than on incongruent trials (ps <

2805

.005) and did not differ in accuracy on either trial type (ps >
.75; Figure 3).

Discussion
Results indicate that a brief 10-minute guided
meditation can improve executive attentional control even in
naïve, inexperienced meditators. Perhaps more interesting is
the fact that this meditation-induced improved performance
was only observed for individuals relatively low in
Neuroticism; individuals higher in Neuroticism did not
exhibit any performance boost following meditation.
Neuroticism, which is characterized by anxiety, high
negative affect, and worry, may prevent individuals from
reaping the benefits of meditation, as it may be difficult for
individuals higher in Neuroticism to disregard their negative
emotionality and focus on the early stages of mindfulness
practice.
Previous research has focused on the reduction of
neuroticism, anxiety, and stress due to meditation and less
on personality predictors (e.g., Neuroticism) of response to
meditation. For example, Williams, Francis, and Durham
(1976) found that males who practiced transcendental
meditation (i.e., a self-selected group) were more neurotic
than the general population, but that they also became less
neurotic over the course of a 6-month period of study and
that decreases in Neuroticism were directly associated with
frequency of meditation. Similarly, Lane and colleagues
(2007) found that Neuroticism moderated treatment effects
in a group of individuals who completed training in
meditation, such that individuals higher in Neuroticism at
baseline showed greater decreases in negative mood,
perceived stress, and anxiety over the course of training.
Thus, Neuroticism appears to have a positive impact on
more long-term consequences of meditation. Less is known
about its ability to predict who will benefit from the practice
of meditation.
In an early review of the literature, Delmonte (1985)
argued that prospective meditators often report higher than
average anxiety levels, and that anxiety predicts lower
frequency of practice. Ironically, Delmonte (1985) also
reported that meditation reliably decreases levels of anxiety
over the course of practice. Furthermore, many studies have
shown that regular meditators tend to be lower in trait
Neuroticism (Leung & Singhal, 2004). Thus, greater stress
and anxiety may drive individuals to engage in meditation,
while also negatively impacting the frequency of practice. If
they, however, do persist in meditation, these individuals
often show decreases in their anxiety and negative affect.
The current study is unique in that we recruited healthy
undergraduate students who had not expressed any desire to
practice meditation and simply measured Neuroticism; in
this way, we did not bias our sample toward particular
personality traits. Indeed, we did not tell participants that
they were engaging in a guided meditation in order to
minimize expectancy effects. And we controlled for
frequency of practice by requiring that all participants
simply complete one 10-minute guided meditation in the

laboratory. Thus, our results suggest that trait Neuroticism
may negatively impact the efficacy of short, guided
meditation; individuals high in anxiety and self-awareness
may not be able to relax and follow the instructions
presented in guided audio meditation, thus preventing them
from reaping the benefits of a meditation intervention. This
finding has strong implications for the field, as it suggests
that the very population thought to benefit most from
meditation (i.e., individuals high in anxiety and
Neuroticism) may have difficulty initially engaging in the
practice. As meditation becomes more frequently prescribed
as part of a holistic treatment for mental health disorders
often associated with high Neuroticism, including
depression, phobia, and other anxiety disorders,
practitioners would benefit from an understanding of the
difficulties individuals high in Neuroticism face in both
learning and persisting in the practice of mindfulness
meditation.
In sum, our results suggest that even in novices, one
brief 10-minute audio-guided meditation improves attention.
Specifically, on an attentional task performed under time
pressure, participants in the meditation condition exhibited a
boost in accuracy reflecting increased attentional control.
Importantly, this effect was strongest for individuals lower
in Neuroticism, indicating that personality may impact the
ability to reap the benefits of brief meditation. Although
much remains to be studied, the current paper suggests that
brief meditation impacts attention even in novice
practitioners and therefore has widespread implications.

Figures

Figure 1: Trial schema for the Flanker Task.

2806

Figure 2: The condition x trial type interaction in
accuracies. Both groups were more accurate on congruent
than on incongruent trials, but individuals in the meditation
condition performed better on incongruent trials than did
those in the control condition.

Figure 3: The interaction between condition, trial type,
and Neuroticism. Meditation was effective in improving
performance on incongruent trials for individuals lower in
Neuroticism (-1 SD) but not for those higher in Neuroticism
(+1 SD).

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all of the members of the Norris
Social Neuroscience Laboratory at Swarthmore College for
their help with data collection, analysis, and feedback.
Nikhil Paladugu was instrumental in study design and data
collection. Most importantly, we are extremely grateful to
Hedy Kober, Ph.D., of Yale University for developing and
sharing the meditation and control audio tapes used in both
studies.

References
Ainsworth, B., Eddershaw, R., Meron, D., Baldwin, D. S.,
& Garner, M. (2013). The effect of focused attention
and open monitoring meditation on attention network

function in healthy volunteers. Psychiatry Research,
210(3), 1226-1231.
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson,
N. D., Carmody, J., ... & Devins, G. (2004).
Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11(3), 230241.
Bowen, S., Witkiewitz, K., Clifasefi, S. L., Grow, J.,
Chawla, N., Hsu, S. H., ... & Larimer, M. E. (2014).
Relative efficacy of mindfulness-based relapse
prevention, standard relapse prevention, and treatment
as usual for substance use disorders: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(5), 547-556.
Brefczynski-Lewis, J. A., Lutz, A., Schaefer, H. S.,
Levinson, D. B., & Davidson, R. J. (2007). Neural
correlates of attentional expertise in long-term
meditation practitioners. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 104(27), 11483-11488.
Brewer, J. A., Mallik, S., Babuscio, T. A., Nich, C.,
Johnson, H. E., Deleone, C. M., ... & Carroll, K. M.
(2011). Mindfulness training for smoking cessation:
results from a randomized controlled trial. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 119(1), 72-80.
Brewer, J. A., Worhunsky, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y. Y.,
Weber, J., & Kober, H. (2011). Meditation experience
is associated with differences in default mode network
activity and connectivity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 108(50), 20254-20259.
Carter, O. L., Presti, D. E., Callistemon, C., Ungerer, Y.,
Liu, G. B., & Pettigrew, J. D. (2005). Meditation alters
perceptual rivalry in Tibetan Buddhist monks. Current
Biology, 15(11), R412-R413.
Delmonte, M. M. (1985). Meditation and anxiety reduction:
A literature review. Clinical Psychology Review, 5(2),
91-102.
Ding, X., Tang, Y. Y., Tang, R., & Posner, M. I. (2014).
Improving creativity performance by short-term
meditation. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 10(1), 1-8.
Elliott, J. C., Wallace, B. A., & Giesbrecht, B. (2014). A
week-long meditation retreat decouples behavioral
measures of the alerting and executive attention
networks. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 1-9.
Eriksen, C. W. (1995). The flankers task and response
competition: A useful tool for investigating a variety of
cognitive problems. Visual Cognition, 2(2-3), 101-118.
Eriksen, B. A., & Eriksen, C. W. (1974). Effects of noise
letters upon the identification of a target letter in a
nonsearch task. Perception & Psychophysics, 16(1),
143-149.
Goyal, M., Singh, S., Sibinga, E. M., Gould, N. F.,
Rowland-Seymour, A., Sharma, R., ... & Ranasinghe,
P. D. (2014). Meditation programs for psychological
stress and well-being: A systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(3), 357-368.
Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A. A., & Oh, D.
(2010). The effect of mindfulness-based therapy on
anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic review.

2807

Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(2),
169-183.
Jha, A. P., Krompinger, J., & Baime, M. J. (2007).
Mindfulness training modifies subsystems of attention.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(2),
109-119.
John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., & Kentle, R. L. (1991). The
Big Five Inventory--Versions 4a and 54. Berkeley, CA:
University of California,Berkeley, Institute of
Personality and Social Research.
Lane, J. D., Seskevich, J. E., & Pieper, C. F. (2007). Brief
meditation training can improve perceived stress and
negative mood. Alternative Therapies in Health and
Medicine, 13(1), 38-44.
Leung, Y., & Singhal, A. (2004). An examination of the
relationship between qigong meditation and personality.
Social Behavior and Personality: An International
Journal, 32(4), 313-320.
Lippelt, D. P., Hommel, B., & Colzato, L. S. (2014).
Focused attention, open monitoring and loving kindness
meditation: effects on attention, conflict monitoring,
and creativity–A review. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 15.
Ludwig, D. S., & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2008). Mindfulness in
medicine. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 300(11), 1350-1352.
Lueke, A., & Gibson, B. (2016). Brief mindfulness
meditation reduces discrimination. Psychology of
Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 3(1),
34-44.
MacLean, K. A., Ferrer, E., Aichele, S. R., Bridwell, D. A.,
Zanesco, A. P., Jacobs, T. L., ... & Wallace, B. A.
(2010). Intensive meditation training improves
perceptual discrimination and sustained attention.
Psychological Science, 21(6), 829-839.
Sedlmeier, P., Eberth, J., Schwarz, M., Zimmermann, D.,
Haarig, F., Jaeger, S., & Kunze, S. (2012). The
psychological effects of meditation: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 138(6), 1139-1171.
Tang, Y. Y., Hölzel, B. K., & Posner, M. I. (2015). The
neuroscience of mindfulness meditation. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 16(4), 213-225.
Tang, Y. Y., Ma, Y., Wang, J., Fan, Y., Feng, S., Lu, Q., ...
& Posner, M. I. (2007). Short-term meditation training
improves attention and self-regulation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104(43), 1715217156.
Williams, P., Francis, A., & Durham, R. (1976). Personality
and meditation. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 43(3),
787-792.
Zeidan, F. (2015). The neurobiology of mindfulness
meditation. In K. W. Brown, J. D. Creswell, & R. M.
Ryan (Eds), Handbook of Mindfulness: Theory,
Research, and Practice (pp. 171-189). New York, NY:
Guilford.
Zeidan, F., Gordon, N. S., Merchant, J., & Goolkasian, P.
(2010). The effects of brief mindfulness meditation

training on experimentally induced pain. The Journal of
Pain, 11(3), 199-209.
Zeidan, F., Johnson, S. K., Diamond, B. J., David, Z., &
Goolkasian, P. (2010). Mindfulness meditation
improves cognition: Evidence of brief mental training.
Consciousness and Cognition, 19(2), 597-605.

2808

