But where’s the evidence? The effect of explanatory corrections on inferences about
false information
Saoirse Connor Desai (saoirse.connor-desai@city.ac.uk) & Stian Reimers (stian.reimers.1@city.ac.uk)
City, University of London, Department of Psychology, Whiskin Street
London, EC1R 0JD
Abstract
Research on the continued influence effect has consistently
shown that people continue to rely on false causal information
despite being corrected by more recent information.
Corrections are most effective when paired with an alternative
explanation that ‘fills the causal gap’ left by the correction.
However, it may not always be possible provide an alternative
explanation. Previous research suggests people more readily
discount unreliable information. Two experiments examined
whether corrections to false causal information in a news
report are more effective when the correction explains why
the source of the false information was unreliable. The results
showed that a correction did not fully eliminate reliance on
false information and that an explanatory correction was no
more effective than a non-explanatory correction. People also
continued to rely on false information when there was limited
information to support its validity. Possible explanations for
the ineffectiveness of explanatory corrections are discussed.
Keywords: False Information; Continued Influence;
Corrections; Inference; Explanations; Reasoning; Memory

Introduction
Many news organizations now report breaking news via
social media platforms. Although social media helps to keep
people up to date, breaking news can be based on mistaken,
inaccurate, or incomplete information. When false
information1 is reported news organizations would
ordinarily issue a correction, revising their original account.
Provided that the false information has not proliferated,
being aware of a correction should normatively neutralize
belief in the false information. In contrast, numerous
experiments on the continued influence effect (CIE) have
shown that causal false information continues to be
influential beyond a correction (Ecker, Lewandowsky, &
Apai, 2011; Ecker, Lewandowsky, Swire, & Chang, 2011;
Ecker, Lewandowsky, & Tang, 2010; Johnson & Seifert,
1994; Wilkes & Leatherbarrow, 1988).
The standard experimental paradigm for studying the CIE
involves reading a series of messages describing a fictional
news story over time. Explanatory target information is
presented and subsequently corrected for one group of
participants, but remains uncorrected for a control group.
Inferences and memory for the news report are then
assessed through a series of open-ended questions. In
Johnson and Seifert (1994), participants read a story about a
warehouse fire wherein target information implies that
1

In this context the term ‘false information’ refers to incorrect or
inaccurate information that is initially presented as true.

carelessly stored flammable materials (oil paint and gas
cylinders), were a likely cause of the fire. Later in the story,
some participants learn that no such materials had actually
been found. A comprehension test follows, which includes
indirect inference questions (e.g., “what could have caused
the explosions?”), and questions assessing recall of basic
facts (e.g., “what was the cost of the damage done?”).
Inference responses are then coded in order to measure the
extent to which the target information (oil paint and gas
cylinder) has been discounted. Responses are coded
according to whether they are consistent with the
explanatory theme implied by the target information (e.g.,
“exploding gas cylinders”) or not (e.g., “electrical short
circuit”).
The key finding from CIE studies (for reviews see
(Lewandowsky, Ecker, Seifert, Schwarz, & Cook, 2012;
Seifert, 2014) is that corrections do not fully eliminate
reliance on false information. People continue to rely on
false information despite recalling the correction, when
given prior warnings about false information in news
reports; whether corrections are repeated, or appear
immediately after the false information (Ecker,
Lewandowsky, & Apai, 2011; Ecker et al., 2011; Ecker et
al., 2010; Johnson & Seifert, 1994). The CIE has been
replicated using various types of news stories, types of false
information (e.g., Ecker et al., 2011), and using direct or
indirect measures of reliance on false information (Connor
Desai & Reimers, 2016; Rich & Zaragoza, 2016).
Identifying the cognitive mechanisms underlying the
successful correction of false information has timely, realworld implications in a wide variety of domains (e.g., news
stories, public health information, in the courtroom).

Filling the causal gap One explanation for the CIE is that
corrections are ineffective because a correction alone leaves
a causal gap in a person’s mental model of the reported
event (e.g., Johnson & Seifert, 1994; Wilkes &
Leatherbarrow, 1988; Lewandowsky et al., 2012). In this
view, people maintain the false information because they
prefer an inconsistent to an incoherent mental event model.
In the warehouse fire example, an individual might infer
that a fire started by an electrical short circuit was a result of
negligence, based on information suggesting that flammable
liquids were carelessly stored. Correcting a key piece of
causal information (i.e., no flammable liquids) results in an
incoherent mental model. People might continue to draw
causal inferences from the false information because it is the
only explanation available to them. In line with the mental
models account, combining a correction with an alternative
1

1824

explanation to ‘fill the causal gap’ considerably reduces the
degree to which people rely on false information (e.g., there
was evidence the fire was caused by arson; Ecker et al.,
2011; Johnson & Seifert, 1994a; Rich & Zaragoza, 2016;
Tenney, Cleary, & Spellman, 2009).
In the real world it is not always possible to provide a
single, coherent, alternative explanation to replace corrected
false information (e.g., the true cause the Flight MH370
disappearance still remains unknown). Due to the fact that
alternative explanations are not always available, it is
important to identify other means of increasing the
effectiveness of corrections.

Explanatory corrections One way of increasing the
impact of corrections is to explain why the original
information is no longer relevant or useful. For example,
Bush, Johnson, and Seifert (1994) found that explaining that
target information had been of poor quality (the storeroom
actually contained cans of coffee and soda canisters), or
was no longer relevant (a delivery of paint and gas cylinders
was expected but never arrived), enhanced the effectiveness
of the correction statement compared to a correction alone,
but an explanatory correction was still not as effective an
offering an alternative explanation. Bush et al., also found
that ruling out the involvement of the corrected information
(there was clear evidence that no paint or gas were ever on
the premises) without providing an explanation actually
decreased the effectiveness of the correction. These findings
can be understood by the pragmatic inferences people draw
about the conversational implications of the original
statement (cf. Seifert, 2014). The validity of corrected
information might be reinforced because people assume that
a speakers only offer true (maxim of quality) and relevant
(maxim of relevance) information (Grice, 1975). Bush et
al’s findings suggest that the person issuing the correction
must explain why the original information should no longer
be believed in order ensure the correction is understood.
Legal decision-making studies support the idea that
explaining why initial information is unreliable can enhance
the effectiveness of a correction. For example, Kassin and
Sommers (1997) found that mock-jurors who learned a key
piece of incriminating evidence was inadmissible because it
was unreliable (a taped confession secured without a
warrant) were more likely to convict a defendant than
mock-jurors who were told that the evidence was unreliable
(the tape was inaudible). Similarly, Fein, McCloskey and
Tomlinson (1997) found mock-jurors discounted
inadmissible incriminating testimony when its reliability
was called into question. Finally, Lagnado and Harvey
(2008) showed that people providing evidence that an
eyewitness has a ‘longstanding grudge’ against the suspect
resulted in participants discounting that testimony. These
studies suggest that explanatory corrections could be as
effective as combining a correction with an alternative
explanation when the correction explains why the initial
source of the false information is unreliable.

Pilot study
The pilot study tested whether explanatory corrections are
more effective than a correction alone when the correction
explains why the original source of the false information is
unreliable (i.e., mistaken or intentionally deceptive). There
were two main predictions: 1) Explanatory correction
groups would produce fewer target information consistent
inferences than the correction alone group, and 2)
Correction only group would produce fewer target
information consistent inferences than a group who was
never exposed to a correction.

Methods
Participants Forty-five U.S. based participants were
recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk (17 female, age
36.3±9.70). Participants were paid $1 and took an average
of 14 minutes to complete the experiment.
Design Participants were randomly assigned to either the no
correction (11), correction only (10), explanatory correction
error (10), or explanatory correction lie (14) correction
groups. There were four main dependent measures: 1)
references to target information on inference questions, 2)
recall on filler items, and 3) awareness of the correction.
Materials and Procedure Participants read a news story
describing a warehouse fire, displayed as a series of
sequentially presented short messages. Materials were
reconstructed from an experiment by (Johnson & Seifert,
1994; Exp 3a). There were 12 discrete messages (1, target
message, 1 critical message, 1 causal detail message, 9
additional messages), in the style of ‘Tweets’ from the
social media platform Twitter, an approach inspired by
Hardwicke, Manning and Shanks (2016). The ‘Tweets’
originated from the same fictional news outlet, called “news
now” and each message was no longer than 140 characters.
Messages appeared one a time for a minimum of 5 seconds
each; there was no maximum time. Participants clicked a
button to proceed to the next message; they were unable to
return and view previous messages.
Participants completed an instructional attentional check
(e.g., Oppenheimer, Meyvis, & Davidenko, 2009) before
starting the experiment. The explanatory theme implied by
the target message was that flammable materials had been
carelessly stored in a storeroom. The target message,
containing information about a possible cause of the fire
(there were cans of oil paint and gas cylinders present in a
storeroom), was presented at Message 5. The causal detail
containing information consistent with the explanatory
theme implied in the target message (thick, oily smoke +
sheets of flames hinder firefighters efforts, intense heat has
made the fire difficult to bring under control) appeared at
Message 8. The critical message varied depending on
condition and appeared at Message 11. The remaining
(filler) messages provided event information, which was
neutral with respect to the explanatory theme implied by the
target message (e.g., Three warehouse workers working
overtime, have been taken to St Columbus Hospital, due to
smoke inhalation).
2

1825

Table 1 Example questions and responses from pilot study

In the three correction conditions Message 11 corrected
earlier information about the contents of the storeroom;
participants in the no correction condition learned instead
that warehouse workers taken to hospital had been released.
The explanatory correction groups either learned that the
target information had been corrected because an employee
confused the soda canisters and coffee cans for paint and
gas (error) or that an employee lied that there were
flammable materials in the storeroom (lie). There were four
narrative versions in total.
After reading all of the ‘Tweets’ participants completed a
questionnaire consisting of seven inference questions, seven
filler questions and two questions assessing awareness and
understanding of the correction. Inference and filler
questions were presented in a random order. Inference
questions asked participants about information not explicitly
mentioned in the news report (e.g., “Is there any evidence of
careless management in relation to this fire?”), and included
a question querying participants about what they thought the
most likely cause of the fire was. Filler questions enquired
about the explicit details included in additional (filler)
messages included in the news story (e.g., “Which hospital
were the workers taken to?”). Two further questions
assessed awareness and understanding of the correction
message. Participants typed a response to each of 16
questions in a text box, were required to use a minimum of
25 characters, and encouraged to answer using full
sentences.

Pilot study: Results
Coding of Responses
The main dependent variable extracted from inference
question responses was ‘references to target information’.
References that explicitly stated, or strongly implied, that
the fire was caused by gas and oil paints were scored a 1 on
the target information measure, and were otherwise scored
as 0. The maximum individual score for inference questions
was 7. Filler question responses were scored for accuracy.
Correct or partially correct responses were scored 1 and a
score 0 was given for an incorrect response. The maximum
individual score for filler questions was also 7. Awareness

Figure 1: Mean target information inference scores (left
panel), filler accuracy scores (top right panel), and
awareness of correction scores (bottom right panel) as a
function of correction. Error bars represent 95% confidence
interval of the mean.

of correction scores were computed using the same criteria;
the maximum individual awareness of correction score was
2. One-way ANOVA analyzed differences between the
correction conditions for all three measures. 2 Fig 1 shows
mean inference, filler and awareness of correction as a
function of correction condition.
Inference scores There was significant effect of correction
on the number references to target information, F (3, 41) =
3.32, p <. 05, η2 = .20. Planned contrasts showed a
correction reduced references to target information
compared to no correction, t (19) = -2.98, p < .01, d = 1.46.
However, neither an error explanatory correction, t (19) = 0.55, d = 0.23, nor a lie explanatory correction, t (23) = 1.45, d = 0.53, reduced references to target information
compared to no correction.
Filler recall accuracy There was a significant effect of
correction on filler recall accuracy, F (3, 41) = 4.39, p < .01,
η2 = .24. Tukey’s tests showed the no correction group
recalled significantly more filler details than the lie
explanatory correction group, t (23) = -3.34, p =. 009, d
=1.14. None of the other differences were significant (p’s >
.05).
Awareness of correction There was a significant effect of
correction on awareness of correction scores, F (2, 31) =
6.52, p < .01, η2 = .30. Tukey’s tests revealed that the
correction only group showed more awareness of the
correction than the error, t (18) = -3.09, p = .01 d = 1.62, or
lie, t (22) = -3.24, p < .01, d = 1.22 explanatory correction
groups. The two explanatory correction groups did not
significantly differ, p = .10.

2

Planned contrasts are reported for predicted differences. Tukey’s posthoc tests are reported when no difference between conditions was
predicted.

3

1826

Figure 2: Content of critical messages in main experiment. In
contrast to previous studies, the critical message in each of the
correction conditions explicitly stated that the message was a
correction.

Interim Discussion
A correction alone reduced, but did not fully eliminate,
target information references when compared to no
correction. Pilot results also showed that an explanatory
correction did not reduce references to target information
compared to no correction. On average both explanatory
correction groups made more target information references
than the correction only group, although these differences
were not significant. These results are inconsistent with
previous findings showing that an explanatory correction
was more effective at reducing reliance on target
information than a correction alone (cf. Bush, Johnson &
Seifert, 1994).
The most likely reason that an explanatory correction was
less effective than a correction alone is that participants in
the explanatory correction groups showed poorer awareness
and understanding of the correction, than the correction only
group. Only 40% of the error explanatory correction group,
and 21% of the lie explanatory correction group understood
and were aware of the correction, compared to 90% of the
correction only group. Both explanatory correction groups
also recalled fewer story details on average than the
correction only group. Some participants’ responses
indicated doubts about the credibility of the correction
message (e.g., questioning whether the employee really lied
about the contents of the storeroom), and other responses
suggested misunderstanding of the correction message (e.g.,
the employee thought there was soda and coffee but there
was actually paint and gas). A lack of clarity of the
explanatory correction messages could explain poorer
awareness and understanding in explanatory correction
conditions could also explain why the current results do not
replicate previous findings (cf. Bush et al., 1994). The main
experiment sought to rectify these issues by enhancing the
clarity of the correction messages.

Figure 3: Mean target information inference score as a
function of condition in main experiment. Error bars represent
the 95% confidence interval of the mean.

Main Experiment
The same general setup was employed in the main
experiment except that a number of changes were made to
rule out explanations identified in the interim discussion.
The hypotheses and predictions were also the same as the
pilot study.
Participants Three-hundred and twelve U.S. based
participants were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk
(146 female, age 39.67±12.31). Participants were paid $1
and took an average of 20 minutes to complete the
experiment.
Design, materials and procedure Participants were
randomly assigned to either the no correction (71),
correction only (87), explanatory correction error (71), or
explanatory correction lie (83) groups. Dependent measures
were the same as in the pilot study.
Content of the critical messages was modified from the
pilot study in order to make it unequivocally clear that the
target information was being corrected (see Fig 2). Unlike
previous studies, the critical message for the correction
conditions explicitly stated that the target information was
being corrected.

Results
Additional coding and analysis was performed on one of the
filler questions to the total number of references indicating
flammable substances had been in the storeroom before the
fire. The additional ‘discounting’ measure further assessed
the extent to which the false information had been
disregarded. Responses were scored 1 if the response
indicated there were flammable substances in the storeroom
before the fire and 0 otherwise. One-way ANOVA analyzed
differences between conditions for all four dependent
measures.
Inference scores There was a significant effect of
correction on references to the target information, F (3, 308)
= 23.23, p < .001, η2 = .18. Planned contrasts revealed a
correction significantly reduced the number of references to
target information, t (156) = -6.84, p < .001, d = 0.98.
4

1827

Likewise, the error, t (140) = -6.90, p < .001, d = 1.02, and
lie, t (152) = -6.99, p <. 001, d = 1.01., explanatory
correction groups, made significantly fewer references to
the target information than the no correction group. Mean
target information inference scores are shown in Fig 3.
Filler recall accuracy There was no effect of correction on
filler recall accuracy, F (3, 308) = 0.64, p = .90, η2 = .01, so
it was not necessary to perform contrast analysis. Mean
filler recall scores ranged from 4.58 to 4.96 (out of 7).
Awareness of correction No correction group responses
were excluded from analysis because their responses to
awareness of correction questions were meaningless. There
was a significant effect of correction condition on awareness
of correction scores, F (2, 238) = 3.76, p < .05, η2 = .03.
Tukey’s tests showed a significant difference between the
correction only and explanatory correction error group, t
(168) = -2.39, p = .05, d = 0.37. There were non-significant
differences between the explanatory correction error and
correction only groups (p =.06), and both the explanatory
corrections groups (p = 1). Given the small effect size the
difference is considered negligible.
Discounting false information The inference scores
suggest that explanatory corrections are treated the same as
a correction alone. If this is the case, then the number of
references indicating the storeroom contained flammable
substances before the fire should be equivalent to inference
scores. There was a significant effect of correction on the
number of responses indicating the storeroom contained
flammable substances before the fire, F (3, 308) = 57.25, p
< .001, η2 = .36. Planned contrasts confirmed the same
pattern of results as inference scores; there were
significantly higher number of references stating that
flammable substances had been in the storeroom before the
fire in the no correction than the correction only group, t
(156) = 9.22, p < .001, d = 1.49, the error correction group, t
(140) = -12.27, p < .001, d = 2.81, or the correction lie
group, t (152) = -9.99, p < .001, d = 1.68. A closer
inspection of the responses suggested that explanatory
corrections were not treated the same as a correction alone.
Fig 4 shows the mean number of responses indicating that
flammable substances were in storeroom before the fire.
Tukey’s tests showed that the explanatory correction error
group significantly differed to the correction only, t (156) =
-3.66, p < .01, d = 0.55, and explanatory correction lie
group, t (152) = -2.75, d = -.45. The difference between the
correction only and explanatory correction lie groups was
not significant, p = .80.

Discussion
The results show a clear continued influence effect; a
correction significantly reduced, but did not eliminate,
references to target information. A correction appeared to
have a similar impact on inferences whether accompanied
by an explanation as to why the original source of the false
information should not be trusted, or not. A closer
inspection of responses suggested fewer people continued to
think that flammable substances had been in the storeroom

Figure 4: Mean number of references to presence of
flammable substances in the storeroom before the fire as a
function of correction condition. Error bars represent 95%
confidence interval of the mean.

before the fire when the correction replaced the contents of
the storeroom (i.e., there were soda cans and gas canisters in
the storeroom) than when the correction left the storeroom
empty before the fire (i.e., the employee had lied about
flammable materials in the storeroom). In addition, the
continued influence effect was still observed despite the fact
that the correction to target information was explicitly stated
in the correction message.

General Discussion
The experiments reported in this paper examined the impact
of explanatory corrections on inferences about false
information in the context of breaking news reports on
social media. The findings reported here are consistent with
previous studies showing that corrections do not fully
eliminate reliance on false information (Ecker,
Lewandowsky, Swire, et al., 2011; Ecker et al., 2010;
Johnson & Seifert, 1994; Wilkes & Leatherbarrow, 1988).
These results also provide a novel contribution to the
literature on the continued influence effect. Specifically, a
correction that explained why the original source of the false
information was unreliable was no more effective in
reducing reliance on false information, than a correction
alone. Participants made an equivalent number of references
to target information whether the correction provided an
explanation for why the target information should no longer
be believed (i.e., the current inaccuracy of the target
information was directly attributed to a mistaken or a
deceptive individual), or not.
Despite this finding there was evidence to suggest that
corrections were not treated equally. People were less likely
to say that flammable substances (oil paint and gas
canisters) were in the storeroom before the fire when the
contents of the storeroom were replaced with other objects
(soda canisters and coffee cans) than when the contents of
the storeroom were not replaced (i.e., the employee lied that
there were flammable items in the storeroom). One
explanation for this inconsistency between inferences and
5

1828

memory of the storeroom contents is that people who
received the error correction updated their representation of
the contents of the room whilst maintaining an inconsistent
mental model of the event. In contrast, people did not
update their representation of the storeroom when the
contents were not replaced with alternative materials. These
results do not support previous findings showing that
explanatory corrections are more effective than a correction
alone (Bush, Johnson, & Seifert, 1994).
The main methodological difference between the current
study and previous study is that the explanatory correction
conditions in this study involved an additional source of
information. In addition to making a judgment about
whether the correction sufficiently negated the false
information participants had to establish why or how the
original source of the information (i.e., the employee)
provided the information in the first place. Without knowing
why the employee lied about the flammable materials or
how the employee was able to confuse flammable for nonflammable substances, people might still assume the false
information is relevant. Another possible reason for the
inconsistent results could be that in at least one of Bush et
al’s conditions the correction made it logically impossible to
continue to rely on the false information whereas this was
not the case in the current study. These findings further
demonstrate that pragmatic inferences play an important
role in successfully correcting false information.
The current studies also showed evidence of the continued
to rely on false information even though the report only
contained one piece of information that reinforced the false
information explanatory theme. This suggests that people
construct a mental model of the incident on the basis of
limited causal information. If there is no information to
indicate an alternative explanation then people fall back on
the only explanatory information available to them. It is also
possible that people interpret (or re-interpret) information as
supporting their leading hypothesis (e.g., Carlson & Russo,
2001). Future studies are necessary to address whether
people re-interpret neutral information to fit false causal
information or whether people construct their mental event
model based on limited information.
While the current study provides initial steps, there is a lot
more left to explore. It will be necessary to further explore
why explaining why the information was unreliable was no
more effective than withdrawing the false information and
why the current findings are discrepant with previous
continued influence (Bush et al., 1994) and legal decision
making studies (e.g., Lagnado & Harvey). Future studies
will further investigate the role of source reliability in
correcting false information, and use a wider range of
scenarios as well as types of false information.

References
Bush, J. G., Johnson, H. M., & Seifert, C. M. (1994). The implications of
corrections: Then why did you mention it? In Proceedings of the
Sixteenth Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference, Atlanta,
Georgia (Vol. 27, pp. 112–117). Atlanta.
Carlson, K. a, & Russo, J. E. (2001). Biased interpretation of evidence by mock
jurors. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Applied, 7(2), 91–103.
http://doi.org/10.1037/1076-898X.7.2.91
Connor Desai, S., & Reimers, S. (2016). Direct and indirect measures of the
Continued Influence Effect. Unpublished manuscript.
Ecker, U. K. H., Lewandowsky, S., & Apai, J. (2011). Terrorists brought down
the plane!--No, actually it was a technical fault: processing corrections
of emotive information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology
(2006), 64(2), 283–310. http://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2010.497927
Ecker, U. K. H., Lewandowsky, S., Swire, B., & Chang, D. (2011). Correcting
false information in memory: manipulating the strength of
misinformation encoding and its retraction. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 18(3), 570–578. http://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-011-0065-1
Ecker, U. K. H., Lewandowsky, S., & Tang, D. T. W. (2010). Explicit warnings
reduce but do not eliminate the continued influence of misinformation.
Memory & Cognition, 38(8), 1087–1100.
http://doi.org/10.3758/mc.38.8.1087
Fein, S., McCloskey, a. L., & Tomlinson, T. M. (1997). Can the Jury Disregard
that Information? The Use of Suspicion to Reduce the Prejudicial
Effects of Pretrial Publicity and Inadmissible Testimony. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(11), 1215–1226.
http://doi.org/10.1177/01461672972311008
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In J. L. Cole, P., & Morgan (Ed.),
Syntax and semantics, Vol 3: Speech acts (pp. 41–58). New York: NY:
Academic Press.
Johnson, H. M., & Seifert, C. M. (1994). Sources of the Continued Influence
Effect: When Misinformation in Memory Affects Later Inferences.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
20(6), 1420–1436. http://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.20.6.1420
Kassin, S. M., & Sommers, S. R. (1997). Inadmissible Testimony, Instructions
to Disregard, and the Jury: Substantive Versus Procedural
Considerations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin.
http://doi.org/10.1177/01461672972310005
Lagnado, D. a, & Harvey, N. (2008). The impact of discredited evidence.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(6), 1166–1173.
http://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.15.6.1166
Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. H., Seifert, C. M., Schwarz, N., & Cook, J.
(2012). Misinformation and Its Correction: Continued Influence and
Successful Debiasing. Psychological Science in the Public Interest,
13(3), 106–131. http://doi.org/10.1177/1529100612451018
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009). Instructional
manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to increase statistical power.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(4), 867–872.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2009.03.009
Rich, P. R., & Zaragoza, M. S. (2016). The continued influence of implied and
explicitly stated misinformation in news reports. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory & Cognition, 42(1), 62–
74. http://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000155
Seifert, C. M. (2014). The Continued Influence Effect: The Persistence of
Misinformation in Memory and Reasoning Following Correction.
(Rapp, David N., Braasch, Jason L.G., Ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Tenney, E. R., Cleary, H. M. D., & Spellman, B. A. (2009). Unpacking the
doubt in “beyond a reasonable doubt”: Plausible alternative stories
increase not guilty verdicts. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 31(1),
1–8. http://doi.org/10.1080/01973530802659687
Wilkes, A. L., & Leatherbarrow, M. (1988). Editing episodic memory following
the identification of error. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology Section A, 40(2), 361–387.
http://doi.org/10.1080/02724988843000168

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Tom Hardwicke for his insights and expertise
regarding the continued influence effect paradigm.

6

1829

