Children’s semantic and world knowledge overrides fictional information during
anticipatory linguistic processing
Ruth Lee (rj.lee@mail.utoronto.ca)

OISE, University of Toronto
Craig G. Chambers (craig.chambers@utoronto.ca)

Department of Psychology, University of Toronto
Falk Huettig (falk.huettig@mpi.nl)

Department of Psychology of Language, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Patricia A. Ganea (patricia.ganea@utoronto.ca)

OISE, University of Toronto
Abstract

information over situation-specific knowledge (Snedeker &
Trueswell, 2004; Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip,
1999). Children may therefore find it difficult to rely on a
fictional context to inform real-time language processing,
particularly in fantastical fiction where described events
(e.g., a person flying) strongly depend on information in the
narrative, and are at odds with the nature of the real world.
Conversely, it is possible that the incongruent actions and
salient contrast between the real and narrative worlds
involved in a fantastical narrative may strengthen children’s
mental simulation of story information, and thus support
their ability to rely upon contextual information to anticipate
upcoming language input. Preschool children are already
becoming competent comprehenders of discourse; they
become sensitive to its causal structure (Lynch et al., 2008)
and begin to make inferences connecting the events evoked
in narrative with world knowledge (Barnes, Dennis, &
Haefele-Kalvaitis, 1996). Preschool children also
understand that events in fiction can contradict their
knowledge of the real world, and involve systematic rules
governing what can and cannot happen within the context of
that world (Sharon & Woolley, 2004; Van de Vondervoort
& Friedman, 2014).
Thus, is not clear how effectively young children can use
fantastical facts introduced in a narrative to interpret the
story as it unfolds. Notably little work has investigated the
real-time processes and underlying mechanisms involved in
children’s interpretation of fictional discourse. Most
investigations of children’s narrative comprehension have
instead relied on offline measures, such as the verbal
production of story elements (e.g. Paris & Paris, 2003). By
using implicit measures such as eye movements we can gain
additional insights into children’s moment-by-moment and
automatic consideration of possible referents as language
unfolds in real time.
In the current study, we investigate children’s real-time
language processing in discourse contexts that present
fantastical protagonists and improbable events, using a
spoken language eye tracking methodology. The goal of the
study is to compare children’s and adults’ use of fictional

Using real-time eye-movement measures, we asked how a
fantastical discourse context competes with stored representations
of semantic and world knowledge to influence children's and
adults' moment-by-moment interpretation of a story. Seven-yearolds were less effective at bypassing stored semantic and world
knowledge during real-time interpretation than adults.
Nevertheless, an effect of discourse context on comprehension was
still apparent.
Keywords: discourse; children; sentence comprehension; eyetracking; semantics; cognition; fantastical fiction

Real-time interpretation of fantastic fiction
Linguistic processing requires listeners to identify relevant
thematic relationships between the entities and events
evoked in a sentence. Studies of visually-situated language
processing have shown that comprehenders use such
relations to predict upcoming linguistic input, and in turn
direct their attention to compatible referents in the visual
world (e.g., Altmann & Kamide, 1999; Kamide, Altmann, &
Haywood, 2003). For example, when hearing the sentence
‘The boy eats the big cake’ while looking at a scene
containing a cake and a bird, adults and children as young as
2 years of age look to the cake while ‘eats’ is unfolding
(Mani & Huettig, 2012). Children as young as 3 years of
age can also use their prior knowledge of the relationships
between actions and agents to generate more sophisticated
predictions, e.g. anticipating 'bone' upon hearing "The dog
hides" (Borovsky, Elman, & Fernald, 2012).
In adults, comprehension is also rapidly influenced by
higher-order meaning created by physical, functional and
situational relations between entities and events (Chambers
& San Juan, 2008; Sedivy, 2003; Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995). Situation-specific
factors, including a fictional context, can in fact override
lexical and semantic relationships based on stored
knowledge (Cook & O’Brien, 2014; Filik, 2008; Nieuwland
& Van Berkum, 2006). However, prior research with grade
school children has shown that they tend to privilege lexical

730

information that contradicts lexical and world knowledge to
constrain predictions about upcoming language input. Can
young children rely upon fantastical facts introduced in the
prior discourse to predict upcoming referents, and what is
the time course of this process? In other words, how does a
fantastical discourse context compete with information in
children’s stored representations of semantic and world
knowledge to constrain their understanding of the situations
being described? The competition between semantic and
real-world knowledge and discourse information that
violates that knowledge can be explored by presenting
children with a discourse-final sentence in which the
protagonist acts on an object in an unusual way (e.g.,
wearing boxes on her feet). By examining eye movements
in the window of time between the onset of a verb that
semantically constrains the referent (e.g., ‘putting on’) and
the onset of the following noun, we can gain insights into
children’s interpretation of the unfolding sentence. If
children rely upon the fantastical discourse to interpret the
sentence, we would expect them to demonstrate more
anticipatory eye movement to objects that are congruent
with the discourse than to objects that are congruent with
stored event semantics and world knowledge, but
incongruent with the discourse.
We also explore the relationship of predictive language
processing in fantastical contexts with other mental
functions. Anticipation of events consistent with a
fantastical fictional world is likely to require the suppression
of stored knowledge based on the stable semantic
relationships of the real world. We might therefore expect it
to be positively predicted by inhibitory control and
negatively predicted by receptive vocabulary and semantic
fluency, which reflect strong, well-defined networks of
semantic relationships. Constraints on working memory
may also limit children’s performance by limiting the ability
to maintain concurrent interpretations. Studies measuring
event-related potentials (ERPs) have shown working
memory to predict adults’ ability to use rich contextual
information to build a message-level representation of
linguistic input (Huettig & Janse, 2016; Wlotko &
Federmeier, 2012), perhaps because it binds knowledge to
linguistic and semantic knowledge in space and time.

cognitive, speech, language, hearing, or attentional issues.
Children heard English spoken at home more than 75% of
the time. Adults were native speakers of English. Data from
27 additional participants were collected, but not used due
to: unsuccessful calibration (3 adults, 1 child), no trials that
captured eye movements more than 50% of the time (7
adults, 5 children), failed pre-test (3 children), lack of
attention (2 adults, 3 children), and misunderstanding the
task (1 adult, 2 children).

Materials
Cartoon images were taken from open-source resources, and
the displays accompanying each narrative depicted agents
and objects against a white background. Sentences were prerecorded by a female, native Canadian-English speaker.

Norming of stimuli
Offline tasks with a separate group of 4- and 5-year-old
participants were conducted to establish that even younger
children could recognize the objects and used the verbs to
identify referents in the expected manner. Children were
tested at the Ontario Science Centre. The experimenter
showed the child a four-object display, provided a label, and
asked her to identify the relevant object. 100% of children
recognized all the images presented during the critical
sentences (N = 8 per target image). Children were then
introduced to pictures of agents (e.g. ‘This is Chloe the
fairy’), following which they were presented with a fourobject display, and asked (e.g.) ‘What will Chloe eat?’ Fourand 5-year-olds selected the only referent that was
semantically plausible following the verb over 90% of the
time across trials (N = 16 per target image).

Method
Participants

Figure 1. Example of stimuli used for the sentence
comprehension task.

Sixty-four 7-year-old children (range: 7;0-7;11, Mage:
7;4) and 68 adults (range: 18-35 years; Mage: 25)
participated in the current experiment. Seven-year-olds were
chosen because they are highly experienced with narratives;
because younger (3-5-year-old) children are more often
willing to attribute unconventional behaviour to humans
(Boerger, 2011); and because pilot testing revealed that they
could attend through 16 consecutive eye-tracking trials, and
complete the full one-hour procedure without signs of
fatigue. Inclusionary criteria were normal or corrected-tonormal vision and no history of diagnosis or treatment of

Procedure
Sentence comprehension task Participants sat in a
stationary chair in front of a computer with a 1920x1200
LCD display. Eye movements were recorded using a Tobii
X120 eye-tracker. A nine-point calibration procedure was
used to set up tracking of both eyes. In the description phase
of the experimental condition (N=32 7-year-olds and N=34

731

adults), participants saw a centrally presented picture of a
fantastical agent (e.g., a superhero or monster), and
simultaneously heard a story. Story sentences contained
referents that were semantically congruent with a preceding
verb, and referents that were unusual patients of the
preceding verb. For instance: ‘Chloe the fairy doesn’t have
cake for her snack. She has snow for her snack! And Chloe
doesn’t wear shoes on her feet. She wears boxes on her feet!
What is Chloe going to do?’ Participants then saw a central
fixation cross. In a subsequent test phase, participants saw a
display comprising the four mentioned items (e.g. cake,
snow, shoes, and box), one placed in each corner of the
screen, and heard the critical sentence. In 4 of the 8
experimental trials, the verb in the critical sentence was
semantically constraining (e.g., ‘Chloe is eating up the
snow’). Thus, the verb narrowed to 1 the number of
referents in the display that were coherent with children’s
stored semantic knowledge (henceforth, semantically
congruent referent, or SCR: e.g., cake) as well as the
number of referents that were coherent with the story
information (discourse-congruent referent, or DCR: e.g.,
snow). In the other 4 experimental trials, the verb did not
constrain the referent: e.g. ‘Chloe is looking at the snow’.
Half of the participants heard a critical sentence based on
the first part of the story (e.g., Chloe eating up the snow),
and half heard a story based on the second part of the story
(e.g., Chloe putting on the box). In 8 filler trials, participants
heard that agents ‘sometimes’ performed expected actions
and ‘sometimes’ performed actions that violated world
knowledge, breaking up the pattern in the content and
outcomes of the stories and reducing the risk of strategic
adjustments. Counterbalancing was in place for the portion
of the story that was referenced during the critical sentence,
the order in which typical and atypical verb patients were
mentioned, the pairing of stories with constraining and
neutral verbs, and the location of the DCR on the screen.
The location of other objects was randomized.
To confirm that children could recall simple discourse of
the type used in the experiment, the sentence comprehension
task was preceded by two offline pre-trials in which children
were asked a comprehension question in place of the critical
sentence. For instance, children heard ‘Gordon the gnome
doesn’t bang on a drum. He bangs on a pillow! And Gordon
doesn’t dig with a shovel. He digs with a toothbrush!’ Once
the array of possible referents was displayed, children were
asked ‘What does Gordon bang on?’ Only three children
failed to identify the target during one or both of the two
comprehension trials, and were excluded from the analysis.
A separate set of 32 7-year-olds and 34 adults
participated in a control condition in which no story
discourse preceded the critical sentence. In this condition,
during the description phrase participants saw the picture of
the agent, but in place of the story they only heard (e.g.)
‘This is Chloe the fairy’, followed by the critical sentence.
Following the sentence comprehension task participants
completed several individual difference measures. These
were drawn largely from the National Institutes of Health

Toolbox (NIH TB) Cognition Battery (McDonald, 2014),
which is administered in a computerized adaptive format.
Each of the tasks in the Toolbox has been normed and
validated for ages 3-85.
Inhibitory control The inhibitory control measure was the
NIH TB Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention Test. The
test requires participants to focus on a specific stimulus
while inhibiting attention to other stimuli flanking it.
Sometimes the middle stimulus is congruent (pointing in the
same direction as the flankers) and sometimes incongruent
(pointing in the opposite direction). Scores reflect both
accuracy and reaction time.
Working memory Working memory was measured using
the NIH TB List Sorting Working Memory Test, which
involves both storage and manipulation of items in memory.
Images of animals and foods are displayed with
accompanying audio and written text (e.g., “horse”). The
participant is asked to repeat back the items in size order
from smallest to largest, within a single dimension (either
animals or foods: 1-List) and then on 2 dimensions (foods,
then animals: 2-List). The score is equal to the number of
items that are both recalled and sequenced correctly.
Receptive vocabulary The receptive vocabulary measure
was the NIH TB Picture Vocabulary Test. Participants hear
a word and simultaneously see four photographic images on
the computer screen. Participants were asked to point to the
picture that most closely matches the meaning of the word.
Semantic fluency Semantic fluency was measured using
two components of the NEPSY word generation task
(Korkman, Kirk, & Kemp, 2007). Participants were given
one minute to produce as many members of a semantic
category as they were able. Categories were ‘animals’ and
‘foods and drinks’. Participants received one point for every
correct item. Incorrect words and repetitions were excluded.

Data scoring and analysis
The proportion of time that participants spent looking to
each referent was calculated separately for three timewindows corresponding to different speech landmarks,
namely the pre-naming window (1000 ms prior to verb
onset to verb onset), verb window (1280 ms prior to noun
onset to noun onset) and noun window (233 ms after noun
onset to 2000 ms after noun onset). Average looking time
within these windows was calculated separately for
constraining and neutral verb trials, based on gaze position
measures assessed every 50 ms.
Raw scores for receptive vocabulary, inhibitory control
and attention, and working memory were downloaded from
the NIH Toolbox Assessment Center. Two coders viewed
video recordings of the semantic fluency (word generation)
task. There was excellent agreement between coders’
judgments, r(126) = 1, p = < .001. Disagreements were
resolved by a third coder.

732

Looking time data failed to fit a normal distribution
following log and empirical logit transformations (Barr,
2008.) Therefore, all analyses were bootstrapped in SPSS
21, using 1000 case resamples with replacement from the
original dataset and a 95% percentile confidence interval.

interpret an unfolding sentence (children: t(31)=2.59, p =
.024; adults: t(33)=3.81, p = .002). Children, but not adults,
also looked to the SCR at a rate above chance (t(31)=4.75, p
= .001). Thus, taking the verb window as a whole, both
children and adults anticipated the DCR as the patient of the
constraining verb, while only children anticipated the SCR.

Results
Control condition In the control condition with no story,
both children and adults looked at chance to the DCR (p
>.05), and above chance to the SCR (children: t(27) =5.61, p
= .001, adults: t(29)=4.64, p = .001), as expected (Figure 2).
Constraining verb trials Recall that the displays
contained two distractor objects in addition to the DCR and
SCR. We first ascertained whether participants looked
preferentially to the DCR and SCR. Both adults and
children did so at a rate significantly above chance
(children: t(31)=8.1, p = .001; adults: t(33)= 7.82, p = .001).
A one-way ANOVA demonstrated that adults’ and
children’s looking behaviour was similar (F(1,65) = .00, p
>.05.) Thus, both children and adults discounted distractors
from their interpretation of the unfolding sentence following
verb onset, as seen in Figure 3.
In order to discover how hearing a constraining verb
influenced children’s and adults’ anticipatory processing,
we then examined the proportion of time that participants
spent looking to the DCR and SCR before and after verb
onset. Since constraining and neutral verb trials were
identically structured prior to verb onset, we collapsed
looking time in the pre-verb window across trial types
(constraining and neutral) for this analysis. Paired t-tests
demonstrated that upon hearing a constraining verb, the
proportion of both children’s and adults’ looking time to the
semantically congruent referent rose relative to its pre-verb
baseline (children: t(31)=-3.54, p = .005); adults: t(32) =2.16, p =.04). The proportion of adults’ looking time to the
discourse-congruent referent also rose following the onset of
the constraining verb (t(32)=-3.32, p = 002); the proportion
of children’s looking time did not (p > .05). Thus, hearing a
constraining verb caused adults, but not children, to increase
their consideration of the discourse-congruent referent.
We then examined fixation patterns within the verb
window separately for the DCR and SCR to determine
whether children’s and adults’ proportions of looking time
to these referents differed. They did not significantly differ
for either referent (both p >.05), nor did proportion of
looking time to the SCR differ between children and adults
in the no-story control condition (p >.05). Next, we
examined children’s and adults’ rates of looking against
chance, calculated at .2 to account for looks to blank space
on the screen, to establish whether both semantic coherence
and discourse context influenced participants’
interpretations of the sentence prior to hearing the noun.
Both children and adults looked to the DCR at a rate above
chance during the verb window, suggesting that both age
groups relied to some extent on the discourse context to

Figures 2&3. Time-course plots of proportion of looking
time to potential referents on experimental trials
containing constraining verbs (Figure 2), and on control
trials with no discourse context containing constraining
verbs (Figure 3).

Neutral verb trials
Recall that neutral verb trials did not contain semantically
congruent objects because the verb (e.g., "look at" was by
definition compatible with all display objects. They instead
contained two "discourse-congruent" objects in the sense
that each story presented the character carrying out two
unusual actions. For neutral verb trials, we therefore
collapsed the proportion of looking time to both DCRs. As
predicted, neither children nor adults made anticipatory
looks to the DCRs during the verb window of the critical
sentence. Adults and children looked similarly to the DCRs,
and neither adults nor children looked to the DCRs at a rate
above chance (all p >.05). This confirmed that patterns in
the constraining verb conditions were not simply due to

733

attentional capture or interest in the images used as the SCR
and DCR.

generating expectations for the referent that was congruent
with their semantic and world knowledge. Adults did not,
although some late consideration of the semantically
congruent referent is clearly apparent from an examination
of the latter half of the verb window in Figure 2. This is not
unexpected, as active prediction is often accompanied by a
certain degree of thematic priming even when these effects
are incongruent with sentence and discourse information
(Kukona, Fang, Aicher, Chen, & Magnuson, 2011).
Children with strong pre-existing networks of semantic
relationships, as indexed by receptive vocabulary, found it
difficult to override these networks in favour of the
discourse context. On average, they showed less
consideration of the discourse-congruent referent than did
children with smaller receptive vocabularies. It is also
possible that children who possess a large vocabulary have a
well-developed sense of the need for a clear conceptual
basis for any new semantic relationship. In future research,
we will ask whether longer and more causally rich stories
than those presented in the current study may improve such
children’s performance. However, on a different measure of
semantic network strength (semantic fluency), there was no
relationship with the extent to which the DCR was
considered. This may be because this kind of word
generation task also places demands on executive control:
the inhibition of irrelevant information, and the deployment
of strategic planning. Given that we did not find a
relationship between our measure of inhibitory control and
children’s looking behaviour, it is possible that in this task,
the process of suppressing semantic knowledge may not
require inhibition of the prepotent semantically congruent
interpretation. Rather, it may involve maintaining
representations of both the semantically congruent and
discourse-congruent interpretation, and discounting the
latter relative to the former.
Contrary to expectation, the poorer children’s working
memory, the more they relied on the discourse-congruent
referent to interpret the unfolding critical sentence. If this
finding can be replicated, several possible explanations
should be explored in future research. It is possible that
weak representations of the discourse entail relatively more
attention to the discourse-congruent referent in attempt to
support effort towards recall of the role of the object in the
story. It is also possible that the stronger the discourse
information in children’s working memory, the greater the
co-activation in memory of stored semantic information,
which then remains relatively highly activated in children in
comparison to adults.
The real-time processing of fantastical discourse speaks
to the interaction of several abilities and knowledge types –
stored semantic knowledge, vocabulary, working memory,
and the moment-by-moment identification of thematic
relationships – all of which influence children’s mental
representations of the events they hear about. This topic
provides a rich opportunity to characterize the information
processing skills underlying children’s language
comprehension at the discourse level.

Individual differences
Pearson correlations between individual difference measures
and proportion of looking time to the DCR and SCR in the
verb window were examined separately for adults and
children. On control trials containing no story, none of the
correlations were significant for children or adults (all p
>.05). On experimental trials, none were significant for
adults on constraining or neutral verb trials, nor for children
on neutral verb trials (all p >.05). Children’s looking time
on constraining verb trials was not correlated with inhibitory
control, nor with semantic fluency (both p >.05). Contrary
to expectation, children’s working memory was negatively
correlated with their looking time to the DCR (r(30) =
−.50, p = .004), and children’s receptive vocabulary was
positively correlated with their looking time to the SCR
(r(30) = .46, p = .011).
Linear regressions were conducted on the proportion of
children’s looks to DCR and SCR in the verb window.
Working memory significantly predicted children’s looking
time to the DCR, b = −.343, t(1,28) = -3.11, p = .004, and
explained approximately 26% of variance in children’s
looking time to the DCR, R2=.256, F(1,28) = 9.57, p = .004.
Receptive vocabulary significantly predicted children’s
looking time to the SCR, b = −.031, t(1,30) = 2.82, p = .004,
and explained approximately 21% of variance in children’s
looking time to the SCR, R2=.210, F(1,30) = 7.99, p = .004.

Discussion
This study demonstrates that while 7-year-old listeners to
fantastical fiction find it difficult to override semantic
congruence in favour of discourse congruence, the discourse
context nevertheless competes with semantic relationships
based on stored knowledge to direct their interpretation of
fantastical fictional events. The results also demonstrate that
the importance of different types of predictive information
appears to change between grade school and adulthood.
In the absence of a story, children as well as adults
generated expectations for the object that served as the most
typical patient of an immediately preceding verb, as
expected (e.g. Mani & Huettig, 2012). Given a fantastical
story, however, both children and adults used the discourse
context to guide their appraisal of appropriate verb patients:
they anticipated the DCR, which was congruent both with
the discourse and with a constraining verb. However,
children’s anticipation of the discourse-congruent referent
diminished over the time course of the verb phrase, whereas
adults’ anticipation of this object increased over the same
time window, suggesting that children began to discount the
early expectations that had been generated for a discoursecongruent noun.
Seven-year-olds had difficulty overriding an
interpretation of the critical sentence based on stored
semantic relationships and real-world knowledge,

734

processing: Evidence from anticipatory eye movements.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49(1), 133–156.
Korkman, M., Kirk, U., & Kemp, S. (2007). NEPSY–
Second edition (NEPSY II). San Antonio: The
Psychological Corporation.
Kukona, A., Fang, S.-Y., Aicher, K. A., Chen, H., &
Magnuson, J. S. (2011). The time course of anticipatory
constraint integration. Cognition, 119(1), 23–42.
Lynch, J. S., van den Broek, P., Kremer, K. E., Kendeou, P.,
White, M. J., & Lorch, E. P. (2008). The Development of
Narrative Comprehension and Its Relation to Other Early
Reading Skills. Reading Psychology, 29(4), 327–365.
Mani, N., & Huettig, F. (2012). Prediction during language
processing is a piece of cake—But only for skilled
producers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 38(4), 843–847.
McDonald, Skye (Ed.) (2014). Special series on the
Cognition Battery of the NIH Toolbox. Journal of
International Neuropsychological Society (JINS), 20(6),
487-651.
Nieuwland, M. S., & Van Berkum, J. J. (2006). When
peanuts fall in love: N400 evidence for the power of
discourse. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(7),
1098–1111.
Paris, A. H., & Paris, S. G. (2003). Assessing narrative
comprehension in young children. Reading Research
Quarterly, 38(1), 36–76.
Sedivy, J. C. (2003). Pragmatic versus form-based accounts
of referential contrast: Evidence for effects of
informativity expectations. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 32(1), 3–23.
Sharon, T., & Woolley, J. D. (2004). Do monsters dream?
Young children’s understanding of the fantasy/reality
distinction. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
22(2), 293–310.
Snedeker, J., & Trueswell, J. C. (2004). The developing
constraints on parsing decisions: The role of lexicalbiases and referential scenes in child and adult sentence
processing. Cognitive Psychology, 49(3), 238–299.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268(5217), 1632–1634.
Trueswell, J. C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N. M., & Logrip, M. L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: Studying on-line
sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73(2),
89–134.
Van de Vondervoort, J. W., & Friedman, O. (2014).
Preschoolers can infer general rules governing fantastical
events in fiction. Developmental psychology, 50(5), 15941599.
Wlotko, E. W., & Federmeier, K. D. (2012). So that’s what
you meant! Event-related potentials reveal multiple
aspects of context use during construction of messagelevel meaning. NeuroImage, 62(1), 356–366.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Discovery Grant from the
Natural Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada, ‘The influence of fantastical discourse context on
young children’s on­line sentence comprehension’, to P.
Ganea. R. Lee is supported by an Ontario Graduate
Scholarship. The authors thank the Ontario Science Centre
for supporting collection of norming data. Thanks also to
Naiqi Gabriel Xiao for assistance with data processing, to
Amanda Tallon for assistance with testing, to Rafiya Asad,
Reem Draz, Abdullah Malik, Angela Nyhout, Thahmina
Rahman, and Amanda Tallon for assistance with stimuli and
data coding, and to Begüm Özdemir, Gabrielle Strouse, and
others in the Language and Learning Lab for helpful
feedback.

References
Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73(3), 247–264.
Barnes, M. A., Dennis, M., & Haefele-Kalvaitis, J. (1996).
The effects of knowledge availability and knowledge
accessibility on coherence and elaborative inferencing in
children from six to fifteen years of age. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 61(3), 216–241.
Barr, D. J. (2008). Analyzing ‘visual world’ eyetracking
data using multilevel logistic regression. Journal of
memory and language, 59(4), 457-474.
Boerger, E. A. (2011). “In fairy tales fairies can disappear”:
Children’s reasoning about the characteristics of humans
and fantasy figures. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 29(3), 635–655.
Borovsky, A., Elman, J. L., & Fernald, A. (2012). Knowing
a lot for one’s age: Vocabulary skill and not age is
associated with anticipatory incremental sentence
interpretation in children and adults. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 112(4), 417–436.
Chambers, C. G., & Juan, V. S. (2008). Perception and
presupposition in real-time language comprehension:
Insights from anticipatory processing. Cognition, 108(1),
26–50.
Cook, A. E., & O’Brien, E. J. (2014). Knowledge
Activation, Integration, and Validation During Narrative
Text Comprehension. Discourse Processes, 51(1-2), 26–
49.
Filik (2008). Contextual override of pragmatic anomalies:
evidence from eye movements. Cognition, 106(2), 10381046.
Huettig, F., & Janse, E. (2016). Individual differences in
working memory and processing speed predict
anticipatory spoken language processing in the visual
world. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(1), 8093.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G., & Haywood, S. L. (2003). The
time-course of prediction in incremental sentence

735

