Cognitive Style Predicts Magical Beliefs
Giorgio Gronchi (giorgio.gronchi@unifi.it)
Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child’s Health – Sect. Psychology
via di San Salvi 12, pad 26 - 50100 Firenze, Italy

Jeffrey C. Zemla (zemla@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA

Marco Brondi (marcobrondi@gmail.com)
La Corte dei Miracoli - House of Magic
via G. Piombanti 9d - 57122 Livorno, Italy
Abstract
Magicians often rely on misdirection to fool their audience. A
common way to achieve this is for the magician to provide a
plausible and intuitive (but false) account of how an effect is
performed in order to prevent spectators from uncovering the
truth. We hypothesized that analytical thinkers would be more
likely than intuitive thinkers to seek alternative explanations
when observing a mental magic effect because generating a
coherent explanation requires analytical thought. We found
that while intuitive thinkers often espoused explanations for a
magic trick similar to one provided by the magician,
analytical thinkers tended to generate new explanations that
echoed rational principles and relied on physical mechanisms
(rather than mental capabilities). This difference was not
predicted by differences in numeracy skills or need for
cognition.
Keywords: cognitive style, misdirection, CRT, dual process
theory of reasoning.

Introduction
Renewing a research program as old as scientific
psychology itself (Binet, 1894; Triplett, 1900), in the last
decade a new research program has emerged that uses
illusionism and magical effects to investigate how the mind
works (Kuhn, Amlani, & Rensink, 2008; Kuhn & Land,
2006; Kuhn, Olson & Raz, 2016; Macknik, MartinezConde, & Blakeslee, 2010; Rensink & Kuhn, 2015). Such
efforts have mainly focused on the roles of perception,
attention, and visual cognition, though a limited number of
studies have examined the relationship between higher-level
cognition and illusionism (Danek et al., 2014; Olson et al.,
2015; Subbotsky, 2010). Nonetheless, there may be a deep
connection between cognitive styles of thinking and the way
in which people explain a magical effect.
Ekroll and Wagemans (2016) wrote “[illusionists’]
ultimate aim is to design miracles, not mere illusions. That
is, the magician's first question is how they can create the
illusion of impossibility. Relatedly, the magician's second
question is how they can make sure that nobody is able to
figure out how it was done. That is, they are essentially
aiming to construct a problem that is as difficult to solve as
possible, given the fundamental principles of human

problem solving” (p. 486). These goals are mainly
addressed by using misdirection: the act of manipulating the
spectator’s attention away from the actual cause of a magic
effect (Kuhn et al., 2014). From a psychological point of
view, misdirection can be achieved through the
manipulation of variables related to at least three different
processes: perception, memory and reasoning.
Kuhn et al. (2014) describe the role of perception and
memory in detail, but the authors pointed out that
misdirection of reasoning and beliefs is loosely defined and
harder to describe. However, virtually all areas of
illusionism employ techniques based on the dual process
theory of thought (Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman, 1996;
Stanovich & West, 2000) distinction between analytical
(i.e., a slow and effortful form of deliberative thought)
versus intuitive (i.e., a fast and effortless form of associative
thought) thinking. When a magician interacts directly with a
spectator, their actions, dialogue, and other aspects of the
performance are aimed at prompting fast, effortless,
associative, and nearly-automatic responses. For example,
in the classic force, a spectator is asked to pick a card. The
choice appears to be at the discretion of the spectator;
however, the magician has actually chosen a predetermined
card that he “forces” the spectator to pick. The force is
obtained by placing the chosen card directly in the hand of
the spectator in a way that seems as if it were a random
choice. The timing and the naturalness of the magician’s
movements are crucial factors in getting the participant to
“choose” the predetermined card. From a psychological
point of view, the success of the force depends on triggering
an intuitive-based response—that the participant actually
has a choice—and crucially, avoiding an analytical response
that could lead the participant to choose a different card
(such as one located at the extremities of the fan of cards).
The renowned card magic conjuror Roberto Giobbi suggests
a series of verbal and non-verbal techniques that stimulate a
quick and automatic response (Giobbi, 1995). For example,
make a person feel comfortable and then abruptly ask for a
card. When this happens in front of an audience, the person
may feel pressured to comply quickly or risk embarrassment
in front of the public for not having completed such a
simple assignment.

2138

Mental magic attempts to create the illusion of
impossibility by simulating supernatural mental abilities
(e.g., telepathy, clairvoyance, psychokinesis, mediumship,
and so on) and, as opposed to more traditional magic areas
(such as card magic), sleight-of-hand or object manipulation
skills cannot be taken into account as a possible explanation.
More recently, given the cultural and educational changes in
Western society, supernatural-based explanations have
become unrealistic for a general audience—although
intuitive thinkers are more likely to hold supernatural
(Bouvet & Bonnefon, 2015) and paranormal (Pennycook et
al., 2012) beliefs. Instead, the mental magic effects are
explained in terms of natural skills, such as the ability to
reliably read non-verbal signals, body language and
subliminal manipulation of others behaviors by means of
psychological suggestion. Even if such abilities are not
100% reliable and in many cases are not sufficient for
explaining the observed effect, people generally accept that
mental magic is due to highly trained psychological skills.
Mentalists will adopt many subtle techniques in order to
promote the default, most intuitive or automatic explanation
and to avoid promoting alternative explanations. Analytical
thinking could help the observer to contemplate alternative
hypotheses (such as the use of physical devices or the
presence of an accomplice) as well as the weaknesses of the
assumed explanation based on the highly developed
psychological ability of the mentalist (such as the
unreliability of method).
Because magicians rely on intuitive explanations to sell
the illusion, individuals prone to analytical thinking may be
less susceptible to these tricks. Can individual differences in
cognitive style predict the explanations given to a mental
magic performance? Adopting a common methodology
adopted from the dual process theory literature (Gronchi et
al. 2016; Zemla, Steiner, & Sloman, 2016), it is possible to
investigate the relation between cognitive style
(predisposition to adopt analytical vs intuitive thinking)
with the explanation given to a mental magic effect. We
seek to establish whether analytical thinking affects the
explanations produced by spectators of a magic trick. We
predict that observers adopting an analytical cognitive style
are more able to inhibit the default, mental power-based
explanation suggested by the mentalist.

Experiment
We investigated whether an individual’s cognitive style
affects judgments about a mental magic effect. Participants
watched a video where an expert mentalist performed a
prediction effect (predicts a purported “free” choice made
by the spectator), and were then prompted to explain the
effect they just witnessed. In addition, participants made
several judgements, such as whether it was easy to generate
an explanation, whether they were surprised by the outcome
of the effect, and whether they enjoyed the trick. On a
separate day, participants completed an extended version of
the cognitive reflection test (CRT; Frederick, 2005) used to
measure the cognitive style and other related measures.

Method
Participants 335 freshmen college students (71 male, 29
unknown) enrolled in the Psychology major of the
University of Florence were recruited for course credit. The
sample mean age (in years) was 19.5 (sd = 2.3), range 18-46
(29 of unknown age).
Materials and procedure Participants completed a Mental
Magic Task and four other questionnaires: an extended
version of the CRT questionnaire, the Need for Cognition
(NFC) questionnaire, an abbreviated Numeracy Scale, and
three questions about Science Interest. All materials were
presented to participants in Italian and are translated here for
the reader.
On day 1 of the experiment, participants completed an
extended version of the CRT questionnaire (Toplak, West &
Stanovich, 2014; Zemla, Steiner, & Sloman, 2016). The
CRT scale is comprised of questions that have a wrong but
intuitive answer in addition to a correct answer that requires
analytical thinking. For example, one question states: In a
lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch
doubles in size. If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover the
entire lake, how long would it take for the patch to cover
half of the lake? The default, intuitive response is 24 days
(if 48 days is the time necessary to cover the entire lake, half
of 48 should be intuitively the time necessary for covering
half the surface). However, if the responder inhibits such
response, it is relatively easy to see that every day the patch
doubles in size, so on the 47th day the lake was half covered
and on the 48th the lily pads will cover the entire surface. So,
the inhibition of the most obvious response allows to adopt
a deliberation-based form of thinking. The number of
correct answers on the CRT measures the degree to which
participants engage in analytical thinking and inhibit
intuitive responses. Participants completed the 7-item CRT
scale in an open-ended format (except for the last item
which was a multiple choice question).
On the same day, participants also completed three
multiple choice questions about Science Interest inspired by
the Science Curiosity Scale (Landrum et al., 2016): 1)
Which of the following do you most like to read? Possible
answers: fiction, science, sports, politics, history, other. 2)
Let’s suppose that it’s necessary to take a mandatory class
(which will not influence your grade; only attendance is
necessary). Which of the following topic would you like to
take? Possible answers: Contemporary history, Creative
writing, Physics and Astronomy, Cinema and Arts. 3) Let’s
suppose that you are travelling for business in an abroad
city that you have already visited and known. You have a
free afternoon and you have time to do only one of the
following activities (free and equally near to your hotel):
Possible answers: Visiting the science museum, visiting the
contemporary art museum, watching a show in a square,
relaxing in a park, stay in the hotel to rest. Thus, for each
question, there was an answer indicating interest toward
science. The scale is intended to avoid socially desirable

2139

responses that may be elicited from other science interest
scales.
On day 4, participants completed a six-item numeracy
scale (Weller et al., 2013) that evaluates one’s competence
in solving numerical problems (i.e., basic numerical
operations, percentages). Given that CRT also measures
numerical abilities as well as of inhibition of the intuitive
response, we included the Numeracy Scale in order to
exclude the possibility that an effect is due to numeracy and
not cognitive style. On the same day, participants also
completed the Need for Cognition scale (NFC; Cacioppo &
Petty, 1982). The NFC measures the tendency to enjoy and
engage in challenging cognitive activities. Indeed, some
people have little motivation and tend to avoid effortful
cognitive activities whereas other individuals consistently
seek opportunities to engage such kind of tasks.
On day 8, participants watched a video about a mentalist’s
performance. The mentalist is talking with a spectator about
free will and the possibility of predicting others’ behavior.
The mentalist then shows a chessboard with the pieces in
the starting position and asks the spectator to choose one of
the pieces. The spectator, following the mentalist’s
directions, announces the chosen piece (a white bishop) and
places it in the middle of the chessboard. The mentalist
takes the chosen piece in his hands and begins to speculate
about the factors that could have influenced the participant’s
choice: Did the white bishop have a particular significance?
Was that particular bishop closer to the spectator compared
to other bishops? Finally, the mentalist declares that he
knew in advance that the spectator would take that particular
piece and then invites the spectator to take another piece.
The video ends with the revelation that every other piece
besides the white bishop is stuck to the chessboard, so it
would appear impossible that the participant could have
chosen any other piece. Participants observed the video in a
group, but they were also able to re-watch it using a
smartphone or tablet. After watching the video, participants
were individually asked to provide an explanation for the
effect they just saw in an open-ended format. In addition,
they answered each of the following questions on a 5-point
Likert scale (from “not at all” to “extremely” for questions
1, 2 and 4 and from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”
for questions 3, 5, 6, 7): 1) How much did you enjoy the
effect you just saw? 2) How much did it surprise you? 3) I
tried to predict what the magician would do before he did it
4) How confident are you in your explanation? 5) It is easy
to think of many alternative explanations for this effect 6) I
would like to know how the effect actually works 7) I would
like to see other magic effects.

Data Analysis
For each participant, four scores were computed: a CRT
score (the number of correct analytical responses out of 7),
an NFC score, and a science interest score (giving 1 point
for each answer related to science), and a numeracy score.
The open format question (“How do you explain the effect
you just saw?”), was coded using two different criteria. The

first criterion was based on physical explanation vs mental
explanation. Physical explanations often contained reference
to a physical device, such as glue or a magnet, but also
include trivial solutions such as collusion between the
mentalist and the spectator. Mental explanations were based
on the possibility of behavior conditioning, the power of
gestures, and the possibility of genuinely predicting in
advance the spectator’s choice (including supernatural
powers). A third “other” category included no response,
incomplete responses, and explanations not suitable to be
categorized in previous terms (such as “I don’t know”/“no
idea”).
A second criterion coded explanations as rational or
irrational. Rational explanations included all the physical
explanations that are actually feasible in practice, but also
included statistical-based reasoning such as the possibility
of predicting behavior with high probability on the basis of
modal choices (obtained from experience). Irrational
explanations were the same as the mental explanations
excluding interpretations based on the statistical properties
of people’s choices (by means of previous empirical
observations). Since all reported physical explanations were
feasible ways of obtaining the effect, no physical
explanations were coded as irrational. Again, an “other”
category was included for coding no response, incomplete
responses or other explanations not suitably categorized in
previous terms. Two independent judges coded each
explanation according to the two criteria. A third,
independent judge broke any ties (5 out of 335 for the first
criterion and 22 out of 335 for the second criterion).

Results
Explanations of the magic effect With regard to the
physical/mental dichotomy, the most common explanation
(about 70%) was a mental explanation based on the belief
that the magician could systematically influence other
people choices, such as “the mentalist implicitly and
secretly conditioned the choice of the spectator.” In several
cases, participants added details such as “with gestures”,
“with his voice”, “with his gaze”, “with his mind”, “with his
movements,” and so on. Only 13% of participants explained
the effect in terms of a physical device (e.g., a special,
delayed-effect glue; a magnet-based mechanism) or with a
trivial solution (the spectator is an accomplice). The
remaining 17% of responses were classified as “other”.
With regard to the rational/irrational dichotomy, all of the
physical explanations were included in the rational category
and the majority of the mental explanations were
categorized as “irrational”. However, some of the mental
explanations were included in the “rational” category. These
were explanations based on the belief of influencing other’s
choice by subtle psychological techniques together with
some rational considerations. For example: “The mentalist
did a lot of trials before with other people to look for the
most chosen piece. When facing the spectator, the mentalist
someway suggested with his gaze to take the most likely
piece. I think the mentalist has been very lucky.” or “The

2140

mentalist knows which piece is generally chosen most often.
He exploited such knowledge together with his ability to
influence spectator choice. Maybe he was not certain of the
final result, but it was the most likely result.” According to
the rational/irrational dichotomy, the rational explanations
were about 20% and the irrational explanations were about
63%. The remaining 17% were classified as “other”.

participants generated. Participants who generated physical
compared to mental explanations did not differ in numeracy,
t(34.2) = .33, p = .74, nor did participants who generated
rational compared to irrational explanations, t(73.9) = .27, p
= .79. This rules out the possibility that the observed CRTrelated differences can be due to disparity in numerical
ability.

Explanations types and analytical style We evaluated
whether CRT scores were correlated with the type of
explanation produced (Figures 1 and 2). As predicted, those
who generated a physical explanation (compared to a mental
explanation) tended to have higher CRT scores, t(70.1) =
12.89, p < .001. Likewise, participants who wrote a rational
explanation had higher CRT scores compared to those who
wrote an irrational explanation t(105.7) = 13.61, p < .001.

Explanations types and Need for Cognition There were
no differences in the NFC score between those who
generated physical and mental explanations, t(33.2) = .11, p
= .91, or between those who generated rational/irrational
explanations, t(80.8) = 1.26, p = .21. This rules out the
possibility that the observed CRT-related differences can be
due to different inclination towards effortful cognitive
activities.
Explanations types, science interest and analytical style
Participants that wrote a physical explanation had a greater
score in Science Interest compared to those that wrote a
mental explanation, t(55.3) = 2.65, p = .011. Similarly,
participants who wrote a rational explanation had a greater
interest in science, t(94.97) = 2.36, p = .021. Science
Interest was also significantly correlated with the CRT, r =
.35, p < .001.

Figure 1: Participants who generated physical explanations
typically had higher CRT scores (more analytical).

Figure 2: Participants who generated rational explanations
typically had higher CRT scores (more analytical).

Explanation types and correlations among the questions
of the Mental Magic task We expected that the way in
which participants explained the effect would influence their
response and enjoyment of the effect. However, we found
that the type of explanation produced did not predict
enjoyment of the effect, the surprise experienced, the
attempt to predict the effect, the confidence in the
explanation given, the ease of thinking of different
explanations, the desire to know how it works, or the desire
to see a new effect (all p > .1). Similar results were obtained
for the rational/irrational dichotomy. However the questions
about the Mental Magic effect were correlated among
themselves (Figure 3). Having enjoyed the effect correlated
with all other variables in the mental magic task except the
confidence of the given explanation. The degree of surprise
was highly correlated with enjoyment of the trick (r = .45),
the desire to know how the trick was performed (r = .33)
and desire to see new magic effects (r = .34). Attempts to
predict the mentalist’s actions during the effect was weakly
correlated with the ease of generating an alternative
explanation after the effect (r = .07), the desire to know how
the trick was performed (r = .14), and desire to see new
magic (r = .12). The highest correlation was between the
desire to know how the trick was performed and the desire
to see new magic (r = .65). All correlations reported above
were significant with p < .05, uncorrected for multiple
comparisons.

Explanations types and Numeracy Scale Unlike CRT,
numeracy scores did not predict the explanation type that

2141

Figure 3: Correlations among the enjoyment of the effect
(enjoyment), the surprise experienced (surprise), the attempt
to predict the effect (prediction), the confidence in the
explanation given (confidence), the easiness of thinking of
alternative explanations (ease of explanation), the desire to
know how it was performed (know the trick) and the desire
to see a new effect (new). Correlations with CRT, NFC,
Numeracy skills and Science Interest are also reported.
Analytical style and Mental Magic task questions The
CRT was marginally correlated with the interest in seeing
new magic (r = .10, p = .08), significantly correlated with
attempts to predict how the trick was done (r = .11, p =
.004), and significantly correlated with enjoyment of the
mental effect (r = .14, p = .01).
NFC and Mental Magic task questions Similarly to CRT,
Need for Cognition was correlated with the interest in
seeing new magic (r = .21, p = .01), attempts to predict the
next move of the mentalist (r = .21, p = .01), and with the
enjoyment of the mental effect (r = .18, p = .04). The NFC
was also marginally correlated with the interest in how the
trick was performed (r = .15, p = .07).
Science Interest and Mental Magic task questions
Science Interest was significantly correlated with attempts
to predict the actions of the mentalist (r = .12, p = .029).

Discussion
We found that analytical thinking predicts the way people
explain a mental magic effect: intuitive thinkers were more
inclined to explain a mental magic effect in the same terms
suggested by the mentalist (e.g., conditioning the spectator’s
choice or advanced psychological ability), whereas
analytical thinkers were more likely to explain the observed

effect by referring to a physical device or trivial tricks (such
as collusion, i.e., a previous agreement between the
mentalist and the spectator). The same pattern also held
when “rational” considerations were taken into account in
the categorization of the explanations: analytical thinkers
were more inclined to seek an alternative explanation and
reject an irrational explanation offered by the mentalist. We
also found that these same differences in explanation type
were predicted by interest in science, perhaps due to an
aversion towards non-scientific (irrational) explanations.
Moreover, we observed that such differences between
analytical and intuitive thinkers were not due to related
constructs such as numeracy skills or need for cognition
Although the explanation that a participant offered did not
affect the way they perceived the trick (i.e., it was not
correlated with any of the mental magic task questions),
analytical style did predict differences. Analytical thinkers
were more likely to predict the next step of the performance,
suggesting that they were trying to go deeper into the effect
not only at the end of the performance but also during the
trick itself. This deeper level of engagement may be the
reason why analytical thinkers also enjoyed the magic effect
more, and expressed more interest in seeing new magic. We
also found that being an analytical thinker was associated
with an interest in science.
A limit of the present study is its reliance on correlational
data. We are planning to further investigate this topic by
manipulating the cognitive style to verify whether inducing
analytical thinking will prompt participants to generate
alternative rational explanations. Moreover, it is important
to note that the sample was composed of Italian freshmen
psychology students in their first days of college:
commonly, those students have high expectations about the
capabilities of psychology, including the skills that
mentalist’s performance suggests. This may explain the bias
to provide mental explanations in our sample, although it
does not explain the main effect of analytical thinking on
explanation type. Another critical aspect is that we
employed a single performance that was either interpretable
in terms of advanced psychological skills and in physicaldevice terms in a relatively easy way. In other kinds of
performances, it could be more difficult to think of
rational/physical device-based explanations.
This work represents a first-step in the psychological
investigation of magical effects in cognitive terms going
beyond the more common perception and attention-based
perspectives. The already existent but still limited literature
about high-level cognition and magic may greatly benefit
from our understanding of reasoning-based misdirection in
terms of dual process theory of thought. In particular, such
benefits can go in two opposite directions: psychological
studies on cognitive styles (and dual process theory) may
employ mental magic effects and magician’s misdirection
techniques to create unique and innovative experimental
settings and, at the same time, conjurors may rely on the
dual process theory of thought to improve their
performance.

2142

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Stefania Righi and Fiorenza Giganti for
judging the open format questions. We are also in debt with
Rachele Massini (who was also the third judge), Giacomo
Fini, Daniele Lari, and Eleonora Falciani for collecting data.
This work has been motivated also by fruitful discussions
during La Corte dei Miracoli – House of Magic meetings.

References
Binet, A. (1894). Psychology of Prestidigitation. Annual
Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Bouvet, R., & Bonnefon, J-F. (2015). Non-reflective
thinkers are predisposed to attribute supernatural
causation to uncanny Eexperiences. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 41(7), 955-961.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for
cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42(1), 116.
Danek, A. H., Fraps, T., Von Mueller, A., Grothe, B., &
Öllinger, M. (2014). Working wonders? Investigating
insight with magic tricks. Cognition, 130(2), 174-185.
Ekroll, V., & Wagemans, J. (2016). Conjuring deceptions:
Fooling the eye or fooling the mind? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 20(7), 486-489.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996). Rationally and
Reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
Giobbi, R. (1995). Card College, Vol. 1: A Complete
Course in Sleight-of-hand Card Magic. Seattle:
Hermetic Press.
Gronchi, G., Righi, S., Parrini, G., Pierguidi, L., &
Viggiano, M. P. (2016). Dual process theory of
reasoning and recognition memory errors: Individual
differences in a memory prose task. In Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 331-335). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Kuhn, G., Amlani, A. A., & Rensink, R. A. (2008). Towards
a science of magic. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(9),
349-354.
Kuhn, G., Caffaratti, H. A., Teszka, R., & Rensink, R. A.
(2014). A psychologically-based taxonomy of
misdirection. Frontiers in Psychology, 5.
Kuhn, G., & Land, M. F. (2006). There's more to magic than
meets the eye. Current Biology, 16(22), R950.
Kuhn, G., Olson, J. A., & Raz, A. (2016). Editorial: The
psychology of magic and the magic of psychology.
Frontiers in Psychology, 7:1358.
Landrum, A. R., Hilgard, J., Akin, H., Li, N., & Kahan, D.
M. (2016). Measuring interest in science: The Science
Curiosity Scale. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 16191624). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

Macknik, S. L., Martinez-Conde, S., & Blakeslee, S. (2010).
Sleights of Mind: What the Neuroscience of Magic
Reveals about our Everyday Deceptions. London:
Macmillan.
Olson, J. A., Amlani, A. A., Raz, A., & Rensink, R. A.
(2015). Influencing choice without awareness.
Consciousness and Cognition, 37, 225-236.
Pennycook, G., Cheyne, J. A., Seli, P., Koehler, D. J. &
Fugelsang, J. A. (2012). Analytic cognitive style predicts
religious and paranormal belief. Cognition, 123(3), 335346.
Rensink, R. A., & Kuhn, G. (2015). A framework for using
magic to study the mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 5.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two system of
reasoning. Psychological Bullettin, 119(1), 3-22.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: implications for the rationality
debate. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Subbotsky, E. (2010). Magic and the Mind: Mechanisms,
Functions, and Development of Magical Thinking and
Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2014).
Assessing miserly information processing: An expansion
of the Cognitive Reflection Test. Thinking & Reasoning,
20(2), 147-168.
Triplett, N. (1900). The psychology of conjuring deceptions.
American Journal of Psychology, 11, 439–510.
Weller, J. A., Dieckmann, N. F., Tusler, M., Mertz, C. K.,
Burns, W. J., & Peters, E. (2013). Development and
testing of an abbreviated numeracy scale: A Rasch
analysis approach. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 26(2), 198-212.
Zemla, J. C., Steiner, S. M., & Sloman, S. A. (2016).
Analytical thinking predicts less teleological reasoning
and religious belief. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 12171222). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

2143

