Conversational topic connectedness predicted by Simplicity Theory
Jean-Louis Dessalles (dessalles@telecom-paristech.fr)
LTCI, Telecom ParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay
Paris, France
narratives and argumentative discussions. The way
narratives connect to each other is particularly intriguing.
We will observe patterns of topic connection using data
taken from a corpus of spontaneous conversations. I will
then introduce the Simplicity Theory (ST) framework and
show how it can be used to explain the topic connectedness
phenomenon.

Abstract
People avoid changing subject abruptly during conversation.
There are reasons to think that this constraint is more than a
social convention and is deeply rooted in our cognition. We
show here that the phenomenon of topic connectedness is an
expected consequence of the maximization of unexpectedness
and that it is predicted by Simplicity Theory.
Keywords: Conversation, topic
unexpectedness, interestingness.

change,

simplicity,

Conversational Topics

Introduction
A few decades ago, attempts were made to understand how
and why conversational topics are almost systematically
connected to each other, while abrupt topic shifts are
avoided or even socially repressed. Jerry Hobbs (1990), for
instance, describes several connection patterns that topics
must respect to come next to each other in conversation and
he wonders whether these mechanisms are due to cognitive
constraints or are mere social conventions. The constraint of
topic connectedness is so strong that abrupt topic change is
classically considered characteristic of pathological
conversation. The inability to respect topic connectedness
during conversation has been for instance described in
autism (Hale & Tager-Flusberg, 2005; Volden et al., 1997)
and in schizophrenia (Harrow et al., 1983). Even in these
conditions, it is not clear whether patients merely ignore the
constraint or still respect it covertly. The latter possibility
would result from the patients’ inability to realize that some
elements needed for connecting topics lie only in their mind
and have not been made public (Harrow et al., 1983).
Though authors had an intuition about what a
conversational topic is and about how an utterance can be
appropriate, the lack of proper definitions made the problem
of topic connectedness difficult to address formally. When
commenting on his maxim ‘be relevant’, Grice wonders
“what different kinds and focuses of relevance there may
be, how these shift in the course of a talk exchange, how to
allow for the fact that subjects of conversation are
legitimately changed, and so on. I find the treatment of
such questions exceedingly difficult” (Grice, 1975).

Conversation has often been described either at the
surface level, with notions like repairs and adjacency pairs,
or at the sociological level, with notions like involvement,
face preservation or gender talk. The present study adopts a
rather different perspective, a cognitive one. The point is to
show that the problem of topic connectedness can be
derived as a natural consequence of conversational
mechanisms operating at the cognitive level.
The remainder of the text starts by making a distinction
between two fundamentally different conversational modes:

For long, it was hardly possible to study spontaneous
conversations by making any hypotheses beyond what could
be objectively observed. No assumptions were made about
the participants’ beliefs or desires. As a consequence, the
existence of two sharply contrasted conversation modes,
narratives and argumentative discussions, was considered
unimportant. Though these two modes may be observed in
pure form during conversations, they are sometimes
intertwined, making the distinction less apparent at the
surface level. If one takes a cognitive perspective, however,
the distinction cannot be overlooked. The first explicit
description of the narrative/argumentation dichotomy was
apparently given by Jerome Bruner (1986), though many
authors (e.g. Sacks, 1992; Tannen, 1984; Eggins & Slade,
1997) implicitly distinguished between stories and other
forms of verbal interaction.

Conversational stories
People tell stories during conversations, i.e. they mention past
events that are supposed to have occurred. Despite early
studies (Sacks, 1992; Labov & Fanshel, 1977:105; Polanyi,
1979; Tannen, 1984), the importance of the phenomenon has
rarely been acknowledged until more recently (Norrick,
2000), as it only occurs among people who are already
acquainted and is absent from most corpora recorded in the
lab. Typical conversational narratives are easy to recognize.
They are most often about past events (the past tense is used
in English) for which the four w’s (when, where, what, who)
get instantiated. Consider the following conversation from my
corpus. It involves two French women who had some trouble
buying butter (‘beurre’ in French) during their stay in Spain
[translated from French].
D: […] she was with her cousin in Spain. And so… they wanted to
buy butter. And then [laugh] her cousin said to her, she didn’t
speak one word of Spanish, but she said to her: “I can speak
Italian; Italian and Spanish, that’s the same”, and then
O: Oh là là! Oh là là!
D: So she enters the store, and she says ‘Burro’. And then [laugh]
then everyone was staring at her, and so ‘burro’ means ‘donkey’.
O: Oh! [laugh]. It means ‘donkey’! She wanted to say ‘Butter’!
Burro. [laugh] It plays tricks, isn’t it?

1914

This story is definitely reporting a situated event: the
‘when’, ‘where’, ‘what’, ‘who’ are supposed to be constants
and not variables. However, being situated is not sufficient
for an event to be worth telling.
“if you come home and report what the grass looked like
along the way, that there were four noticeable shades of
green some of which appeared just yesterday because of
the rain, then there may well some tightening up on the
part a your recipient. And if you were to do it routinely,
then people might figure that there's something odd about
you” (Sacks 1992:219)
“We would intuitively reject such introductions as ‘Let me
tell you something ordinary that happened yesterday…’ A
narrative that is in fact judged to be ordinary may be
rejected after it is told by expressions equivalent to ‘So
what!’” (Labov & Fanshel 1977:105)

The missing ingredient that is required to turn an event into
a story has been informally described by several authors in
similar terms: narratable events should be ‘problematic’
(Ochs et al., 1992), ‘different from ordinary experience’
(Labov & Fanshel 1977:105), ‘unexpected, deviant, extraordinary, or unpredictable’ (van Dijk, 1993), ‘abnormal’
(Schank, 1979), ‘odd or unexpected’,’ rare’, ‘impossible or
unheard of’, be ‘the violation of a norm’ (Polanyi, 1979),
‘depart from expectations’, be a low probability event (Agar,
2005). The ‘burro’ story above definitely matches many of
these criteria. We will subsume all these properties by saying
that an event must be unexpected to be storyworthy. This
notion will be refined below.
Languages offer means to emphasize unexpectedness,
ranging from adjectives like odd, funny to specific markers
like the wo particle in Cantonese (Luke 1990).
Unexpectedness is the key element that controls
storyworthiness. Emotional events are of course interesting,
but happy or tragic situations do not arouse emotion unless
they are unexpected (Saillenfest & Dessalles, 2012). We
will see that the unexpectedness requirement is also the very
reason why narrative topics are connected.

Argumentative discussion
A significant amount of conversational time is devoted to an
activity that radically differs from story telling, namely
argumentative discussion. The argumentative mode seems
to be the prevalent one, at least in my corpus of family
conversations. During an argumentative discussion, people
deal with problems, i.e. incompatibilities between beliefs
and/or desires1. The following conversation deals with TV
and radio power consumption (translated from French).
P- When you put it into standby mode using the remote control
with the small red dot on.
L- mmm
P- Does the TV remain switched on?
L- Yes.
1

The word ‘argumentation’ in English sometimes conveys an
idea of dispute or may refer to situations in which some individual
tries to convince another. We do not consider such restrictions.

P- So it is to be avoided,
L- No.
P- leaving it that way permanently?
L- No. People would say yes, but, it is quite irritating; you don’t
take advantage of having a remote control, and, uh, I mean, you
will save six month or one year on the TV’s life expectancy. Pff.
D- [to P] Not at all. And anyway, it sets…, it damages tubes a lot to
set them on and off.
L- No but anyway, the tube is switched off when you put in
standby mode.
D- I don’t think so.
L- No, one should not compare consumer electronics and
professional tubes.
D- Because, still, when you [really] switch it on, you can hear quite
a discharge.
L- Yes, well, the tube warms up. When you put it…, No, no, the
tube is switched off, but because it is consumer electronics, uh,
otherwise you burn the tube, if it is consumer electronics.
O- A totally unrelated issue: when I put, I leave my radio plugged
in, knowing that it is also a cassette recorder,
L- Yes.
O- I can hear something. […] Should I switch… should I pull off
the plug each time or it cannot damage the engine.

The problem here is the apparent incompatibility between
the standby mode and the wish to keep the TV undamaged
(the last utterances show the transition to the next topic).
Discussions function as consistency maintaining devices:
participants point to an incompatibility (like standby mode
vs. no damage) or try to resolve a previously mentioned
incompatibility.

What counts as a topic?
Based on the argumentative/narrative dichotomy, the notion
of topic can receive a proper definition.
 The topic of a narrative is the unexpected event it refers
to.
 The topic of an argumentative discussion is the logical
inconsistency that motivates it.
One could be tempted to consider that stories and
argumentation are just two extremes in a continuum. An
utterance like (talking about a toddler) “She is going down
the stairs by herself!” might seem hard to classify either as
narrative or as argumentative, as the event is both unexpected
and potentially problematic (the child may fall down). And
how would this injunction to a child: “Don’t touch it!” or an
exclamation like “Oh, that’s wonderful!” be classified? There
are reasons, though, to stick to the narrative vs. argumentation
dichotomy. The most important one comes from the
conviction that human conversational behaviour cannot be
based on a wide gamut of unrelated cognitive devices. The
narrative competence, as described by Simplicity Theory (see
below), and the argumentative competence, as described in a
minimal way in (Dessalles, 2016) can account for the
relevance of most conversational utterances.
The crucial element that helps decide in which mode we
are is negation. If the speaker has the negation of the state of
affairs in mind (the child [should] not go down the stairs by
herself; the child should not touch the object), then the

1915

move is argumentative; if the event is regarded as
unexpected, it is a narrative move2.

Topic shift and topic drift
Respecting transitions between conversational topics seems
almost as important as making appropriate moves.

same way as narratives. Table 2 shows an example of what
we may call argumentation rounds. The above discussion
about the TV in standby mode is included in this round.
Note that a story is embedded in this sequence, as it is used
as an argument (independently from its unexpected
character that makes it a story in its own right).

Not only are there socially sanctioned rules for appropriate
topics of conversation, but also, in the course of a
conversation, it is impolite to make an abrupt change of
topic even to another socially sanctioned topic. To make a
change of topic one must usually create some link to the
previous topic, or one must drift to another topic in a
stepwise fashion. (Shiller 1995:184)

Table 1: Example of story round
L compliments his mother on the
salad dressing she made [19 sec.]
P tells a story that happened during a
group travel in Italy. Salad was served
without dressing in restaurants, and
one had to dress it for the whole
group. P tells the extreme contrast in
the quantities of oil and vinegar
depending on who did the dressing,
and the ensuing frictions within the
group [207 sec.]
Discussion about cheese [118 sec.]
P tells another story about the same
trip in Italy. Two members of the
group tried to ask for more milk at
breakfast, trying to say milk in
various languages (French, English,
Latin), without success, until one of
them said ‘moo’ (“meuh” in French)
[44 sec.]
L tells how people looked at him with
puzzlement as he merely tried to ask
the way by giving his hotel address
during his recent trip in Italy [52 sec.]
D tells a story about word confusion
during a trip in Spain. The two friends
wanted to buy butter. One of them
tried the Italian word ‘burro’,
claiming that the two languages were
close enough. But ‘burro’ means
donkey in Spanish [44 sec.]
L remembers that a friend prepared a
dish of spaghetti for L and D. The
recipe was called ‘doppio burro’.

Hobbs (1990) identified several patterns through which
successive topics connect to each other. One of them is
‘semantic parallelism’. Two topics may share a common
predicate p applied to different (but similar) arguments a1
and a2: p(a1) and p(a2). For instance, two stories about an
accident share this common feature, though the different
roles (driver, victim…) would differ. Conversely, two
stories may be connected by an argument instead of by the
predicate: p1(a) and p2(a), e.g. if successive stories involve a
same protagonist.
Hobbs then considers connections that apply to
argumentative discussions. It is often artificial to talk about
topic change in argumentative discussion. Hobbs prefers to
talk about topic drift. Since argumentative discussions go
around problems (i.e. logical inconsistencies between beliefs
and/or desires), a solution to a previous problematic issue
may be regarded itself as problematic. This may lead to topic
drift: People stack problematic topics on top on each other,
and may or may not revert to a previous one. When there is a
‘main issue’, the topic can be clearly identified. For instance,
in my main corpus of French conversation, one discussion
about preparing a meal that would suit North American
visitors consists of 255 utterances and lasts for twenty
minutes. In many cases, however, discussions drift with no
intent to reconsider the initial issue.

[16 sec.]

Observing topic shifts
Stories tend to cling to each other, forming what Deborah
Tannen (1984:100) calls story rounds. During a
conversation among friends, she counted 48 narratives, 21
of which where told in five rounds: two stories about sex
differences for language learning, five stories about adopted
children, five about summer camps, five about strange
accidents and four about child discovery of sexuality. The
‘burro’ story (see above) is part of a story round as well.
This story round in detailed in Table 1. Transitions between
topics (here, association or analogy) are shown.
As mentioned above, argumentative discussions tend to
drift through logical connections. However, in some cases,
discussions can be connected to each other in much the
2

Note that speaker and hearer may adopt different attitudes, e.g.
if the latter proposes a solution (go and grab the child) to what was
a ‘look at this!’ utterance.

P tells a story about having
complimented two German friends on
their dresses using a German word
that sounds like an insult in French

association

association

analogy

analogy

association

analogy

[100 sec.]

It is interesting to observe the different categories of topic
transition, as they are described for instance in (Hobbs,
1990), at work in real conversations. The point is not to
make precise quantitative assessments, as we expect
significant variance depending on the kind of corpus we
observe (number and age of participants, degree of
acquaintance, situation and so on). Rather, we would like to
get just some rough idea of the relative importance of the
different forms of topic connections.
The corpus chosen here is a set of conversations recorded
during family gatherings during three years. The total
duration is 17h50min. Participants are mostly the same

1916

across recordings. In order to avoid selection bias, a
sampling method has been used. Two-minute long slices
were selected around 139 randomly defined time locations.
8 of these slices were ignored as no one was talking at the
central time. 18 more were discarded as unintelligible.
Reasons for unintelligibility are multiple and include noises,
simultaneous loud conversations and child screams. The 113
remaining excerpts can be classified as shown in Table 3.
Table 2: Example of argumentation round

[19 sec.]

Discussion about P’s TV
getting damaged when it is in
standby [68 sec.]
Discussion about a radio
making a noise when in
standby [107 sec.]

Table 3: Topic shift counts

Argumen tation

story as
argument
follow-up

drift

follow-up

N ar r a t ive s

P explains the strange
intermittent failure of Z’s
brand new TV set and asks
for advice [50 sec.]
P and Z give an account of
how the failure first appeared
and then disappeared, without
the service engineer having
done anything [147 sec.]
Discussion about possible
causes for the failure [87 sec.]
Discussion about the low
qualification of service
engineers [107 sec.]
Narrative about a child
[32 sec.]
Back to discussion about the
failure [230 sec.]
Small discussions about the
dishes [58 sec.]
Discussion about the
robustness of modern TV sets

drift

association

Topic type

Link with parent topic

# / 113

Problem

None

1

Problem

Situation

12

Problem

solution, refutation

13

Problem

Problem

6

Problem

Narrative

3

Solution

Problem

33

Signal

Situation

14

Narrative

None

3

Narrative

Situation

2

Narrative

Temporal

1

Narrative

Common item

4

Narrative

Close association

3

Narrative

Analogy

13

Narrative

Problem

1

Narrative

Explanation, refutation,
solution

4

analogy

Explaining topic connectedness

Several comments have to be made about these results.
The main observation is that very few topics are introduced
out of the blue in this kind of corpus. This may suggest that
the number of abrupt topic change observed in other corpora
(e.g. Nordenstam, 1992) might be overestimated, either
because some crucial connecting piece of knowledge might
be unknown to the external observers, or because
conversations elicited in the lab might lack the spontaneous
aspect of normal conversation.
Almost any connection seems possible between narratives
(the term ‘signal’ refers to mentions of unexpected events
that are ‘here and now’3). The most represented topic
connection in this corpus is analogy, which means that these
narratives occurred in typical story rounds. The connection
might be less tight, as when only one element is common
with the parent topic.
3

Another observation is that the most basic pattern:
problemsolution or solutionproblem, is the majority
argumentative connection but is not the only one. Problems
may also refer to the current situation (e.g. I am missing a
fork) or to an element from a preceding narrative.
Surprisingly, a problem may also refer to another problem.
This occurs in a problem-solution-problem-problem pattern,
in which the last problem suggests that not adopting the
solution is a problem as well (see (Dessalles, 2016) for a
minimal model of relevant argument generation).

One such signalled event is a news about the near future. It is
listed as ‘narrative’, though narratives are typically about past
events.

In this section, we go beyond description and ask why
conversation topics are so systematically connected. The
suggestion will be that topic connectedness is the expected
outcome of the quest for unexpectedness and that it is
predicted by Simplicity Theory.

Simplicity Theory
Simplicity Theory (ST) has been developed to explain event
narratability. As discussed above, the core notion is
unexpectedness: events must be unexpected to be tellable, and
conversely unexpected events are systematically tellable. The
notion of unexpectedness is not intrinsic to the event. It
depends on the observer and on the current context. Previous
attempts to define unexpectedness as ‘low probability’ failed
to incorporate this necessary relation to the context.
ST is based on the notion of abnormal simplicity. Imagine
that the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 are drawn in the National
Lottery. Tough the probability of this outcome is exactly the
same as for any other draw, the news would be considerably
more thrilling. Intuitively, the consecutive draw is
interesting because it is abnormally simple. Simplicity is

1917

obvious here as the sequence 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 is compressible.
The underlying theoretical notion is a cognitive (i.e.
resource-bounded) version of Kolmogorov complexity4.
Complexity here means ‘minimal description length’. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6 can be described using a much shorter code than a
‘normal’ draw like 3, 17, 27, 28, 33, 45. The consecutive
draw can be described using the ‘increment’ operation,
which is one of the simplest operations in the context of
numbers, whereas the ‘normal’ draw cannot be
‘compressed’ down to a shorted description than itself.
Unexpectedness (or abnormal simplicity) U results from a
contrast between causal complexity Cw (the circumstances
or choice points that brought the event to happen) and
description complexity C. Formally:

where s is the event, f is a predicate and ci are constants.
Note that a property may represent a conjunction of
properties: f(s, c1, c2, …) = /\ fi(s, ci1, ci2, …). For instance, a
property of the event might be takes_place(s, Spain). The
unexpectedness of s is:

U = Cw  C.

Conditional complexity C(x|y) means the minimal
description length of x when the description of y is
available. (3) generalizes easily to conjunctions /\ fi.
We see from (2) and (3) that when telling a story or
pointing to a problematic situation, the mention of
contextual elements such as f or ci encroaches on
unexpectedness, as it diminishes the gap between causal
complexity and description complexity.

(1)

Though ST was initially developed to account for specific
situations such as lottery draws or coincidences, we were
surprised to find that the complexity drop between causality
and description generalizes to all narratable situations
(Dessalles, 2008). For instance, a fortuitous encounter is all
the more narratable as the place of the encounter is complex
(or hard to reach) and the encountered person is simple (a
close acquaintance or a celebrity). The former parameter
(location remoteness) controls the causal complexity, while
the latter (minimal description of the person) controls the
description complexity (see www.simplicitytheory.science
for further examples). ST also accounts for problems
underlying argumentative topics: the intensity of the
problem corresponds to a high value of causal complexity
Cw (Dessalles, 2013).
Simplicity Theory accounts for many aspects of
interestingness that are left otherwise unexplained. It
explains why recent events are more interesting if they are
closer in time and space, why ‘round’ anniversaries (after
exactly 1, 10 or 100 years) make past events worth talking
about, why mishaps concerning celebrities might be as
interesting for certain audiences as if they concerned own
family, why people are fond of exceptions, norm-breaking
behaviour and record-breaking performances, why
collectors value items that are remarkable due to a simple
feature (e.g. an inverted image on a stamp), and so on. All
these predictions are derived from the equation U = Cw – C
(Dessalles, 2008; 2013; Saillenfest & Dessalles, 2015; see
www.simplicitytheory.science).

Context and simplicity
Context plays a prominent role in the phenomenon of topic
connectedness. ST not only defines this role, but also defines
what the context is. In ST’s framework, the context is defined
as the set of properties that contribute to making the event
unexpected. Formally, such properties can be written as:
f(s, c1, c2, …),
4

Note that the ‘resource-bounded’ restriction makes the notions
of complexity and of unexpectedness computable (Saillenfest &
Dessalles, 2015).

U(s) = Cw(f(s, c1, c2, …)) – C(f(s, c1, c2, …)).

(2)

It is easy to define context based on (2):
Context =
properties and constants involved in complexity drop.
Using complexity chain rule, we can write:
C(f(s, c1, c2, …)) < C(f) + C(c1|f) + … + C(s|f, c1, …). (3)

Topic connectedness explained
Topic connectedness offers an opportunity for conversational narrators to save on the description side under
the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis: Elements of the previous context
are available for free for further descriptions.
For instance, if T–1 represents the preceding context and if
f and c1 are part of it, then C(f|T–1) = 0 and C(c1|f, T–1) = 0.
They disappear from (3). Since T–1 has no reason to have a
causal effect on s, Cw(s|T–1) = Cw(s), and (2) becomes:
U(s | T–1) = Cw(s) – C(s | f, c1, T–1).

(4)

We can see that if f and c1 are part of the current context (i.e.
contribute to the complexity drop in (1) and are thus relevant):
U(s | T–1) > U(s).

(5)

We can conclude that the situation is more unexpected after
T–1 than in the absence of any context, and that the presence
of f in T–1 makes it (more) relevant. As a consequence, an
event that would be impossible to introduce out of the blue
may get enough unexpectedness to be worth telling.
For instance, in the ‘burro’ story, elements like ‘trip’,
‘foreign country’ or ‘communication failure’ are available
for free from the previous story about attempts to ask for
milk at breakfast in Italy (see Table 1). Moreover, ‘butter’
appears simple as ‘milk’ was previously mentioned, and
‘Spain’ would appear simpler than most other countries
(seen from France) as ‘Italy’ was mentioned. The second
story would have been less unexpectedness without these
elements already available. Similarly, in the argumentation
round of Table 2, the close analogy between the TV and the
radio getting possibly damaged in standby mode makes the
second discussion much easier to introduce. The analogy

1918

spares the complexity of describing some elements of the
second discussion (consumer electronics, standby mode,
getting damaged), making the problem worth discussing
about. In the excerpt, note that despite the close analogy, the
speaker still feels the additional precaution ‘A totally
unrelated issue’ (original: “une question tout à fait à côté”)
to be necessary when introducing her topic.

Discussion
Hobbs (1990) wonders “to what extent topic drift [is] a
matter of cognition and to what extent a matter of
convention”. The above development suggests that social
conventions play hardly any role, beyond the mere control
of the unexpectedness threshold (as a result, switching topic
might be easier in relaxed or intimate situations).
Could it be that the reuse of contextual elements from one
context to the next would just be due to some sort of
cognitive laziness or inertia on the speaker’s side? We can
exclude this possibility: as we saw, topic connectedness is not
only a fact, but also a requirement. A same topic that would
be interesting during a story round or an argumentation round
may appear inappropriate or even pathological when
introduced out of the blue (Sacks, 1992). The present paper
suggests that a cognitive determinism is involved.
When introducing a topic abruptly, bringing concepts and
names into the new context adds to descriptive complexity
and, as a result, diminishes unexpectedness, up to a point
that the new topic is at risk of loosing all relevance. Already
mentioned concepts or names are, by contrast, descriptively
costless. The very existence of ‘story rounds’ or
‘argumentation rounds’ seems to be entirely due to the
temptation of using elements of the previous context to
enhance the unexpectedness of the next one. The demand
for unexpectedness appears to be a universal property of
human spontaneous conversation. Topic coherence through
conversation seems to be a side-effect of this requirement.

References
Agar, M. (2005). Telling it like you think it might be: Narrative, linguistic anthropology, and the complex organization.
Emergence: Complexity & Organization, 7 (3), 23-34.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dessalles, J.-L. (2008). Coincidences and the encounter
problem. In B. C. Love, K. McRae & V. M. Sloutsky
(Eds.), 30th Annual Conf. of the Cognitive Science
Society, 2134-2139. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Soc..
Dessalles, J.-L. (2013). Algorithmic simplicity and
relevance. In D. L. Dowe (Ed.), Algorithmic probability
and friends - LNAI 7070, 119-130. Berlin, D: Springer.
Dessalles, J.-L. (2016). A Cognitive Approach to Relevant
Argument Generation. In M. Baldoni, C. Baroglio, F.
Bex, T. D. Bui et al. (Eds.), Principles and Practice of
Multi-Agent Systems, LNAI 9935, 3-15. Springer.

Eggins, S. & Slade, D. (1997). Analysing casual
conversation. London: Equinox.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, vol. III: Speech
acts, 41-58. New York: Academic Press.
Hale, C. M. & Tager-Flusberg, H. (2005). The relationship
between discourse deficits and autism symptomatology.
J. of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 35 (4), 519524.
Harrow, M., Lanin-Kettering, I. & Prosen, M. (1983).
Disordered thinking in schizophrenia: Intermingling and
loss of set. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 9 (3).
Hobbs, J. R. (1990). Topic drift. In B. Dorval (Ed.),
Conversational organization and its development, 3-22.
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Labov, W. & Fanshel, D. (1977). Therapeutic discourse.
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Luke, K. K. (1990). Utterance particles in Cantonese
conversation. John Benjamins Publishing.
Nordenstam, K. (1992). Male and female conversational
style. Int. J. of the sociology of language, 94 (1), 75-98.
Norrick, N. R. (2000). Conversational narrative:
storytelling in everyday talk. Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Ochs, E., Taylor, C., Rudolph, D. & Smith, R. (1992).
Storytelling as a theory-building activity. Discourse
processes, 15, 37-72.
Polanyi, L. (1979). So What's the point? Semiotica, 25 (3),
207-241.
Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation vol. 2. Oxford,
UK: Blackwell.
Saillenfest, A. & Dessalles, J.-L. (2012). Role of
kolmogorov complexity on interest in moral dilemma
stories. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles & R. Cooper (Eds.),
34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
947-952. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Saillenfest, A. & Dessalles, J.-L. (2015). Some probability
judgments may rely on complexity assessments. 37th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
2069-2074. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Schank, R. C. (1979). Interestingness: controlling
inferences. Artificial Intelligence, 12 (3), 273-297.
Shiller, R. J. (1995). Conversation, information, and herd
behavior. American Economic Review, 85 (2), 181-185.
Tannen, D. (1984). Conversational style - Analyzing talk
among friends. Norwood: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Volden, J., Mulcahy, R. & Holdgrafer, G. (1997).
Pragmatic language disorder and perspective taking in
autistic speakers. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18 (2), 181198.
van Dijk, T. A. (1993). Stories and racism. In D. K. Mumby
(Ed.), Narrative and social control: critical perspectives,
121-142. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

1919

