Convincing Conversations:
Using a Computer-Based Dialogue System to Promote a Plant-Based Diet
Emma L. Zaal (E.L.Zaal@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, Oude Kijk In't Jatstraat 26
Groningen, 9712 EK, The Netherlands

Gregory J. Mills (G.J.Mills@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, Oude Kijk In't Jatstraat 26
Groningen, 9712 EK, The Netherlands

Afke Hagen (A.Hagen.1@student.rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, Oude Kijk In't Jatstraat 26
Groningen, 9712 EK, The Netherlands

Carlijn A. Huisman (C.A.Huisman@student.rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, Oude Kijk In't Jatstraat 26
Groningen, 9712 EK, The Netherlands

John C.J. Hoeks (J.C.J.Hoeks@rug.nl)
Center for Language and Cognition Groningen, Oude Kijk In't Jatstraat 26
Groningen, 9712 EK, The Netherlands

Abstract
In this study, we tested the effectiveness of a computer-based
persuasive dialogue system designed to promote a plant-based
diet. The production and consumption of meat and dairy has
been shown to be a major cause of climate change and a
threat to public health, bio-diversity, animal rights and human
rights. A system promoting plant-based diets was developed,
comprising conversational, motivational and argumentational
elements. 280 participants were randomly assigned to one of
four conditions, each representing a particular combination of
motivational and argumentational modules. Male participants
showed higher intention scores in the motivational conditions
compared to the argumentation-only or control condition.
Female participants scored higher overall, unaffected by
condition. These results suggest that men and women are
differentially sensitive to persuasive strategies regarding the
adoption of a plant-based diet. It seems to be particularly
worthwhile to use motivational - as opposed to merely
argumentational - elements in a persuasive conversation.
Keywords: human-machine interaction; dialogue system;
persuasive
communication;
cognitive
dissonance;
motivational interviewing.

Introduction
When individuals experience a mismatch between their
beliefs and their actual behavior, the phenomenon of
cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1957) kicks in: "an
aversive state which motivates cognitive or behavioural
actions to lower itself” (Dijkstra, 2009, p.792). For instance,
most people do have a desire to behave ethically, but this
desire is often not reflected in their actual behavior. People
are often 'wilfully ignorant' when it comes to their ethical
beliefs, actively ignoring or discarding relevant information

about those beliefs (Zane, Irwin & Reczek, 2013).There are
two ways in which you can deal with and/or solve cognitive
dissonance. The first one is to change your cognitions in
line with your current behavior. For example, you could
change your belief: “behaving ethically is not so important
for me (anymore).” The second way is to change your
behavior in line with their current beliefs: actually acting in
an ethical manner (Dijkstra, 2009; Hewstone, Jonas &
Stroebe; 2012).
The latter way of solving cognitive dissonance is often an
ultimate goal of – for instance - health and sustainability
communication professionals: they want people to change
their behaviour, like: exercise more often (Riet et al., 2010);
quit smoking (Ballast & Dijkstra, 2011); reduce fat-intake
(Wright, Velicer & Prochaska, 2008); behave
environmentally friendly (Bolderdijk et al., 2012) etc.
However, people often change their cognitions instead of
their actual behavior. Therefore, persuaders often start by
trying to change people’s cognitions. In order to achieve
this, one has to address the most focal cognitions that people
hold about a particular behaviour (Fishbein & Yzer, 2003).
One problem area that is often associated with cognitive
dissonance, is the consumption of meat and other animal
products. Meat eaters are assumed to experience cognitive
dissonance resulting for instance from the perceived
aversive consequences of their diet (“I eat meat but eating
meat hurts animals”) (Cooper & Fazio, 1984); or because it
threatens their self-integrity (“ethical people don’t eat meat,
but I do”) (Aronson, 1968). Most people believe it is wrong
to hurt animals, while at the same time around 95% of the
consumers in the U.S. eat meat. Researchers have referred
to this phenomenon as the ‘meat-paradox’, and claim that

3627

cognitive dissonance lies at the heart of this phenomenon
(Bastian, Loughnan, Haslam & Radke 2012; Rothgerber,
2014).
Besides solving the unpleasant feeling of cognitive
dissonance that consumers may experience due to eating
meat, there are several other important reasons to address
meat consumption. First, the livestock industry is one of the
largest polluters worldwide. In order to meet stringent
climate change targets, the consumption of animal products
should be reduced at least by half (Donham et al., 2007;
Hedenus, Wirsenius & Johansson, 2014; Hertwich et. al.,
2010; Steinfeld et al., 2006). Second, the production of
animal products is threatening rights and wellbeing of both
humans and animals due to poor working conditions for the
first, and poor living conditions for the latter (Pew
Commission, 2008). Third, individual and public health is
negatively affected by meat and dairy consumption. For
instance, the growing consumption animal products is
associated with an increase of diseases like obesity, type II
diabetes (Cooney, 2014; Montonen et al., 2013), heart and
vascular diseases (Yokoyama et al., (2014) and a variety of
cancers, like colorectal, lung and bladder cancer (Lippi,
Mattiuzzi & Cervellin, 2016). Thus, a successful promotion
of plant-based diets - diets without meat, dairy and eggs –
could have a great many positive outcomes for animals,
humans, and the environment.
It has been claimed that one of the most effective
strategies to reach persuasion is through conversation and
interaction (Helme et al., 2011; Noar, Carlyle & Cole,
2006). However, even if that were the case, face-to-face
conversations are obviously very time consuming and costly
(Southwell & Yzer, 2007). A fruitful solution for this could
be the deployment of human-machine interaction systems.
There is a huge benefit in using online dialogue systems as
larger target groups can be reached at lower costs. In
addition, automated dialogues can also easily be tailored,
which lowers resistance to persuasion and makes messages
individually more relevant (Dijkstra, 2008). An added
benefit for experimental research is that manipulations can
be held more constant, making it easier to measure the
effect(s) of the strategy/strategies employed within the
dialogue system separately - and/or combined.

In addition, a second module was designed to reduce the
likelihood of experiencing negative affect and resistance to
counter arguments and persuasion. In building this module,
we borrowed heavily from the theoretical framework of
Motivational Interviewing (MI). MI is "a collaborative
conversation style for strengthening a person’s own
motivation and commitment to change" (Miller & Rollnick,
2002). In this method, the receiver formulates its own goals,
capacities and reasons regarding his/her behavior change
towards the targeted behavior. Dialogue in MI is framed in
such a way to emphasize one's autonomy and to avoid any
direct confrontation with the target individual. Important
elements of MI are: 1) an explicit consent question, asking
whether an individual agrees with talking about a specific
topic; 2) a ‘motivation ruler’, which consists of asking one
to number or 'grade' their motivation to change and
subsequent questioning and giving feedback on the number
they choose (e.g., “You chose “2”, what would it take for
you to get a higher level of motivation?”); and 3) a
‘confidence ruler’, which asks about a person’s confidence
in his/her own capacity to change towards the target
behavior. Digital applications of this conversational method
have proved to be effective in achieving positive intentional
and behavioral outcomes (Shingleton & Palfai, 2015).
To increase the ‘feel’ of an actual conversation, we
include a picture (of a young female) to visualize the
‘person’ talking to the participant. We use personal
pronouns like “I” and “you” in conversation; and talk is
individually tailored by the system throughout the
conversation based on responses of the - non-digital conversational partner. In the future, we would like to
develop a more sophisticated dialogue system, capable of
reacting to natural language input. Previous research has
shown that technological social agents - like robots - are
able to induce behavior change by providing interactive
feedback with regard to for instance sustainability-related
behavior like energy conservation (Ham & Midden, 2014).
However - to our knowledge - no research has yet looked
into computerized agents that are active in the field of plantbased eating. We used survey-builder Qualtrics to design a
straightforward, tree-based conversational system with
feedback based on answers on - for the most part - multiple
choice questions.

The Dialogue System
We devised and tested a persuasive online dialogue system
that promotes plant-based diets. Our system incorporates
persuasive strategies aimed at reducing the consumption of
animal products. First, an ‘argumentation’ module was
designed to target cognitive dissonance by addressing focal
beliefs about meat consumption. This module provides
individually tailored arguments that address the individual’s
so-called ‘disengagement’ beliefs: beliefs that may be true
in themselves, but that are not valid arguments in the
discussion at hand (e.g., “Our ancestors ate meat” is true,
but it is not a valid reason why a present-day individual
should still be eating meat).

Table 1: Example of tree-based conversation with Eliza
"When are you planning to make changes to your diet?"
Participant's answer
Eliza's answer
"That's pretty soon, good to
• Within a week
hear! Can I ask you more?"
• Within a month
"You're taking your time,
• Within 3 months
but that's OK! Are there any
• Within a year
ways to potentially speed up
this process for you?"

3628

Method
Participants
Three-hundred-and-seventy-one Dutch participants took
part in the research. Participants were recruited from social
media, mailing lists and the researchers' personal networks.
Data from participants who had a vegetarian or vegan diet or failed to complete the questionnaire - were excluded from
analysis. Two-hundred-and-eighty participants remained. Of
this sample, 76% was female (N=212) and 24% male
(N=68). Participants' mean age was 26 years (SD=9.9),
ranging from 17 to 65. Male and female participants were
dispersed evenly across four conditions (15-20 men and 5560 women in each condition).

Measures
Disengagement Belief Strength The strength of the various
disengagement beliefs was measured by asking participants
about the extent they (1) totally disapprove - (7) totally
approve of fourteen disengagement beliefs about eating
meat (i.e. "Without meat you cannot be healthy"; "Lions eat
meat too"). These fourteen disengagement beliefs were
formulated based on a belief elicitation study in which
twenty-three participants stated the most important reasons
for them to keep eating meat. In the present study,
participants were asked which three of these fourteen beliefs
were the most important reasons for them to keep eating
meat. Subsequently, they received tailored feedback based
on the answers they provided. This feedback was framed as
a short text in a what-if question format (i.e. "You state that
meat is too tasty. That is hard to deny! But what if you find
out that some meat substitutes are quite good and sometimes
even as good as real meat. Would you then be open to
change your current diet towards a more plant-based diet?").
When a participant answered "no", the dialogue system
would give similar ‘what-if’ feedback for the second and/or
third reason, until the participant either answered "yes" or
all three reasons were addressed. Note that all responses of
the dialogue system consisted of valid arguments, based on
scientific findings.
MI module In the full MI version, participants were
explicitly asked for their approval to talk about their dietary
habits ("In this program, I will talk about the advantages of
having a plant-based diet [...] Are you open to talk about
your own eating habits and possible changes to it?"). When
participants did not consent, there was a short feedback page
after which the experiment ended. As we described above,
motivation to change towards a plant-based diet was
measured by asking one's motivation on scales ranging from
(0) No motivation at all - (10) very highly motivated. (e.g.
"It looks like reducing your meat consumption is not that
high of a priority for you! Could you tell me why?") A
similar procedure was used for measuring how much
participants trusted their own capacity to perform the
requested behavior (self-efficacy).

Attitude and Behavioral Intention Attitude was measured
by evaluating the following statement on a semantic
differential scale: "If I would change my current diet to a
vegan diet, that would be...": i.e. good-bad; foolish-wise;
unnecessary-necessary. In addition, participants evaluated
several statements on a seven-point scale ranging from (1)
strongly disapprove - (7) strongly approve (i.e. "A diet
without animal product is more environmentally friendly.").
Behavioral intention towards three kinds of behavior was
measured: going completely or partially vegan; going
completely or partially vegetarian; going completely or
partially organic where meat was concerned. These
intention measures were weighted and summed into one
intention-score that indicated their willingness to change
their diet towards a more - or less - plant-based diet (the
higher, the more willing).
Evaluation questions At the end of the session, we asked
1) whether participants felt they were addressed in a nice
manner, and 2) whether they liked to communicate with
Eliza by means of evaluating statements on a Likert-type
scale: (1) completely disagree - (7) completely agree.

Procedure and Design
When starting the dialogue system, participants saw a
picture of a young girl who was introduced as “Eliza”. She
asked if they cared to join her in a conversation about their
eating habits. Subsequently, participants were asked about
their gender, age, education and actual eating habits. Next,
participants received information about several benefits of a
plant-based diet. In three of the four conditions the
disengagement belief handling module (‘DBH’) was
included to address the participant's most focal beliefs about
eating meat. Two of the four versions also included a
motivational interviewing module (‘MI’), either a full (with
an explicit consent question) or partial (without an explicit
consent question) module. A fourth version did not include
DBH and MI modules and served as - baseline - control
condition. Table 2 shows how the modules were combined
in the different versions of the system that were used in this
study.
Table 2: Experimental conditions
Full MI
Consent
MI
DBH
INFO

+
+
+
+

Partial
MI
+
+
+

DBH

Control

+
+

+

Note. MI = Motivational Interviewing; DBH = Disengagement
Belief Handling; Consent = consent question; INFO =
information on plant-based diet.

3629

Analysis
We used between-groups univariate Analysis of Variance to
investigate the patterns of results for Attitude, Intention and
Evaluation. Condition was one factor, with four levels (Full
MI, Partial MI, DBH and Control), and Sex of Participant
the other factor (male versus female). This latter factor has
consistently been shown to influence behavioral outcomes
concerning reduction of meat consumption (e.g. Cooney,
2014). In the analysis on Evaluation there were only three
levels of Condition, as the Control condition did not feature
a conversation with Eliza.

Results
Table 3 shows the means for attitude towards adopting a
plant-based diet, and the composite scores for intention to
reduce meat consumption per condition.
Table 3: Means and Composite Scores (plus standard
errors) of intention and attitude

Condition
Full MI
Partial MI
DBH
Control

Intention
Men
95.45
(7.95)
95.67
(10.72)
80.65
(8.89)
65.95
(7.76)

Women
99.67
(5.24)
106.80
(5.24)
101.72
(4.80)
102.23
(4.41)

Attitude
Men
5.56
(.21)
5.21
(.28)
4.74
(.23)
5.11
(.20)

Sex was found to be marginally significant (F(3,272) = 2.2,
p=.09).
Further exploration of these effects showed that intention
scores were only significant between conditions for male
participants (F(3,64)=2.85, p=.044) but not for female
participants (F(3,208)=.332, p=.80). A post-hoc test showed
that intention scores of men who were exposed to the
Control condition (M=66.0, SE=7.8), were significantly
lower than mean intention scores of men who were exposed
to either the full MI condition (M= 95.5, SE=8.0), p=.011;
or the partial MI condition (M=95.67, SE=10.8), p=.030.
Intention scores between men in the DBH condition and the
control condition did not differ.

Evaluation questions
Table 4 shows the mean scores about the participants'
appreciation for the way they were addressed by Eliza and
the extent they liked talking to her.
Table 4: Means (plus SE) of appreciation and liking

Women
5.62
(.14)
5.56
(.14)
5.45
(.12)
5.77
(.11)

Condition
Full MI
Partial MI
DBH

Appreciation
Men
Women
5.26
5.33
(.32)
(.21)
4.91
5.23
(.43)
(.22)
5.53
5.02
(.36)
(.19)

Liking
Men
4.42
(.32)
4.46
(.42)
4.73
(.36)

Women
4.04
(.20)
4.18
(.21)
4.06
(.19)

Note. MI = Motivational Interviewing; DBH = Disengagement
Belief Handling

Note. MI = Motivational Interviewing; DBH = Disengagement
Belief Handling

Effects of Condition and Sex on Attitude
A Univariate Analysis of Variance showed a significant
main effect of Condition on Attitude towards adopting a
more plant-based diet (F(3,269)=2.67, p=.048). Attitude
scores of participants in the Control (M=5.44, SE=.12) and
Full MI (M=5.59, SE=.12) condition were significantly
higher than Attitude scores of participants in the DBH
condition (M=5.10, SE=.13). In addition, there was a main
effect of Sex on Attitude (F(1.269)=11.54, p=.001). Women
(M=5.60, SE=.06) scored significantly higher on attitude
measures than men (M=5.16, SE=.06) regardless of
exposure to experimental condition. No interaction effect of
Condition x Sex was found (p-value>.23).

Effects of Condition and Sex on Intention
A Univariate Analysis of Variance showed a marginally
significant main effect of Condition on Intention to adopt a
more plant-based diet F(3,272)=2.29, p=.078. In addition,
there was a main effect of Sex on Intention. Men (M=84.44,
SE=4.56) scored significantly lower on intention to adopt a
more plant-based diet than women (M=102.61, SE=2.47),
F(1,272) = 12.74, p=.000. The interaction of Condition x

In general, participants felt they were addressed in a nice
manner: mean scores ranged from 4.9 to 5.5 (maximum 7).
A 3 x 2 ANOVA was carried out - no evaluation questions
about Eliza were asked in the control condition - which
showed no significant main or interaction effects (p-values
> .37). Participants also seemed to like to communicate with
Eliza, though the marginally significant main effect of Sex
of Participant (F(1,182)=3.39, p=.067) suggested that male
participants enjoyed talking to Eliza a little bit more
(M=4.54, SE=.21) than female participants (M=4.09,
SE=.12). No other effects were significant (p-values > .77).

Discussion
The aim of this research was to find out 1) whether it would
be effective to design a dialogue system to promote plantbased diets, and 2) which elements or modules contribute to
the persuasive power of the system. To this end, four
versions of a computer-based dialogue system were
developed, which ‘talked’ about the benefits of plant-based
diets and provided - individually tailored - conversations
based on different persuasive strategies.
Most importantly, we saw positive effects of
incorporating persuasive strategies in a dialogue system.
This implicates the usefulness of using a dialogue system to

3630

promote sustainable behavior concerning the promotion of
adopting a (more) plant-based diet.
We discovered effects of the different versions on
behavioral intention towards adopting a plant-based diet.
These effects were only present for men. Women were in
general more willing to change their diet, regardless of the
condition they were assigned to. So contrary to
expectations, men seemed to be most sensitive to persuasion
in the area of moving towards a plant-based diet. Men who
were exposed to the Full MI and the Partial MI conditions which both contained a motivational interviewing module showed higher intentions to adopt a more plant-based diet
than men in the control condition. The DBH condition that
only contained disengagement belief handling did not
significantly differ from the control condition.
Apparently, if we restrict our persuasive attempt to mere
argumentation, we will not get far, at least not with our male
conversational partners. This conclusion is underscored by
the findings regarding participants' attitudes. Incorporating
an argumentational component even seems to negatively
affect those: attitude scores were significantly lower in the
argumentation-only (DBH) condition than in the Control
condition for both men and women. Because a DBH module
is included in all experimental conditions, it is still possible
that DBH is effective, but only in combination with a
motivational module. Future research including an ‘only
MI’ condition could perhaps answer that question.
A second important finding concerns the effects of Sex of
the Participant. Our results support the notion that men and
women think differently about adopting a more plant-based
diet and that they are persuaded by different means (e.g.
Cooney, 2014). However, as we said, the outcome was not
quite as we anticipated, as we expected that women would
be more susceptible to persuasion in this area. What our
results do suggest is that women are generally more likely to
have or adopt a plant-based diet. While it is true that in this
research only men were positively affected by two versions
of the intervention, women showed more positive attitudes
and higher intentions to adopt a more plant-based diet than
men overall.
Of specific interest is that there was also a (trend towards
a) main effect of Sex on the scores of one of the evaluation
questions, when participants were asked whether they had
enjoyed talking to Eliza. Men had enjoyed the conversation
with Eliza more than women. Perhaps if we would use a
picture of a young male, this ‘Elisus’ would work better
with a majority of female participants. We will tackle this
issue in a future version of the present experiment.
Future studies in our lab will focus on a number of issues.
First of all, we will perform a replication of this study in a
different participant group to gauge the extent to which we
can generalize the specific findings of this study
Second, we measured intention immediately after
participants were exposed to the intervention. It is very
likely the case that interventions need much more time
before they have a detectable effect. Especially with
difficult behaviors like changing dietary habits, the

occurrence of what is sometimes called ‘sleeper effects’
seems very plausible (Kumkale & Albarracín, 2004).
In addition, as in most studies, the present research
measured behavioral intention and not actual behavior.
While intention is thought to be a potent predictor of actual
behavior (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010), being able to measure
and predict actual behavioral outcomes is the ultimate goal
of persuasion research. We would like to use some form of
longitudinal design, where we measure - self-reported eating behavior over a longer period.
Finally, the present research measured the effects of a
single intervention. In the real world, people are often
exposed more than once to the same, or related persuasive
information – they read advertisements in newspapers and
magazines, see posters, look at commercials etc. Perhaps
we need multiple exposures to create more persuasive
results.
In conclusion, then, our research suggests that a dialogue
system can induce behavior change in the field of a plantbased life-style. However, strategy-wise, only giving people
arguments in trying to persuade them is not going to work.
People, especially men, may want to feel their own
autonomous motivation, which can be fueled by a
supporting dialogue based on - for instance – elements from
motivational interviewing. Future research should test
designs that incorporate different combinations of
persuasive strategies (and pictures/avatars); multiple
exposures to/conversations with the system; over a longer
time span; and should measure actual consumption behavior
instead of intention as outcome.

References
Aronson, E. (1968) Dissonance theory: Progress and
problems. Ableson, R.P. (1968) Theories of cognitive
consistency: A sourcebook. Rand Mcnally, Chicago, 5-27
Ballast, K., & Dijkstra, A. (2011) Personalization and
perceived personal relevance in computer-tailored
persuasion in smoking cessation. British Journal of
Health Psychology, 17 (1), 60-73
Bastian, B., Loughnan, S., Haslam, N., & Radke, H. (2012)
Don’t mind meat? The denial of mind to animals used for
animal consumption. Personality and Social psychology
Bulletin, 38, 247-256.
Bolderdijk, J.W., Steg, L., Geller, E.S., Lehmand, P.K.,
Postmes, T. (2013) Comparing the effectiveness of
monetary versus moral motives in environmental
campaigning. Nature Climate Change, 3, 413-416
Cooney, N. (2014) Veganomics. The Surprising Science on
What Motivates Vegetarians from the Breakfast Table to
the Bedroom. Brooklyn: Lantern Books
Cooper, J., Fazio, R.H. (1984) A new look at dissonance
theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 17,
229-266
Dijkstra (2009) Disengagement beliefs in smokers: Do they
influence the effects of a tailored persuasive message
advocating smoking cessation? Psychology & Health, 24
(7), 791-804

3631

Dijkstra, A. (2008). The psychology of tailoring-ingredients
of computer-tailored persuasion. Personality and Social
Psychology Compass, 2, 765-784.
Donham, K. J., Wing, S., Osterberg, D., Flora, J. L., Hodne,
C., Thu, K. M., & Thorne, P. S. (2007). Community
Health and Socioeconomic Issues Surrounding
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 115(2), 317-320.
Festinger, L. (1957) A theory of cognitive dissonance, Vol 2.
Stanford University press, Palo Alto, CA
Fishbein, M. & Ajzen, I. (2010) Predicting and changing
behavior: the reasoned action approach. New York:
Psychology Press
Fishbein, M. & Yzer, M. (2003) Using Theory to Design
Effective Health Behavior Interventions. Communication
Theory 13 (2), 164–183
Ham, J., & Midden, C. H. (2014). A persuasive robot to
stimulate energy conservation: The influence of positive
and negative social feedback and task similarity on
energy-consumption behavior. International Journal Of
Social Robotics, 6(2), 163-171. doi:10.1007/s12369-0130205-z
Hedenus, F., Wirsenius, S., & Johansson, D. (2014). The
importance of reduced meat and dairy consumption for
meeting stringent climate change targets. Climatic
Change, 124(1/2), 79-91. doi:10.1007/s10584-014-11045.
Helme, D.W. & Noar, S.M. & Allard, S. & Zimmerman,
R.S. & Palmgreen, P. & McClanahan, K.J. (2011) InDepth Investigation of Interpersonal Discussions in
Response to a Safer-Sex Mass Media Campaign. Health
Communication, 26, 366–378
Hertwich, E., van der Voet, E., Suh, S., Tukker, A.,
Huijbregts M., Kazmierczyk, P., Lenzen, M., McNeely, J.
& Moriguchi, Y. (2010). Assessing the Environmental
Impacts of Consumption and Production: Priority
Products and Materials, A Report of the Working Group
on the Environmental Impacts of Products and Materials
to the International Panel for Sustainable Resource
Management. UNEP
Hewstone, M., Stroebe, W. & Jonas, K. (2012) An
Introduction to social psychology. Glasgow: The British
Psychological Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Kumkale, G. T., & Albarracín, D. (2004). The Sleeper
Effect in Persuasion: A Meta-Analytic Review.
Psychological Bulletin, 130(1), 143–172.
Lippi, G., Mattiuzzi, C., & Cervellin, G. (2016). Meat
consumption and cancer risk: a critical review of
published
meta-analyses.
Critical
Reviews
In
Oncology/Hematology,971-14.
Miller, W. R. & Rollnick, S. (2002) Motivational
interviewing, preparing people for change (second
edition). New York: The Guilford Press
Montonen, J., Boeing, H., Fritsche, A., Schleicher, E., Joost,
H., Schulze, M., Steffen, A. & Pischon, T. (2013).
Consumption of red meat and whole-grain bread in

relation to biomarkers of obesity, inflammation, glucose
metabolism and oxidative stress.
Noar, S.M. & Carlyle, K. & Cole, C. (2006) Why
communication is crucial: meta-analysis of the
relationship between safer sexual communication and
condom use. Journal of health communication, 11(4),
365-90
Pew Commission on Industrial Farm Animal Production.
(2008). Putting meat on the table: Industrial farm animal
production in America. Washington, DC.
Riet, van ‘t, J.P., Ruiter, R.A.C., Werrij, M.Q., Vries, de, H.
(2010) Investigating message-framing effects in the
context of a tailored intervention promoting physical
activity. Health education research, 25(2), 343-354
Rothgerber, H. (2014) Efforts to overcome vegetarianinduced dissonance among meat eaters. Appetite, 79, 3241
Shingleton, R.M. & Palfai, T.P. (2015) Technologydelivered adaptations of motivational interviewing for
health-related behaviors: A systematic review of the
current research, Patient Education and Counseling (99),
pp. 17–35
Southwell, B. G., & Yzer, M. C. (2007). The Roles of
Interpersonal
Communication
in
Mass
Media
Campaigns. Communication Yearbook, 31420-462.
Steinfeld, H., Gerber, P., Wassenaar, T., Castel, V., Rosales,
M. & de Haan, C. (2006).
Livestock's
long
shadow: environmental issues and options. Food and
Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations
Wright, J.A., Velicer, W.F., Prochaska, J.O. (2008) Testing
the Predictive Power of the Transtheoretical Model of
Behavior Change Applied to Dietary Fat Intake. Health
Education Research, 24 (2), 224-23.
Yokoyama, Y., Nishimura, K., Barnard, N. D., Takegami,
M., Watanabe, M., Sekikawa, A., & ... Miyamoto, Y.
(2014). Vegetarian Diets and Blood Pressure: A Metaanalysis. JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(4),577-587.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.14547.
Zane, D., Irwin, J. & Reczek, R. (2015) Do less ethical
consumers denigrate more ethical consumers? The effect
of wilful ignorance on judgments of others. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 26, 337-349.

3632

