Cross-situational learning of novel anaphors
Karen Clothier (kclothi1@jhu.edu)
Cognitive Science Department, 3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218 USA

Satoshi Nambu (satoshi.nambu@monash.edu)
School of Languages, Literatures, Cultures and Linguistics, 20 Chancellors Walk
Clayton, 3800 AUSTRALIA

Hajime Ono (hajime@tsuda.ac.jp)
Faculty of Arts, 2-1-1 Tsuda-machi, Kodaira-shi
Tokyo, 187-8577 JAPAN

Akira Omaki (omaki@uw.edu)
Department of Linguistics, Guggenheim Hall Box 352425
Seattle, WA 98195 USA
Abstract

translation of (1) results in an ambiguous sentence, as zibun
can refer to either Bill or John. This suggests that in
Japanese and other related languages, the local domain for
zibun is expanded to the whole sentence, thereby allowing
both the local and non-local antecedents.
This cross-linguistic variation suggests that the
interpretive possibilities for anaphors are not universally
determined, and must be learned from language experience.
Learning the interpretive possibilities of anaphors requires
learners to infer the intended meaning of the utterance based
on the utterance context. For example, the nature of the
events described by (1) and (2) is different: one is reflexive,
while the other is transitive. Thus acquiring anaphors
requires the learner to simultaneously track the syntactic
relations between the anaphor and its antecedent, as
determined by the context of the utterance. Critically,
learning that the LD reflexive can take either a local or nonlocal antecedent requires tracking such information across
multiple situations in which the LD reflexive is used with
either one.
Previous word learning research has investigated how
learners use such cross-situational regularities or syntactic
structures to learn word meanings. For example, 2.5 yearolds acquired the meaning of a novel verb (e.g. pim)
dependent solely on the frequency with which the verb was
presented with a particular video of a particular action (Scott
& Fisher, 2012; for similar work on nouns see Smith & Yu,
2008). While there is an on-going debate over whether
learners gradually update word meaning hypotheses across
situations, or whether learners instead iteratively test and
revise successive hypotheses across situations (see Medina,
Snedeker, Trueswell, & Gleitman, 2011), both lines of work
critically point to the fact that information across trials
contributes to the word learning process.
Much work has also explored how learners use syntactic
frames to constrain the meaning of novel words (syntactic
bootstrapping; see Gleitman, 1990). For example, Yuan and
Fisher (2009) showed that when infants heard a series of

Word learning research has shown that learners constrain the
hypothesis space for word meanings by using multiple
sources of information, such as cross-situational regularities
of word-context co-occurrences or syntactic cues, like the
number of arguments. These studies typically focus on word
meaning development where these cues can be helpful but not
necessary. As such, it sheds little light on the acquisition of
anaphors, which requires tracking syntactic dependencies
across situations. To test whether or how learners track this
information, we conducted a novel anaphor learning
experiment with English and Japanese speakers, manipulating
cross-situational regularities in anaphors and their syntactic
dependencies. Results show both English and Japanese
speakers closely track the frequency of interpretive
possibilities for novel anaphors. However, they demonstrate
difficulties learning long-distance reflexives, which are
compatible with either local or non-local antecedents. This
suggests that successful anaphor learning requires more than
cross-situational regularities of interpretive possibilities.
Keywords: anaphors; binding;
statistical learning; word learning

language

acquisition;

Introduction
Sentences (1) and (2) illustrate that the interpretation of
local reflexives like himself and pronouns like him rely on
structural relationships to their antecedents (the noun phrase
that the reflexive or pronoun refers to, e.g. himself = John in
(1), but him = Bill in (2)).
(1) Bill said that John kicked himself.
(2) Bill said that John kicked him.
This complementarity suggests that these anaphors respect
different locality constraints; informally, English reflexives
can only be bound by antecedents in the same clause,
whereas pronouns must not be bound by antecedents in the
same clause (Chomsky, 1981).
Other languages have different types of anaphors. For
example, Japanese has a long-distance (LD) reflexive zibun,
and replacing himself with this LD reflexive in the Japanese

228

transitive sentences with two arguments (e.g. Jimmy blicked
the cat) in the absence of contextual information, they
reliably interpreted the novel verb as referring to a causative
event that requires two participants. On the other hand,
presenting a series of intransitive sentences led infants to
interpret the novel verb as referring to a single participant
event. Such work shows that learners can use information
from syntactic structures to narrow their hypotheses about
word meanings.
In sum, the work reviewed above shows that learners
make use of both distributional and linguistic cues.
However, few studies have investigated the mechanism of
anaphora acquisition, which requires tracking the crosssituational regularities of syntactic relations themselves.
Research on anaphora acquisition mechanisms not only fills
this empirical gap, but also provides a novel window into
the constraints on cross-situational, statistical learning
mechanisms.
The present study uses a novel anaphor learning
experiment to investigate if and how participants use crosssituational co-occurrences of word form, contextual
information, and syntactic structure. During the learning
phase, participants are presented with sentence-picture pairs
that contextually constrain the intended meaning of the
target English sentence like (1) or (2) with a novel anaphor.
We used three novel anaphors, following the interpretive
possibilities of local reflexive (botu), pronoun (sumu), as
well LD reflexive (togu). We included these three anaphor
types for three reasons. First, this combination of anaphors
is attested in Japanese and other languages, and therefore
provides an ecologically valid anaphor system. Second, for
English speakers, the Japanese LD reflexive is a new
category of anaphor, so this allows us to simulate an actual
learning process. Third, the local reflexive and pronoun are
expected to be readily learnable for English speakers since
both exist in English, and are also presented with a single
interpretive possibility across trials. Thus, these anaphors
can be used to validate this novel experimental procedure.
In order to probe the effectiveness of distributional
information, we manipulated the frequency of two
interpretive possibilities for the LD reflexive (i.e., local
antecedent, akin to the meaning of (1), or non-local
antecedent, akin to the meaning of (2)) by creating three
between-subjects learning conditions: a Balanced condition
where there were 50% local and 50% non-local antecedents;
an LD-majority condition where 80% of the time the
antecedent was non-local, and only local 20% of the time;
and a Local-majority condition, where 80% of the time the
antecedent was local, and only non-local 20% of the time.
If anaphor acquisition relies on accruing information and
testing hypotheses across situations, then we would expect
that a learner in the Balanced condition would be best able
to learn the Japanese-style LD reflexive; encountering both
interpretive possibilities should maximize learners’ chances
to realize the optionality of local and non-local antecedents.
However, there are two additional biases that may affect
how learners use distributional information. For example, it

has been proposed that in the absence of clear
disambiguating information, learners are often biased to
adopt syntactic structures that are easier to process in
subsequent comprehension (e.g. Fedzeschkina, Newport, &
Jaeger, 2016; Hawkins, 1999). With respect to processing
LD reflexives, it has been found that at least in processing
of Chinese LD reflexives, readers are biased to access local
antecedents due to constraints on the working memory
mechanism (e.g., Dillon et al., 2014). If this bias extends to
anaphor acquisition, learners may struggle to learn the
availability of the non-local antecedent with the LD
reflexive, whereas even a relatively small percentage of
input supporting the local antecedent may be sufficient to
learn the availability of the local antecedent. Under this
account, learners may in fact represent our LD-majority
condition as if it were a ‘Balanced’ condition, because this
local binding bias would enhance the availability of the
local antecedent while dampening that of the non-local
antecedent. If this is the case, then learners in the LDmajority condition – instead of the Balanced – should be
best able to realize the optionality of local and non-local
antecedents with the LD reflexive.
Another potential source of bias, which may be
particularly relevant to the present study, is the influence of
anaphors in the participants’ native languages. The second
language (L2) acquisition literature has found evidence for
strong first language influence on the L2 acquisition of
anaphors. For example, Yuan (1998) showed that Japanese
speakers learning the Chinese LD reflexive were more
likely to accept non-local antecedents than English speakers
learning Chinese. Conversely, Japanese speakers learning
English struggled to rule out non-local antecedents for
English reflexives in a similar task (Hirakawa, 1990).
Together, these results suggest that learners tend to
‘transfer’ and expect the same anaphors in their L2. Given
that our study explores how adult learners acquire a novel
anaphor, anaphors in the native language may constrain
what can be learned within a single experimental session.
To investigate the native language influence on anaphor
acquisition, we conducted this experiment with English
native speakers and Japanese native speakers. If prior
knowledge affects novel anaphor acquisition, then we would
expect a contrast between the English and Japanese group:
English speakers should struggle to learn the optionality in
the LD reflexive, whereas Japanese speakers should be able
to correctly learn the novel LD reflexive based on their
knowledge of zibun in their native language.

Experiment
Participants
Fifty-seven native English-speaking members of the Johns
Hopkins University community participated in the
experiment. They were compensated with course credit or
$10 cash. According to self-reports, none of the participants
knew languages with LD reflexives. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the three learning manipulation

229

conditions. All participants completed a learning phase and
then a test phase in the same session.
In addition, 57 native Japanese-speaking students from
Tsuda College participated in the Japanese version of the
same experiment. They were compensated ¥1000.
Performance in an English cloze task (adapted from
Kobayashi, 2002) revealed intermediate syntactic and
semantic knowledge in English (maximum possible score:
25; M = 15.529, SE = 4.130), suggesting the relative
dominance of Japanese over English.

Learning Conditions The picture-sentence pairs were used
to create three different distributions of LD reflexive
interpretations. For the Balanced condition, 15 LD reflexive
sentences were paired with local antecedent pictures
(including the necessarily local mono-clausal sentences,
which appeared with a single character performing an action
to themselves, with no speech bubble); the remaining 15
sentences appeared with non-local antecedent pictures. For
the LD-majority condition, 24 sentences appeared with nonlocal antecedent pictures, while the remaining six sentences
(including the three mono-clausal sentences) appeared with
local antecedent pictures. For the Local-majority condition,
24 sentences (including the three mono-clausal sentences)
appeared with local antecedent pictures, while the remaining
6 appeared with non-local antecedent pictures. This resulted
in an 80%/20% distribution in the two unequally distributed
conditions.

Materials
Learning Phase Trials The 78 sentences for the Learning
Phase were English sentences with clausal embedding (e.g.
John
{said/remembered}
that
Susan
combed
{botu/togu/sumu}), where botu, togu and sumu were the
novel words used as the local reflexive, LD reflexive, and
pronoun respectively. These anaphors were not marked for
gender. Three main clause verbs (comb, wash, fan) were
used once with both said and remembered. Using these six
sentence frames, three male and three female character
names were permuted to create 24 sentences containing the
local reflexive and 24 containing the pronoun. For the local
reflexive sentences, one sentence for each main clause verb
was replaced with a mono-clausal sentence with the same
verb. Taking these local reflexive sentences (including the
mono-clausal sentences) and adding 6 additional embedded
clause sentences following the same procedure described
above created the 30 sentences containing the LD reflexive.
In order to make the intended interpretation of each
sentence clear, throughout the experiment pictures were
paired with each sentence to form a trial. Local reflexive
sentences were depicted with pictures showing the
syntactically local noun phrase as the antecedent of the
anaphor; pronoun sentences were depicted with pictures
showing the syntactically non-local noun phrase as the
antecedent of the anaphor (as in Figure 1). Critically, LD
reflexive sentences were depicted with either type of
picture; referred to as the local antecedent in the former
case, and the non-local antecedent in the latter.

Picture Verification Test To create the sentences for the
picture verification test, one set of six embedded clause
sentence frames for each anaphor was reused with three new
main clause verbs (splash, paint, measure). To create the
trials, half the sentences were paired with their appropriate
picture as described above to make match trials, and the
other half was paired with the inappropriate picture (e.g. a
non-local picture with a local reflexive sentence) to make
mismatch trials, making sure that a roughly equal number of
each anaphor, embedding and main clause verbs were in
both sets of trial types. 1
Materials for the Japanese experiment For the Japanese
version of this experiment, the Japanese sentence materials
were constructed in a very similar way as in the English
experiment. However, because Japanese verbs are more
selective in their argument structure, we were forced to
change the events depicted in order to maintain natural
sounding sentences, opting for a construction where the
anaphor is marked with the dative particle -ni. The events
depicted in the Japanese learning materials were: sticking
tape to someone (__-ni gamutepu-wo haru), wrapping a
ribbon around someone (__-ni ribbon-wo makitsukeru), and
loading a log onto someone (__-ni maruta-wo noseru). In
the test they were: spilling water onto someone (__-ni mizuwo kakeru), putting paint on someone (__-ni enogu-wo
nuru), and pinning an award on someone (__-ni bajji-wo
tsukeru). All stimuli were presented in Japanese using
hiragana and kanji, with novel anaphors spelled in katakana.

Procedure
The procedure was identical for the two language groups,
but the Japanese version was carried out in Japanese by
trained native Japanese-speaking research assistants.

Figure 1: An example picture-sentence pair with togu
(the novel LD reflexive), which illustrates the non-local
antecedent (Adam washing David). The local antecedent
version of this trial type would picture Adam washing
himself inside the speech bubble.

1

Since both local and non-local antecedents are acceptable for
the LD reflexive, there were no mismatch trials for this anaphor in
the embedded clause sentence types discussed here.

230

Learning Phase This experiment was implemented in
PsychoPy (Pierce, 2007). During the Learning Phase the
participant was presented with one picture-sentence trial at a
time. They were instructed to read the sentence aloud, and
take as long as they needed to figure out the meaning of the
novel word. They used the space bar to progress to the next
trial, working at their own pace.
Participants were instructed to infer the meaning of novel
words they would encounter in the experiment. The
instructions explicitly stated that the novel words may or
may not correspond to existing words in their native
language. After the instructions, there were three blocks of
learning trials, consisting of 26 trials each, with eight
sentences each for the local reflexive and pronoun, and 10
LD reflexive sentences (including 1 mono-clausal local and
one LD reflexive sentence).
In order to motivate participants during the learning
phase, these learning blocks were interspersed with two quiz
blocks containing 12 picture verification test trials, four for
each anaphor. At the start of the first quiz block participants
were given brief instructions telling them to respond
‘match’ if the sentence appropriately described the picture
based on what they thought the novel words meant. There
were two practice trials. No feedback was provided.
The order of these learning blocks, and of the quiz blocks
was counter-balanced across participants to control for any
list order effects. The trial presentation order was
randomized within each block using PsychoPy’s trial
randomization function. Participants typically completed
this phase in 20-30 minutes.

Figure 2: Mean acceptance rates, split by each anaphor
given a particular antecedent, across the three learning
conditions, from English speaking participants.
reassured us that the task was achievable given consistent
input. We turn now to the optionality in the LD reflexive.
With respect to the acquisition of the LD reflexive, we
had initially expected participants in the Balanced condition
to show the best ability to accept the LD reflexive in both
local and non-local antecedent trials. However, this
expectation was not confirmed, as the acceptance rate for
the LD reflexive was not high in either local or non-local
antecedent trials (Figure 2). In order to explore the impact of
distributional regularities, we conducted planned pairwise
analyses and compared response rates for the LD reflexive
across the three learning conditions. Participants in the
Local-majority condition and LD-majority condition
showed a reliable preference to accept the LD reflexive with
the antecedent that was frequently presented in the input
(Local-majority condition: β = 1.211, z = 6.336, p < .001;
LD-majority condition: β = -1.024, z = -5.201, p < .001).
Finally, when response rates for the LD reflexive were
compared across the three conditions, participants only
showed a strong preference for an antecedent in the Local
condition (β = 1.211, z = 6.336, p < .001) and the LD
condition (β = -1.024, z = -5.201, p < .001), not the
Balanced condition. Furthermore, in a model considering
only acceptance rates of the LD reflexive in the Balanced
condition, there was no significant preference for either
antecedent (β = 0.614, z = 1.547, p = .122), suggesting that
participants in the Balanced condition truly were responding
at chance on a given LD reflexive trial. This pattern of
responses suggests that participants’ behavioral response
patterns reproduced the distributional regularities they
observed in their input.
Moreover, participants in the LD-majority condition were
less likely to accept the local antecedent with the LD
reflexive compared to those in the Local-majority condition
(β = -0.823, z = -6.119, p < .000), or those in the Balanced
condition (β = -0.347, z = -2.593, p = .010). Similarly,
participants in the Local-majority condition were more
likely to accept the LD reflexive with local antecedents
compared to those in the Balanced condition (β = 0.340, z =

Test Phase Participants were given the picture verification
test as described above for the quiz trials. Again, they were
told to indicate if the sentence described the picture by
pressing either ‘f’ for match or ‘j’ for mismatch. The trials
were presented randomly, with a break halfway through.
Participants typically completed the test phase in 20-30
minutes.

Results
For statistical analyses of the data, the picture verification
responses from each language group were entered into a
mixed logit model (Jaeger, 2008) with the acceptance
response (i.e. the picture and the sentence description
match) as the dependent variable. We used learning
condition, picture antecedent and anaphor type, and the twoand three-way interactions as predictors, and participant and
item as random effects.
English Figure 2 shows the results for the English-speaking
participants. On average, participants in all three learning
conditions were more likely to accept the local reflexive
with a local antecedent (β = 1.568, z = 13.239, p < .000) and
less likely to accept the pronoun with a local antecedent (β =
-1.531, z = -12.833, p < .000). This was an expected pattern
given that local reflexives and pronouns exist in English,
and the input provided consistent information. This

231

2.775, p = .006), and the LD-majority condition (β = 0.823,
z = 6.119, p < .000). These patterns suggest that participants
in the unequally distributed learning conditions also
reproduced the rate at which the local or non-local
antecedents appeared in their input.

showed a strong preference for an antecedent in the Local
condition (β = 0.787, z = 4.065, p < .001) and the LD
condition (β = -1.062, z = -5.228, p < .001), not the
Balanced condition. In the model considering only
acceptance rates of the LD reflexive in the Balanced
condition, there was again no significant preference for
either antecedent (β = -0.493, z = -1.215, p = .224).
Overall, participants across both language groups show
strikingly similar response patterns. They were only willing
to accept each anaphor following the distribution of
antecedent co-occurrences provided in their input, even
when the optionality presented there resembled their native
language (i.e. Japanese speakers). Results also suggest that
the chance responding in the Balanced condition across both
language groups was not the result of different individuals
preferring different antecedents, rather as a group these
participants are simply reproducing the statistical
regularities in their input.

Japanese Figure 3 shows the results for the Japanesespeaking participants. Overall, Japanese speakers’ response
patterns were very similar to those of English speakers.
Participants across the three learning conditions accepted
the local reflexive more often with local antecedents (β =
1.196, z = 10.524, p < .001) and rejected the pronoun with
local antecedents (β = -1.275, z = -10.519, p < .001).
Japanese speakers were also sensitive to the distributions in
their learning condition. When participants in the Balanced
condition were compared to those in the Local-majority
condition, there was no significant difference in their
acceptance rates for the two antecedents with the LD
reflexive (β = 0.208, z = 1.378, p = .168)2. But like English
speakers, participants in the LD condition compared to the
Balanced were less likely to accept the LD reflexive with a
local antecedent (β = -0.637, z = -4.757, p < .000).
Pairwise analyses of the LD reflexive data at each group
level again reveal the similarity between English and
Japanese speakers. Participants only showed a strong
preference for a local antecedent in the Local-majority
condition (β = 0.787, z = 4.065, p < .001) and non-local
antecedent in the LD-majority condition (β = -1.062, z =
-5.228, p < .001), but no clear preference was observed in
the Balanced condition. Furthermore, in comparison to
participants in the Local-majority condition, those in the
LD-majority condition were less likely to accept the LD
reflexive with local antecedents (β = -0.679, z = -5.228, p <
.000). Finally, when response rates for the LD reflexive
were compared across the three conditions, participants only

Discussion
The present study used a novel anaphor learning paradigm
to investigate cross-situational learning of novel anaphors.
Overall, we found that participants in our study appear to
track the distribution of syntactic structures across situations
to constrain their anaphor acquisition. The fact that learners
reproduced the distribution of local vs. non-local
interpretations for the LD reflexive indicates that the input
distribution was guiding the process of anaphor acquisition.
This kind of probability-matching behavior, which has been
reported in other statistical learning paradigms (e.g. Hudson
Kam & Newport, 2005), further illustrates humans’ ability
to reproduce and learn regularities in their input from simple
frequency tracking (c.f. Estes, 1976). Furthermore, the fact
that there was little difference between the two language
groups – specifically the fact that Japanese speakers, like
English speakers, treated the LD reflexive as a local
reflexive or pronoun based on their learning condition rather
than following the interpretive possibilities of their native
zibun – suggests that biases to copy and reproduce
regularities in the input distribution played a more important
role than other potential biases (e.g. processing biases or L1
influence).
One of the main research questions in this study
concerned how participants handle the optionality in the
interpretive possibilities of the LD reflexive, and how
manipulating the distribution of those two options would
affect acquisition. The results demonstrate that learners
struggle to acquire the optionality of the LD reflexive,
regardless of their native language. Participants in the
unequally distributed learning conditions appeared to treat
the antecedent that only appeared 20% of the time as noise,
ignoring it during learning, and accepting roughly that same
rate of ‘noise’ during test (for all three anaphors). In other
words, participants in the LD-majority and Local-majority
conditions simply treated the LD reflexive as another form
of either the pronoun or local reflexive, respectively.

Figure 3: Mean acceptance rates, split by each anaphor
given a particular antecedent, across the three learning
conditions, from Japanese speaking participants.
2

However, the main model shows that overall participants in the
Local condition were more likely to accept the LD reflexive with
the local antecedent (β = 0.517, z = 3.444, p = .001).

232

Acknowledgments

Participants in the Balanced condition appear to be roughly
at chance in accepting or rejecting the provided antecedent.
These results and conclusion raise an important question
for future research: if distributional regularities are not
useful in acquiring anaphors that allow for more than one
interpretation, how do speakers of languages like Japanese
acquire the interpretative optionality of their LD reflexives?
One possible explanation is that learners must first be
confident about one possible antecedent before allowing
optionality. For example, learners in the two unequally
distributed learning conditions may have settled on one
interpretation, without having received enough evidence to
allow optionality. Learners in the Balanced condition,
however, were not confident about either antecedent. To test
this, an on-going follow-up experiment is exploring the
effect of presentation order and the frequency of particular
antecedents, e.g. presenting a majority of either local or
non-local antecedents before introducing the kind of
optionality we presented in the Balanced condition.
Alternatively, this difficulty could be explained by a
uniqueness principle, i.e., bias against many-to-one
meaning-form mappings. Learners must learn that both
multiple semantic and syntactic mappings are acceptable for
LD reflexives, so future work should investigate this bias at
both levels. For example, highlighting the distinctiveness of
the LD reflexive’s interpretive optionality may increase
learners’ acceptance of optionality. To this end, sentences
with relative clauses may help learners disambiguate
between anaphor types: in “The woman standing next to
Susan splashed her/herself,” zibun is only interchangeable
with herself, not her because Susan does not c-command the
anaphor. The current data can only address the acquisition
of the locality constraint, and not the c-command
requirement on the structural relation between antecedent
and anaphor, but learning both in tandem may be critical for
successful acquisition of an LD reflexive.
Sentences where the reflexive is in the subject position of
an embedded clause could also provide evidence that the LD
reflexive differs from the local reflexive in its syntactically
constrained interpretive possibilities (e.g. “John said that
zibun-wa awesome.”). While such a sentence is not possible
with a local reflexive, it is grammatical for zibun precisely
because the LD reflexive can take an antecedent outside the
local clause (in contrast to the local reflexive’s more
restricted locality constraint). Providing these sentences in
the learning input may provide further evidence to learners
about the distinctiveness of the LD reflexive, and increase
their confidence that optionality is integral to the LD
reflexive type anaphor itself and not noise in the input.
In short, findings from the present study provide an
important step towards understanding the constraints on
cross-situational learning of anaphoric expressions. We
suggest that successful acquisition of an LD reflexive may
require that learners incrementally acquire interpretive
possibilities in sequence, or that they are presented with an
additional syntactic cue that unambiguously indicates the
availability of the non-local antecedent interpretation.

We thank Akari Ikeuchi, Mei Yoshimoto, Moeko Sato,
Morine Kondo, and especially Moeko Kita for help with
data collection in Japan. The Japanese study was supported
by NSF EAPSI fellowship 1614233 awarded to KC.

References
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding.
Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Dillon, B., Chow, W. Y., Wagers, M., Guo, T., Liu, F., &
Phillips, C. (2014). The structure-sensitivity of memory
access: evidence from Mandarin Chinese. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 1025.
Estes, W. K. (1976). The cognitive side of probability
learning. Psychological Review, 83(1), 37.
Fedzechkina, M., Newport, E. L., & Jaeger, T. F. (2016).
Balancing effort and information transmission during
language acquisition: Evidence from word order and case
marking. Cognitive Science.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language acquisition, 1(1), 3-55.
Hawkins, J. A. (1999). Processing complexity and filler-gap
dependencies across grammars. Language, 244-285.
Hirakawa, M. (1990). A study of the L2 acquisition of
English reflexives. Second Language Research, 6(1), 6085.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. L. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child
learners in language formation and change. Language
learning and development, 1(2), 151-195.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. Journal of memory and language, 59(4), 434446.
Kobayashi, M., (2002). Cloze tests revisited: Exploring item
characteristics with special attention to scoring methods.
The Modern Language Journal, 86(4), 571-586.
Medina, T. N., Snedeker, J., Trueswell, J. C., & Gleitman,
L. R. (2011). How words can and cannot be learned by
observation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(22), 9014-9019.
Peirce, JW (2007) PsychoPy - Psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1-2):8-13.
Scott, R. M., & Fisher, C. (2012). 2.5-year-olds use crosssituational consistency to learn verbs under referential
uncertainty. Cognition, 122(2), 163-180.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106(3), 1558-1568.
Yuan, B. (1998). Interpretation of binding and orientation of
the Chinese reflexive ziji by English and Japanese
speakers. Second Language Research, 14, 324-340.
Yuan, S., & Fisher, C. (2009). “Really? She blicked the
baby?” Two-year-olds learn combinatorial facts about
verbs by listening. Psychological Science, 20(5), 619-626.

233

