Decisions based on verbal probabilities:
Decision bias or decision by belief sampling?
Hidehito Honda (hitohonda.02@gmail.com)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan

Toshihiko Matsuka (matsukat@muscat.L.chiba-u.ac.jp)
Department of Cognitive and Information Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan

Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo
3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan
Abstract
We examined decisions based on verbal probability phrases,
such as "small chance," "likely," or "doubtful" (we call these
phrases verbal probabilities). Verbal probabilities have
communicative functions called directionality and can be
categorized into positive (e.g., "likely" or "probable") or
negative (e.g., “unlikely,” “doubtful”) phrases in terms of
their directionality. Previous studies have shown that the
directionality of phrases affects decisions. Although such
decisions seem biased, we argue that they are not. We
hypothesize that since a speaker has the option to choose the
directionality used during communication, the selected
directionality becomes relevant information to a decision
maker, and is taken into account in making decisions. We
modeled these processes using the Decision by Belief
Sampling (DbBS) model. We found that the observed data
could be well explained by our hypothesis, and that the DbBS
model could be one of the best potential models for decisions
based on verbal probability information.
Keywords: Verbal probabilities; decisions based on verbal
probabilities; directionality; decision by belief sampling.

Introduction
In the research on judgment and decision making, topics
pertaining to probabilities, such as probability judgment and
decisions based on probability information, have been some
of the most studied. In the present study, we shall discuss
decision making based on different kinds of probability
information.
Probability information can be expressed in various forms.
The most basic of these expressions is numerical probability,
such as “20%.” Probability information is also expressed
with verbal phrases such as "it is likely," "it is doubtful," or
"it is certain."1 In the present study, we examined decisions
based on verbal probabilities and analyzed how the
difference in expressions affected cognitive processes.
Particularly, we focus on the communicative functions of
verbal probabilities. Teigen and Brun (1995) showed that
verbal probabilities have communicative functions, called
1

Hereafter, we call verbal probability phrases verbal
probabilities.

557

directionality, which change the listeners' focus. Verbal
probabilities can be categorized into positive or negative
phrases in terms of their directionality. Positive phrases (e.g.,
"small chance," "likely," "certain") make listeners focus on
the occurrence of uncertain events. In contrast, negative
phrases (e.g., "unlikely," "doubtful," "uncertain") make
listeners focus on the non-occurrence of uncertain events.
Previous studies have shown that the directionality affected
decision making. Here, we introduce one of the most
intriguing studies, the "Marianne study" (Study 1) in Teigen
and Brun (1999). This experiment involved a task
describing the probable effectiveness of a treatment with
either a positive phrase ("there is some possibility that the
treatment will be helpful in her case") or a negative phrase
("it is quite uncertain that the treatment will be helpful in
her case"). Participants rated how likely they would
recommend this treatment to a patient (Marianne) based on
these phrasings, using a 4-point scale (1: absolutely yes, 4:
absolutely not). Numerical translations for positive and
negative phrases answered by different participants were
31.7% and 31.3%. Based on these results, the two phrases
should have conveyed highly similar degrees of certainty for
the effectiveness of treatment. However, the participants
gave highly different decision ratings depending on the
probability expressions. Mean ratings for positive and
negative phrases were, 1.78 and 2.78, respectively (when
scores of 1 or 2 were jointly regarded as "Yes" decisions,
the proportions of "Yes" decisions for the two phrases were
90.6% and 32.4%, respectively).
Ostensibly, the results in Teigen and Brun (1999) may
have suggested a decision bias produced by the difference in
probability expression, perhaps another form of the framing
effect (Teigen & Brun, 2003). In the following sections, we
shall claim that the effect of different probability
expressions on decisions is not a decision bias, and that such
decisions derive from a decision maker's inferences
regarding background information based on speaker’s
choice of directionality. Furthermore, we model this
decision processes using a Decision by Belief Sampling
model.

Speaker’s choice of directionality and listener’s
inferences in communication
In communication, speakers will select an expression
according to situational factors. McKenzie and Nelson
(2003) and Sher and McKenzie (2006, 2008) argued that a
speaker's reference point affects her/his choice of expression
when conveying quantitative information, such as the
amount of water in a glass (e.g., "half full" or "half empty").
In a task examining this phenomenon, it was found when
the glass (a 500ml capacity) had 250ml of water,
participants used the description of “half full” when the
glass had previously 0ml of water more often than when the
glass had previously 500ml of water. It was also found that
a listener could infer the speaker's original reference point
(e.g., the amount of water originally in the glass before
more was added or removed) based on the selected
expression. Honda and Yamagishi (2017) found analogous
tendencies in communication using verbal probabilities.
Imagine trying to convey that an uncertain event had a 50%
chance of occurrence using verbal probabilities. Honda and
Yamagishi (2017) showed that when a speaker’s prior
expectation of the event occurrence was lower (higher) than
50%, they tended to prefer positive (negative) phrases.
Honda and Yamagishi (2017) also found that listeners could
infer the speaker’s expectation based on the phrases used.
When a positive phrase was presented, listeners tended to
infer that speaker's prior expectation of the probability was
lower than when a negative phrase was presented.
These findings indicate that the selected phrase implicitly
conveys important information for decision making. For
example, given that a speaker follows the above regularity,
50% conveyed by a positive (negative) phrase implies "good
(bad)" situation relative to the speaker’s expectation. Thus,
the findings of Teigen and Brun (1999) (i.e., participants
tended to recommend a treatment conveyed by a positive
phrase more than one conveyed by a negative phrase)
suggest that in making decisions, participants took into
account the relevant information (i.e., relatively “good” or
“bad” situations) implied by the directionality chosen.

Figure 1. Summaries of DbBS. (A) Probabilistic belief
regarding an uncertain event. This is represented by the
density function of the beta distribution. (B) Mean of
belief. (C) Entropy of belief. (D) Skewness of belief. (E)
Subjective value in DbBS. This is represented with the
cumulative distribution function of the beta distribution.

Model of decision making based on verbal
probabilities: Decision by Belief Sampling

sample of N items. In this model, if the decision sample
differs, r varies in the relationship between R and the
decision sample. Imagine the subjective value for 40%.
When decision samples are 10%, 20%, 30%, 30%, and 50%,
the subjective value is r = (5-1)/(6-1) = 0.8. In contrast, in
decision samples of 20%, 30%, 70%, 80%, and 90%, the
subjective value is r = (3-1)/(6-1) = 0.4. That is, even when
the target has the same attribute value, the subjective value
varies depending on decision samples. Previous studies have
shown that decision samples affect an evaluation of the
target value and the evaluation for the same target varies
depending on the samples (e.g., Stewart, Chater, Stott &
Reimers, 2003; Stewart, Reimers, & Harris, 2014).
In the present study, we propose a decision model,
Decision by Belief Sampling (DbBS), based on the DbS
model. Figure 1 summarizes DbBS. Here, we introduce

As described above, previous findings suggest that different
phrases implicitly convey information about the relative
status of the decision situation, and people utilize this
information in making decisions. In the present study, we
model such decision processes based on the Decision by
Sampling model (DbS, Stewart, 2009; Stewart, Chater, &
Brown, 2006). In the DbS model, subjective attribute values
are constructed by a series of binary, ordinal comparisons to
a sample of attribute values that reflect the immediate
decision context and real-world distribution. The subjective
value for a target is calculated as follows:
(1)
where r (0 ≤ r ≤ 1) denotes the subjective value for a target,
and R denotes the rank of the target within the decision

558

basic two assumptions: Firstly, the decision maker (DM)
refers to memory samples in making decisions, and these
samples represent the DM’s probabilistic belief of event
occurrence. For example, imagine the probable success rates
of medical procedures for both a serious disease and
appendicitis, respectively. Generally, people believe that the
probability of success in treating a serious disease is low
compared to the probable success of treating appendicitis
(Honda & Matsuka, 2014). We assume that the DM refers to
memory samples according to her/his probabilistic belief.
We represent these beliefs using beta distributions. Figure 1
(A) shows four examples of a DM's subjective beliefs
regarding uncertain events. We can discuss the features of
probabilistic belief based on its statistical characteristics
such as mean, entropy (i.e., uncertainties about successes or
failures), and skewness of beta distributions (see Figure 1
(B), (C), and (D)). Example 1 represents the belief such that
an event will occur or not with high uncertainty and without
skewness. Likewise, in Examples 2 and 4, the DM has the
belief such that the event will happen with low or high
probability with relatively low uncertainty and positive or
negative skewness. Example 3 represents the belief that an
event has around 50% of occurrence with low uncertainty
and without skewness. Thus, beta distributions can represent
extensive kinds of beliefs about uncertain events. Secondly,
we assume that a subjective value for a target is constructed
by the comparison between the target value and memory
samples. Figure 1 (E) shows subjective values calculated by
the DbBS model (i.e., equation (1)). Given that beta
distributions represent beliefs about uncertain events,
subjective values correspond to values in the cumulative
distribution functions (CDF) of beta distributions. As is
apparent, depending on the beliefs, the subjective values
differ even for the same target probability. One of the most
notable features in the DbS (or DbBS) model is that
subjective values are highly affected by the skewness of
distributions in decision (or memory) samples (Brown &
Matthews, 2011). Therefore, subjective values highly differ
between beliefs with high probability and those with low
probability (see Examples 2 and 4 in Figure 1).
We believe that the DbBS model can clarify the
following points regarding decisions based on verbal
probabilities. First, the DbBS model can clarify the implicit
assumptions (i.e., beliefs about uncertain events) people
have in making decisions. Although Honda and Yamagishi
(2017) showed that listeners have different assumptions
depending on the directionality of verbal probabilities, it
remains an empirical question whether people have such
assumptions in making decisions. Using the DbBS model,
we can examine this question. Second, the DbBS model will
provide a new perspective on phenomena regarding
decisions based on verbal probabilities. For example, we
can discuss whether the influence of directionality on
decisions reflects decision bias.
According to previous findings (Honda & Yamagishi,
2017) and the assumptions of the DbBS model, our
hypothesis is as follows: DMs refer to different memory

samples depending on the directionality of verbal
probabilities because the selected directionality become
relevant information to DMs. In particular, DMs refer to
memory samples with lower probability when presented
with positive phrases than when presented with negative
phrases. As a result, decision patterns differ between
positive and negative phrases. For example, even when
DMs think that a probability of an uncertain event is 30%
when presented with a verbal probability, the subjective
value for the probability will be higher when presented with
a positive phrase than a negative phrase, because DMs have
lower memory samples (see Examples 2 and 4 in Figure 1
(A) and (E)).

Behavioral experiment
In order to examine the above hypothesis, we conducted
behavioral experiments about decisions based on verbal
probabilities.

Method
Participants Japanese undergraduates (N = 60) participated
as part of their course work.
Tasks, materials, and procedure We conducted two tasks:
a decision task and a task measuring the membership
function for verbal probabilities. The decision task was
based on the Marianne study (Study 1) in Teigen and Brun
(1999). The cover story was as follows:
Your friend has periodically been suffering

Table 1. Verbal probabilities used in the experiment.
Verbal probabilities
Mpeak SDpeak
positive phrases
It is almost certain that *
0.957 0.037
There is a good chance that *
0.779 0.126
It is possible that *
0.418 0.167
It is likely that *
0.540 0.164
There is a small possibility that *
0.346 0.129
There is some possibility that *
0.232 0.116
There is a slight hope that *
0.121 0.115
There is a tiny hope that *
0.074 0.097
negative phrases
There are minor concerns that *
0.602 0.167
It is quite doubtful that *
0.494 0.188
It is not certain that *
0.532 0.165
It is uncertain whether *
0.466 0.178
It is quite unlikely that *
0.433 0.141
There is little hope that *
0.177 0.088
It is unlikely that *
0.137 0.103
It is almost impossible that *
0.027 0.038
*(the treatment will be helpful in that case.)

559

from migraine headaches, and is now
considering a new method of treatment based
on acupuncture. The treatment is rather costly
and long-lasting. The friend asks if you think
the friend should give it a try. Fortunately, you
happen to know a physician with good
knowledge of migraine treatment, whom you
can ask for advice.
Participants were presented with a verbal probability by the
physician (e.g., “It is likely that the treatment will be helpful
in that case.”). Considering this information, participants
were asked to rate how much they would recommend that
their friend try this treatment, using a scale that was labeled
"do not recommend at all" on the far left and "recommend
very much" on the far right. This rating scale contained 101
points (0 - 100)2.
We also measured membership function of verbal
probabilities based on Budescu, Karelitz, and Wallsten
(2003). Participants were presented with a single verbal
probability and 11 probability values (1%, 10%, 20%, ...,
90%, and 99%) simultaneously and asked to rate the degree
(i.e., membership value) to which the verbal probability
describes each probability, using a scale that was labeled
"not at all" on the far left and "absolutely" on the far right.
Therefore, this task measures the degree of certainty
attributed to a verbal probability. This rating was recorded
with 101 points (0-100).
For these two tasks, we used eight positive and eight
negative phrases based on Honda and Yamagishi (2017).
Table 1 shows the sixteen phrases used in the experiment.
We conducted the two tasks individually using a
computer. In both tasks, a single phrase was randomly
presented and participants answered the question. In the
decision task, participants answered the question for each
phrase once. When measuring membership function,
participants answered the question for each phrase twice.

between the mean degrees of certainty for phrases (peaks of
the membership function) and decision ratings for 8 positive
and 8 negative phrases. As is apparent, even though positive
and negative phrases were perceived to be analogous in the
degree of certainty, decision ratings differed such that
participants tended to answer with higher ratings for
positive phrases. Therefore, the findings of Teigen and Brun
(1999) were essentially replicated in the present study.
Model-based analyses for individual data Next, we
analyzed the individual data using the DbBS model. In our
DbBS model, we assumed that subjective value of certainty
conveyed by a phrase corresponds to the CDF in the beta
distribution. Therefore, we estimated two parameters (α and
β) of the beta distribution whose CDF best explains the
decision ratings. The two parameters were estimated by a
grid search in the range of 0.1 and 10, with increments of
0.1. That is, we estimated the parameter using 10000 sets.
The parameter set with which the model showed the highest
r2 between model predictions and decision data was
regarded as the best model. We searched the best parameter
sets for positive and negative phrases, respectively, for each
participant.
We found that the DbBS model generally explained the
observed decisions well. The medians of r2s between model
predictions and observed data for 60 participants were 0.77
and 0.66 for positive and negative phrases, respectively. In
the following analyses, when the model fittings in both
positive and negative phrases for a participant showed more
than 0.3 in r2, we used her/his data. With this criterion, we
used data from 45 out of 60 participants (75.0%). Figure 3
shows five examples of decision ratings and model fittings
for positive and negative phrases.

Results and discussion
Numerical representation of verbal probabilities
According to Wallsten, Budescu, Rapoport, Zwick, and
Forsyth (1986), we assumed that the degree of certainty
attributed to a verbal probability could be represented with a
membership function. Peak (the probability with the highest
membership value) is one of the most discriminative
features of membership functions (Budescu et al., 2003).
Accordingly, we assumed that the peak of the membership
function represented the degree of certainty for a verbal
probability felt by a participant. Since participants rated
membership values twice for each phrase, the mean of the
membership values was regarded as the membership value
for the phrase. Table 1 shows means and SDs of peaks for
16 phrases.
Decision ratings for aggregated data First, we examined
the aggregated data. Figure 2 shows the relationship

Figure 2. Relationship between subjective degree of
certainty for phrases (peak of the membership function)
and decision rating.

2

In the following analyses, the ratings were mapped onto 0-1
scale.

560

Figure 3. Examples of observed decision rating (points) and model fitting (line) for five participants. (A) shows data for
positive phrases. (B) shows data for negative phrases.

Figure 4. Summaries of model-based analyses. (A) Scree plot for within-cluster sum of squares (WSS) in K-Means
clustering. (B) Three clusters on decision sample. The black line denotes mean of cluster. The grey line denotes individual
data. (C), (D), and (E) show distributions of statistics (mean, entropy, and skewness) in each cluster. (F) Proportions of
data in positive and negative phrases that were categorized into each cluster.
Next, we examined participants' memory samples in
detail with the following procedures. First, we clustered
shapes of beta distributions using probability densities. In
particular, patterns of probability densities3 for 45 (number

of participants) * 2 (positive and negative phrases) = 90 data
sets were clustered using the K-Means method. We used
scree plots for the within-cluster sum of squares (WSS) for
each cluster in order to determine the number of clusters
(see Figure 4(A)). We adopted three clusters for the
following two reasons. Firstly, the reduction of WSS was
relatively sharp with up to three clusters. Secondly, since

3

In this analysis, we used density values for 99 probabilities
(1%, 2%, 3%, …, 97%, 98%, and 99%).

561

References

there were at least 13 data for every cluster, we can assume
that each cluster does not necessarily represent rare memory
samples.
Figure 4 (B) shows three clusters of memory samples.
The black line denotes mean of cluster, and the grey line
denotes individual data. Using individual data, we
calculated the mean, entropy, and skewness. Figure 5 (C),
(D), and (E) show distributions of these statistics in each
cluster. Figure 4 (F) shows the proportions of data that were
categorized into one of the three clusters by positive or
negative phrase. The decision patterns were explained with
the different assumption between positive and negative
phrases. When presented with positive phrases, decision
patterns were well explained with the assumption that
participants referred to memory samples with low
probability (see cluster 1 in Figure 4). In contrast, for the
negative phrases, decision patterns were explained under the
assumption that participants referred to samples with high
probability (see clusters 2 and 3 in Figure 4).
Taken together, we found that the DbBS model generally
explained decisions based on verbal probabilities. It was
also found that decision patterns were well explained under
the different assumptions between positive and negative
phrases. For positive (negative) phrases, decision patterns
were well explained under the assumption that participants
referred to memory samples with low (high) probability.
Therefore, our hypothesis was corroborated.

Brown, G., & Matthews, W. (2011). Decision by Sampling
and Memory Distinctiveness: Range Effects from RankBased Models of Judgment and Choice. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2, 299.
Budescu, D. V, Karelitz, T. M., & Wallsten, T. S. (2003).
Predicting the directionality of probability words from
their membership functions. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 16, 159–180.
Honda, H., & Matsuka, T. (2014). On the role of rarity
information in speakers’ choice of frame. Memory and
Cognition, 42, 768–779.
Honda, H., & Yamagishi, K. (2017). Communicative
functions of directional verbal probabilities: Speaker’s
choice, listener’s inference, and reference points. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70, 21412158
McKenzie, C. M., & Nelson, J. (2003). What a speaker’s
choice of frame reveals: Reference points, frame selection,
and framing effects. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10,
596–602.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (2006). Information
leakage from logically equivalent frames. Cognition, 101,
467–494.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (2008). Framing effects and
rationality. In N. Chater & M. Oaksford (Eds.), The
probabilistic mind: Prospects for Bayesian cognitive
science (pp. 79–96). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stewart, N. (2009). Decision by sampling: The role of the
decision environment in risky choice. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62, 1041–1062.
Stewart, N., Chater, N., & Brown, G. D. A. (2006).
Decision by sampling. Cognitive Psychology, 53, 1–26.
Stewart, N., Chater, N., Stott, H. P., & Reimers, S. (2003).
Prospect relativity: How choice options influence decision
under risk. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
132, 23–46.
Stewart, N., Reimers, S., & Harris, A. J. L. (2014). On the
origin of utility, weighting, and discounting functions:
How they get their shapes and how to change their shapes.
Management Science, 61, 687–705.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1995). Yes, but it is uncertain:
Direction and communicative intention of verbal
probabilistic terms. Acta Psychologica, 88, 233–258.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (1999). The Directionality of
Verbal Probability Expressions: Effects on Decisions,
Predictions, and Probabilistic Reasoning. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 80, 155–190.
Teigen, K. H., & Brun, W. (2003). Verbal probabilities: a
question of frame? Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 16, 53–72.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D. V, Rapoport, A., Zwick, R., &
Forsyth, B. (1986). Measuring the vague meanings of
probability terms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 115, 348–365.

General discussion
In the present study, we examined decisions based on verbal
probabilities. Particularly, we examined whether the DbBS
model explained the decision processes. We found that the
DbBS model explained the decision patterns well.
Observed differences in memory samples were essentially
in accord with our hypotheses based on previous findings
about the speaker’s choice of directionality in
communication (Honda & Yamagishi, 2017). As previously
noted, decisions affected by directionality seem like
evidence of decision bias because people make different
decisions even when positive and negative phrases convey
analogous probabilities. Our present findings answer the
question, “Why are people affected by directionality when
making decisions?” Our answer is: people take into account
the information conveyed by the selected directionality, and
as a result refer to different memory samples. Therefore,
decisions affected by directionality are not examples of
decision bias, but decisions according to different memory
samples.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (A, 16H01725; B, 25280049; B, 16H02835),
Innovative Areas (26118002; 16H06569), and Young
Scientists (B, 16K16070).

562

