Didn’t know, or didn’t show? Preschoolers consider epistemic state and degree of
omission when evaluating teachers
Ilona Bass (ilona.m.bass@rutgers.edu)1 , Elizabeth Bonawitz (elizabeth.bonawitz@rutgers.edu)1 ,
Hyowon Gweon (hyo@stanford.edu)2
1
2

Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract

teacher (Gweon & Asaba, in press). Thus by the preschool
years, children expect teachers to be accurate and fully informative, and penalize those who violate these expectations.
This early-emerging sensitivity to teacher informativeness
raises important questions about how children make these
evaluations: What are the representations and inferences that
allow children to distinguish helpful and less helpful teachers? One possibility is that children learn sets of rules and
exceptions that allow them to recognize and avoid undesirable teachers. Prior findings suggest that young children
are biased towards trusting adult informants, and may even
continue to trust them after discovering their unreliability
(Jaswal, Croft, Setia, & Cole, 2010). Children may also acquire a set of rules akin to Gricean Maxims (Grice, 1975),
which prescribe that a helpful, cooperative communicator
should provide accurate and relevant information in the right
amount. If children are simply using learned heuristics or
rules to evaluate informants, it may be difficult for them to
make nuanced, context-specific judgments of informant quality, particularly in novel situations. However, another possibility is that these evaluations arise from sophisticated inferences about teacher informativeness; by understanding how
unobservable mental states of others (e.g., informants’ intent
or knowledge) can influence their teaching behaviors, children can draw much more flexible and accurate informant
evaluations even in novel contexts.
Previous work on Theory of Mind and moral reasoning
suggests that young children readily interpret others’ observable actions in light of their unobservable mental states: They
evaluate others’ actions based on their outcomes and on the
actor’s underlying intent, exonerating accidental harms (e.g.,
Cushman, Sheketoff, Wharton, & Carey, 2013; Wellman,
Cross, & Watson, 2001; Nelson, 1980; Baird & Astington,
2004). Furthermore, even toddlers exonerate an agent who refused to help another person when the agent was incompetent
and thus unable to help the requester (Jara-Ettinger, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2015). Given prior work on children’s ability to consider others’ mental states in evaluating others, here
we ask whether children can consider informants’ knowledge
and their competence in evaluating their teaching.
Prior computational work describes teacher-learner interactions as based on a set of mutually constraining inferences.
The teacher considers the learner’s knowledge to select the
evidence that would maximally increase the learner’s belief
in the correct hypothesis. The learner updates his beliefs with
the assumption that the teacher is knowledgeable and intends

The ability to recognize and evaluate reliable informants is a
critical skill for effective social learning. Building on prior
work showing children’s sensitivity to informants who omit
relevant information, here we asked whether children’s teacher
evaluations incorporate information about 1) the epistemic
state of the teacher, and 2) the amount and value of information
taught. Preschool-aged children rated informants who taught
learners about a novel toy with four functions; we systematically varied the number and value of functions the teachers
knew and taught. Our results indicate that children exonerated unintentional omissions of teachers who had incomplete
knowledge, and provided graded ratings based on the degree of
omission. These findings are consistent with the predictions of
prior computational work, and suggest that the ability to reason
about others’ knowledge plays an important role in children’s
inferences about others’ efficacy as informants.
Keywords: cognitive development, pedagogy, social learning

Introduction
Young children rely heavily on others for their learning. Although children readily explore and learn from their own experience (Schulz, 2012; Bonawitz, van Schijndel, Friel, &
Schulz, 2012; Stahl & Feigenson, 2015), pedagogy is a powerful, effective way to learn about the world. Recent research
suggests that children do more than simply absorb and accumulate information from others; they actively modulate their
inferences depending on the social context (Bonawitz et al.,
2011), and selectively approach others to request information when help is needed (Gweon & Schulz, 2011; Goupil,
Romand-Monnier, & Kouider, 2016). However, learning
from pedagogy comes with an inherent hazard: being misinformed. Informants may vary in quality – some may be
wrong, ignorant, or even deceptive. Thus, the ability to detect and evaluate unhelpful informants is critical for accurate
learning. How do young children face this challenge?
Prior research has found that children avoid learning from
informants who provide inaccurate information (e.g., Birch,
Vauthier, & Bloom, 2008; Jaswal & Neely, 2006; Koenig,
Clément, & Harris, 2004; Pasquini, Corriveau, Koenig, &
Harris, 2007). Recent studies further suggest that young children recognize and evaluate a more subtle form of misinformation: providing accurate yet insufficient evidence. Given
a teacher who presented one function on a toy, children rated
the teacher as more helpful when the toy only had one function than when it had four (i.e., when the teacher omitted 3 of
the 4 functions; Gweon, Pelton, Konopka, & Schulz, 2014a;
Gweon & Asaba, in press). Children as young as four show
this sensitivity, although they successfully evaluate underinformative teachers only after observing a fully informative

105

to provide the best information for the learner (Shafto, Goodman, & Frank, 2012; Shafto, Goodman, & Griffiths, 2014).
In this framework, a teacher can be evaluated based on how
she samples information for the learner, and what the learner
can infer from the information.
This allows us to consider two key hypotheses about what
might influence children’s evaluations of teachers. Consider
a teacher demonstrating a device with four functions (some
interesting, some humdrum) to a naı̈ve learner. How might
a rational observer evaluate the teacher, based on what she
demonstrates? First, we might predict that an evaluation of an
informant is sensitive to the epistemic state of that informant.
For example, consider two teachers, each of whom demonstrates just one of the four functions. One teacher knows that
the device has four functions, but the other only knows about
the one function she demonstrated. While the learner only
learns about one of the four functions in both cases, we might
be more inclined to pardon the teacher who didn’t know about
the additional functions: The ignorant teacher demonstrated
everything she knew, and may thus be considered a better
teacher than the knowledgeable informant who omitted information. We refer to this as the epistemic pardon hypothesis.
Our second hypothesis pertains to the quality of the taught
information. A teacher who knows all four functions of a
device will be most helpful if she demonstrates all four, and
least helpful if she demonstrates none. Extending this reasoning to partial demonstrations, we would predict evaluations
to be modulated by the degree of omission: Even when two
teachers both omit information, a teacher who demonstrates
two functions is still better than someone who showed just
one. Further, if the functions differ in their value (e.g., how
interesting they are), we might also expect an effect of the
value of demonstrated functions: A teacher who demonstrates
two high-value functions and omits two low-value functions
would be better than someone who does the opposite. We refer to these predictions as the quality-of-omission hypothesis.
Recent computational work has formalized the two hypotheses posited above, and shown that adults’ evaluations
of various teachers are highly consistent with these hypotheses (Bass, Hawthorne-Madell, Goodman, & Gweon, 2015).
When adults evaluate informant quality, they readily incorporate information about a teacher’s epistemic state, as well
as the amount and the value of taught information. Adults’
informant evaluations are thus likely based on abstract representations of others’ minds rather than a set of rules that
dictate what a teacher should or should not do.
Some prior work suggests that children’s evaluations of
teachers also depend on abstract representations of knowledge states rather than simple heuristics. For instance, children show increased exploration of a toy following a teacher’s
demonstration of that toy if the teacher had previously committed a sin of omission (Gweon et al., 2014a), suggesting
that children use concrete demonstrations to infer abstract
qualities of teachers’ quality, and adjust their inferences accordingly. Children also understand that omission isn’t al-

ways bad: Given a toy with 20 buttons but only 3 that are
functional, children prefer a teacher who shows just the 3
functional buttons (as opposed to the one who additionally
shows the 17 inert buttons), if the learner already expects
only a few of the buttons to work (Gweon, Shafto, & Schulz,
2014b). Children thus readily consider learners’ epistemic
states to evaluate teacher helpfulness, and even judge omission as beneficial when partial demonstration is sufficient.
However, these studies leave open a critical question: Can
children consider the teacher’s epistemic state in evaluating
the helpfulness of their teaching? Going beyond recognizing
that teachers might not know everything (Jaswal & Neely,
2006), can children actually use this information to exonerate under-informative pedagogy? Because children are surrounded by many adults who are much more knowledgeable
than they are, this may be a particularly challenging inference
for young children.

Preschoolers’ Evaluations of Teachers
In the current study, we investigate whether preschool-aged
children’s teacher evaluations reflect the underlying representations of teachers’ knowledge and competence; in particular, we ask whether each of our two hypotheses (epistemic
pardon, and quality-of-omission) – both of which are consistent with adults’ teacher evaluations (Bass et al., 2015) –
are also consistent with children’s ratings of teacher quality.
We showed children videos of five different informants who
taught learners about a novel toy with four functions. We
systematically varied the number and value of functions that
the teachers knew and taught, and randomized the order in
which the five teachers were seen with one caveat: All children first saw the teacher who knew and taught all four of the
toy’s functions, and were told that this was an example of excellent teaching. Our decision to anchor children’s responses
in this way was motivated by prior findings: First, children
reliably rate teachers highly when they provide true and complete information (e.g., Gweon et al., 2014a; Koenig & Harris, 2005); second, although four- and five-year-olds’ ability
to evaluate under-informative teachers is limited, seeing an
example of a fully informative teacher first allows them to
successfully evaluate under-informative teachers (Gweon &
Asaba, in press). These results suggest that such contextual
support helps children attend more closely to dimensions of
teacher informativeness. Since we are interested in children’s
ratings of several under-informative teachers relative to each
other (and not to the fully informative teacher), we anchored
children’s ratings of this ideal teacher at the top of the scale.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-four children (M age = 60 months, range = 49 − 72
months; 15 females) were tested at local preschools.

Materials
Rating Scale Children used a 0 to 20 point rating scale to
evaluate teachers. Children placed a small circular magnet on

106

Figure 1: All children saw and rated the KA TA teacher first. The order of the remaining four test trials was counterbalanced
across children. Memory cues were adhered to the rating scale as children provided their ratings.
All; KA THH, where she Knew All and Taught 2 Highvalue functions; KA TLL, in which she Knew All and Taught
2 Low-value functions; KA TL, where she Knew All and
Taught 1 Low-value function (“beep”); and KL TL, where
she Knew 1 Low-value function (“beep”) and taught it.
Memory Cues To help children recall precisely what each
teacher knew and taught, we created small cards that depicted
screenshots of the Exploration and Teaching phases from the
teaching videos. Small arrows with adhesive backs were attached to each memory cue (see Figure 1).

the scale to indicate how good they thought a teacher was.
Novel Toy The novel toy was a square pyramid covered in
blue felt with four colorful buttons, each corresponding to a
different function. Two functions were low-value: The toy
could beep, and it could make a static-like noise. The other
two functions were high-value: The toy could play clips of
two different children’s songs. The relative value of these
functions were validated in a separate group of 10 children
(M age = 66 months, range = 49 − 91 months), who were
asked to rate “how cool” each of the four functions were using
the rating scale described above. The two songs (M = 15.3,
SD = 3.1) were rated significantly higher than the beep and
the noise (M = 8.8, SD = 3.7; t(9) = 3.41, p = .008), with
no differences within the value pairs (p’s > .33).

Procedure
Frame Story & Rating Scale Training Children were told
that they would be meeting some people who were in teaching school; the experimenter needed the child’s help to figure
out how good the different teachers were so that she would
know how much more school the teachers needed. The experimenter then introduced the rating scale, and children were
briefly trained on how to use it to indicate teacher quality.
Children who failed this training did not proceed to the main
task and were dropped from analysis (see Results).
Novel Toy Next, the experimenter introduced the novel toy,
and encouraged children to try to figure out how it worked.
After the child successfully pressed all four buttons, the experimenter noted that they now knew all about the toy. Children were then told that the other day, the teachers from the
school had taught some new students about how the novel toy
worked, and it was the child’s job to watch them teach about
the toy and figure out how good each teacher was at teaching.
Teacher Evaluations All children were first shown the
KA TA condition. Before watching the video, children were
told that this teacher was all done with school, and was therefore already a good teacher. After watching the first video,
children were shown the memory cue for the KA TA teacher,

Teaching Videos Teaching videos were presented on a 15inch MacBook Pro, and comprised two main phases. In the
Exploration phase, the teacher sat down at a table on which
the novel toy was placed and explored the toy’s functions;
then, a naı̈ve learner suddenly entered the room, startling the
teacher out of her exploration, and asked her to show him how
the toy worked. In the Teaching phase, the teacher demonstrated to the learner some subset of the functions she had
discovered during the exploration phase (details follow), after
which she said, “That’s how this toy works!” thereby clearly
ending the demonstration.
There were five versions of the teaching videos, which
varied based on the number and value of the functions that
the teacher discovered and taught. In the Exploration phase,
the teacher either discovered 1) all four functions, or 2) just
the low-value “beep” function before the learner entered the
room. In the Teaching phase, the teacher either taught: 1)
all four functions, 2) both high-value functions, 3) both lowvalue functions, or 4) just one low-value function (“beep”).
Crossing these two variables yielded five possible teaching
scenarios: KA TA, in which the teacher Knew All and Taught

107

and were asked to provide a rating. Children who did not
place the marker near the top of the rating scale were reminded that this teacher was already done with school. The
experimenter adhered the memory cue’s arrow to the rating
scale where the child had placed the marker.
Children were then shown the remaining four teachers
who, they were reminded, were still in teaching school; these
constituted the four test trials. The order in which these four
teaching scenarios were presented was completely counterbalanced, yielding 24 different orders. While the actors in
the videos and the test conditions were fully counterbalanced
with respect to each other, such that any potential effects of
teaching condition could not be explained by personal characteristics of the actors, the order of the actors was always the
same (e.g., “Liz” was always the first teacher, even though the
first test condition varied between participants). After watching each video, children were shown the memory cue for the
teacher they had just seen, and were asked to provide a rating. The experimenter adhered the memory cue’s arrow to
the rating scale where the child had placed the marker. Children who merely placed each teacher on the scale in the order
of presentation (from most helpful to least helpful) were excluded from analysis. See Figure 1 for a schematic of the
procedure for teacher evaluations.

Figure 2: Average ratings for the KA TA reference teacher
and all four test conditions. Children rated the teacher who
knew only one function (KL TL) higher than the teacher who
knew all but taught one (KA TL), pardoning omission when
it occurred for epistemic reasons. Children also showed sensitivity to the degree of omission, rating the teacher who
demonstrated two low-value functions (KA TLL) as better
than the teacher who demonstrated one (KA TL).
providing additional evidence that children considered teachers’ epistemic states when making their evaluations, and were
even able to exonerate bad teaching when it was explained by
limited knowledge.

Results
Prior to analysis, we dropped children who did not pass the
rating scale training (N = 1), placed teachers in descending
order on the rating scale as they saw them (N = 7), or gave all
teachers the same rating (N = 1). One additional child did not
want to continue playing after the first KA TA trial. Our final
sample therefore consisted of 24 children (M age = 60 months,
range = 49 − 72 months; 12 females).
We first asked whether children differentiated between the
four teachers in the test trials. An omnibus repeated-measures
ANOVA on children’s ratings in these four trials revealed a
significant main effect of condition (F(3, 69) = 3.50, p =
.020, ηp 2 = .132; see Figure 2). We therefore conducted followup analyses to investigate our two stated hypotheses.

Quality-of-Omission Hypothesis
We explored the effect of the degree of teachers’ omission
of information on children’s ratings with a paired-samples ttest, comparing the KA TLL condition to the KA TL condition (varying the number of functions taught while holding
epistemic state and value constant). We again found significant differences (t(23) = 2.54, p = .019, ηp 2 = .218): Children gave higher ratings to the teacher who demonstrated two
low-value functions (M = 11.9, SD = 6.4) than the teacher
who demonstrated just one low-value function (M = 7.8,
SD = 5.4). As before, we also compared the proportion
of children who rated the KA TLL teacher higher than the
KA TL teacher to chance. This binomial test neared significance (p = .076 one-tailed), with 67% of children rating the
KA TLL teacher higher than the KA TL teacher.
Finally, we compared the KA TLL teacher to the KA THH
teacher to examine the effect of information value on children’s ratings. This paired-samples t-test was not significant
(p = .874): Children did not differentiate between teachers
who taught two high-value (M = 12.1, SD = 5.2) versus two
low-value (M = 11.9, SD = 6.4) functions. Possible explanations for this null result follow in the discussion.1

Epistemic Pardon Hypothesis
To investigate the effect of the teacher’s epistemic state on
children’s ratings, we compared the KA TL condition to the
KL TL condition, thereby holding constant what the teacher
taught and only varying what she knew. A paired-samples
t-test revealed significant differences between the ratings of
these two teachers (t(23) = 2.58, p = .017, ηp 2 = .224), with
children giving higher ratings to the teacher who knew only
one function (M = 11.5, SD = 5.7) than the teacher who knew
all four functions but taught just one (M = 7.8, SD = 5.4).
We also looked at the number of children who placed the
KL TL teacher higher than the KA TL teacher on the rating
scale. Seventy-one percent of participants rated the KL TL
teacher higher than the KA TL teacher; this proportion differed significantly from chance (50%, p = .032 one-tailed),

1 In

an ongoing replication with adults, we are finding the same
pattern of results as we did with children: Adults’ ratings are influenced by the informant’s knowledge state and the degree of information omission, but not by the value of the functions taught.

108

Discussion

in adults’ teacher evaluations, and is consistent with Bayesian
models of pedagogical reasoning (e.g., Bass et al., 2015). Are
there circumstances under which under-informative teaching
can be fully exonerated? In ongoing work, we are exploring whether the degree to which children exonerate underinformative teachers is modulated by contexts that explain
away the teacher’s failure to discover relevant functions and
resultant lack of knowledge (e.g., a broken toy).

Inspired by computational models of pedagogy and prior behavioral work with adults (e.g., Shafto et al., 2014; Bass et
al., 2015), here we investigated how children make nuanced
evaluations of helpful and unhelpful teachers; specifically, we
asked whether children 1) exonerate partial teaching based on
the teacher’s epistemic state, and 2) provide graded evaluations based on the amount and value of information taught.
We found that, like adults, preschoolers were sensitive to
teachers’ epistemic states, and accordingly pardoned informants who provided less information when teaching from
limited knowledge. Children’s ratings were also sensitive to
the amount (but not the value) of information taught.
The results from our epistemic comparisons extend prior
work showing that children prefer truthful teachers (Koenig
et al., 2004; Koenig & Harris, 2005; Jaswal & Neely, 2006),
and fully informative teachers (Gweon et al., 2014a; Gweon
& Asaba, in press). They are also consistent with more recent
findings on children’s ability to consider learners’ epistemic
states (Gweon et al., 2014b) in evaluating teachers. However, our findings are somewhat surprising in light of the idea
that many explicit Theory of Mind (ToM) skills are just developing between the ages of three and five (Wellman et al.,
2001). Without explicit information about what the teacher
knew, preschoolers were able to 1) infer her epistemic state
by observing her exploration, and 2) use this representation
to pardon her “sin of omission”.
This finding thus raises important questions about the relationship between the development of ToM reasoning and
social evaluation in pedagogical contexts. If ToM does in
fact modulate children’s teacher evaluations, children may
become more adept at selecting from whom to learn throughout their preschool years. Indeed, Jaswal et al. (2010) found
that three-year-olds are almost indiscriminately trusting of
informants, while older children are more wary of possible
misinformation. It would be interesting to ask whether children who are better at ToM reasoning also consider teachers’
epistemic states more readily, leading them to be more willing than children with less proficient ToM abilities to exonerate teachers who were unintentionally under-informative.
Critically, given recent findings on the relationship between
ToM and children’s own teaching skills (Bass et al., in press),
such results would support important links between theory of
mind, pedagogical skill, and teacher evaluations.
Note that although children did exonerate the KL TL
teacher relative to the KA TL teacher, no under-informative
teacher was rated as favorably as the informant who knew and
taught all four of the toy’s functions. Intuitively, this makes
sense: Children’s ratings of an informant’s helpfulness will
reflect, among other things, how well a learner learned as
a consequence of the informant’s teaching. Thus while the
KL TL teacher did the best she could given what she knew,
she was still not as good of a teacher as the KA TA teacher
because she failed to discover information that could have
been useful for the learner. This intuition also naturally arises

Our results also show that children did not penalize all
omissions equally. Even though all teachers were underinformative, children were sensitive to the “degree of omission,” giving lower evaluations to teachers who provided less
information. This extends prior work showing that children
distinguish fully informative teachers from those who were
vastly under-informative (Gweon et al., 2014a; Gweon &
Asaba, in press), and further suggests that children’s evaluations of under-informative teachers are based on a more
nuanced understanding of teachers’ behaviors than a simple
binary judgment. This leaves open questions about the nature
of the mechanisms that underlie sensitivity to informant quality more generally: How early do they emerge? What other
factors can children incorporate into their informant evaluations, and how do these change as children develop?
Our work adds to the growing body of literature on children’s ability to draw pragmatic inferences from others’ behaviors in both verbal and nonverbal communication. Recent work has demonstrated intriguing parallels between children’s evaluations of pedagogical informants and their ability
to draw scalar implicature (Gweon & Asaba, in press). Given
prior work on scalar implicature that reveals children’s ability
to evaluate infelicitous uses of quantifiers (Barner, Brooks, &
Bale, 2011; Katsos & Bishop, 2011), our results further suggest that children as young as four might have the necessary
prerequisites for considering the “degree of sin” in infelicitous scalar expressions (e.g., it is worse to say that the boy
drank “a bit” of milk than to say he drank “some” milk, when
really he drank almost all the milk in the cup).
Finally, we note that children’s ratings in the current study
were not moderated by the value of the demonstrated functions: Children rated a teacher who chose to show the
two lower-value functions just as highly as the teacher who
showed two higher-value functions. These results differ from
adults’ sensitivity to information value in a highly similar
paradigm (Bass et al., 2015). There are several possible explanations for this null finding. First, the relative value of the
toy’s functions in our study may not have been salient enough
to elicit this difference. While we did validate the functions’
values in a separate group of participants, those children were
explicitly asked to compare and consider the functions’ “coolness”; for children in the current study, these subtle value differences may not have been conspicuous enough to differentiate teachers who taught the songs versus the noises. A second
possibility is that the ability to consider the value of information in service of making pedagogical evaluations does not
emerge until later in development. This would suggest that

109

although children show remarkable ability in evaluating others, there may be other important factors that young children
fail to consider. Third, it is possible that children are capable of considering information value (and that the functions’
values were sufficiently salient in our task), but that children
spontaneously attributed a reason for why the informant selected these functions; for instance, perhaps the low-value
teacher really liked those functions, or thought they would
be more important for the learner to know. Future work could
tease apart these hypotheses to identify the role of information value in children’s informant evaluations.
As we have discussed, there are many unanswered questions concerning the nature of children’s reasoning about pedagogical informants that our results do not directly address.
Nevertheless, along with prior work, our findings suggest
that young children do have abstract representations of what
it means to be a good teacher. Understanding the development of children’s epistemic trust and its relationship to their
growing ability to reason about others’ minds will provide
further insight into the cognitive mechanisms that support the
uniquely human abilities to learn from and teach others.

Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole
& J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Speech acts
(Vol. 3, pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Gweon, H., & Asaba, M. (in press). Order matters: Childrens evaluation of under-informative teachers depends on
context. Child Dev.
Gweon, H., Pelton, H., Konopka, J., & Schulz, L. (2014a).
Sins of omission: Children selectively explore when teachers are under-informative. Cognition, 132(3), 335–341.
Gweon, H., & Schulz, L. (2011). 16-month-olds rationally
infer causes of failed actions. Science, 332(6037), 1524.
Gweon, H., Shafto, P., & Schulz, L. (2014b). Children consider prior knowledge and the cost of information both in
learning from and teaching others. Proc 36th Cogn Sci Soc.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Tenenbaum, J., & Schulz, L. (2015). Not so
innocent: Toddlers’ inferences about costs and culpability.
Psychol Sci, 26(5), 633–640.
Jaswal, V., Croft, A., Setia, A., & Cole, C. (2010). Young
children have a specific, highly robust bias to trust testimony. Psychol Sci, 21, 1541–1547.
Jaswal, V., & Neely, L. (2006). Adults don’t always know
best: Preschoolers use past reliability over age when learning new words. Psychol Sci, 17(9), 757-758.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. (2011, July). Pragmatic tolerance:
Implications for the acquisition of informativeness and implicature. Cognition, 120(1), 67–81.
Koenig, M., Clément, F., & Harris, P. (2004). Trust in testimony: Children’s use of true and false statements. Psychol
Sci, 15(10), 694–698.
Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2005). Preschoolers mistrust ignorant and inaccurate speakers. Child Dev, 76(6), 1261–
1277.
Nelson, S. A. (1980). Factors influencing young children’s
use of motives and outcomes as moral criteria. Child Dev,
51(3), 823–829.
Pasquini, E., Corriveau, K., Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2007).
Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy of informants.
Dev Psychol, 43(5), 1216–1226.
Schulz, L. (2012). The origins of inquiry: Inductive inference
and exploration in early childhood. Trends Cogn Sci, 16(7),
382–389.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N., & Frank, M. (2012). Learning from
others: The consequences of psychological reasoning for
human learning. Perspect Psychol Sci, 7(4), 341–351.
Shafto, P., Goodman, N., & Griffiths, T. (2014). A rational
account of pedagogical reasoning: Teaching by, and learning from, examples. Cogn Psychol, 71, 55–89.
Stahl, A., & Feigenson, L. (2015). Observing the unexpected enhances infants’ learning and exploration. Science,
348(6230), 91–94.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Dev, 72(3), 655–684.

References
Baird, J. A., & Astington, J. W. (2004). The role of mental
state understanding in the development of moral cognition
and moral action. New Dir Child Adolesc Dev, 2004(103),
37–49.
Barner, D., Brooks, N., & Bale, A. (2011). Accessing the unsaid: The role of scalar alternatives in children’s pragmatic
inference. Cognition, 118(1), 84–93.
Bass, I., Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Ramarajan, D., Gopnik, A.,
& Wellman, H. (in press). I know what you need to know:
Children’s developing theory of mind and pedagogical evidence selection. Proc 39th Cogn Sci Soc.
Bass, I., Hawthorne-Madell, D., Goodman, N., & Gweon,
H. (2015). Not by number alone: The effect of teachers’
knowledge and its value in evaluating “sins of omission”.
Proc 37th Cogn Sci Soc.
Birch, S., Vauthier, S., & Bloom, P. (2008). Three- and
four-year-olds spontaneously use others’ past performance
to guide their learning. Cognition, 107(3), 1018–1034.
Bonawitz, E., Shafto, P., Gweon, H., Goodman, N., Spelke,
E., & Schulz, L. (2011). The double-edged sword of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous exploration and discovery. Cognition, 120(3), 322–330.
Bonawitz, E., van Schijndel, T., Friel, D., & Schulz, L.
(2012). Children balance theories and evidence in exploration, explanation, and learning. Cogn Psychol, 64(4),
215–234.
Cushman, F., Sheketoff, R., Wharton, S., & Carey, S. (2013,
April). The development of intent-based moral judgment.
Cognition, 127(1), 6–21.
Goupil, L., Romand-Monnier, M., & Kouider, S. (2016). Infants ask for help when they know they don’t know. PNAS,
113(13), 3492–3496.

110

