Different processes for reading words learned before and after onset of literacy
Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Ya-Ning Chang (y.chang5@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YF, UK

Stephen Welbourne (stephen.welbourne@googlemail.com)
Neuroscience and Aphasia Research Unit (NARU), University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK
Abstract

Early acquired words are learned when the neural network
supporting the mappings among print, sound and meaning is
plastic and able to acquire mappings effectively. Mappings
for later acquired words are required to fit around the
previously learned mappings, when the neural network has
lower plasticity, resulting in prioritisation for early over later
acquired words. Such AoA effects are predicted to be
greater for arbitrary mappings, such as between meaning
and sound, rather than for (quasi-)regular mappings such as
between print and sound, because learning arbitrary
mappings is more computationally intensive and therefore
affected more by reduced plasticity (Lambon Ralph &
Ehsan, 2006). However, AoA effects ought still to be
observed even for regular mappings because of the smaller,
but still present, effect of reducing plasticity in learning the
mappings.
These predictions have been supported by meta-analyses
of behavioural studies (Brysbaert & Ghyselinck, 2006)
which have investigated AoA effects for naming and for
lexical decision. It is generally assumed that for naming,
semantic representations of words are minimally involved in
producing the phonological form of a word from its
orthographic form (Harm & Seidenberg, 1999). However,
lexical decision appears to implicate semantic
representations to a greater degree (Chang et al., 2016;
Plaut, 1997), in that semantic properties of words, such as
imageability or concreteness, account for more variance in
lexical decision or picture naming responses and little for
written word naming (Balota et al., 2004; Catling &
Johnston, 2009). Brysbaert and Ghyselinck (2006) showed
that AoA effects were much greater for tasks involving
semantics, including lexical decision, than for tasks
involving production of phonology (see also Cortese &
Khanna, 2007). However, the fact that AoA does still
account for some variance in naming indicates the effects of
plasticity in the quasi-regular print to sound mapping for
English (see Lambon Ralph and Ellis, 2000, and Monaghan
and Ellis, 2010, for computational illustrations of this).
Conversely, the size of the AoA effect can be used to
indicate the extent to which the pathways to and from
lexical semantics in the reading system are involved in
reading. If the AoA effect is large, then semantics is likely
to be involved, if the effect is small then semantics is less
likely to be involved. Chang et al. (2016) implemented a
triangle computational model of single word reading, and
varied the point at which words were presented to the
model, to simulate different AoA of words. For simulations
of naming, AoA had a significant effect, but for simulations

Learning to read has a substantial effect on the representations
of spoken and meaning forms of words. In this paper we
assess literacy effects beyond representational changes,
focusing on adaptations to the architecture of the reading
system that maps between these representations. We present a
connectionist model of reading that predicted distinct
processing of pre- and post-literacy acquired words. For
reading for meaning, words learned prior to literacy were
processed more indirectly via phonological representations,
whereas for post-literacy acquired words, processing was
more direct along the orthography to semantics pathway. This
more computationally intensive route was prioritised because
indirect phonology to semantics mappings were unavailable.
Such an effect was less apparent for naming, because learning
direct orthography to phonology mappings is less
computationally intensive. These results were confirmed in an
analysis of naming and lexical decision behavioural data. The
effect of literacy onset remains an observable artefact in adult
reading.
Keywords: literacy; age of acquisition; language
development; reading fluency; reading comprehension;
computational modelling.

Effects of literacy on reading
There are multiple influences on readers’ speed and
accuracy of reading, and these have been extensively
documented in the literature over the last 50 years of reading
research. For instance, higher-frequency words tend to be
accessed more quickly and accurately than lower-frequency
words, and early-acquired words tend to be responded to
faster and more accurately than later-acquired words,
referred to as an “age of acquisition” (AoA) effect
(Brysbaert, & Ghyselinck, 2006; Cortese & Khanna, 2007;
Juhasz, 2005; Monaghan & Ellis, 2002).
Theories of the origin of the AoA effect on reading are
two-fold. One view is that early acquired words result in
prioritised lexical semantic representations, because they
enter first of all into the lexical semantic associative
network, and subsequently learned words are then connected
to previously acquired words (Brysbaert & Ghyselinck,
2006). Analyses of semantic associations by Steyvers and
Tenenbaum (2005) confirmed that early acquired words do
have more words associated with them than later acquired
words, and they demonstrated that small-scale illustrative
versions of this growing semantic associative network could
prioritise early acquired words in semantic processing.
An alternative perspective is that AoA effects are instead
found in the mappings between representations, rather than
the representations themselves (Monaghan & Ellis, 2010).

811

of lexical decision, AoA accounted for a substantially larger
proportion of variance.
One absence from these theoretical and implemented
models of reading, however, is the role not only of AoA but
also of different modes by which words are acquired.
Literacy is known to have profound effects on language
processing, resulting in changes to phonological awareness
(Hulme, Bowyer-Crane, Carroll, Duff, & Snowling, 2012;
Morais, Cary, Alegria & Bertelson, 1979), changes to
phonological processing of words (Smith, Monaghan, &
Huettig, 2014), as well as semantic fluency (Kosmides,
Tsapkini, Folia, Vlahou, & Kiosseoglou, 2004), and even
visual processing (Szwed, Ventura, Querido, Cohen, &
Dehaene, 2012).
However, less studied are the potential effects of literacy
on the architecture of the reading system in terms of
pathways employed between different representations of
words. Prior to literacy, the learner acquires mappings
between sound and meaning representations of words,
through listening and comprehending words, and speaking
words for others’ comprehension. However, once the child
begins to learn to read for these already known words,
mappings will be generated from print to the stored sound
and meaning representations. But for new words, the print
form will be mapped onto newly acquired sound and
meaning representations, where the mappings between
sound and meaning are not available in advance.
In terms of the operation of the reading system, this
difference between pre-literacy and post-literacy acquired
words is likely to be profound. In the triangle model of
reading (Seidenberg & McClelland, 1989) there are two
routes by which a printed word can be pronounced. This can
occur directly, through learned mappings between print and
sound, or indirectly from print via semantics to sound (see
Figure 1). Similarly, for reading comprehension, the
mapping from print can be directly to meaning, or indirectly,
from print to sound to meaning. For pre-literacy acquired
words, the indirect route is more likely to be available,
because the sound to meaning routes are already acquired,
whereas for post-literacy words, the indirect route requires
two mappings to be acquired.
Furthermore, the properties of the mappings from print to
sound and meaning will also contribute to the extent to
which direct and indirect mappings are utilised. Regular
mappings, such as between print and sound in English, are
easier to acquire than arbitrary mappings, such as between
print and meaning. Thus, the direct route is more likely to be
prioritised for print to sound mappings than the indirect
route, and the indirect route is more likely to be prioritised
for print to meaning mappings than the direct route, because
the indirect route is more easily acquired, at least for words
acquired pre-literacy, where the sound to meaning mapping
is already in place in the language processing system.
Based on this theory, we predict that there is likely to be a
distinction between pre-literacy and post-literacy processing
of words’ print to meaning mappings, as in lexical decision.
Pre-literacy, the indirect route is more likely to have a

greater influence on processing. Post-literacy, the direct
route is likely to have a greater influence. Whereas for print
to sound mappings, as in word naming, we predict no
difference between pre- and post-literacy processing,
because both will be mapped via fast-acquired direct print to
sound mappings, which will have an equal influence on
reading.
In this paper, we first provide a computational test of the
extent to which the triangle model of reading predicts
different processing routes for words pre- and post-literacy.
We then test whether the predictions of the model are
observed in behavioural data on word naming and lexical
decision response times. For both the simulation and the
behavioural data, we use the size of the AoA effect as an
index of the extent to which direct mappings from
orthography to semantics are implicated in the reading
system. For naming, a larger AoA effect indicates greater
use of indirect mappings via semantics for reading tasks, for
lexical decision a larger AoA effect indicates greater use of
direct mappings from orthography, where arbitrary
mappings between orthography and semantics are
implicated. A smaller AoA effect for lexical decision
indicates that the indirect quasi-regular mapping from
orthography to phonology is being prioritised. It is the case
that mappings between phonology and semantics are also
arbitrary, but these mappings would exert a smaller AoA
effect than that observed for the newly acquired mappings
because they are intensively trained, and acquired earlier in
acquisition, thus reducing distinctions between words due to
greater plasticity of resources for early-learned mappings
(see e.g., Ellis & Lambon Ralph, 2000; Monaghan, Chang,
Welbourne, & Brysbaert, 2017).
Context
(4)

Hidden
(300)

Semantics
(2446)

!

Hidden
(300)

Hidden
(500)

!

Phonology
(200)

Attractor
(50)

!

Hidden
(10)

!

Attractor
!
(50)

Hidden
(500)

Orthography
(364)

Figure 1. The architecture of the triangle model of reading.

A computational model of literacy effects on
reading processes
Method
Network Architecture
The model is based on the connectionist triangle model of
reading (Harm & Seidenberg, 2004; Seidenberg &
McClelland, 1989), as shown in Figure 1. The critical
property of the model is that it incorporates three

812

representations of single words – print, sound, and meaning.
Each of these representations is interconnected by sets of
hidden units that permit the mappings between
representations to be acquired as a consequence of exposure.
The sound and meaning layers were also each connected to
a set of attractor units that enable the model to develop highfidelity phonological and semantic representations of words.
Also included was a context layer to enable
disambiguation of the meaning of homonyms (e.g., /beIs/ as
the instrument bass and as the location base, see Chang et
al., 2016, for more details).

the network and connections were adjusted to reduce error.
Similarly, for the hearing task, the phonological input and
the context were clamped for 8 time steps, and the model
was required to produce the target semantic form at the
output. For the stable attractor tasks, the input was presented
then activation cycled for 6 time steps, before the model was
required to reproduce the originally inputted phonological or
semantic representation. For pre-literacy training, the four
tasks were interleaved, with 40% of trials each for the
speaking and hearing tasks, and 10% each for the
phonological and semantic attractor trials. There were
600,000 trials altogether.
For pre-literacy training, the model was exposed to 2,973
monosyllabic words, which were selected to be the most
common words occurring in reading materials before age
18, and therefore those words most likely that children come
across prior to literacy onset. Words were presented
randomly, but selected according to their frequency. The
model was trained with a learning rate of 0.05 using backpropagation through time, and cross-entropy error was
computed. No adjustments to weights were made if the
model was within 0.1 of the target for each output unit.
In the post-literacy training, the model was given printed
word forms, and required to learn to map onto phonological
and semantic representations. Words were presented to the
model incrementally, according to the reading-age at which
words occurred. Similar to Monaghan and Ellis (2010),
reading developed cumulatively, over 14 reading stages
reflecting reading materials experienced from age 5 to 18,
determined from the educator’s word frequency guide (Zeno
et al., 1995), see Chang et al. (2016) for more details.
For each word, the model cycled for 12 time steps of
activation after which the model had to generate the
phonological and semantic representations of the word.
These reading trials were interleaved with hearing and
speaking trials, and phonological and semantic attractor
trials, to ensure that the pre-literacy mappings were
maintained during reading training. There were 1.74 million
post-literacy training trials altogether.
Critically, by the end of training, the model had been
exposed to all words, but some of these had been acquired
prior to literacy onset, and others were acquired from print.
We refer to these words as pre- and post-literacy words.

Representations
The representations of words were derived from Harm
and Seidenberg’s (2004) version of the triangle model.
Printed words were represented across 14 letter slots, with
each letter slot comprising 26 units relating to one letter of
the alphabet. If a letter was present in a slot, then the unit
corresponding to the letter had activity 1, otherwise the units
were inactive. Spoken words were represented in terms of
segmental phonological features, across 8 phoneme slots of
25 binary phonological feature units, with distinct phonemes
represented in terms of overlapping subsets of the units
representing the features. Finally, lexical meaning
representations were constructed from semantic features in
WordNet (Miller, 1990). Each word activated a subset of the
2446 semantic features in the semantic layer of the model,
with activity 1 if the semantic feature was associated with
the word.
The model was eventually trained to read 6229
monosyllabic words, which were presented during reading
training according to log-compressed frequency, where
frequency was taken from the Wall Street Journal corpus
(Marcus, Santorini, & Marcinkiewicz, 1993), to be
consistent with Harm and Seidenberg’s (2004)
implementation of the triangle model.
Training Procedures
The training process had two phases: a pre-literacy and a
post-literacy phase. In the pre-literacy training, the model
learned to map between phonology and semantics on a
subset of words from the entire training set, that children are
more likely to have learned before beginning reading. In the
post-literacy phase, the model was trained to learn to map all
words from orthographic forms onto phonology and
semantics.
In pre-literacy training, the model was trained on oral
language tasks, including a speaking task (mapping from
semantic to phonological representations), a hearing task
(mapping from phonological to semantic representations), as
well as tasks that assisted in developing stable attractors at
phonology and semantics (mapping from phonological to
phonological representations, and from semantic to semantic
representations). For the speaking task, the semantic input
pattern for a selected word was clamped for eight time steps,
then in the last two time steps, the model was required to
reproduce the phonological form for the word. The
difference between the model’s actual production and the
target phonological production was backpropagated through

Testing Procedures
To measure pre-literacy oral language skills, the model
was tested on its productions for the speaking and hearing
tasks. For semantics, if the model was closer to the target
word than any other word, then it was judged to be accurate.
For phonology, if the model was closer to the target
phoneme at each phoneme slot then it was judged to be
correct.
For the analysis of reading performance, we interpreted
orthographic to phonological representations to be
analogous to behavioural naming responses (Chang, Furber,
& Welbourne, 2012), and orthographic to semantic
mappings to relate to lexical decision responses (see, e.g.,
polarity measure in Plaut, 1997, and Chang et al., 2016).

813

Results

Literacy onset was a significant predictor of changes in
the model’s performance – at the point of literacy onset, the
regression gradient for the AoA effect changed, such that
words acquired pre-literacy demonstrated a smaller change
in response times associated with increasing AoA compared
to words acquired post-literacy. This effect was substantially
larger for lexical decision than for naming responses,
suggesting that processing for pre-literacy acquired words
used the indirect route from orthography to semantics via
phonology, whereas the post-literacy acquired words used
the direct orthography to semantics route.
We next tested whether a similar change in processing
was associated with literacy onset in naming and lexical
decision behaviour.

At the end of pre-literacy training, of the words to which
the model had been exposed prior to onset of literacy, the
model was able to speak 90.7%, and comprehend 91.7%
correctly. After reading training, the model was accurate for
99.4% of phonology and 93.3% of semantics for the reading
task.
To assess whether literacy changed patterns of processing
in the model, multiple regression analyses were conducted
for the model’s simulations of word naming and lexical
decision tasks. The mean square error of the model’s
productions was taken as the dependent variable, and a set
of psycholinguistic variables were included as predictors, to
relate to previous regression analyses of behavioural data
(e.g., Balota et al., 2004; Cortese & Khanna, 2007). These
variables were cumulative frequency (CF), orthographic
neighbourhood size (OrthN) (Coltheart, 1977), word length
(Len), consistency (Cons) (which was the proportion of
words with the same pronunciation of the orthographic rime,
e.g., “gave/save” versus “have”), and AoA, which was the
reading stage during training for the model. Error scores
were log transformed and all the predictor variables were
centred.
To examine the effect of literacy onset on the model’s
performance, hierarchical regression analyses were
conducted. At step 1, all psycholinguistic variables were
entered, then at step 2 whether the word appeared pre- or
post-literacy was entered as a variable interacting with AoA.
If processing changes from pre- to post-literacy, then the
effect of AoA at the point of literacy onset should change, as
an index of the involvement of semantics – reflected in a
significant interaction. It was not possible to include literacy
onset as a separate variable because it is highly correlated
with the interaction term. The results for naming and lexical
decision are shown in Table 1.

Testing the literacy effect in word processing
Method
The data were a subset of responses from the English
Lexicon Project (Balota et al., 2007), comprising naming
and lexical decision response times from a set of 816 young
adult participants from a range of universities. We acquired
data for 2,536 monosyllabic words, for which all the
psycholinguistic variables could be generated.
Word-form frequency, orthographic neighbourhood size,
and word length were taken from the CELEX database
(Baayen, Pipenbrock, & Gulikers, 2005). These three
measures were taken from the same dataset to ensure
consistency across these measures. AoA was taken from
Kuperman, Stadthagen-Gonzalez, and Brysbaert (2012).
Consistency of words was determined in the same way as
for the computational simulation.

Results
We first aimed to replicate the results of Balota et al.
(2004, 2007) in determining the role of frequency, word
length, neighbourhood size, consistency, and AoA in a
linear regression on naming response times and lexical
decision response times.
Then, we measured whether there was an effect of onset
of literacy in the behavioural data through adding an
interaction between AoA and literacy onset. Age of literacy
onset could not be included a priori as with the simulation,
however, we assumed that if there is an effect of onset of
literacy, then this should occur somewhere close to the age
of 5. Onset of literacy was thus determined iteratively
between the age of 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 years in order to assess
whether there is a discontinuity in response times predicted
by AoA that changes around the age children begin formal
literacy. We took as an indicator of discontinuity a
significant interaction between AoA and literacy onset,
though see Baayen, Feldman, and Schreuder (2006) for an
alternative means of measuring discontinuities (note they
were unable to test AoA because of small sample size).
For naming and lexical decision response times, the
results of the multiple regression are shown in Table 2. For
naming, adding the interaction between onset of literacy and

Table 1. Results from the regression analysis for naming and
for lexical decision in the computational model.

Step 1

Step 2

***

CF

Naming

Lexical Decision

β

β

-0.179

***

-0.107***

OrthN

-0.256**

0.012

Cons

-0.247***

-0.016

Len

-0.071

***

-0.127***

AoA

0.198***

0.452***

AoA x
Literacy
onset

0.219***
ΔR2 = 0.37%

0.501***
ΔR2 = 1.96%

p<.001; **p<.01; β is a standardized beta value.

814

AoA for any of the ages 3 to 7 did not significantly improve
the model fit (Bonferroni corrected).
For lexical decision response times, there were significant
effects of literacy onset found at ages 5, 6, and 7, with the
largest effect for age 6. Figure 2 shows the effect of this
discontinuity in predicting response times for lexical
decision when the onset of literacy is implemented at age 6.
The same Figure illustrates no statistically significant
discontinuity effect for naming response times.
Table 2. Results from the regression analysis for naming and
for lexical decision in the behavioural data.

Step 1

Step 2

***

Naming

Lexical
Decision

β

β

Log-frequency

-0.156***

-0.305***

OrthN

-0.255***

-0.001

Cons

-0.115***

-0.032*

Len

0.165***

-0.062***

AoA

0.174***

0.440***

AoA x Literacy
onset age 3

-3.220

1.572

AoA x Literacy
onset age 4

-0.653

0.369

AoA x Literacy
onset age 5

0.150

0.387*

AoA x Literacy
onset age 6

0.151

0.348***

AoA x Literacy
onset age 7

0.154

0.310***

Figure 2. Interaction between AoA and onset of literacy at
age 6 in lexical decision but not in naming responses.
For naming tasks, the use of this prior semantics to
phonology knowledge has a minimal effect, because the
quasi-regularity of orthography to phonology mappings is
relatively easy to acquire. The greater difficulty of learning
an arbitrary mapping from orthography to semantics, then
using this semantic representation to activate the previously
acquired phonological representation for the known word,
means that this indirect processing is unlikely to be involved
differentially for words learned pre- versus post-literacy.
For lexical decision, or other tasks involving activation of
semantic representations, the role of literacy onset appears
to be quite different. The computational model predicted
that when prior knowledge about phonological and semantic
associations is available, as it is for pre-literacy acquired
words, then an indirect route is likely to be involved in
mapping from orthographic to semantic representations. For
words learned post-literacy, this prior knowledge is not
available, and so the reading system has to proceed via
generating either a new mapping from orthography to
semantics, or a new mapping from phonology to semantics.
Thus, a distinct pattern of response is likely to be observed
for lexical decision of pre- and post-literacy words.
The behavioural results provide support for the
computational predictions of different pathways used in
reading pre- versus post-literacy. Even though literacy onset
was several years before the participants in the lexical
decision study were tested, the vestiges of literacy onset
appear to be still observable in reading behaviour. We
acknowledge that literacy onset is not a sudden change, as
some new words will still be acquired aurally even after
reading training has commenced, and proficient reading is
not immediate, but requires extensive, sometimes strenuous,
training (e.g., Seidenberg, 2017). Nevertheless, we have
shown that literacy onset changes the use that the reader
makes of the language system, and this differential use of
the system survives to be observed in behavioural responses

p<.001; **p<.01; *p<.05; β is standardized beta value

General Discussion
Onset of literacy has a profound effect on cognition, but
generally these effects have been assessed on the
representations involved in reading, rather than the
pathways
involved
in
mapping
between
these
representations (Hulme et al., 2012; Morais et al., 1979;
Smith et al., 2014). In this paper, we show that onset of
literacy likely has a long-standing impact on the architecture
of the reading system. For words that are in the learner’s
vocabulary prior to onset of literacy, reading can proceed
via two routes – directly, by newly learned mappings from
orthography to semantics, or orthography to phonology, or
can instead exploit indirect pathways that incorporate
learned mappings between phonology and semantics that the
learner already has cemented in their language system.

815

even after decades of reading practice.

Hulme, C., Bowyer-Crane, C., Carroll, J. M., Duff, F. J., &
Snowling, M. J. (2012). The causal role of phoneme
awareness and letter-sound knowledge in learning to read
combining intervention studies with mediation analyses.
Psychological Science, 23(6), 572-577.
Juhasz, B. J. (2005). Age-of-Acquisition effects in word and
picture identification. Psychological Bulletin, 131(5), 684712.
Kosmidis, M. H., Tsapkini, K., Folia, V., Vlahou, C. H., &
Kiosseoglou, G.. (2004). Semantic and phonological
processing in illiteracy. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society, 10(6), 818-827.
Kuperman, V., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Brysbaert, M.
(2012). Age-of-acquisition ratings for 30,000 English
words. Behavior Research Methods, 44(4), 978-990.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., & Ehsan, S. (2006). Age of
acquisition effects depend on the mapping between
representations and the frequency of occurrence: Empirical
and computational evidence. Visual Cognition, 13, 292248.
Marcus, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., & Santorini, B.
(1993). Building a large annotated corpus of English: the
penn treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 313-330.
Miller, G. A. (1990). WordNet: An on-line lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3, 235-312.
Monaghan, J., & Ellis, A. W. (2002). What exactly interacts
with spelling--sound consistency in word naming? Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 28(1), 183-206.
Monaghan, P., Chang, Y.N., Welbourne, S., & Brysbaert,
M. (2017). Exploring the relations between word
frequency, language exposure, and bilingualism in a
computational model of reading. Journal of Memory and
Language, 93, 1-21.
Monaghan, P., & Ellis, A. W. (2010). Modeling reading
development: Cumulative, incremental learning in a
computational model of word naming. Journal of Memory
and Language, 63(4), 506-525.
Morais, J., Cary, L., Alegria, J., & Bertelson, P. (1979).
Does awareness of speech as a sequence of phones arise
spontaneously? Cognition, 7(4), 323-331.
Plaut, D. C. (1997). Structure and function in the lexical
system: Insights from distributed models of word reading
and lexical decision. Language and Cognitive Processes,
12(5-6), 765-805.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The Large‐scale
structure of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29(1), 4178.
Szwed, M., Ventura, P., Querido, L., Cohen, L., & Dehaene,
S. (2012). Reading acquisition enhances an early visual
process of contour integration. Developmental Science,
15(1), 139-149.
Zeno, S. (Ed.). (1995). The educator’ s word frequency
guide. Brewster, NJ: Touchstone.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by ESRC grant RES-000-224049.

References
Baayen, R. H., Feldman, L. B., & Schreuder, R. (2006).
Morphological influences on the recognition of
monosyllabic monomorphemic words. Journal of Memory
and Language, 55, 290-313.
Baayen, R.H., Pipenbrock, R. & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX Lexical Database (CD-ROM). Philadelphia, PA:
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Sergent-Marshall, S. D.,
Spieler, D. H., & Yap, M. (2004). Visual word recognition
of single-syllable words. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133(2), 283-316.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Hutchison, K. A., Cortese, M. J.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., Neely, J.H., Nelson, D.L., Simpson,
G.B., & Treiman, R. (2007). The English lexicon project.
Behavior Research Methods, 39(3), 445-459.
Brysbaert, M., & Ghyselinck, M. (2006). The effect of age
of acquisition: Partly frequency related, partly frequency
independent. Visual Cognition, 13(7-8), 992-1011.
Catling, J. C., & Johnston, R. A. (2009). The varying effects
of age of acquisition. Q J Exp Psychol, 62(1), 50-62.
Chang, Y. N., Furber, S., & Welbourne, S. (2012). “Serial”
effects in parallel models of reading. Cognitive
Psychology, 64(4), 267-291.
Chang, Y. N., Monaghan, P., & Welbourne, S. (2016).
Effects of experience in a developmental model of
reading. Proceedings of the 38th Cognitive Science Society
Conference.
Coltheart, M., Davelaar, E., Jonasson, J. T., & Besner, D.
(1977). Access to the internal lexicon. In S. Dornic (Ed.),
Attention and Performance VI (pp. 535-555). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cortese, M. J., & Khanna, M. M. (2007). Age of acquisition
predicts naming and lexical-decision performance above
and beyond 22 other predictor variables: an analysis of
2,342 words. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 60(8), 1072-1082.
Ellis, A. W., & Lambon Ralph, M. A. (2000). Age of
acquisition effects in adult lexical processing reflect loss
of plasticity in maturing systems: Insights from
connectionist networks. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 26(5),
1103-1123.
Ghyselinck, M., Lewis, M. B., & Brysbaert, M. (2004). Age
of acquisition and the cumulative-frequency hypothesis: A
review of the literature and a new multi-task investigation.
Acta Psychologica, 115(1), 43-67.
Harm, M. W., & Seidenberg, M. S. (2004). Computing the
meanings of words in reading: Cooperative division of
labor between visual and phonological processes.
Psychological Review, 111(3), 662-720.

816

