Discourse Acquisition in ‘Pear Stories’ of Preschool-aged Children
Vladimir V. Glebkin (gleb1514@gmail.com)
Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration,
Prospect Vernadskogo, 82, Moscow, Russian Federation 119571;
Gymnasium 1514,
Krupskoi Street, 12, Moscow, Russian Federation 119311
Nikita A. Safronov (nikita1997.08.21@mail.ru),
Moscow Region State University,
Radio Street, 10, Moscow, Russian Federation 105005
Varvara A. Sonina (varvarasonina@mail.ru),
Gymnasium 1514,
Krupskoi Street, 12, Moscow, Russian Federation 119311

Abstract
This work focuses on an issue situated at the intersection of
two domains: the oral mode of communication vs. the
written mode of communication, and language acquisition.
The backbone of this research is a conjecture that, for some
age groups (babies, toddlers and preschool-aged children),
to explore the acquisition of discourse as a whole (including
gestures, facial expressions, prosody, pauses and discursive
markers, etc.) is more appropriate than explore the
acquisition of language exclusively. “The Pear Film”
experimental line underpins the method of this research.
The database comprises 74 ‘pear stories’ of Moscow
preschool-aged children and high school students. Three
parameters of the discourse are of interest for the authors: a
logical structure and a coherence of the narrative; gestures
and spontaneous movements lost any communicative
meaning; discourse words and pauses.
Keywords: multimodal communication,
language acquisition, narrative, pear stories.

discourse,

Introduction
The study of spoken language in contrast with its written
form has been one of the most intriguing issues in
cognitive science over recent decades. At the beginning of
the paper it is worthwhile to outline the key points which
underpin this avenue of research (Tannen 1982; Chafe
1985; Chafe & Tannen 1987; Miller & Weinert 1998;
Holie & Adger 1998; Li & Hombert 2002; Linell 2005;
Tomasello 2008; Fais et al. 2012).
Since its emergence as an independent branch of
science, linguistics by default has been based on the
structure of written language as a paradigm for language
in general. This has deep roots in the backstory of
linguistics. Although for the Ancient Greeks and the
Ancient Romans speech and argument were important
elements of both politics and everyday life, theoretical
approaches to language developed by Plato and,
especially, by Aristotle bore on written language. This
held true, without any alternatives, in the philosophy of
the Middle Ages. Linguistic views of patristics and, then,
scholasticism were almost exclusively concerned with
literacy. Afterwards, the ancient and medieval tradition
strongly influenced early modern scholars in their view of

language (Pascal, Descartes, Leibniz, Wilkins, etc.). As a
result, some models of language as a formal system of
symbols were developed which, in turn, inspired modern
linguists to develop formal theories of language
(Chomsky's works include abundant quotations from
Descartes (Chomsky 1966, 2006), NSM theory by
Wierzbicka and Goddard is, more or less, a replica of
Leibniz's language of thought (Wierzbicka 1972, 1980,
1996), etc.). All these theories are based, as a matter of
fact, on the framework of written language, even if their
authors claim the opposite.
Although the view of language represented in the
previous paragraph is likely to be a common place for
linguists, this is anything but the truth. Importantly, unlike
written language, spoken language is an element of
multimodal communication, and it is absolutely senseless
to explore spoken language beyond its links with other
elements (gestures, facial expressions, prosody, pauses
and discursive markers, etc.). Therefore, the only way to
account for the framework and functions of spoken
language in different communicative situations is to tackle
the structure of discourse as a whole.
Such a change of perspective helps, in particular, to
shed new light on the question of the origin of language.
Thus, Tomasello (e.g., 2008) and colleagues take the
social nature of humans as a basis for the research
framework. For them, the demands of social nature cause
a growth of both intensity and complexity of social
communication which, in turn, leads to emergence of
more complicated tools to perform that. These tools
include gestures, prosody and, then, meaningful
combinations of sounds as a part of multimodal
communication.
This approach also changes standard views of the
problem of language acquisition. Babies, toddlers and
preschool-aged children acquire not exclusively language,
but rather different types of discourse in which language is
an extremely important but not the only element.
Language acquisition goes for them in line with gesture
acquisition, prosody acquisition, mimicry acquisition, etc.
This provides a theoretical framework of our
research, whereas its experimental framework is based on
"The Pear Film" research line. It is reasonable to outline

2096

the milestones of "The Pear Film" story before proceeding
to the structure and the results of the experiment.
"The Pear Film" is a six-minute movie made by
Wallace Chafe and his colleagues in 1975. The film
includes actions, pictures and sounds, but no words. In
that, it deploys the same chain of events for all viewers.
Therefore, a comparison of "the Pear Film" retellings, i.e.
‘pear stories’, by people of different cultures and
languages can provide the researcher with important data
of how language and culture influence a way people
conceptualize a stream of events. Since 1975 a lot of
investigations have been carried out to compare retelling
strategies for people of different cultures (Du Bois 1980;
Tannen 1980; Orero 2008; Matzur & Mickievicz 2012;
Blackwell 2015), for people with intellectual disability
(Cummings 2015, 59–63); some investigations have
explored peculiarities of referential choice in retellings
(Downing 1980; Clancy 1980), work of consciousness in
narration (Chafe 1980; Bernardo 1980), a structure of
multimodal discourse (Fon et al. 2011; Kibrik et al. 2015).
As mentioned, a structure of multimodal discourse is
also the main object of interest for the authors of this
paper. In general, we follow the model developed by
Kibrik and colleagues (2015), but we are interested in a
process dynamics rather than a static picture.
Let us proceed directly to the research presented in
this paper. The ‘pear stories’ of Moscow preschool-aged
children in comparison with similar stories of high school
students were in the focus of our interest in this research.
In other words, we addressed a particular type of
multimodal discourse in order to explore the process of
discourse acquisition by focusing on a logical structure
and a coherence of the narrative, gestures and spontaneous
movements lost any communicative meaning, discourse
words and pauses. Before dealing this issue at hand, some
clarifications are needed.
Firstly, the discourse of the pear film retellings is not
an informal situation for subjects, especially, for kids.
Indeed, in natural contexts kids communicate and, in
particular, retell stories in different way. At the same time,
this situation is not completely unnatural for them. This is
a type of a public talk they encounter in kindergartens, at
schools and some other public places. They acquire this as
they acquire many other types of multimodal
communication. So, despite obvious restrictions, this kind
of discourse can provide important data on the way of
acquiring
particular
elements
of
multimodal
communication by preschool and early school-age
children.
In order to monitor quality of acquiring particular
discourse skills, a sample for comparison is needed.
Adults are expected to be such sample; however, the work
with 14-16 year old students shows that they are as skillful
in "The Pear Film" retellings as adults are. In that, because
of some practical reasons a group of such students was
taken as a control group for our research.
In our analysis we focused on three discourse
elements which need more precise description.
A. A logical structure and a coherence of the
narrative. There are a lot of works investigating the
narrative development in preschool age children which
use a wide range of criteria to check this process (Peterson

& McCabe 1983; Stein & Albro 1997; Sedov 2004;
Nicoladis et al. 2009; Laurent et al. 2015; Levy &
McNeill 2015). A commonly used parameters to check
narrative development are as follows: the length of story
in words; the number of different words used to tell the
story; a total of scenes in retellings; presence of basic
semantic components of the story (beginning, setting and
ending) (Nicoladis et al. 2009; Laurent et al. 2015).
However, these characteristics seem to provide only a
coarse-grained picture of the process failing to verify how
subjects represent a logical structure of the narrative, i.e.
causal links connecting the events within it. A more
precise model to evaluate exactly this factor was
elaborated in Sedov 2004. In order to check to what extent
subjects represent a logical structure of stories they retell,
the author examines such variables as the frequency of
deictic words in the retellings, the frequency of anaphoric
repetitions, the frequency of introductory model words,
referential models the subjects apply, the appearance of
retrospective and perspective views in the retellings, etc.
Taking into account these and similar works, in our
research we focused on the following characteristics: the
total number of words exploited in retelling, discounting
selfrepetitions and false starts (TW); a total of scenes
presented in retelling (TS); a total of errors in action
description standardized on 100 words (FA) (e.g., ‘guys
picked up pears’ instead of ‘the boy hands pears to one of
the guys’); a total of errors in object description
standardized on 100 words (FO) (e.g., ‘apples’ instead of
‘pears’); a total of incorrect description of causal chain of
events and sub-events standardized on 100 words (FC)
(e.g., ambiguous reference, missing connections within an
event and between events); a total of interpretations (TI)
(e.g., ‘stole a basket of pears’ instead of ‘picked up a
basket of pears’); a total of dependent words standardized
on 100 words (TD) (such as ‘who’, ‘which’, ‘because’,
etc.).
B. Gestures and spontaneous movements lost any
communicative meaning. As mentioned, a number of
works has been published over recent years to explore
various aspects of correlation between gesture
development and spoken language development in
narratives of preschool age children (Nicoladis et al. 2009;
Laurent et al. 2015; Levy & McNeill 2015). Meanwhile,
in our knowledge there are no works focusing on
spontaneous movements lost any communicative
meaning. Of great importance is the fact that kids, when
retelling the story, perform a lot of unconscious
movements which do not address their interlocutors.
These movements are not gestures in the strict sense; the
only function of such movements is to help kids in their
reasoning and speaking. This is no metaphor to say that
kids not only think with their brains and speak with their
tongues, but they also think and speak with their bodies.
Some evidence of this can be also found in students’ and
adults’ retellings, but in this case such movements are
presented in a restricted mode.
Again, in our knowledge this is a novel research
domain which demands, first of all, a correct typology of
spontaneous movements. A version of this is suggested
below. Another important task is to measure the difference

2097

Table 1. Mean TW, TS, TI, ЕС for CH and S

in spontaneous movements of preschool age kids and that
of high school students. This procedure is also presented
below in the description of experimental method.
C. Discourse words and pauses. An important
aspect of language acquisition is also, so to speak,
smoothness of speech. Adults avoid pauses in
communication and use different strategies to fill them
(stretching out first and last sounds of the word, use of
discourse words and single sounds, etc.). At the same
time, kids are not embarrassed by gaps in communication.
Their speech, at least, in this particular type of discourse,
is, as it were, ragged. In the experiment we measured this
difference. Also we compared a number of and a mean
length of EDU (elementary discourse units) for the two
groups of participants.

Experiment
Method
Subjects. 50 5-7 year old children (22 m, 28 f) attending
Moscow kindergartens (CH), and 24 (10 m, 14 f) 14-16
year old Moscow high school students (S). All subjects
were monolingual.
Material. "The Pear Film" by Wallace Chafe (6 min 32
sec).
Procedure. Each subject was processed individually. At
the beginning the subjects were asked for watching the
film closely in order to retell it as precisely as they can.
Then they watched the film and after a minute retold it to
some people who have not seen this film before. For
kindergarten kids it was their kindergarten teacher, for
students - their peers. At the same time, in order to check
how the choice of addressee may influence the results,
five students were asked to retell the story to the school
principal in her office. When retelling, all subjects were
sitting on high chairs for recording not only hand
movements but also leg movements.
The retellings were filmed by a hidden camera for
CH subjects and overtly for S subjects. Because of some
technical problems only 37 from 50 CH video-retellings
fitted for further examination (at the same time, all CH
tape recordings were made properly).
Then the data were processed with ELAN to examine
gestures and spontaneous movements. Also the retellings
were recorded with unite-based discourse transcription
system.
In order to work out TS we asked 10 independent
participants to divide the film into episodes, and premised
on their choice singled out eight basic scenes which
formed the narrative framework.

Results
A. The results for narrative skills are presented in
Table 1 and Table 2.

TW

TS

TI

TD

CH

88.2±45.9

5.3±1.6

1.5±1.0

1.0±1.2

S

298.6±138.2

7.8±0.7

4.7±1.9

2.4±1.1

Table 2. Mean FA, FO, FC for CH and S
FA

FO

FC

CH

1.9±2.1

1.5±2.2

2.0±2.2

S

0.1±0.4

0.1±0.3

0±0.2

All these results are statistically significant
(p<0.001).
Concerning five students retelling the pear story to
the school principal, there were no significant difference
between them and other students in the scope of this
experiment. Retellings in the principal office were likely
to be less detailed and more formal, but in comparison
with CH subjects these discrepancies were not important.
The quantitative data can be complemented by some
qualitative analysis. Let us begin with TW. As this can be
seen from Table 1, the mean length of the narrative is over
three times more for the students than for the preschoolaged children. It means that the CH subjects lose a lot of
content when describing any episode. Importantly, they
only point at actions not focusing on appearance, clothes,
scenery, etc. In turn, S subjects provided more or less
detailed description of the picker, and also briefly
characterized appearance of other characters.
FO values are consistent with this observation. In
contrast with S subjects, CH subjects confused not only
pears and apples, but also, and much more often, they
confused age (‘man’ instead of ‘boy’) and gender (‘boy’
and even ‘man’ instead of ‘girl’) of the characters.
TS, FA and FC values points to notable difficulties in
representing causal chain of the narrative. TS values show
that two, in average, basic scenes get lost in ‘pear stories’
of preschool-aged children. This means that the story is
often broken up into independent fragments which are
linked with the conjunction ‘then’. To be more precise, a
majority of CH subjects missed the episode with a goat,
which does not ‘work’ later on in the film (only 8 subjects
from 50 remembered this), many of them missed also the
girl on a bike approaching the boy, and sometimes the
final scene was missed as well. Also, almost in all stories
of CH subjects there were some ambiguities in reference
because their use of pronouns sometimes did not allow
determine a subject correctly.
Data for EC are consistent with that point. S subjects
often used dependent words (mainly, ‘who’, ‘which’, but
also ‘when’, ‘where’, ‘what’, ‘why’, etc.) in order to
clarify reference. If there are some objects with the same
nomination (e.g., ‘boy’), exploiting of such constructions
is useful tool for reference clarification. Meanwhile, CH
participants can hardly use this tool.

2098

Let us proceed to exploring some correlations within
CH group. First of all, there is a positive correlation
between the age of participants (AP) and TW, TI, TD and
a negative correlation between the age of participants and
FA, FO, FC. However, only the correlation between AP
and TW; AP and FO are significant (r(AP, TW) = 0.35,
r(AP, FO) = -0.27, p<0.05; r(AP, TI) = 0.14, r(AP, TD) =
0.23, r(AP, FA) = -0.25, r(AP, FC) = -0.13).
In the meantime, there is a significant positive
correlation between TW and TI, TW and TD, and also a
significant negative correlation between TW and FA, TW
and FC, TW and FO (r(TW, FA)=-0.44, r(TW, FC)= 0.46, p<0.01; r(TW, TI)= 0,34, r(TW, TD)=0.33, r(TW,
FO) = -0,29, p<0.05). This gives some evidence for the
point that all narrative skills represented by the variables
of the subset A develop consistently.
In order to complete the spectrum of problems CH
subjects encountered it is worth noting that ten of them
(20%) were not able to retell the pear film on their own,
and the experimenters were made to help them with
leading questions.
B. As mentioned, spontaneous movements were in
focus of our interests. We singled out three general types
of body movements according to body parts which
provide them: hand movements (HM), leg movements
(LM), torso movements (TM). Also for hands and legs we
distinguished implicit movements (e.g., slight finger
movements) and explicit movements (e.g., open
movements of the whole hand). So, we used five
combinations: IHM, EHM, ILM, ELM, TM. We measured
the total time of each kind of movement in ratio to the
time of the whole story presented in percent. The results
are expressed in Table 3.
Table 3. Mean IHM, EHM, ILM, ELM, TM for CH and S
IHM

EHM

ILM

CH

31.9±22.2

5.5±10.1

7.0±11.6

S

20.0±21.4

0.2±0.8

4.6±9.6

ELM

TM

Σ

6.9±16.9

15.7±17.3

65.8±18.2

CH
S

0

0.6±1.1

24.5±21.1

As can be seen from Table 3, there is a significant
difference in performing spontaneous movements during
the retelling between CH and S groups (the use of oneway ANOVA to compare Σ for these groups gives
p<0.001). CH subjects perform such movements during
over a half-time period of the retelling, and over a quartertime period of the retelling the movements are explicit.
The spectrum of their movements is really wide: kids put
their hands under the legs, fidget in their seats, lift their
legs up to their mouths, etc. All this almost totally
disappear in retellings of S subjects. The only spontaneous
movements they perform are implicit hand movements

such as to finger over and, to some extent, implicit leg
movements. Other types of movements are extremely rare.
Importantly, there is no significant correlation
between Σ (the sum of IHM, EHM, ILM, ELM, TM) and
TW for CH subjects (r=-0.14). This can be interpreted as
some evidence against the conjecture that narrative skills
and body experience in discourse develop coherently.
The picture of gestures for CH and S groups is
strictly opposite. Only 8 from 50 (16%) CH subjects
exploited gestures as a more or less important tool in
communication. At the same time, almost all S subjects
resorted to the permanent use of gestures during their
retellings. The total time of gesture performance in ratio to
the time of the whole story presented in percent is 2.4±5.2
for CH subjects and 68.5±23.7 for S subjects (p<0.001).
Addressing again S subjects who retold the pear story
to the school principal, it is worthwhile to note that they
performed less gestures and more spontaneous movements
than their peers but this difference cannot change the
picture drawn above.
C. The last group of parameters we worked out is
concerned with discourse words, pauses and an EDU
length. We measured the total number of discourse words
in ratio to TW (DW, %), the total length of pauses in ratio
to the time of the whole story (LP, %) 1, and a mean EDU
length (EDUL, words). The data are presented in Table 4.
Table 4. Mean DW, LP, EDUL for CH and S
DW
LP
EDUL
CH

3.0±2.0

38.2±11.2

3.2±0.5

S

4.1±3.1

25.3±10.4

4.2±0.6

These data give clear evidence that CH subjects in
comparison with S ones are less skillful in filling pauses
in communication (p<0.001). Also it is worthwhile to
point at more extensive EDU for S subjects (p<0.001).The
difference between DW for CH subjects and S subjects is
not significant.
Importantly, there is significant positive correlation
between TW and DW for CH subjects (r (TW, DW) =
0,32, p<0.05). Meanwhile, the correlation between TW
and LP and between TW and EDUL is not significant (r
(TW, LP) =-0,23; r (TW, EDUL) = -0,02).

Discussion
The results of the experiment support the basic
hypothesis of significant obstacles which preschool-aged
children encounter when acquiring the discourse of
retelling story in formal situation. In the experiment three
basic components of this discourse were examined: a
logical structure and a coherence of the narrative; gestures
and spontaneous movements lost any communicative
meaning; and EDU, discourse words and pauses. In all
these components CH subjects experienced more or less
serious difficulties in comparison with a control group
presented by high school students. Furthermore, the
1

Only 37 from 50 recordings were valid for the pause
measuring.

2099

experiment provided some evidence that these
components are acquired coherently, that is, the progress
in one component correlates with positive shifts in others.
It is worth classifying the problems CH subjects face
and cognitive skills behind these problems. Two basic
domains can be picked out in "The Pear Film" retelling
discourse. The first one is concerned with the ‘content’ of
the discourse (to make sense of the story and to present
this correctly in speech), the second one − with ‘right’
mode of communicative behavior. Cognitive skills behind
the first domain can be also divided into two parts. The
first part is based on situated cognition. A lack of practical
knowledge entails increasing FO value which
characterizes flaws in recognizing particular objects (as
mentioned, kids confused pears with apples, goat with
caw, girl with boy, boy with man, etc.) The second set of
problems points at an inability to figure out a causal chain
of events and to represent this chain in the retelling. In
consistency with Sedov’s (2004) results our data show
that a majority of CH subjects in their retellings get
plunged into the stream of events, and they are unable to
change the perspective and to look at the story from the
bird’s eye view. This also determines their view of an
addressee. They usually take for granted that an addressee
is also familiar with all details of the story and he can
easily reconstruct those following restrained comments of
a storyteller. TS, TI, FA, and FC values characterize this
issue.
CH subjects have also obvious problems with the use
of language. “The Pear Film” retelling as a kind of
discourse is close to writing, and writing skills are widely
used by S subjects in their retellings. More or less
consciously, they rest on texts studied at school as a
paradigm for ‘pear stories’ they make up. CH subjects
have no such experience. An influence of literacy on their
retellings is trifling, if it is at all. As a result, their
language is extremely poor, with minimum of extended
and subordinate constructions. TC value is responsible for
this set of factors.
The ‘communicative’ domain of the discourse is
characterized by values of variables which constitute
subsets B and C. In particular, LHM, EHM, LLM, ELM,
and TM values point at a flaw in discourse competence
connected with some lack of body control in
communication.
Although three sets of factors presented above
address different cognitive domains and function more or
less independently, there is some coherence in their
development (e.g., significant positive correlation between
TW and DW give some evidence for such coherence).
Also LHM, EHM, LLM, ELM, TM data need more
detailed commentary. This sounds nowadays as a common
point that body movements in discourse have nothing but
communicative function. Nevertheless, this is not so for
kids. Again, the behavior of CH subjects gives robust
evidence that they not only think with their brains and
speak with their tongues, but they also think and speak
with their bodies. The spontaneous movements which they
perform intensively during the retelling are not directed to
their interlocutors, but these movements do rather
produce, as it were, ‘nutrient medium’ for the process of
speaking. Their speech is a vivid and striking illustration

of theoretical postulates of embodiment theory (Barsalou
1999; Krois 2007; Barsalou 2010).
Finally, we venture to make a conjecture in this
scope. The comparison of communicative models of CH
and S subjects indicates a substantial shift from
spontaneous movements to gestures. This shift is likely to
be consistent with Vygotsky's (1986) theory of inner
speech. According to Vygotsky, cognitive development in
ontogeny is concerned with the transition from egocentric
speech to inner speech which cognitive function is to
mediate between speech and thought. From this
perspective, inner speech is interpreted as interiorization
of egocentric speech. Similarly, implicit spontaneous
movements can be treated as interiorization of explicit
spontaneous movements. Such interiorization comes to the
end in thought which includes words and movements in a
‘converted’ mode similarly to how synthesis includes
thesis and antithesis in Hegel's philosophy. On the
opposite stage, thought deploys into a communicative
utterance directed to an addressee and formed by words,
gestures, prosody and other elements of multimodal
communication. In this scope, gestures not just
accompany words in communication, but rather they are
equally meaningful element of communicative behavior.
Another possible domain to apply the results of our
research is the theory of origin of language developed by
Tomasello and colleagues. As mentioned, they point at
gestures as at an important predecessor of vocal
communication, but they do not take into account
spontaneous movements. A precise analysis of
spontaneous movements of children and great apes might
shed new light on this issue.

References
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and brain sciences, 22, 577–660.
Barsalou, L. (2010). Grounded cognition: Past, Present
and Future. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2 (4), 716–724.
Bernardo, R. (1980). Subjecthood and Consciousness. In
In Chafe, W. (ed.). The Pear Stories: Cognitive, Cultural,
and Linguistic Aspects of Narrative Production (pp. 275–
300). Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.
Blackwell, S. (2015). Porque in Spanish Oral Narratives:
Semantic Porque, (Meta)Pragmatic Porque or Both? In A.
Capone, & J. Mey (eds.), Interdisciplinary Studies in
Pragmatics, Culture and Society (pp. 615–632). New
York: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Chafe, W. (1980). The Development of Consciousness in
the Production of a Narrative. In W. Chafe (ed.). The
Pear Stories: Cognitive, Cultural, and Linguistic Aspects
of Narrative Production (pp. 9–50). Norwood, New
Jersey: Ablex.
Chafe, W. (1985). Linguistic Differences Produced by
Differences between Speaking and Writing. In D. Olson,
A. Hildyard, & N. Torrance (eds.), Literacy, Language,
and Learning (pp. 105–123). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Chafe, W. & Tannen, D. (1987). The Relation between
Written and Spoken Language. Annual Review of
Anthropology, 16, 383–407

2100

Chelliah, S. (2013). Predicting reference form: A Pear
Story Study of information status, thematic role and
animacy in Meithei (Manipuri, Meiteiron). In T. Thornes,
Andvik E., G. Hyslop, & J. Jansen (eds.), Functionalhistorical approaches to exploration (pp. 223–236).
Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Chomsky, N. (1966). Cartesian linguistics. New York,
Harper & Row.
Chomsky, N. (2006). Language and mind. Cambridge
etc.: Cambridge University press.
Clancy, P. (1980). Referential Choice in English and
Japanese Narrative Discourse. In W. Chafe (ed.), The
Pear Stories: Cognitive, Cultural, and Linguistic Aspects
of Narrative Production (pp. 127–202). Norwood, New
Jersey: Ablex.
Cummings, L. (2015). Pragmatic and Discourse
Disorders. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Downing, P. (1980). Factors Influencing Lexical Choice
in Narrative In W. Chafe (ed.), The Pear Stories:
Cognitive, Cultural, and Linguistic Aspects of Narrative
Production (pp. 89–126). Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.
Du Bois, J. (1980). The Search of a Cultural Niche:
Showing the Pear Film in a Mayan Community. In W.
Chafe (ed.), The Pear Stories: Cognitive, Cultural, and
Linguistic Aspects of Narrative Production (pp. 1–8).
Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.
Fais, L., Leibowich, J., Hamadani, L. & Ohira, L. (2012).
Infant movement as a window into language processing.
In J.-M. Colletta & M. Guidetti (eds.), Gesture and
Multimodal Development (pp. 99–127). Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub. Co.
Fon, J., Johnson, K. & Chen, S. (2011). Durational
Patterning at Syntactic and Discourse Boundaries in
Mandarin Spontaneous Speech. Language and Speech, 54,
5-32.
Holie, S. & Adger, C. (eds.). (1998). Kids
talk: strategic language use in later childhood. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kibrik, A., Fedorova, O., & Nikolaeva, Ju. (2015).
Multimodal Discourse: In Search of Units, in G. Airenti,
B. Bara & G. Sandini (eds.), Proceedings of the
EuroAsianPacific Joint Conference on Cognitive Science,
4th European Conference on Cognitive Science, 11th
International Conference on Cognitive Science, Torino,
Italy, September 25–27, 2015 (pp. 662–667). Torino:
University of Torino.
Krois, J. (ed.) Embodiment in cognition and culture.
(2007). Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Pub.
Co.
Laurent, A, Nicoladis, E. & Marenette, P. (2015). The
development of storytelling in two languages with words
and
gestures.
The
International
Journal
of
Bilingualism,19 (1), 56–74.
Levy, E & McNeill, D. (2015). Narrative development in
young children: gesture, imagery, and cohesion.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Li, Ch. & Hombert, J.-M. (2002). On the evolutionary
origin of language. In M. Stamenov & V. Gallese (eds.),
Mirror neurons and the evolution of brain and language
(рр. 175–206). Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Pub.

Linell, P. (2005). The written language bias in linguistics:
its nature, origins, and transformations. London; New
York: Routledge.
Matzur, I. & Mickievicz, A. (2012). Pear Stories and
Audio Description: Language, Perception and Cognition
across Cultures. Perspectives, 20 (1), 55–65.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and Thought. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Miller, J. & Weinert, R. (1998). Spontaneous spoken
language: syntax and discourse. Oxford: Clarendon Press;
New York: Oxford University Press.
Nicoladis, E., Pika, S. & Marentette, P. (2009). Do
French-English bilingual children gesture more than
monolingual children? Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 38, 573–585.
Orero, P. (2008). Three different receptions of the same
film: ‘The Pear Stories Project’ applied to audio
description. European Journal of English Studies, 12 (2),
179–193.
Peterson, C. & McCabe, A. (1983). Developmental
psycholinguistics: three ways of looking at a child's
narrative. New York: Plenum Press.
Sedov, K. (2004). Diskurs i lichnost': evolyutsiya
kommunikativnoi kompetentsii [Discourse and personality:
the evolution of communicative competence]. Moscow:
Labirint.
Stein, N. & Albro, E. (1997). Building complexity and
coherence: Children's use of goal-structured knowledge in
telling stories. In M. Bamberg (ed.), Narrative
development: Six approaches (pp. 5–44). Mahwah, N.J.:
L.Erlbaum Associates.
Tannen, D. (1980). A Comparative Analysis of Oral
Narrative Strategies: Athenian Greek and American
English. In W. Chafe (ed.), The Pear Stories: Cognitive,
Cultural, and Linguistic Aspects of Narrative Production
(pp. 1–8). Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.
Tannen, D. (ed.). (1982). Spoken and written language:
exploring orality and literacy. Norwood: ABLEX Pub.
Corp.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Vilaró, A., Duchowski, A, Pilar, O., Grindinger, T.,
Tetreault, S. & di Giovanni, E. (2012). How sound is the
Pear Tree Story? Testing the effect of varying audio
stimuli on visual attention distribution. Perspectives, 20
(1), 55–65.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1972). Semantic Primitives. Linguistische
Forschungen. №22. Frankfurt/M: Athenäum.
Wierzbicka, A. (1980). Lingua mentalis: The Semantics of
natural Language. Sydney etc.: Academic Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1996). Semantics: primes and universals.
Oxford, N. Y.: Oxford University Press.

2101

