Discourse continuity promotes children’s learning of new objects labels
Jessica F. Schwab (jschwab@princeton.edu)
Casey Lew-Williams (caseylw@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Peretsman-Scully Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA
Abstract
The present study examined the influence of continuity of
reference (i.e., discourse continuity) on children’s learning of
new objects labels. Four-year-old children were taught three
new label/objects pairs, where the speaker’s references to
objects were either continuous (i.e., clusters of utterances
referred to the same object) or discontinuous (i.e., no two
sequential sentences referred to the same object). In two
experiments, children learned new word/object mappings
more successfully when object labels were accompanied by
continuous references to the same object. This research
reveals how discourse cues support children’s encoding of
new words, and in doing so, advances our understanding of
the specific features of parents’ language input that facilitate
children’s language development.
Keywords: discourse continuity; word learning; childdirected speech

Introduction
Children are adept at analyzing the complexities of their
language input in order to learn new words, but there is also
substantial variability in their learning. In order to better
understand these differences, researchers have examined
various features of caregivers’ input shown to influence
vocabulary growth, including social cues (such as eye gaze
and pointing; e.g., Booth, McGregor, & Rohlfing, 2008;
Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008), structural cues (such as
repetition and utterance length; Brent & Siskind, 2001;
Lew-Williams, Pelucchi, & Saffran, 2011; Schwab & LewWilliams, 2016), visual cues (such as the size of labeled
objects in the visual field or their perceptual salience;
Pereira, Smith, & Yu, 2014; Pruden, Hirsh-Pasek,
Golinkoff, & Hennon, 2006), and auditory cues (such as
intonation and pitch; e.g., Ma, Golinkoff, Houston, & HirshPasek, 2011; Singh, Nestor, Parikh, & Yull, 2009). Here we
focus on a contextual cue of parents’ speech that may also
facilitate children’s vocabulary development: the content or
structure of the discourse exchange. Specifically, discourse
continuity, or the clustering of utterances that reference the
same topic, may promote children’s word learning (e.g.,
Frank, Tenenbaum, & Fernald, 2013). Recent research on
this topic suggests that discourse continuity does promote
children’s in-the-moment disambiguation of word-referent
mappings in noisy referential contexts (Horowitz & Frank,
2015), but it is not yet clear whether discourse continuity
also contributes to children’s encoding of new words in less
ambiguous contexts, i.e., when caregivers hold and talk
about an object in front of children, as is common in natural
communication. Thus, the present study tests whether

discourse continuity influences the learning of multiple new
object labels in 4-year-old children.
Previous research has revealed that young children are
sensitive to various aspects of the discourse context and
structure. For example, 24-month-olds have been shown to
understand that adults pay attention to – and talk about –
novel aspects of an interaction (Akhtar, Carpenter, &
Tomasello, 1996). That is, children are able to learn a new
word when an adult labels an object that is novel to the
discourse context from only the adult’s own point of view.
Relatedly, two-year-olds have been shown to use speakers’
speech disfluencies to predict their intended referents during
object labeling (Kidd, White, & Aslin, 2011). Finally, crosslinguistic research has revealed that children who hear more
consistent referential patterns within discourse –
specifically, regarding the use of either null, pronominal, or
lexical verb arguments – tend to produce more consistent
patterns earlier, compared to children exposed to
inconsistent discourse patterns (Guerriero, Oshima-Takane
& Kuriyama, 2006). Nevertheless, there is little research to
date that specifically looks at children’s ability to take
advantage of discourse continuity, or the idea that
neighboring utterances are likely to refer to the same topic
(e.g., Frank, Tenenbaum, & Fernald, 2013; Hoff-Ginsberg,
1994; Ochs & Shieffelin, 1983). For example, if a child
simply hears, “I rode a camel!”, he or she might come to the
incorrect conclusion that a camel is some sort of automated
vehicle. If instead the child hears, “I took a trip to the desert.
I rode a camel! He was so sweet and let me pet him,” he or
she might use the topic continuity between camel and other
words in the discourse in order to discern the meaning of
camel (i.e., an animal living in the desert), as well as to
encode its meaning more concretely and accurately.
Most existing research on the topic of discourse
continuity and children’s language learning has examined
the use of discourse continuity in child-caregiver
interactions (Frank, Tenenbaum, & Fernald, 2013; Rohde &
Frank, 2014). Rohde and Frank (2014) analyzed discourse
continuity in parents’ interactions with their children using
three different methods: raw annotations of speakers’
referent, the output of a computational model, and
judgments made by human coders. Across the three
methods, the researchers determined that many topicsignaling cues – such as pronoun use and sentence-final
reference – found in adult discourse are also present in
child-directed speech. They conclude that the function of
these cues in child-directed speech may be to help children
acquire additional referential information from their input,
particularly when individual utterances are ambiguous. Hoff

3101

(2010) revealed that children produce topic-continuing
discourse themselves, particularly during certain languagerich activities such as reading. Other work suggests that
speakers’ discourse continuity might be relevant for
supporting a key component of children’s language
development: the learning of new words. Frank,
Tenenbaum, & Fernald (2013) found that caregivers’
references to objects in a child-parent play session were
more continuous (or “clumpy”) than would be expected by
chance. Moreover, computational modeling work has shown
some evidence of the importance of discourse continuity for
word learning. In their word-learning model, Luong, Frank,
and Johnson (2013) set speakers’ intended referent to be
continuous across utterances. This discourse information,
combined with social cues, led to some improvements in the
model’s word learning performance. Together, these studies
suggest that discourse continuity exists in adult-child
interactions and provides helpful cues to word learning, yet
they are unable to conclusively determine whether or not
discourse continuity improves children’s word-learning
abilities.
Erika Hoff (2003) began to answer this question – of
whether continuity of discourse promotes children’s word
learning – by looking at topic-continuing replies, i.e.,
caregivers’ utterances that continue a topic previously
introduced by the child. Hoff found that the amount that
mothers used topic-continuing replies predicted their
children’s vocabulary growth ten weeks later, suggesting
that continuity in mother-child interactions may indeed
promote children’s language learning. Horowitz and Frank
(2015) went further by testing whether children are able to
use a speaker’s discourse continuity as a strategy for
determining object reference in ambiguous word learning
situations. In their study, children ages 2-6 years completed
a novel word-learning task, where the only cue to reference
was the placement of a labeling event within the discourse
structure of the interaction. Specifically, children heard an
object label (with no associated gestural cues to the referent)
flanked by descriptions of either toy A or toy B (which were
accompanied by gestural cues). If children are able to use
discourse continuity as a cue to reference, they should be
able to determine the object/label pairing if the labeling
event occurs between two descriptions of the same object
(either toy A or toy B), i.e., if the labeling episode is
discourse continuous. If the labeling event occurs between
two descriptions of different objects (toy A and toy B), the
label/object pair should be indeterminable. The results
revealed that children were in fact only able to successfully
determine the referent when labels were discourse
continuous. Moreover, children only started showing
successful disambiguation by age 3-4, and showed even
better learning through ages 5 and 6, suggesting that
children’s ability to use discourse information in
determining object reference might develop over the course
of childhood.
Discourse continuity clearly seems to be helpful for
disambiguation, i.e., determining reference in uncertain

situations. However, it has not yet been determined whether
discourse continuity, in addition to helping determine an
accurate word/object mapping in the moment, is also helpful
for children’s encoding of a new word that is clearly the
focus of attention. Not only is the latter common in
caregiver-child interactions (e.g., Pereira, Smith, & Yu,
2013), but so is caregivers’ tendency to refer to a string of
objects in sequence. As speakers rapidly shift focus from
one object to the next in conversation, it is possible that
providing context for each labeling episode through topic
continuity helps children successfully encode and remember
new object labels. In the present paper, we test this
prediction in 4-year-olds by teaching them three new words,
either with or without discourse continuity. If discourse
continuity does in fact promote children’s word learning, we
predicted that children who heard clusters of continuous
reference to objects would show better learning of object
labels (defined as proportion of object/label mappings
correctly identified in the test phase) compared to children
who heard object references distributed over the course of
the learning phase.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we tested the extent to which continuity of
reference influences children’s learning of three new
word/object pairs. In the Continuous condition, clusters of
three utterances included one labeling utterance directed
toward a particular object, accompanied by two additional
utterances describing – but not explicitly labeling – the same
object. In the Discontinuous condition, children heard the
same labels for each object and the same object-directed
utterances as in the Continuous condition, but the discourse
was not continuous (e.g., a label for Object A might be
immediately followed by commentary about features of
Object B). Each label or object-directed utterance was
unambiguous, i.e., it was accompanied by the speaker
gazing toward and grasping the object. At test, children
were presented with a two-alternative forced choice
reaching task in order to measure their knowledge of each
object label. If discourse continuity does in fact promote
children’s word-learning abilities, children should show
more successful learning of correct object/label mappings in
the Continuous compared to the Discontinuous condition.

Method
Participants Participants were 40 4-year-old children
(M=46.41 months, SD=3.71, Range=42.1-53.63). Twentythree participants were male, and all participants came from
monolingual English-speaking homes. Children had no
history of pervasive developmental delays. Twenty children
were randomly assigned to each of two experimental
conditions: a Continuous or Discontinuous condition,
described in detail below. Three additional participants were
tested but not included due to fussiness/refusal to cooperate
(n=2) or taking an extended break halfway through test
trials (n=1)

3102

Figure 1. Schematic depicting sample trials in the learning phase for the Continuous and Discontinuous conditions in
Experiment 1. Between each trial, the speaker rested both hands in her lap and smiled at the participant.
Stimuli and Design Three novel words—gazzer, cheem,
and tobu—corresponded to one of three novel objects, each
characterized by a different color, texture, and shape (see
Figure 1). Half of participants were exposed to one set of
word/object pairings, and half were exposed to a second,
counterbalanced set of pairings.
In the Continuous condition, blocks of three adjacent
trials in the learning phase referred to the same object.
Either the first or second trial was a labeling trial, while the
other two trials provided identifying visual information
about the object (e.g., “This is a gazzer. / This is small and
green. / This feels really spiky.”). There were two blocks of
trials for each novel word/object pair. Each object was
referred to six times total (2x per object label).
The Discontinuous condition consisted of the same exact
trials as the Continuous condition, but trials within each
block of the learning phase were pseudo-randomly ordered
such that no two adjacent utterances referred to the same
object (see Figure 1). Thus, participants heard the same
number of total references to each object and the same
number of object labels as in the Continuous condition, but
discourse continuity was absent.
Procedure During the experiment, an experimenter sat
across from the participant at a table and told him or her,
“We’re going to play a game together! Just watch and pay
attention because I’m going to ask you some questions
about these things later. Are you ready? Here we go!”
During the learning phase, the experimenter placed all
three objects in a line directly in front of her on the table (in
one of two counterbalanced orders). On each of 18 learning
trials (approximately four seconds in duration), the
experimenter began with her hands in her lap. Then she 1)
smiled at the participant, 2) looked down at an object, 3)
grabbed the object, raised it slightly, and tilted it up, 4)
looked back at the participant and said a labeling or objectdirected sentence about the object, 5) looked back at the
object and set it back down, and 6) put her hands back in her
lap. Two counterbalanced trial orders were used for each
condition across participants.

The test phase began immediately after the learning
phase. The experimenter removed all three objects from the
table and told the participant that she was now going to ask
some questions. Next, the experimenter took two objects at
a time, placed them in an uncovered basket, and put the
basket on the table. Without looking down at the objects, the
experimenter slid the basket toward the participant. Then
she asked the participant to choose one of the objects and
hand it to the experimenter (e.g., “Which one is the cheem?
Can you give me the cheem?”). During each test trial, the
experimenter maintained eye contact with the participant. If
a child initially touched more than one object, the object
that was finally handed to the experimenter was recorded as
his or her choice. There were 12 test trials total (four trials
per object/label pairing). Two counterbalanced test orders
were used across participants. Across conditions,
participants saw the same pairs of two novel objects,
positioned on the left and right sides of the basket.
Finally, children’s vocabulary was assessed using the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) (Dunn & Dunn,
2007). The PPVT is a standardized measure to assess
children’s receptive vocabulary by asking them to identify
familiar words from a flipbook of pictures. Children were
also rewarded with stickers following the test phase and
again during and after the administration of the PPVT.

Results and Discussion
Word learning was measured in terms of the proportion of
word/object pairs that children correctly identified in the test
phase. A two-tailed independent samples t-test showed that
learning was significantly greater in the Continuous
condition (M=.88, SE=.03) compared to the Discontinuous
condition (M=.77, SE=.04; t(34.27)=2.05, p<.05, d=.65; see
Figure 2). Additionally, between conditions, there was no
significant difference in children’s mean age (Continuous:
M=46.96 months, SD=4.13; Discontinuous: M=45.86
months, SD=3.26; t(36.05)=.94, p=.35) or mean
standardized PPVT score (Continuous: M=118.63,
SD=11.96;
Discontinuous:
M=114.21,
SD=15.05;
t(34.26)=1.0, p=.32). Interestingly, however, learning was
significantly greater than chance for both the Continuous

3103

(t(19)=12.28, p<.001) and Discontinuous conditions
(t(19)=6.20, p<.001), suggesting that children are able to
successfully learn the novel words even without discourse
continuity. However, continuity of reference does seem to
provide an additional word-learning boost.
Because we tested children ranging from 3.5 to 4.5 years
of age, we examined a possible interaction between age and
discourse continuity on children’s word learning. A 2x2
factorial Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with age and
condition (Continuous or Discontinuous) as betweensubjects factors revealed a significant main effect of
condition (F(1, 36)=4.31, p<.05), but no significant main
effect of age (F(1, 36)=2.04, p=.16) and no significant
condition x age interaction (F(1, 36)=.80, p=.38). Thus,
across the 3.5- to 4.5-year range, discourse continuity
supported children’s word learning equivalently.
These results suggest that discourse continuity promotes
word learning for 3.5- to 4.5-year-old children. Importantly,
however, the “discourse” in our experiment provided
relevant visual information about each object, such as its
color or texture (in a similar manner to Horowitz & Frank,
2015). Thus, it remains unclear whether topic continuity in
this experiment facilitated learning due to the informative
discourse that accompanied object labels, or whether simply
having continuity of object reference drove the more
successful learning in the Continuous condition. In
particular, we wanted to determine whether continuity of
uninformative discourse – i.e., discourse that provided
relatively neutral information about the objects (e.g., “This
is good and neat”) – would promote children’s word
learning in a similar manner. In Experiment 2, we sought to
answer this question by replicating Experiment 1, but using
uninformative instead of informative discourse.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 sought to replicate the results of Experiment 1
using uninformative discourse. In each condition
(Continuous/Uninformative
and
Discontinuous/
Uninformative), object labels were the same as in
Experiment 1, but accompanying discourse provided no
relevant information about each object. If the relevant
contextual cue boosting children’s performance in this task
is continuity of reference more generally – and not the
pairing of object labels with important visual information in
the discourse – we again expected children to show more
successful learning of object/label mappings in the
Continuous/Uninformative condition compared to the
Discontinuous/Uninformative condition.

Method
Participants Participants were 40 4-year-old children
(M=46.37 months, SD=3.36, Range=42.27-53.13). Sixteen
participants were male, and all participants came from
monolingual English-speaking homes. Children had no
history of pervasive developmental delays. Twenty children
were randomly assigned to one of two experimental
conditions: a Continuous/Uninformative or Discontinuous/

Uninformative condition, described in detail below. Two
additional participants were tested but not included due to
experimenter error (n=1) or being bilingual (less than 85%
English exposure) (n=1).
Stimuli and Design The words and objects used were
identical to Experiment 1. The Continuous/Uninformative
condition was identical to the Continuous condition from
Experiment 1, except that object-directed utterances
provided no identifying visual information about each object
(e.g., “This is a gazzer. / This is good and neat. / This is nice
and
cute.”).
Object-directed
utterances
in
the
Continuous/Uninformative condition were matched to
sentences in the Continuous condition from Experiment 1 in
total number of syllables. The Discontinuous/Uninformative
condition consisted of the exact same trials as the
Continuous/Uninformative condition, but trials within each
block of the learning phase were ordered such that no two
adjacent utterances referred to the same object. Thus, as in
Experiment 1, participants in this condition heard the same
number of total references to each object and the same
number of object labels as the Continuous conditions, but
there was no discourse continuity.
Procedure The procedures for the learning phase, test
phase, and administration of the PPVT in Experiment 2
were identical to the procedures in Experiment 1.

Results and Discussion
Again, word learning was measured in terms of the
proportion of word/object pairs that children correctly
identified in the test phase. A two-tailed independent
samples t-test showed that learning was significantly greater
in the Continuous/Uninformative condition (M=.88, SE=.03)
compared to the Discontinuous/Uninformative condition
(M=.72, SE=.04; t(34.64)=2.93, p=.006, d=.92; see Figure
2). Additionally, between conditions, there was no
significant difference in children’s average age (Continuous:
M=46.27 months, SD= 3.20; Discontinuous: M=46.47
months, SD=3.60; t(37.50)=-.18, p=.86) or average
standardized vocabulary score (Continuous: M=119.5,
SD=13.13;
Discontinuous:
M=114.72,
SD=12.62;
t(35.83)=1.14, p=.26).
Because we tested children ranging from 3.5 to 4.5 years
of age, however, we again examined a possible interaction
between age and discourse continuity on children’s word
learning. A 2x2 factorial Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)
with age and condition (Continuous or Discontinuous) as
between-subjects factors revealed a significant main effect
of condition (F(1, 36)=8.27, p=.007), but no significant
main effect of age (F(1, 36)=.01, p=.92) and no significant
condition x age interaction (F(1, 36)=.62, p=.44). Similar to
Experiment 1, across the 3.5- to 4.5-year range, discourse
continuity promoted children’s word learning equivalently.
Additionally, similar to Experiment 1, there was significant
learning compared to chance for both conditions
(Continuous:
t(19)=11.83,
p<.001;
Discontinuous:

3104

t(19)=4.95, p<.001), again suggesting that continuity of
reference supports word learning in the absence of discourse
continuity.
Comparing across Experiment 1 and Experiment 2, there
was no significant difference in learning between the
Continuous and Continuous/Uninformative conditions
(t(37.95)<.01, p>.99, d<.01), or between the Discontinuous
and Discontinuous/Uninformative conditions (t(37.99)=-.81,
p=.42, d=.26). A 2x2 mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with experiment (1 or 2) as a between-subjects factor and
condition (Continuous or Discontinuous) as a withinsubjects factor revealed a significant main effect of
condition (F(1, 76)=12.47, p<.001, η2p=.14), but no
significant main effect of Experiment (F(1, 76)=.44, p=.51,
η2p=.005), and no significant condition x experiment
interaction (F(1, 76)=.44, p=.51, η2p=.005). Thus,
Experiment 2 successfully replicated the results of
Experiment 1 in an uninformative discourse context.
Together, these results suggests that continuity of reference
generally – and not just continuity of informative discourse
– seems to promote children’s word learning.

Figure 2: Mean proportion object/label mappings correctly
identified in Experiment 1 (Continuous vs. Discontinuous
conditions) and Experiment 2 (Continuous/Uninformative
vs. Discontinuous/Uninformative conditions). Error bars
show +/- 1 SEM across participants.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we show that continuity of reference
promotes 4-year-old children’s learning of new object
labels. Moreover, the speaker’s discourse does not need to
provide informative content in order to promote children’s
word learning – simply having continuity of reference in
child-directed speech seems to be sufficient to support
learning. Thus, not only does discourse continuity help
children determine ambiguous word/object mappings in the
moment (Horowitz & Frank, 2015), but also, it helps
children encode multiple new object labels in the context of
rapidly shifting adult-child interactions.
A great deal of recent research has focused on children’s
ability to track statistical co-occurrences in language in
order to learn word-referent mappings (e.g., Smith & Yu,

2008), but fewer studies have focused on children’s ability
to use information about the structure of discourse in order
to learn new words. Because children have been shown to
be adept at tracking object-label regularities over time, in
some contexts these kinds of contextual cues may not be
necessary. More likely, however, discourse cues, in addition
to socio-pragmatic cues, help children encode information
about word/object co-occurrences over time, presumably by
increasing their salience. Relatedly, Pereira, Smith, and Yu
(2013) have suggested that there are optimal visual
moments for learning new word/object pairs. That is, when
objects appear in a clean, stable view in front of a child
while it is being labeled, that child is more likely to learn
the object’s label. Here, continuity of reference may provide
a similarly optimal contextual moment for learning a new
word/object pair, where each word and referent are clearly
linked within the discourse, allowing children to attend to
their features or potential functions.
The present results are convergent with findings showing
that repetition of words across neighboring utterances is
helpful for learning (e.g., Onnis, Waterfall, & Edelman,
2008; Schwab & Lew-Williams, 2016). In particular,
previous research has shown that repetition of object labels
in blocks of successive utterances promotes two-year-olds’
encoding of new word/object pairings. Here, at least with
older preschool-age children, simply referencing one object
for several sentences in a row – without repeating the object
label itself – may enable the learner to better encode a
word/object pairing. It is possible that repetition of object
labels themselves – compared to continuity of reference
more generally – promote word learning differentially along
the developmental continuum. For example, previous work
suggests that children’s ability to exploit discourse
continuity to disambiguate moments of reference increases
as children age, with children under 3 years not showing the
ability to take advantage of discourse cues in this context
(Horowitz & Frank, 2015). In a similar manner, the need for
caregivers to repeat object labels in neighboring sentences
may decrease over time as children increase their
proficiency in inferring information from the discourse, i.e.,
become better at learning from discourse continuity. Future
research should aim to directly examine differences in the
influence of partial repetition and discourse continuity on
children’s learning across a wider age range, as well as
relate children’s learning abilities to differences in
caregivers’ naturalistic use of these cues in the home.
Finally, it is not yet clear from the present results whether
children’s increased learning in the Continuous conditions is
a facilitation or interference effect. Specifically, it may be
the case that continuity of reference promotes learning, or
that discontinuity in object reference interferes with learning
because of rapid shifts in attention to different objects. We
are currently pursuing follow-up studies to determine
whether visual continuity is sufficient to support children’s
word learning in this experimental context, or whether
visual discontinuity interferes with learning. If children
learn words similarly regardless of continuous or

3105

discontinuous visual exposure, this would suggest that
continuity in a speakers’ discourse in particular seems to
promote children’s word learning.
Overall, the present experiments reveal that discourse
continuity promotes 4-year-old children’s learning of new
object labels, and this seems to be true regardless of the
content or informativity of the discourse. Previous research
on discourse continuity has found that natural child-directed
discourse tends to be “clumpy” (Frank, Tenenbaum, &
Fernald, 2013), and continuity of discourse helps children
disambiguate between possible referents in the moment
(Horowitz & Frank, 2015). The present work goes further
by suggesting that clusters of reference to particular objects
can help children more successfully encode new words in
the context of hearing sequential label/object pairings, as
speakers rapidly shift focus from one object to the next.
This research has implications for our understanding of how
differences in caregivers’ language input can influence
children’s vocabulary development.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to the participating families and to Jessica
Quinter for all of her help with testing participants and
coding videos. We also thank Eva Fourakis, Carolyn
Mazzei, and the rest of the Princeton Baby Lab for their
administrative assistance. This work was supported by
grants to C.L.W. from the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (R03HD079779), the American
Speech-Language-Hearing Foundation, and the American
Hearing Research Foundation.

References
Akhtar, Carpenter, & Tomasello (1996). The role of
discourse novelty in early word learning. Child
Development, 67(2), 635-645.
Booth, A. E., McGregor, K. K., & Rohlfing, K. J. (2008).
Socio-pragmatics and attention: Contributions to
gesturally guided word learning in toddlers. Language
Learning and Development, 4(3), 179-202.
Brent, M. R., & Siskind, J. M. (2001). The role of exposure
to
isolated
words
in
early
vocabulary
development. Cognition, 81(2), B33-B44.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Infant gaze following
and pointing predict accelerated vocabulary growth
through two years of age: A longitudinal, growth
curve modeling study. Journal of Child Language, 35(1),
207.
Dunn, L.M., & D.M. Dunn (2007). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test—Fourth Edition. Bloomington, MN:
NCS Pearson, Inc.
Frank, M. C., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Fernald, A. (2013).
Social and discourse contributions to the determination of
reference in cross-situational word learning. Language
Learning and Development, 9(1), 1-24.
Guerriero, A. S., Oshima-Takane, Y., & Kuriyama, Y.
(2006). The development of referential choice in English

and Japanese: a discourse-pragmatic perspective. Journal
of Child Language, 33(4), 823-857.
Hoff, E. (2003). The specificity of environmental influence:
Socioeconomic status affects early vocabulary
development via maternal speech. Child Development,
74(5), 1368-1378.
Hoff, E. (2010). Context effects on young children’s
language use: The influence of conversational setting and
partner. First Language, 30(3-4), 461-472.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1994). Influences of mother and child on
maternal talkativeness. Discourse Processes, 18(1), 105117.
Horowitz, A. C., & Frank, M. C. (2015). Young children’s
developing sensitivity to discourse continuity as a cue for
inferring reference. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 129, 84-97.
Kidd, C., White, K. S., & Aslin, R. N. (2011). Toddlers use
speech disfluencies to predict speakers’ referential
intentions. Developmental Science, 14(4), 925-934.
Lew-Williams, C., Pelucchi, B., & Saffran, J. R. (2011).
Isolated words enhance statistical language learning in
infancy. Developmental Science, 14(6), 1323-1329.
Luong, M. T., Frank, M. C., & Johnson, M. (2013). Parsing
entire discourses as very long strings: Capturing topic
continuity in grounded language learning. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1, 315–
326.
Ma, W., Golinkoff, R. M., Houston, D. M., & Hirsh-Pasek,
K. (2011). Word learning in infant-and adult-directed
speech. Language Learning and Development, 7(3), 185201.
Ochs, E. & Schieffelin, B. (1995). The impact of language
socialization on grammatical development. In P. Fletcher
& B. MacWhinney (Eds.), The Handbook of Child
Language (pp. 73–94). Oxford: Blackwell.
Onnis, L., Waterfall, H. R., & Edelman, S. (2008). Learn
locally, act globally: Learning language from variation set
cues. Cognition, 109(3), 423-430.
Pereira, A. F., Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2014). A bottom-up
view of toddler word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 21(1), 178-185.
Pruden, S. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Golinkoff, R. M., &
Hennon, E.A. (2006). The birth of words: Ten-month-olds
learn words through perceptual salience. Child
Development, 77(2), 266-280.
Rohde, H., & Frank, M. C. (2014). Markers of topical
discourse
in
child-directed
speech. Cognitive
Science, 38(8), 1634-1661.
Schwab, J.F., & Lew-Williams, C. (2016). Repetition across
successive sentences facilitates young children’s word
learning. Developmental Psychology, 52(6), 879-886.
Singh, L., Nestor, S., Parikh, C., & Yull, A. (2009).
Influences of infant-directed speech on early word
recognition. Infancy, 14(6), 654-666.
Smith, L., & Yu, C. (2008). Infants rapidly learn wordreferent
mappings
via
cross-situational
statistics. Cognition, 106(3), 1558-1568.

3106

