Discovering Multicausality in the Development of Coordinated Behavior
Tian Linger Xu (txu@indiana.edu)
Computer Science and Cognitive Science Department, 1101 East 10th Street, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Drew H. Abney (dhabney@indiana.edu)
Psychological & Brain Sciences Department, 1101 East 10th Street, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, 47405

Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)
Psychological & Brain Sciences, Cognitive Sciences, and Informatics Department, 1101 East 10th Street, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, 47405

Abstract
Human interaction involves the organization of a collection of
sensorimotor systems across space and time. The study of
how coordination develops in child-parent interaction has
primarily focused on understanding the development of
specific coordination patterns from individual modalities.
However, less work has taken a systems view and
investigated the development of coordination among multiple
interdependent behaviors. In the present work, we used
Granger causality as a mathematical model to construct
dyadic causal networks of multimodal data collected from a
longitudinal study of child-parent interaction. At a grouplevel, we observed increases in the number of causal links and
in the strength of such links in dyadic interaction from 9months to 12-months. At an individual-level, we observed
high variability in the types of causal links that emerged
across developmental ages. We discuss these results in terms
of a multicausality hypothesis for the development of human
coordination.
Keywords: Interpersonal Coordination; Social Interaction;
Child-Parent Interaction; Granger Causality; Multimodal
Social Interaction; Multivariate Autoregressive Model

Introduction
Human interaction entails the organization of a vast array of
sensorimotor systems across space and time (Kendon,
1970). We imitate, align and synchronize over a spectrum of
social behaviors with our social partners during
communication and studies have shown fine-grained
temporal structures across modalities in interpersonal
coordination (Fusaroli & Tylén, 2016; Garrod & Pickering,
2009; Louwerse, Dale, Bard, & Jeuniaux, 2012). How we
are able to organize behaviors across multiple modalities
and achieve seamless coordination in only fractions of a
second is one of the most important questions about human
cognition (Marsh, Richardson, & Schmidt, 2009).
One effective approach to answering this question is to
examine how such smooth coordination evolves during
development. In developmental science, past research have
shown that within specific behavioral modalities,
coordinated behaviors emerge early in life and develop
incrementally with age (Yale, Messinger, Cobo-Lewis, &
Delgado, 2003). For example, infants start to follow and

coordinate the gaze direction of their social partner (Scaife
& Bruner, 1975) and form vocal and facial expression
feedback loops with their parents early in their first year of
life (Cohn & Tronick, 1988). Such social contingencies are
suggested to be indicative of later language development
(Goldstein, King, & West, 2003; Mundy & Newell, 2007;
Warlaumont, Richards, Gilkerson, & Oller, 2014).
Development is about change. The multicausality
assumption in dynamical systems theory (Smith & Thelen,
2003) indicates that change and growth in the system
emerge through the relationships between different
interdependent components, without an executive preprogrammed and unified path. Certain patterns and
behavioral influences emerge or diminish at different
developmental ages, and through different developmental
pathways. In light of this, the aim of the present study is to
examine the change in the organization of coordination
among
multiple interdependent
behaviors.
More
specifically, we want to investigate the connectivity and
directional influences from one modality to another in the
course of development.
Towards this goal, in this paper, we proposed a novel
approach to modeling multimodal coordinated behaviors
between children and parents as a directed graph network
with Granger causality (Bressler & Seth, 2011; Granger,
1969). A longitudinal study was conducted in which we
invited children at 9 months and their parents to participate
in a toy play experiment, and again at 12 months. During the
toy play sessions, we recorded the dyad’s momentary eye
gaze and manual action data with eye-trackers and multiview video recording. With this study and our analytic
approach, we can investigate the development of human
coordination through directional causal relations among a
network of interdependent behavioral variables.
This framework of modeling child-parent interaction as
causal networks allowed us to determine changes in the
amount of causal links and the strength of causal links
across 9- and 12-months. We tested two specific hypotheses
about the development of coordination. First, the
developmental hypothesis: on a group level, we expected
that the number and strength of causal links in the childparent coordination network would increase from 9- to 12-

1369

months. Second, the multicausality hypothesis: we expected
the increased coordination to be achieved by the emergence
of new causal influences in the network, among multiple
different behavior variables. One key assumption of this
hypothesis is that no causal link has developmental priority.
If dyads show individual differences in their coordination
development pattern, it would be an indication that they
each follow distinct pathways to achieve increased levels of
sensorimotor coordination.

Granger Causality for Point Process Data
Coordination patterns change throughout the course of an
interaction and require real-time adjustment of actions and
predictions in accordance with their sensorimotor input
(Clark & Brennan, 1991; Yu & Smith, 2016). When we
study interpersonal coordination and development from a
dynamical approach, one challenge is quantifying
directional influence and connectivity between two specific
variables. This is due, in part, to the interconnectivity and
complexity of information exchange among behavioral
variables (Fusaroli, Konvalinka, & Wallot, 2014; Hidaka &
Yu, 2010).
Granger causality, or G-causality, is a well-established
and effective method for the investigation of directional
relationships among a set of interdependent variables in
many domains (Bressler & Seth, 2011). Granger (1969)
formalized the basic idea of causality between signals
introduced by Wiener (1956) based on multivariate
autoregressive (MVAR) models: if past values of Y contain
information that help predict X above and beyond the
information contained in the past values of X alone, then Y
is said to Granger-cause X.
Kim et al. (2011) proposed a point process framework to
enable G-causality to be applied to point process data with a
discrete nature. A temporal point process is a stochastic time
series of binary events that occurs in continuous time. It can
only take on two values at any point in time, indicating
whether or not an event has occurred. With a time series
dataset of an ensemble of variables, the occurring likelihood
of the event variable X can be modeled by the generalized
linear model (GLM): a linear combination of time series X’s
dependency to the history of each individual element in the
ensemble. Given a set of multivariate temporal streams, the
causal relationships from variable Y to X is assessed by
calculating the relative reduction in the likelihood of
producing this particular history of time series of X when
the history of Y is excluded, compared with the likelihood if
all the available covariates are used in the prediction
calculation. If the prediction likelihood is reduced when the
history of variable Y is excluded from calculation, then there
exists a Granger causal relationship from Y to X. In
addition, Kim et al. (2011) proposed that the sign of
averaged influence of the occurring history of variable Y on
X can be used to distinguish excitatory (positive estimate)
and inhibitory (negative estimate) influences: whether the
event history of Y is more or less likely to lead to the event
occurring for variable X. Finally, the point process

framework also affords researchers to identify the statistical
significance of a causal link based on the likelihood ratio
test statistic. The goodness-of-fit statistics were applied by
comparing the deviance between the estimated model with
trigger variable Y excluded and the estimated full model in
the GLM framework. Then, a multiple hypothesis testing
error measure, FDR, proposed in (Benjamini & Hochberg,
1995; Storey, 2002) was used to control the expected
proportion of false discovery rate when the number of
hypothesis tests is large and the number of rejected null
hypotheses is consequentially large.
Calculating G-causality with GLM model fitting makes
very general assumptions about the data (Barnett, Barrett, &
Seth, 2009) and with the point process framework, we are
able to apply G-cause to categorical behavioral data. In the
present paper, we used this framework to construct
quantitative causal networks among different behavioral
modalities in child-parent interaction and study child’s
coordination development.

Methods
Participants
21 parent-child dyads participated in this study. Dyads came
into the lab when the children were 9-months-old and 12months-old.

Figure 1: (a) A dual eye-tracking child-parent interaction
paradigm. (b) Eye movement and object manipulation
events from both the child and parent were coded into
categorical data streams. The data streams were then
divided into three different ROI groups, preserving only
the onset of events. Finally, per subject, the three groups
were concatenated as input for subsequent calculations of
Granger causality.

1370

Procedure
Figure 1(a) shows the experimental setup of our dual eyetracking child-parent interaction experimental paradigm (Yu
& Smith, 2013, 2016). Parents and their children were
seated across from each other at a plain white table (61cm ×
91cm × 64cm). Head-mounted Positive Science eye trackers
(Franchak, Kretch, Soska, & Adolph, 2011) were put on
both the child and parent to capture their gaze data in real
time. Each eye-tracking system includes an infrared camera
that records eye images (mounted on the head and pointed
to the right eye, see Figure 1a), and a scene camera
capturing the first-person view from the participant’s
perspective. The scene camera’s visual field is 108 degrees
providing a broad view. Each eye-tracking system recorded
both the first-person view video and precise gaze allocation
in that view, with a sampling rate of 30 frames per second.
Another high-resolution camera was mounted above the
table and provided a bird’s-eye view at a recording rate of
30 frames per second.
For each trial of the experiment, there were two sets of
toys. Each set consisted of three toy objects with three
different colors (blue, green, red). The toys were of similar
size and weight. Parents were told that the goal of the
experiment was to study how parents and toddlers interacted
with objects during free play and they were asked to engage
their children with the toys as what they would naturally do
in daily life. Each of the two sets of toys was played with
twice for 90 seconds, resulting in approximately six minutes
of play over four trials from each dyad. Toy set order
(ABAB or BABA) was counterbalanced across dyads.

Data Processing
Human coders went through the videos from multiple
viewpoints and manually annotated frame-by-frame about
which object was gazed at and held by the child and the
parent with both of their hands. In this study, we coded four
Region-Of-Interest (ROI)s for the eye movement data: blue,
green and red object categories (1-3) and other (0). Each
value represents where the child or the parent was looking at
in every frame. The participants could be looking at each
other’s face, but our analysis didn’t include face looking
events in this paper. The same object and empty ROIs (0-3)
were also the coding categories for hand action data
streams, indicating the target object was held by either the
left or the right hand of the child and the parent. For each
trial, after data processing, four coded categorical data event
streams (child gaze events, child holding events, parent gaze
events, and parent holding events) were obtained.
The next step was to convert our behavioral temporal data
streams into multivariate point processes. All behavioral
data streams were divided into three groups by different
ROIs and then only the onsets of object ROI events were
preserved to fit the point process framework for calculating
G-causality. Figure 1(b) shows the point process data
streams from one experimental trial. After point process
conversion, for each dyad, three groups were concatenated
as input data for calculating G-causality. In each group, all

streams contained the onset of the same category of events.
With this point process data transformation, we extracted
Granger causality among different behavioral variables
acting on the same object. For example, we estimated Gcausality from the event of child looking at the red object to
the occurrence of the parent looking at the same object.

Analysis
For each dyad, we constructed a dyadic causal network
among four behavioral variables (child eye movement, child
hand action, parent eye movement and parent hand action)
at 9 months and 12 months. Figure 2 shows the G-cause
network constructed with two dyads’ interaction data. In
each network, there are 4 behavioral variables (child eye,
child hand, parent eye and parent hand) and 12 different
types of directional links between every pair of variables.
The different types of directional links are illustrated in
Figure 2.
Significance tests based on the likelihood ratio test
statistic with FDR controlling false positive causal
interactions (Storey, 2002; Kim et al., 2011) was performed
to determine the statistical significance of every causal link
with regard to the entire network. In Figure 2, red colored
links indicate the significantly positive links with number at
the end of each link representing the G-cause value from
one behavioral variable to the other. For example, at 12
months, Dyad#1 had a significantly positive causal link
from child’s gaze to child’s holding behavior. This means
that the child was looking at a certain object and the
occurrence of this event significantly increased the
likelihood of the child holding the same object. In addition,
to best comprehend the magnitude of G-cause values for our

Figure 2: (a) The G-cause coordination network among
child eye, child hand, parent eye and parent hand time
series for Dyad#1 at 9 months (left) and 12 months
(right); red links are significantly positive G-cause links
and the number indicates the G-cause value of that causal
relation. (b) The G-cause coordination network for
Dyad#2 at 9 months (left) and 12 months (right).

1371

multimodal coordination data, we also calculated the
baseline G-cause network for every interaction. This was
done by randomizing the order of event streams (with all
ROIs and their event durations) for the behavioral variables.
Then, the randomized onsets of object ROI events were
preserved to convert the data to fit point process model for
baseline G-cause network calculation.
The source code, a more detailed explanation of the
Granger causality calculation process and more
supplementary materials of this study are available at:
https://github.com/lingerxu/Granger_causality_coordination
.

Results
To examine our developmental hypothesis – increased
coordination from 9-months to 12-months – we first looked
at two group-level measures: the number of significantly
positive G-cause links and the average G-cause value per
link in each interaction network. For example, in Figure 2a,
Dyad#1 had 3 significantly positive links at 9 months and 5
links at 12 months and the average G-cause value per link
was 2.96 at 9 months (baseline value 0.19) and -2.27 at 12
months (baseline value -0.04). Average baseline G-cause
values obtained with the randomized event streams were
close to 0 for both age groups. In the present paper, we
focused on examining the significantly positive G-cause
links, which have much higher values than baseline and
entail a strong causal link from one behavior variable to
another.
As shown in Figure 3, we observed more significantly
positive G-cause links at 12 months (M=3.95, SD=0.23)
compared to each dyad’s network at 9 months (M=2.38,
SD=0.20), t(20)=3.27, p=.004. We also observed that the Gcause network for 12 month olds (M=5.50, SD=0.39) had
significantly higher average G-cause values per link than 9
months (M=2.52, SD=0.26), t(20)=3.85, p<.0001. Overall,
the multimodal coordination between child and parent
showed increased developmental changes from 9 months to
12 months. The observation of increased positive causal
links in the network and higher G-cause values on average
from 9- to 12-months, suggests that the coordinative
patterns of the child-parent dyadic system are becoming
more dense and stronger.

Multicausality and Individual Differences
The main proposal of the multicausality hypothesis is that
increased coordination is achieved by the emergence of
multiple new causal influences between different pairs of
behavioral variables and that no causal link has
developmental priority. The results observed in the last
section provided clear evidence that child-parent dyadic
systems become more coordinated from 9 months to 12
months. Next, we want to look at how this increased level of
coordination was achieved and whether we will observe
individual differences in the developmental pattern in the
dyadic causal network.

Figure 3: (a) Amount of significantly positive G-cause
links and (b) average G-cause values of child-parent eye
hand coordination networks at 9 months and 12 months.
When we take a closer look at the individual development
between the two networks of each dyad, and how each
causal link in the network changed from 9 months to 12
months, there are multiple types of change. Here we will
mainly focus on examining the emergence of new
significantly positive link, which means that this positive
causal link did not exist in the 9-month coordination
network, and only appeared in the 12-month network.
With 12 different types of G-cause links in total, the
development of the coordination network can be described
by a vector of developmental changes in each type of causal
relations. The developmental coordination row vector for
each dyad is visualized in Figure 4a. Three causal relation
links, child hand→child eye, parent hand→child hand and
child hand → parent hand, are omitted in the illustration
because we did not observe any emergence of new positive
links in these three link types. For example, the two dyads
in Figure 2 can be mapped to the first two vector
representations in Figure 4a. For Dyad#1, two new positive
links emerged in their G-cause network at 12 months. This
emergence is depicted in the developmental coordination
vector: two red cells in parent eye→child eye and child eye
→child hand categories (see Figure 4a, row 1). In another
example, for Dyad#2 (see Figure 4a, row 2), five new links
emerged from 9 months to 12 months. And we can see that,
between the two dyads, four out of five emergent links from
Dyad#2 were completely different from the G-cause relation
types in which Dyad#1’s emergent links belonged to.
Finally, if increased coordination from 9 months to 12
months was achieved through one type of causal link with
causal priority, then the hypothesized frequency distribution
of emergent links will be similar to Figure 4b. We can
observe that the majority of emergent links belong to the
same causal relation type. Alternatively, the multicausality
hypothesis entails that increased coordination is achieved
via multiple different causal relations. In an ideal situation,
we would observe a uniform frequency distribution of
emergent causal relations. This possibility is depicted in
Figure 4c. Figure 4d shows the empirical frequency
distribution of emergent links. The empirical distribution
provides evidence for a diffuse collection of emergent
causal relations, supporting the multicausality hypothesis

1372

Figure 4: (a) The development coordination vector for each dyad’s G-cause network. Red cells indicate the emergence of
significantly positive G-cause links from 9 months to 12 months between different pairs of behavior variables. Each row
represents the developmental change in coordination network for one dyad. Each column represents the developmental
change for a particular type of causal relation link. Three causal relation links, child hand→child eye, parent hand→child
hand and child hand→parent hand, are omitted here because we did not observe the emergence of significantly positive
links. (b) The hypothesized frequency distribution of emergent causal links if increased coordination was achieved by only
one link with causal priority. (c) Illustration of the frequency distribution of emergent links for the ideal uniform
distribution under the multicausality hypothesis. (d) The empirical frequency distribution of emergent links in our results.
that child-parent dyads are utilizing multiple coordination
patterns to achieve increased coordination.

General Discussion
The goal of the present paper was to investigate the
development of multimodal organization in naturalistic
child-parent interactions. We used a novel causal network
modeling approach to better understand how multimodal
dyadic systems change across developmental age. The
observed results provide preliminary evidence for the
developmental and multicausality hypotheses that we
proposed at the outset of the paper.
At a group-level, we observed an increase in the amount
of causal links and an increase in the strength of causal links
from 9 months to 12 months. These results provided support
for the developmental hypothesis, suggesting that the
multimodal coordination patterns across the child-parent
dyadic system became stronger with more components
being coordinated within the dyadic system. This is an
important observation because it provides novel evidence
for an important property of the developing child-parent
dyadic system: development includes adding redundancy to
the social interaction by creating new pathways for
coordination to occur (Yu & Smith, 2016). Redundancy is
an important property for any complex system because it
affords adaptability in the face of intrinsic and extrinsic

perturbations (Kugler & Turvey, 1987; Thelen & Smith,
1998).
At an individual level, we observed that the causal
relation links were distributed among all types of G-cause
relations between two behavioral variables both within and
between agents. Furthermore, the frequency distribution of
emergent causal links was approximately uniform
suggesting that there was no single behavioral link taking
developmental causal priority in the network. These results
add preliminary support for the multicausality hypothesis.
These observations provide important conceptual and
empirical contributions. Multicausality has been proposed to
be an important property of a complex system (Smith &
Thelen, 2003), however there has been little work to extend
the proposal of multicausality to a dyadic model of childparent interactions. This framework quantifies the
directional causal influences between different behavioral
variables to model the complex system of interpersonal
coordination at sensorimotor level. Thus, it can provide
heuristics towards understanding the individual differences
in the establishment of joint attention and possibly the
reasons underlying the correlations between joint attention
and many developmental outcomes (Mundy et al., 2007;
Tomasello & Farrar, 1986; Yu & Smith, 2016). Finally, to
our knowledge, this is the first study to use MVAR-based
Granger causality to model multimodal coordination as
directed causal networks. Our results provide evidence for

1373

the promise of this analysis method as a novel dynamic
modeling method for many domains, such as developmental
science, behavioral science, etc.

Acknowledgments
We thank Melissa Elston, Steven Elmlinger, Charlotte
Wozniak, Melissa Hall, Charlene Tay, and Seth Foster for
collection of the data; Seth Foster and Thomas Smith for
developing data management and processing software; and
Linda Smith, Lei Yuan and Lauren Stone for fruitful
discussions. This work was funded by NIH grants R01
HD074601, R21 EY017843, T32 HD07475

References
Barnett, L., Barrett, A. B., & Seth, A. K. (2009). Granger
causality and transfer entropy Are equivalent for gaussian
variables. Physical Review Letters, 103(23), 1–10.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false
discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
B.
Bressler, S. L., & Seth, A. K. (2011). Wiener-Granger
Causality: A well established methodology. NeuroImage,
58(2), 323–329.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition.
Cohn, J. F., & Tronick, E. Z. (1988). Mother-infant face-toface interaction: Influence is bidirectional and unrelated
to periodic cycles in either partner’s behavior.
Developmental Psychology, 24(3), 386–392.
Franchak, J. M., Kretch, K. S., Soska, K. C., & Adolph, K.
E. (2011). Head-mounted eye-tracking: A new method to
describe infant looking. Child Development, 82(6), 1738–
1750.
Fusaroli, R., Konvalinka, I., & Wallot, S. (2014). Analyzing
Social Interactions: The Promises and Challenges of
Using Cross Recurrence Quantification Analysis.
Translational Recurrences, 137–155.
Fusaroli, R., & Tylén, K. (2016). Investigating
Conversational Dynamics: Interactive Alignment,
Interpersonal Synergy, and Collective Task Performance.
Cognitive Science, 40(1), 145–171.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2009). Joint Action,
Interactive Alignment, and Dialog. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1(2), 292–304.
Goldstein, M. H., King, A. P., & West, M. J. (2003). Social
interaction shapes babbling: testing parallels between
birdsong and speech. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
100(13), 8030–5.
Granger, C. W. J. (1969). Investigating Causal Relations by
Econometric Models and Cross-spectral Methods.
Econometrica, 37(3), 424–438.
Hidaka, S., & Yu, C. (2010). Analyzing multimodal time
series as dynamical systems. In International Conference
on Multimodal Interfaces and the Workshop on Machine

Learning for Multimodal Interaction (p. 53: 1-8). ACM.
Kendon, A. (1970). Movement coordination in social
interaction:
Some
examples
described.
Acta
Psychologica, 32(C), 101–125.
Kim, S., Putrino, D., Ghosh, S., & Brown, E. N. (2011). A
Granger causality measure for point process models of
ensemble neural spiking activity. PLoS Computational
Biology, 7(3), 1–13.
Kugler, P. N., & Turvey, M. T. (1987). Information, natural
law, and the self-assembly of rhythmic movement.
Resources for Ecological Psychology, 481.
Louwerse, M. M., Dale, R., Bard, E. G., & Jeuniaux, P.
(2012). Behavior matching in multimodal communication
Is synchronized. Cognitive Science, 36(8), 1404–1426.
Marsh, K. L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt, R. C. (2009).
Social Connection Through Joint Action and
Interpersonal Coordination. Topics in Cognitive Science,
1(2), 320–339.
Mundy, P., Block, J., Delgado, C., Pomares, Y., Van Hecke,
A. V., & Parlade, M. V. (2007). Individual differences
and the development of joint attention in infancy. Child
Development, 78(3), 938–954.
Mundy, P., & Newell, L. (2007). Attention, joint attention,
and social cognition. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 16(5), 269–274.
Scaife, M., & Bruner, J. S. (1975). The capacity for joint
visual attention in the infant. Nature, 253(5489), 265–
266.
Smith, L. B., & Thelen, E. (2003). Development as a
dynamic system. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(8), 343–
348.
Storey, J. D. (2002). A Direct Approach to False Discovery
Rates on JSTOR. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society:
Series B (Statistical Methodology), 64(3), 479–498.
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1998). Dynamic systems
theories. In Handbook of child psychology.
Tomasello, M., & Farrar, M. J. (1986). Joint attention and
early language. Child Development, 1454–1463.
Warlaumont, A. S., Richards, J. a, Gilkerson, J., & Oller, D.
K. (2014). A social feedback loop for speech development
and its reduction in autism. Psychological Science, 25,
1314–1324.
Wiener, N. (1956). The theory of prediction. In E. F.
Beckenbach (Ed.), Modern mathematics for engineers
(Vol. 1, pp. 165–190). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Yale, M. E., Messinger, D. S., Cobo-Lewis, A. B., &
Delgado, C. F. (2003). The temporal coordination of early
infant communication. Developmental Psychology, 39(5),
815–824.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2013). Joint attention without gaze
following: Human infants and their parents coordinate
visual attention to objects through eye-hand coordination.
PLoS ONE, 8(11).
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2016). Multiple Sensory-Motor
Pathways Lead to Coordinated Visual Attention.
Cognitive Science, 1–27.

1374

