Early produced signs are iconic: Evidence from Turkish Sign Language
Beyza Sümer (bsumer@ku.edu.tr)
Koç University, Turkey
Clara Grabitz (c.grabitz@student.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Aylin Küntay (akuntay@ku.edu.tr)
Koç University, Turkey
Abstract
Motivated form-meaning mappings are pervasive in sign
languages, and iconicity has recently been shown to facilitate
sign learning from early on. This study investigated the role of
iconicity for language acquisition in Turkish Sign Language
(TID). Participants were 43 signing children (aged 10 to 45
months) of deaf parents. Sign production ability was recorded
using the adapted version of MacArthur Bates Communicative
Developmental Inventory (CDI) consisting of 500 items for
TID. Iconicity and familiarity ratings for a subset of 104 signs
were available. Our results revealed that the iconicity of a sign
was positively correlated with the percentage of children
producing a sign and that iconicity significantly predicted the
percentage of children producing a sign, independent of
familiarity or phonological complexity. Our results are
consistent with previous findings on sign language acquisition
and provide further support for the facilitating effect of iconic
form-meaning mappings in sign learning.
Keywords: Iconicity, language acquisition, sign language

Introduction
Arbitrariness, lack of a motivated link between a
linguistic form and its meaning, has long been
considered as a design feature of human language (de
Saussure, 1915, 1983; Hockett, 1960). However, recent
evidence has shown that iconicity, resemblance between
form and its referent, is a more pervasive feature of
language than previously thought (e.g., Perniss,
Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010; Dingemanse, Blasi,
Lupyan, Christiansen, & Monaghan, 2015).
For
example, ideophones are used to express a wide range of
features such as manner of movement, color, shape, size
of an object, or emotional and psychological states (e.g.,
Japanese words ‘korokoro’ to refer to a light object
rolling repeatedly and ‘gorogoro’ to a heavy object
rolling repeatedly) or onomatopoeic words, which use
the sound of a word to depict the sound of its referent
(e.g., “moo” to refer to a cow) (e.g., Imai & Kita, 2014).
Compared to spoken languages, the use of visual-spatial
modality makes iconicity a more prominent feature in
sign languages (e.g., Taub, 2001). Signers can, for
example, use a curved handshape to refer to a cup or use
the signing space in front of them to show the location of
different objects in relation with each other.
Pervasive existence of iconic forms in languages has
intrigued many researchers about its role in language
development. Accumulating evidence has shown that
iconicity has a facilitating effect for early language

development. Imai, Kita, Nagumo, & Okada (2008)
reported an advantage for 3-year-old Japanese acquiring
children in learning action words when these words are
sound-symbolic compared to those which are arbitrarily
linked to the sound of the action. In another study, 2.5year-old children showed a tendency to match the words
with rounded vowels to rounded shapes and words with
unrounded vowels to pointed shapes (Mauer, Pathman,
& Mondloch, 2006). Onomatopoeic words constitute a
substantial portion of early acquired vocabulary by
German speaking children (Laing, 2014). Also, early
acquired words in English and Spanish were rated more
iconic than the ones acquired later (Perry, Perlman, &
Lupyan, 2015; Massaro & Perlman, 2017).
The potential effects of iconicity have also been explored
in the context of sign language acquisition research –
although in fewer studies compared to spoken language
research. To understand the role of iconic nature of
linguistic forms in sign languages, Orlansky &
Bonvillian (1984) analyzed whether the first signs
learned by signing children were more iconic, but their
initial analyses did not find an overrepresentation of such
signs in the first 10 words and beyond. In their data, only
about a third of words were iconic, which was in line
with the overall proportion of iconic signs in American
sign Language (ASL). In contrast, Lloyd, Loeding, &
Doherty (1985) reanalyzed the data based on a broader
definition of iconicity and found an over-representation
of iconic signs in early acquired signs. Since then it has
become clear that iconicity is a more complex property
rather than being a holistic concept, and it is now
common to rate the iconicity of signs on a scalar scale of
1 (not at all iconic) to 7 (highly iconic) (e.g., Vinson,
Cormier, Denmark, Schembri, & Vigliocco, 2008 for
BSL norms). However, iconicity of signs can also differ
qualitatively in meaningful ways: for example, signs can
represent actions or perceptual qualities of their referents
(see Thompson et al., 2011; Ortega, Sümer, & Özyürek,
2016). Under this new view of iconicity, recent studies
with signing children have shown that iconicity has a
predictive power in early sign learning, i.e., iconic signs
are acquired earlier than non-iconic signs (Thompson,
Vinson, Woll, & Vigliocco, 2012; Caselli & Pyers, in
press). Thompson and colleagues (2012) explored the
relationship between iconicity and sign language
acquisition using a mixed cross-sectional, longitudinal
design on productive and comprehensive vocabulary size
of British Sign Language (BSL) acquiring deaf children

3273

of deaf parents administering the MacArthur Bates
Communicative Developmental Inventory (CDI). The
CDI is a parental report in which parents indicate
vocabulary learning by ticking items on a list of words if
their child produces or understands them (Fenson, Dale,
Reznick, Bates, Thal, & Pethick, 1994). They collected
data from 31 deaf children aged between 8 and 30
months and found that iconicity facilitates sign learning
from early development on, but particularly in children
older than 21 months. They argue that the advantage seen
in older children could be due to more cognitive capacity
or more environmental experience which children can
use to understand and establish such iconic links between
meaning and form.
It has also been proposed that other properties of a sign
may be as or even more important than iconicity such as
lexical frequency (i.e., familiarity), neighborhood
density (i.e., the number of lexical items that are
phonologically related to a target), or phonological
complexity (Caselli & Pyers, in press; Thompson et al.,
2012). Phonological complexity in sign language is
based on motoric subunits and seems to be a crucial
factor because children learning a sign language show
phonological reductions and substitutions of features that
are marked less – similar to children learning a spoken
language (e.g., Meier et al., 2008). To what extent these
factors are influential on early sign learning is also
controversial since Thompson et al. (2012)’s results
indicate iconicity to be a more powerful predictor than
other factors such as familiarity or phonological
complexity, while Caselli and Pyers (in press) argue that
neighborhood density and lexical frequency (familiarity)
are also as strong contributors as iconicity in early sign
development.
Studies with signing and speaking children provide
converging evidence on the facilitating role of iconic
form-meaning mappings in early lexical development
regardless of the language modality. Investigating the
effects of iconicity in sign language acquisition provides
further evidence for this “modality-free” role of iconic
forms in this domain of language development and
contributes to our understanding on to what extent
general principles of conceptual development influence
the language development in signing children – a less
studied population compared to speaking children.
The Present Study
The aim of the current study was to add to the growing
literature on the role of iconicity in sign language
acquisition by studying children acquiring TID, which
has been studied less than many Western sign languages
such as ASL or BSL. Analyzing data from other sign
languages is crucial, because conflicting views on the
role of iconicity in sign language acquisition still exist
(e.g. Thompson et al., 2011). Based on Thompson et al.
(2012) and Caselli & Pyers’ (in press) findings, we
assumed that the visual-spatial modality of sign
language, which is rich in iconic form-meaning
mappings, would modulate language acquisition and that
iconicity could present a potential advantage in early

language development for TID acquiring children. We
hypothesized that the iconicity of a sign would be
correlated with the percentage of children producing the
sign. We further expected iconicity to be a significant
predictor of the percentage of children producing a sign,
even if after controlling for familiarity and sign
complexity.
Method
Design
The experiment was realized with a correlational design.
Simultaneous multiple regression was used to test
whether different sign characteristics (iconicity,
familiarity and phonological complexity) were good
predictors for the percentage of children producing a
sign.
Participants
Data were collected for 27 deaf children of deaf parents
and 16 hearing children of deaf parents (i.e., CODAs),
thus for a total of 43 children (female 28) born to deaf
families and exposed to TID from birth. Where possible,
parents participated in data collection at two separate
time points, with a 3-month interval, thus increasing our
data set to a total of 57. Although CDI typically tracks
vocabulary development in children between 8-36
months of age, the age of the children in the current study
ranges between 10-45 months (M = 25.98, SD = 10.23)
to increase sample size. The majority of children were
from families with a middle or upper socio economic
status, meaning that at least one parent works in a paid
job and completed high-school education.
Procedure
Data were elicited from a version of the MacArthur Bates
Communicative Developmental Inventory (CDI)
adapted for TID. In this version, three source tests were
taken into consideration to account for modality and
cultural specific issues: ASL CDI (Anderson & Reilly,
2002), BSL CDI (Woolfe, Herman, Roy, & Woll, 2009)
and Turkish CDI (TIGE, Aksu-Koç, Küntay, Acarlar,
Maviş, Sofu, Topbaş, & Turan, 2009). As a result, TID
CDI consists of 500 items grouped into 18 categories
such as “animals”, “toys” and “actions”.
Although previous CDIs, both for sign and spoken
languages, were administered in a pen-and-paper format,
considering low reading abilities of deaf people (e.g.,
Bloomquist Traxler, 2000), we presented TID CDI in a
web-based format where parents themselves logged onto
the system to see videos of signs one after each other and
decided whether their children produced the sign in the
video. This procedure was preceded by a training session
in which they saw instruction videos in TID and asked
any clarification questions to a deaf assistant, who was
also online during entire training session. Only sign
production data was collected since a small pilot study
with a group of deaf parents showed that it was often
confusing to differentiate comprehension versus
production of a sign for them. They also expressed that
they were less sure about their answers regarding

3274

comprehension since they cannot see comprehension but
only production of the signs.
As part of another study (Taşçı & Sumer, in prep), 4 deaf
signers of TID (Mage = 32.3) were shown a total of 328
signs on a computer screen and asked how iconic they
think these signs are. Here, the iconicity was defined as
the similarity between the linguistic form (i.e., sign) and
the entity that it refers to, including both the perceptual
and/or action-based properties. In another session, 5 deaf
signers (Mage = 33.4), were asked how familiar they think
these signs are. Both iconicity and familiarity ratings
were on a scale of 1 (not at all iconic/familiar) to 7
(highly iconic/familiar) (e.g. see Vinson et al., 2008 for
norms in BSL for comparison). We additionally included
phonological complexity ratings following Mann,
Marshall, Mason, & Morgan (2010), in which three main
phonological parameters of signs (i.e., handshape,
location, movement) were assigned a complexity value.
For example, unmarked handshapes in TID, as
determined by Kubus (2008), were rated less complex
than other handshapes.
Results
We excluded data points with unrealistic productive sign
scores aged 10 to 20 months, if they were outside the
Mean plus Standard Deviation found for ASL norms
(Anderson & Reilly, 2002) for the child’s age range.
These sign scores can be attributed to a misunderstanding
during data collection. Exceptionally high sign scores
were not excluded for children aged older than 20
months, as high variability is a key component of
language acquisition. Thus, we included a total of 51 data
points in our analyses. The productive sign score for the
subsample of 104 signs was (M = 51.27, SD = 32) (Table
1).
Table 1. General descriptive statistics after excluding
outliers (N = 51)
Age

Total Productive
sign score

Subset Productive
sign score

10 - 45
M = 27.45
SD = 9.74

1 - 500
M = 215.49
SD = 154.56

0 - 104
M = 51.27
SD = 32

N = Sample size, M = Mean, SD = Standard deviation

Each sign was on average produced by 44% of children
(M = 0.44, SD = 0.18). Spearman’s correlation between
age and subset productive sign score was significant (rs
= .54, p < .001).

Figure 1. Spearman’s correlation between subset productive
sign score and age in months. Linear trend lines included.

Iconicity, familiarity and complexity scores of 104 signs
were available and used for further analyses (Table 2).
Table 2. Sign ratings and descriptive statistics for the
subset of 104 signs
Iconicit
y

Familiarit
y

Complexit
y

1-7
M = 5.15
SD =
1.89

2-7
M = 6.16
SD = .91

0-2
M = .64
SD = .67

Mean Age
of
Productio
n
4 – 27
M = 15.13
SD = 5.84

PerPro
d
.11 - .84
M = .44
SD = .18

M = Mean, SD = Standard deviation, Mean Age of Production
= mean age of children capable of producing a sign, PerProd =
percent of children capable of producing a sign

Spearman’s correlations were carried out to clarify the
relationship between the main variables in the study
(Table 3). Mean Age of Production and Percentage
Producing were highly positively correlated and
therefore only percentage of production was used for
further regression analyses. Iconicity rs= .38, p < .001 and
familiarity ratings rs= .32, p = .001 were both significantly
positively correlated with Mean Age of Production and
Percentage Producing. However, iconicity and
familiarity ratings were not correlated. Phonological
complexity was not correlated with Mean Age of
Production and Percentage Producing and was also
unrelated to iconicity and familiarity ratings.
Table 3. Spearman’s correlations between the main
variables in the study
Mean Age of
Production
Percentage
Producing
Iconicity
Familiarity

PerProd

Icon

Fam

Complexity

1**

.39*
*

.32*
*

-.13

.38*
*

.32*
*
.13

-.13
-.18
-.03

Complexity

**p ≤ .005, PerProd = Percentage of children capable of
producing a sign, Icon= Iconicity, Fam = Familiarity

3275

Figure 2. Spearman’s correlation between iconicity ratings and
percentage of children producing a sign. Linear trend line
included. rs= .38, p < .001.

Figure 3. Spearman’s correlation between familiarity ratings
and percentage of children producing a sign. Linear trend line
included. rs= .32, p = .001.

The data were entered into simultaneous multiple
regression analysis, using the percentage of children
producing a sign as dependent variable and iconicity,
familiarity and complexity as predictors. The results for
the model indicate that the predictors explained 17% R2=
.17, F(3,100) = 7.84, p < .001. Both iconicity β = .31,
t(100) = 3.38, p = .001 and familiarity β = .25, t(100) =
2.78, p = .006 significantly predicted the percentage of
children producing a sign. Phonological complexity was
not a significant predictor. Adjusted R Squared values
were used in the analysis.
Discussion and Conclusion
We investigated the role of iconicity in the acquisition of
Turkish Sign Language (TID) by signing children of deaf
parents and found that the iconicity of a sign was
positively correlated with the percentage of children
producing a sign. In addition to iconicity, familiarity, but
not phonological complexity, seems to be influential in
early sign learning. We thus provide further evidence
regarding the facilitating role of iconicity in early sign
learning by signing children.

Our results converge with what previous studies with
signing children have found so far (Thompson et al.,
2012; Caselli & Pyers, in press). There is robust evidence
showing that early acquired signs are iconic, which
suggests that resemblance between form and meaning in
sign languages bootstraps word learning in sign
languages. Moreover, analyzing parental input to BSL
signing children aged between 25-51 months, Perniss,
Lu, Morgan, & Vigliocco (2017) suggest that deaf
parents exploit iconicity while communicating with their
children. These studies also show that iconicity seems to
be more advantageous for sign language acquiring
children when they are at around 30-months of age –
although this age group is called “older” in Thompson et
al. (2012) and “younger” in Caselli & Pyers (in press).
This seems to be related to increasing cognitive skills or
more experience with environment that enables
establishing the link between linguistic form and
meaning (Thompson et al., 2012).
Further evidence from spoken languages, which are less
rich in iconic forms than sign languages (Taub, 2001),
has been presented about the facilitating role of iconicity,
as well (e.g., Imai & Kita, 2014; Imai et al., 2008; Laing,
2014; Perry et al., 2015; Massaro & Perlman, 2017). The
effect of iconicity in early word acquisition in spoken
languages seems to be more prominent earlier compared
to what studies with signing children report. Studying
expressive and receptive vocabulary development in the
first four years of English acquiring children (6-47
months of age), Massaro and Perlman (2017) show that
iconicity is more prevalent early in acquisition and
decreases with increasing age and vocabulary size. There
might be a difference in the role of iconicity throughout
development due to different modalities of sign and
spoken languages: sign languages are rich in iconic
forms and signing children are more likely to encounter
iconic forms – not only at the lexical level but also at the
level of morphology (e.g., classifiers) and syntax (e.g.,
expressing spatial relations in signing space) than
speaking children whose lexicon gets enriched with less
iconic words (more arbitrary forms) as they get older.
Therefore, iconicity seems to help children in their early
word learning, but its role might change as children
acquiring languages in different modalities advance in
their language development.
Our results regarding other factors than iconicity such as
familiarity and phonological complexity are partially in
line with Thompson et al. (2012), who found iconicity to
be a stronger predictor of early sign acquisition than
others. The current study, on the other hand, reveals the
role of familiarity as important as iconicity, which is in
line with Caselli & Pyers (in press). The findings
regarding the role of phonological complexity do not
suggest that it predicts early sign learning – as opposed
to Caselli & Pyers (in press). The difference might come
from different definition of complexity since Caselli &
Pyers (in press) focused on neighborhood density (the
number of lexical items that are phonologically related to
a target) rather than a complexity rating system as used
in the current study. Thompson et al. (2012) also

3276

observed an effect of phonological complexity, but this
effect was restricted to younger children (11-20 months
of age) only while Caselli & Pyers (in press) found the
neighborhood density effect across all age groups (8-35
months of age). This might be still a result of different
approaches taken to the analysis of phonological
complexity in different studies.
However, one needs to be careful when interpreting our
findings as the sample size was small and we had to
exclude multiple outliers for the main analyses.
Furthermore, only production scores were collected.
Since comprehension scores are less prone to
phonological and motor constraints, drawing
conclusions from production scores only may
underestimate the role of iconicity, especially for
younger children who produce substitution errors while
producing signs (e.g., Lu, Jones, & Morgan, 2016).
It is also important to note that iconicity and familiarity
ratings were mostly available for nouns which could
have further skewed our sample as some of the first
words were “come” or “kiss”. Perry et al (2015)’s results
from English and Spanish suggest that adjectives are
rated as more iconic than nouns and function words, and
verbs as more iconic than nouns and function words in
English. Perniss et al. (2017), however, found that signs
for objects and actions are rated more iconic than those
for properties (e.g., blue, fast). This might be the result
of modality difference between sign and spoken
languages and underlines the importance of including
different lexical categories in such an analysis.
Additionally, the current study is clearly limited by the
correlational approach taken. With sufficient resources a
Bayesian modelling approach similar to Thompson et al.
(2012) or a mixed-effect logistic regression modelling
approach will be more powerful as one can
simultaneously account for child-specific and itemspecific variability while controlling for factors such as
familiarity or phonological complexity. The current data
set could be used as a basis for further analyses, but it
will also be beneficial to collect iconicity and familiarity
ratings for more signs, in particular for signs that are
action related and represent a wider range of familiarity
ratings.
Finally, the present study is clearly limited by the use of
parental reports – spontaneous production sessions that
target sign and speech output and/or recordings of the
children that are scored will be useful to further qualify
results, particularly in regard to underlying mechanisms
and driving forces. Innovative approaches towards
testing are needed, such as Perniss et al. (2017) who
analyzed child directed signing using only the parents in
an experimental setting and showed that child-directed
signing exploits iconicity, especially when referents are
not present. Such studies will further qualify the input
that signing children receive and might be decisive in
determining the real importance of iconicity for language
acquisition.
Our study represents a further step on the way exploring
iconicity in relation to sign language acquisition. While
we do not agree with the notion that only cognitive

development drives language acquisition based on our
results, iconicity cannot explain all aspects of early sign
language acquisition. Acquisition of these signs is likely
to be driven by contextual factors such as use of
frequency (with both adults and children) or
neighborhood density (Caselli & Pyers, in press).
In summary, language acquisition is likely to be
facilitated by iconicity. Considering the potential benefit
of meaningfully motivated form-meaning for language
acquisition in general, both iconicity and arbitrariness
should be re-evaluated as general properties of a
language (Perniss et al., 2010), although more studies are
needed to further support this claim and its relevance for
all languages.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by Tubitak 2236 (Cofunded Brain Circulation Scheme) awarded to the first
author. We thank deaf families who kindly agreed to
participate in the study and our deaf assistants Sevinç
Akın for her help with data collecting.
References
Aksu-Koç, A., Küntay, A., Acarlar, F., Maviş, İ., Sofu,
H., Topbaş, S., & Turan, F. (2009). Türkçe'de Erken
Sözcük ve Dilbilgisi Gelişimini Ölçme ve
Değerlendirme Çalışması Türkçe İletişim Gelişimi
Envanterleri: TİGE-I ve TİGE-II. TÜBİTAK'a
sunulmuş rapor, Proje No: 107K058. (The assessment
and evaluation of early lexical and grammatical
deveopment in Turkish: The Turkish Communicative
Development Inventories, TIGE-I and TIGE-II. Final
report of Project No: 107K058, submitted to Turkish
Scientific and Technological Research Foundation.)
Anderson, D. & Reilly, J. S. (2002). The MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventory: Normative
data for American Sign Language. Journal of Deaf
Studies and Deaf Education, 7, 83-106.
Bloomquist Traxler, C. (2000). The Standford
Achievement Test, 9th Edition: National norming and
performance standards for deaf and hard-of-hearing
students. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education,
5(4), 337-348.
Caselli, N. & Pyers, J. (in press). The road to language
learning is not entirely iconic: Neighborhood density,
iconicity, and frequency facilitate sign language
acquisition. Psychological Science.
de Saussure, F. (1983). Course in general linguistics (R.
Harris, Trans,; C. Bally & A. Sechehaye, Eds.). La
Salle, IL: Open Court. (Original work published in
1915).
Dingemanse, M., Blasi, D. E., Lupyan, G., Christiansen
M. H., & Monaghan, P. (2015). Arbitrariness,
iconicity, and systematicity in language. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 19, 603-615.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D.
J., & Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 59, 1-173.

3277

Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific
American, 203, 88-96.
Imai, M., Kita, S., Nagumo, M., & Okada, H. (2008).
Sound symbolism facilitates early verb learning.
Cognition, 109, 54-65.
Imai, M. & Kita, S. (2014). The sound symbolism
bootstrapping hypothesis for language acquisition and
language evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 369, 20130298.
Kubus, O. (2008). “An analysis of Turkish Sign language
(TID) Phonology and morphology”. Master’ Thesis,
Middle East Technical University.
Laing, C. E. (2014). A phonological analysis of
onomatopoeia in early word production. First
Language, 34, 387-405.
Lloyd, L., Loeding, B., & Doherty, J. (1985). Role of
iconicity in sign acquisition: A response to Orlansky
and Bonvillian (1984). Journal of Speech and Hearing
Disorders, 50, 299–301.
Lu, J., Jones, A., & Morgan, G. (2016). The impact of
input quality on early sign development in native and
non-native language learners. Journal of Child
Language, 1, 1-16.
Mann, W., Marshall, C. R., Mason, K., & Morgan, G.
(2010). The acquisition of sign language: The impact
of phonetic complexity on phonology. Language
Learning and Development, 6, 60-86.
Massaro, D. W. & Perlman, M. (2017). Quantifying
iconicity’s contribution during language acquisition:
Implications for vocabulary learning. Frontiers in
Communication,
2:4.
doi:
10.3389/fcomm.2017.00004.
Mauer, D., Pathman, T., & Mondloch, C. J. (2006). The
shape of boubas: sound-shape correspondences in
toddlers and adults. Developmental Science, 9(3), 31622.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R., & Vigliocco, G. (2010).
Iconicity as a general property of language: evidence
from spoken and signed languages. Frontiers in
psychology, 1, 227.
Perniss, P., Lu, J. C., Morgan, G. & Vigliocco, G. (2017).
Mapping language to the world: the role of iconicity in
sign language input. Developmental Science, e12551.
Perry, L. K., Perlman, M., & Lupyan, G. (2015).
Iconicity in English and Spanish and its relation to
lexical category and age of acquisition. PLoS ONE, 10,
e0137147.
Orlansky, M. D., & Bonvillian, J. D. (1984). The role of
iconicity in early sign language acquisition. Journal
of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 49(3), 287-292.
Ortega, G., Sumer, B., & Ozyurek, A. (2016). Type of
iconicity matters in the vocabulary development of
signing children. Developmental Psychology. Advance
online publication. doi:10.1037/dev0000161.
Taub, S. F. (2001). Language from the body: Iconicity
and metaphor in American Sign Language.
Cambridge University Press.
Tasci, S. & Sumer, B. (in prep). Comparison of iconicity
judgments of Deaf signers and hearing non-signers.

Thompson, R. L. (2011). Iconicity in language
processing and acquisition: What signed languages
reveal. Language and Linguistics Compass, 5(9), 603616.
Thompson, R. L., Vinson, D. P., Woll, B., & Vigliocco,
G. (2012). The road to language learning is iconic:
Evidence from British Sign Language. Psychological
science, 23(12), 1443-1448.
Vinson, D. P., Cormier, K., Denmark, T., Schembri, A.,
& Vigliocco, G. (2008). The British Sign Language
(BSL) norms for age of acquisition, familiarity, and
iconicity. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 1079–1087.
Woolfe, T., Herman, R., Roy, P., & Woll, B. (2009).
Early vocabulary development in deaf native signers: a
British Sign Language adaptation of the
communicative development
inventories. Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(3), 322-31.

3278

