Effects of Delayed Language Exposure on Spatial Language Acquisition by
Signing Children and Adults
Dilay Z. Karadöller (dilay.karadoller@mpi.nl)
Center for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
International Max Planck Research School for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Beyza Sümer (beyza.sumer@mpi.nl)
Center for Language Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Aslı Özyürek (asli.ozyurek@mpi.nl)
Center for Language Studies & Donders Center for Cognition, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
Deaf children born to hearing parents are exposed to
language input quite late, which has long-lasting effects on
language production. Previous studies with deaf individuals
mostly focused on linguistic expressions of motion events,
which have several event components. We do not know if
similar effects emerge in simple events such as descriptions
of spatial configurations of objects. Moreover, previous
data mainly come from late adult signers. There is not much
known about language development of late signing children
soon after learning sign language. We compared simple
event descriptions of late signers of Turkish Sign Language
(adults, children) to age-matched native signers. Our results
indicate that while late signers in both age groups are
native-like in frequency of expressing a relational encoding,
they lag behind native signers in using morphologically
complex linguistic forms compared to other simple forms.
Late signing children perform similar to adults and thus
showed no development over time.
Keywords: sign language;
relations; left right

late

acquisition;

Engberg-Pedersen, 2003; Slobin, 2003). However, recent
work has found that Turkish Sign Language (TİD)
acquiring deaf children learn to encode static location of
the objects placed on a lateral axis (e.g., pen left to paper,
apple right to box) earlier than their hearing peers (Sümer,
2015; Sümer, Perniss, Zwitserlood, Özyürek, 2014). Even
though these children mostly used classifier predicates,
they also used specific lexical signs (i.e., relational
lexemes) for left and right, which are body-anchored in
TİD (see Figure 1b), as frequently as the native signing
adults. Thus, classifier predicates and/or body anchored
relational lexemes seem to facilitate the learning of static
spatial relations for deaf children who have been exposed
to sign language input since birth (native signers).

spatial

Introduction
The most frequently preferred way of spatial encoding in
sign languages requires the use of morphologically
complex linguistic forms and use of signing space
analogue to how the entities are located with respect to
each other in the real space (e.g., Emmorey, 2002). In
these forms, called classifier predicates (CLs), signers use
their hands to represent the location and motion of the
entities, as shown in Figure 1a below. Morphological
complexity of these forms comes from the need for
choosing the correct handshape for the entities (e.g., index
finger for long and thin entities) and simultaneous
coordination of both hands in the signing space to express
their locations (e.g., Supalla, 1982). The relative spatial
location of these forms in signing space represents spatial
relations among entities in an analogue way – unlike the
categorical forms (i.e., ad positions or spatial nouns) in
spoken languages.
Earlier studies on spatial language acquisition of native
signing deaf children, mostly focused on motion events,
have claimed such morphological complexity to be a
hindering factor compared to hearing children (e.g.

(a) RH: CL (paper)locR
LH: CL (pen)locL

(b) RH: LEFT
LH: LEFT

Figure 1: Descriptions from adult native signers of TİD
for the spatial relation of the pen with respect to the paper
using (a) classifier predicates and (b) body anchored
relational lexeme for ‘left’ (Sümer et al., 2014).
It is not known however if similar patterns also emerge
in language development of deaf children with delayed
sign language exposure (late signers). A previous study
with deaf children (ages 5-6 yrs.) who were never exposed
to a sign language (i.e., home signers) found no evidence
of relational encoding for spatial relation (Gentner,
Özyürek, Gürcanli, Goldin-Meadow, 2013). Here, we
investigate whether spatial encodings of a similar type
studied by Sümer and her colleagues (2014) can also be
learned within a short time by late signing children after
brief exposure (2 years) to sign language (after the age of
6) or whether late exposure to sign language is a

2372

drawback in mastering spatial language in general.
Moreover, we investigate the effects of delayed language
exposure on both late signing children as well as adults to
see if any developmental pattern emerges in such delayed
exposure to language and if yes how.
A body of evidence on the effects of late sign language
acquisition by deaf individuals posits that adult late
signers lag behind adult native signers in several domains
such as general cognitive abilities (Bebko & McKinnon,
1990; Mayberry & Waters, 1991; Parasnis et al., 1996;
Wilson, Bettger, Niculae, & Klima, 1997) and sign
language comprehension (Emmorey, 1993; Emmorey &
Corina, 1992; Mayberry & Eichen, 1991). Nevertheless,
most of the studies were restricted only to sign language
comprehension, and there are only a few studies on sign
language production which focus only on adult patterns.
Question of how late signing children perform in
production compared to late adult signers and also to their
age-matched native signing peers could be informative in
understanding the impact of delayed language exposure
for adult and child late signers, and to what extent
development plays a role in delayed language acquisition.
In series of studies, Newport (1988; 1990) investigated
language production of adult late signers through
descriptions of motion events. She found that they
described motion events by using fewer classifier
predicates (CLs) than native signers, but rather preferred
simple forms such as lexical verbs. Given that the motion
events consist of several components, such as Figure,
Ground, Path, Manner (Talmy, 1985), it raises the
question of whether similar patterns emerge for late
signing children and adults in describing static events
which has fewer components, such as only Figure and
Ground. In addition, a previous study (Sümer, 2015)
revealed that adult-like descriptions of static spatial
relations are acquired earlier for static locations than for
motion event descriptions in TİD by native signing deaf
children. We do not know if these patterns also apply to
late signing children and adults of TİD and if there are any
developmental patterns in late signers.

The Present Study
To answer above questions, this study investigates the
effects of late sign language exposure on the ability to
encode static spatial events for left-right spatial relations
by late signers of TİD and compares them to those of
native TİD signers, which were already reported by Sümer
et al. (2014) and Sümer (2015). We also compare the
descriptions of late signing children and adults to those of
native children and adults obtained earlier by Sümer
(2015) to see if there is any developmental pattern in late
signers.

Participants
Seven adult late signers (30;0 - 49;0, M = 39.14 years), 7
child late signers (7;3 - 10;9, M = 7;8), 10 native adult
signers (18;5 - 45;10, M = 31;4), and 10 native child

signers (7;2 - 9;10, M = 8;3) 1 participated in the study.
All late signers had learned TİD after age 6 when they
started a school for the deaf. Late signers did not have any
prior exposure to sign language because according to the
Turkish Education System, age 6 is the earliest age for
starting school in Turkey. Before starting school, these
signers mainly stayed at home with their non-signing
parents. As a result, late signing children participated in
this study, had exposure of 2 years of sign language at the
time of testing. Before starting to school, both children
groups got two hours of speech therapy every week. At
the end of the study, adult participants received a small
monetary compensation; child participants received a
gender neutral color pencil kit.

Stimuli and Procedure
Stimuli included a set of 36 displays. In each display,
there were 4 pictures 2 consisted of two entities placed in
various spatial configurations (Left, Right, In, On, Under,
Front and Behind) to each other. Within each display
(four-picture set), only one picture was considered to be
the target, which was marked with a red outer frame. The
experimental displays we focused on in this study
consisted of 6 displays, in which the target picture
depicted either Right or Left configurations (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Example of a display. The target picture (apple
to the right of the box) to be described is framed in red.
Participants were seated across a confederate deaf
addressee who was a native signer of TİD. Stimuli were
presented through a 15" MacBook Pro computer.
Computer screen was only visible to the participants.
Participants were asked to describe the target pictures to
the addressee and were not instructed to use any specific
strategy. In order to create an interactive nature, addressee
was given a booklet containing the same displays and was
asked to point at the picture that the participant described.
At the end of the experiment, participants filled out
demographics and language background surveys.

1

Data of native signers were collected as part of a bigger project
conducted between 2010 and 2015 (Sümer, 2015).
2
Pictures used in the study were originally developed by Dr
Jennie Pyers and were adapted further for the purposes of this
present study.

2373

Coding
Descriptions for the target items were coded for the
presence of spatial encoding and choice of linguistic
strategies used to describe spatial relationship between
two entities by using ELAN, a free annotation tool
(http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/) for multimedia
resources developed by the Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, The Language Archive, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands (Wittenburg et al., 2006). We categorized
three main linguistic strategies used to encode,
specifically, Figure object’s relation to Ground object:
Classifier predicates CLs (Figure 1a), Relational Lexemes
like LEFT and RIGHT (Figure 1b), and other alternative
linguistic forms. Other forms included showing the
location of objects through pointing (59% of the cases;
Figure 3), placing the objects in the signing space through
virtually drawing by hand (SASS), using a lexical verb to
infer objects (e.g. using sign for “to sit” to represent
location of a boy).
Annotation of data from the native signers were done
by hearing research assistants and a native TİD signer and
coded by the second author of this study. Annotation of
data from the late signers were done by hearing research
assistant and coded by the first author of this study. Later,
all annotation and coding was checked by the second
author of this study. All annotators and coders had
knowledge of TİD.

First we investigated the frequency of encoding a
spatial relation of entities by different groups in each
language status. Results of the 2 (Age: Adults, Children)
X 2 (Status: Native, Late) Between Subjects ANOVA on
mean proportions of encoding a spatial relation revealed
no main effect of age, F (1,30) = 2.918, p = .098, η2 =
.089, MSE = .381, no main effect of status, F (1,30) =
.373, p = .546, η2 = .012, MSE = .049 and no interaction, F
(1,30) = 768, p = .388, η2 = .023, MSE = .100. These
results indicate that all groups of participants generated
equal amount of relational encodings (Table 1).
Table 1: Mean Proportions and SEs of frequency of
encoding a spatial relation as a function of Age and
Status.
Participants
Adults
Children

Native Signers
0.97 (.02)

Late Signers
0.98 (.03)

0.92 (.05)

0.81 (.11)

As the next step, we investigated what types of
linguistic strategies were preferred by each age group and
status. The results of a 2 (Between Subject, Age: Adults,
Children) X 2 (Between Subject, Status: Native, Late) X 3
(Within Subject, Linguistic Strategy: CLs, RLs, Other)
Mixed ANOVA yielded a main effect of Linguistic
Strategy, F (1.32,12.42) = 37.114, p < .001, η2 = .533,
MSE = .314, no main effect of age, F (1,30) = .347, p =
.560, η2 = .011, MSE = .008, no main effect of Status, F
(1,30) = 1.385, p = .249, η2 = .044, MSE = .008. Due to a
marginal interaction between Linguistic Strategy and
Status, F (1.32,12.42) = 3.628, p = .053, η2 = .108, MSE =
.314, separate analyses were conducted for each Status.

Linguistic Strategies used by Native Signers
(a) RH: Point (cat)locR
LH: CL (boat)locL

(b) RH: CL(house)locR
LH: Point (horse)locL
Figure 3: Descriptions from late signers of TİD for two
objects located on the lateral axis by using pointing by (a)
an adult TİD signer (middle finger point) and (b) a child
TİD signer (index finger point).

The results of 2 (Between Subjects, Age: Adult, Child) X
3 (Within Subjects, Linguistic Strategy: CLs, RLs, Other)
mixed ANOVA showed no main effect of age, F (1,18) =
1.214, p = .285, η2 = .063, MSE = .028 but a main effect
of Linguistic Strategy, F (1.25,22.53) = 60.186, p < .001,
η2 = .770, MSE = .183, without an interaction between
them, F (1.25,2.53) = .251, p = .674, η2 = .315, MSE =
.183. Tests of within subject comparisons showed that
classifier predicates were preferred more frequently than
relational lexemes (p < .001) and other linguistic forms (p
< .001). The frequency of using relational lexemes and
other forms found to be similar to each other (p > .05).
The lack of main effect for age indicated that deaf
children used the linguistic forms in three different
categories as frequently as deaf adults. See Figure 4
below.

Results
Mean proportions of linguistic strategies were calculated
for each participant. Arcsine transformation was applied
to all data to ensure normality. The mean proportions and
standard errors (SEs) in the table and the graphs are
reported from the untransformed data.

2374

Mean Proportions

Linguistic Strategies - Native Signers
1,00
,80
,60
,40
,20
,00

Adults
Children
Class. Rel. Lex. Other
Pred.

Figure 4: Mean proportions and SEs of linguistic
descriptions of native signers as a function of age.

Linguistic Strategies used by Late Signers
The results of 2 (Between Subjects, Age: Adults,
Children) X 3 (Within Subjects, Linguistic Strategy: CLs,
RLs, Other) mixed ANOVA showed no main effect of
age, F (1,12) = .097, p = .761, η2 = .008, MSE = .015 but a
main effect of Linguistic Strategy, F (1.18,14.10) = 6.771,
p = .017, η2 = .036, MSE = .588, without an interaction
between them, F (1.18,14.10) = .450, p = .544, η2 = .036,
MSE = .588. Tests of within subject comparisons showed
that relational lexemes were used less frequently than
classifier predicates (p < .01) and other forms (p < .05).
The frequency of using classifier predicates and other
forms are found to be similar to each other (p = 573). The
results indicate that late signers -unlike native signers- use
other forms as frequently as classifier predicates. See
Figure 5 below.
Results showed that native and late signers show
different production patterns in their descriptions of the
location of the objects when they are placed to left or right
to each other. Namely, native signers show a significant
preference over using the morphologically complex CLs
in describing, however, late signers employ other simpler
forms as frequently as CLs. Moreover, this tendency is
significant for all age groups.

Mean Proportions

Linguistic Strategies - Late Signers
1,00
,80
,60
,40
,20
,00

Adults
Children
Class. Rel. Lex. Other
Pred.

Figure 5: Mean proportions and SEs of linguistic
descriptions of late signers as a function of age.

Discussion and Conclusion
Our study has two key findings. First, late signing adults
and children differ from native signing adults and children
in their linguistic descriptions. Namely, late signers do not

show a preference for CLs. Rather they employ simpler
other forms as frequently as CLs compared to native
signers. These findings clearly indicate that late exposure
to sign language by deaf individuals has long-term effects
on their production patterns. Second, late signing children
perform similar to late signing adults in their static spatial
event descriptions and show no further developmental
trajectory in their preferred linguistic devices.
Results of this study complement the previous literature
– yet in another sign language – showing a tendency
towards decreased preference for CLs and increased
preference for other simpler forms not only for complex
event descriptions, as found in ASL (Newport, 1988;
1990), but also for simple static events (Sümer et al.,
2014; Sümer, 2015). In the case of native signers of TİD,
both adults and children prefer CLs more than RLs and
other forms while the nature of this distribution is
different for late signers of TİD, who use CLs and simpler
other forms such as pointing in similar amounts while
they prefer RLs for left and right less frequently. The
body-anchored relational lexemes in TİD were very rarely
used by late signing adults and not at all by the late
signing children. Thus, the use of CLs and RLs did not
seem to ease acquisition for these children as they did for
native children. However, we should be cautious in
generalizing the effects of these comparisons due to
relatively few number of participants we could investigate
especially from late signing group.
Considering the high proportion of relational encodings
shown on Table 1, 2-year exposure to sign language after
age 6 seems to be enough to initiate spatial language
production in late signing children to become adult like.
This is a rather striking finding since Gentner and her
colleagues (2013) found that home signing children (deaf
children never exposed to a sign language) in similar age
range do not produce gestures in a way that would encode
spatial relations, which indicates the necessity of sign
language input for relational encoding to emerge at all.
This pattern also shows that while relational encoding
might emerge as the earliest feature of encoding a spatial
event, and as less sensitive to delayed exposure,
morphologically complex forms or body anchored
relational lexemes such as LEFT and RIGHT might be more
resistant to the timing of the input to develop.
The difference in the preference for linguistic forms to
encode spatial relations between native signers and late
signers provides evidence for the role of maturational
constrains in language acquisition. Moreover, previous
studies have been mostly on comprehension of sign
language (e.g., Mayberry & Eichen, 1991), our results
indicate that these effects are not only restricted to
comprehension, but also observed in production, as also
shown by Newport (1988; 1990). Furthermore, it shows
that these results on motion event expressions can be
extended to those of static events.
Our study also uniquely displays these patterns for late
signing children for the first time in the literature.
Although, late signing adults of TİD have lengthier
language experience compared to late signing children,
who have only a 2-year of sign language exposure, we
still observed similar preferences in how frequently they
prefer CLs and other forms. It seems that the hindering

2375

effects of delayed language exposure persist in language
production despite many years of language use. This
finding is also in line with other studies that show the
significance of age of acquisition, rather than the length of
exposure, in both sign and spoken language development
(Mayberry, 2010).
Finally, late signing children were not only exposed to
sign language late but also the kind of language they were
exposed to, that is the language used by their late signing
peers in the primary school, was also non-native. Thus,
future research should also investigate the effect of type of
language input (i.e., non-native input) in addition to age of
acquisition in late signing children and adults on late
signers’ language production.

Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by European Research
Council (ERC) Starting Grant and NWO VICI Grant
awarded to the third author. We thank our deaf assistant
Sevinç Yücealtay Akın and our hearing assistant
Hükümran Sümer for their help with data collection and
annotation. Moreover, we thank directors and teachers at
ÇED and Rotary Tuzla Primary School for the Deaf in
Istanbul, Turkey.

References
Bebko, J. M., & McKinnon, E. E. (1990). The language
experience of deaf children: Its relation to spontaneous
rehearsal in a memory task. Child Development, 61,
1744-1752.
Emmorey, K., & Corina, D. (1992). Differential
sensitivity to classifier morphology in ASL signers.
Linguistic Society of America.
Emmorey, K. (2002). Language, cognition, and the brain:
Insights from sign language research. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Emmorey, K. (1993). Processing a dynamic visual—
Spatial language: Psycholinguistic Studies of American
Sign Language. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
22, 153-187.
Engberg-Pedersen, E. (2003). How Composite is a Fall?
Adult’s and Children’s Descriptions of Different Types
of Falls in Danish Sign Language. In K. Emmorey
(Ed.), Perspectives on Classifier Constructions in Sign
Languages. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gentner, D., Özyürek, A., Gürcanli, Ö., & GoldinMeadow, S. (2013). Spatial language facilitates spatial
cognition: Evidence from children who lack language
input. Cognition, 127, 318-330.
Mayberry, R. I. (2010). Early language acquisition and
adult language ability: What sign language reveals
about the critical. The Oxford handbook of deaf studies,
language, and education, 2, 281.
Mayberry, R. I., & Eichen, E. B. (1991). The long-lasting
advantage of learning sign language in childhood:
Another look at the critical period for language
acquisition. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 486512.
Mayberry, R. I., & Waters, G. S. (1991). Children’s
memory for sign and fingerspelling in relation to

production rate and sign language input. Theoretical
Issues in Sign Language Research, 2, 211-229.
Newport, E. L. (1988). Constraints on learning and their
role in language acquisition: Studies of the acquisition
of American Sign Language. Language Sciences, 10,
147-172.
Newport, E. L. (1990). Maturational constraints on
language learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28
Parasnis, I., Samar, V. J., Bettger, J. G., & Sathe, K.
(1996). Does deafness lead to enhancement of visual
spatial cognition in children? Negative evidence from
deaf nonsigners. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
Education, 1, 145-152.
Slobin, D. I. (2003). Language and thought online:
Cognitive consequences of linguistic relativity.
Language in mind: Advances in the Study of Language
and Thought.
Sümer, B., Perniss, P.M., Zwitserlood, I.E.P. & Özyürek,
A. (2014). Learning to express "left-right" & "frontbehind" in a sign versus spoken language. In P. Bello,
M. Guarini, M. McShane & B. Scassellati (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin,Tx: Cognitive
Science Society.
Sümer (2015). Acquisition of Spatial Language by
Signing and Speaking Children: A comparison of
Turkish Sign Language (TİD) and Turkish.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen.
Supalla, T.R. (1982). Structure and acquisition of verbs of
motion and location in American Sign Language.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, UCSD, The USA.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. Language Typology and
Syntactic Description, 3, 57-149.
Wilson, M., Bettger, J. G., Niculae, I., & Klima, E. S.
(1997). Modality of language shapes working memory:
Evidence from digit span and spatial span in ASL
signers. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education,
150-160.
Wittenburg, P., Brugman, H., Russel, A., Klassmann, A.,
Sloetjes, H. (2006). ELAN: A Professional Framework
for Multimodality Research. Proceedings of LREC
2006, Fifth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation.

2376

