Effects of transmission perturbation in the cultural evolution of language
Thomas Brochhagen (t.s.brochhagen@uva.nl)
Institute for Logic, Language & Computation, University of Amsterdam

Michael Franke (mchfranke@gmail.com)
Department of Linguistics, University of Tübingen
Abstract
Two factors seem to play a major role in the cultural evolution
of language. On the one hand, there is functional pressure towards efficient transfer of information. On the other hand, languages have to be learned repeatedly and will therefore show
traces of systematic stochastic disturbances of the transmission
of linguistic knowledge. While a lot of attention has been paid
to the effects of cognitive learning biases on the transmission
of language, there is reason to expect that the class of possibly
relevant transmission perturbations is much larger. This paper
therefore explores some potential effects of transmission noise
due to errors in the observation of states of the world. We look
at three case studies on (i) vagueness, (ii) meaning deflation,
and (iii) underspecified lexical meaning. These case studies
suggest that transmission perturbations other than learning biases might help explain attested patterns in the cultural evolution of language and that perturbations due to perceptual noise
may even produce effects very similar to learning biases.
Keywords: cognitive biases; iterated learning; language evolution

Introduction

learning, in which a language learner must infer unobservables, such as the lexical meaning of a word, from the observable behavior of a single teacher, who is a proficient language user (e.g. Griffiths & Kalish 2007, Kirby et al. 2007).
Concretely, the learner observes instances hs, mi of overt language use in context, where s is a world state and m is the
message that the teacher used in state s. The learner’s task is
to infer which latent type τ (e.g., which set of lexical meanings or which grammar) may have produced a sequence of
such observations. To do so, the learner considers the posterior probability of τ given a data sequence d of hs, mi pairs:
P(τ | d) ∝ P(τ) P(d | τ) ,
where P(τ) is the learner’s prior for type τ and P(d | τ) =
∏hs,mi∈d P(m | s, τ) is the likelihood of type τ producing the
observed data d, with P(m | s, τ) the probability that a type
τ produces message m when in world state s. It is usually
assumed that learners exposed to d adopt type τ with probability F(τ | d) ∝ P(τ | d)γ , where γ ≥ 1 regulates whether
learners probability match (γ = 1) or tend towards choosing a
maximum of the posterior distribution (γ > 1). If the set Dk
of data a learner may be exposed to is the set of all sequences
with k pairs hs, mi, the probability that a learner acquires type
τi when learning from a teacher of type τ j is:

Language is shaped by its use and transmission across generations. Linguistic properties are therefore not necessarily
solely due to functional pressure, such as the selection of
more communicatively efficient behavior. They may also be
effected by a pressure for learnability. In the extreme, an unlearnable language will not make it to the next generation.
The effects that (iterated) learning has on language are often seen as stemming from a combination of general learning
mechanisms and inductive cognitive biases (e.g. Griffiths &
Kalish 2007, Kirby et al. 2014, Tamariz & Kirby 2016). Proposals of biases that shape language acquisition abound, e.g.;
mutual exclusivity (Merriman & Bowman 1989, Clark 2009),
simplicity (Kirby et al. 2015), regularization (Hudson Kam &
Newport 2005), and generalization (Smith 2011). But forces
other than learning biases may also systematically perturb the
transmission of linguistic knowledge and thereby contribute
to the shaping of language by cultural evolution (cf. Perfors &
Navarro 2014). In the following we focus on one particular
source of transmission noise: agents’ imperfect perception
of the world. Our overall goal is to give a formalism with
which to study the possible effects of such perturbations and
to apply it to three case studies on (i) vagueness, (ii) meaning
deflation, and (iii) underspecified lexical meaning.

If a population is a distribution over types, then iterated
Bayesian learning predicts the most likely path of change in
the population due to learning from finite observations.
The prior P(τ) can be understood as encoding learning
biases. For example, learners may have an a priori preference for simpler languages over ones with a more complex
grammar, or over ones with larger or more marked lexical
or phonemic inventories (cf. Kirby et al. 2015). Crucially,
even weak biases can magnify and have striking effects on an
evolving linguistic system, especially if learning is fueled by
only limited input (small k). Experimental and mathematical
explorations of iterated learning have consequently suggested
that the linguistic structure evinced by the outcome of this
process reflects learners’ inductive biases (Kirby et al. 2007;
2014).

Iterated Bayesian learning

Iterated Bayesian learning with state-noise

We model the transmission of linguistic knowledge as a process of iterated learning (Kirby et al. 2014, Tamariz & Kirby
2016). More specifically, we focus on iterated Bayesian

Other stochastic factors beyond learning biases in P(τ) can
influence the adoption of a linguistic type τ based on the observation of hs, mi sequences. One further potential source

P(τ j → τi ) ∝

∑

P(d | τ j )F(τi | d) .

d∈Dk

1678

likely state misperception.1 In this case the posterior probability of τ given the learner’s perceived data sequence dl is
as before: P(τ | dl ) ∝ P(τ) P(dl | τ). Still, state-noise affects
the probability PN (τ j → τi ) that the learner adopts τi given
a teacher of type τ j , because it influences the probability of
observing a sequence dl (with F(τi | d) as before):
PN (τ j → τi ) ∝

∑

PN (dl | τ j )F(τi | d) .

d∈Dk

Figure 1: State-noise during observation of language use.

of “transmission noise” are regular stochastic errors in the
perception of world states (see Figure 1). Imperfect perception may lead teachers to produce utterances that deviate from
their production behavior had they witnessed the state correctly. Similarly, learners may mistake utterances as applying
to different states than the ones witnessed by the teacher who
produced them. For instance, when learning the meaning of
a vague adjective such as tall from utterances like “Jean is
tall”, agents may have diverging representations of how tall
Jean actually is, even if she is in a shared perceptual environment. The main idea to be explored here is that regularities
in misperceptions of states may have striking and possibly
explanatory effects on language evolution.
We denote the probability that the teacher (learner) observes state st (sl ) when the actual state is sa as PN (st | sa )
(PN (sl | sa )). The probability that sa is the actual state when
the learner observes sl is therefore:
PN (sa | sl ) ∝ P(sa ) PN (sl | sa ) .
Assuming a finite state space for convenience, the probability
that the teacher observes st when the learner observes sl is:

Case studies
In what follows we present three case studies that show how
iterated learning under noisy perception can lead to the emergence of linguistic phenomena. The studies are ordered from
more to less obvious examples in which state-noise may be
influential and explanatory: (i) vagueness, (ii) meaning deflation, and (iii) underspecification in the lexicon. No case study
is meant to suggest that state-noise is the definite and only explanation of the phenomenon in question. Instead, our aim is
to elucidate the role that transmission perturbations beyond
inductive biases may play in shaping the cultural evolution of
language. We therefore present minimal settings that isolate
potential effects of state-noise in iterated learning.

Vagueness

PN (st | sl ) = ∑ PN (sa | sl ) PN (st | sa ) .
sa

The probability that a teacher of type τ produces data that is
perceived by the learner as a sequence dl of hsl , mi pairs is:
PN (dl | τ) =

In sum, it may be that learner and/or teacher do not perceive the actual state as what it is. If they are not aware of
this, they produce/learn as if what they observed was the actual state. In particular, the learner does not reason about
noise when she tries to infer the teacher’s type. She takes
what she observes as the actual state that the teacher has seen
as well, and infers which linguistic type (e.g. which set of
lexical meanings or grammar) would have most likely generated the message to this state. This can lead to biases of
inferring the “wrong” teacher type if noise makes some types
err in a way that resembles the noiseless behavior of other
types. That is, such environmental factors can, in principle,
induce transmission perturbations that look as if there was a
cognitive bias in favor of a particular type, simply because
that type better explains the noise.

∏ ∑ PN (st | sl ) P(m | st , τ) .

hsl ,mi∈dl st

It is natural to assume that learners, even if they (in tendency)
perform rational Bayesian inference of the likely teacher type
τ based on observation hsl , mi, do not also reason about statenoise perturbations. In contrast to, e.g., noisy-channel models that have agents reason over potential message corruption
caused by noise (e.g. Bergen & Goodman 2015), our learners
are not proficient language users that could leverage knowledge about the world and its linguistic codification to infer

Many natural language expressions are notoriously vague
and pose a challenge to logical analysis of meaning (e.g.
Williamson 1994). Vagueness also challenges models of language evolution since functional pressure towards maximal
information transfer should, under fairly general conditions,
weed out vagueness (Lipman 2009). Many have therefore
argued that vagueness is intrinsically useful for communication (e.g. van Deemter 2009, de Jaegher & van Rooij 2011,
Blume & Board 2014). Others hold that vagueness arises
naturally due to limits of perception, memory, or information
processing (e.g. Franke et al. 2011, O’Connor 2014, Lassiter
1 To do so, agents would have to infer or come equipped with
knowledge about PN (·|sa ), which could itself be subject to updates.
We stick to the simpler case of noise-free inference here, but as long
as the actual state is not always recoverable our general results also
hold for agents that reason about noise.

1679

& Goodman 2015). We follow the latter line of exploration
here, showing that vagueness can naturally arise under imperfect observability of states (see Franke & Correia (to appear)
for a different evolutionary dynamic based on the same idea).

modeled here for simplicity, each speaker has a fixed and nonvague cut-off point τ in her lexicon. Still, the production behavior of a type-τ speaker in actual state sa is probabilistic
and “vague”, because of noisy perception:

Setup. We analyze the effects of noisy perception on the
transmission of a simple language with 100 states, s ∈ [0, 99],
and two messages, m ∈ {m1 , m2 }. The probability that agents
perceive actual state sa as st /sl is given by a (discretized)
normal distribution, truncated to [0; 99], with sa as mean
and standard deviation σ. Linguistic behavior is fixed by a
type τ ∈ [0; 99] which is the threshold of applicability of m1 :
P(m1 | s, τ) = δs≥τ = (1 − P(m2 | s, τ)). In words, if a speaker
observes a state that is as large or larger than its type, then
message m1 is used (tall), otherwise m2 (small).
Results. The effects of a single generational turnover under noisy transmission of a population that initially consisted
exclusively of type τ = 50 is depicted in Figure 2. As learners try to infer this type from observed language use, even
small σ will lead to the emergence of vagueness in the sense
that there is no longer a crisp and determinate cut-off point
for message use in the population. Instead, borderline regions in which m1 and m2 are used almost interchangeably
emerge. For larger σ, larger borderline regions ensue. The
size of such regions further increases over generations with
growth inversely related to γ and k. As is to be expected, if k
is too small to discern even strikingly different types, then iterated learning under noisy perception leads to heterogeneous
populations with (almost) no state being (almost) exclusively
associated with m1 or m2 .

Figure 2: Noisy iterated learning (γ = 1, σ = 0.4, k = 20).

Discussion. Transmission perturbations caused by noisy
state perception reliably give rise to vague language use even
if the initial population had a perfectly crisp and uniform convention. Clearly, this is a specific picture of vagueness. As

PN (m | sa , τ) = ∑ P(st | sa )P(m | st , τ) .
st

An extension towards types as distributions over thresholds is
straightforward but the main point would remain: systematic
state-noise perturbs a population towards vagueness.
Of course, convergence on any particular population state
will also depend on the functional (dis)advantages of particular patterns of language use. Functional pressure may therefore well be necessary for borderline regions to be kept in
check, so to speak. Which factor or combination thereof plays
a more central role for the emergence of vagueness is an empirical question we do not address here. Instead, we see these
results as adding strength to the argument that one way in
which vagueness may arise is as a byproduct of interactions
between agents that may occasionally err in their perception
of the environment. If state perception is systematically noisy
and learners are not aware of this, some amount of vagueness
may be the natural result.

Deflation
Meaning deflation is a diachronic process by which a form’s
once restricted range of applicability broadens. Perhaps the
most prominent example is Jespersen’s cycle (Dahl 1979), the
process by which emphatic negation, such as French ne ...
pas, broadens over time and becomes a marker for standard
negation. As argued by Bolinger (1981), certain word classes
are particularly prone to slight and unnoticed reinterpretation.
When retrieving their meaning from contextual cues, learners may consequently continuously spread their meaning out.
For instance, Bolinger discusses how the indefinite quantifier
several has progressively shifted from meaning a respectable
number to broader a few in American English. We follow
this line of reasoning and show how state confusability may
lead to meaning deflation. Other formal models of deflationary processes in language change have rather stressed the role
of conflicting interests between interlocutors (Ahern & Clark
2014) or asymmetries in production frequencies during learning (Schaden 2012, Deo 2015).
Setup. The setup is the same as that of the previous case
study, except that we now trace the change of a single message m, e.g., emphatic negation, without a fixed antonym being sent whenever m does not apply. This is a crude way of
modeling use of markers of emphasis or high relevance for
which no corresponding “irrelevance marker” exists. Learners accordingly observe positive examples of use hs, mi but
do not positively observe situations in which m did not apply
to a particular state. This causes asymmetry in the learning
data because some types will reserve their message only for
a small subset of the state space and otherwise remain silent.

1680

Learners take the absence of observations into account but
cannot know what it is that they did not observe. We assume
that learners are aware of k so that:2

relax formerly strict linguistic conventions. In contrast to the
case of vagueness, if there are no relevant competing forms,
e.g., small vs. tall, asymmetry in production and noise will
iteratively increase the state space that a form carves out.

P(τ|dl ) ∝ Binom(successes = k − |dl |, trials = k,

Scalar expressions

τ−1

succ.prob =

∑ P(s = i)) ∏ P(m|s, τ) .

i=0

s∈dl

As before, the second factor corresponds to the likelihood of
a type producing the perceived data. The first is the probability of a type not reporting k − |d| events for a total of k events.
P ∈ ∆(S) is assumed to be uniform. In words, a long sequence
of data consisting of mostly silence gives stronger evidence
for the type producing it having a high threshold of applicability even if the few state-message pairs observed may be
equally likely to be produced by types with lower thresholds.
Results. The development of an initially monomorphic
population consisting only of τ = 80 is shown in Figure 3.
Even little noise causes a message to gradually be applied to
larger portions of the state space. The speed of meaning deflation is regulated by σ, k, and to lesser degree γ. In general,
more state confusion due to higher σ, shorter sequences, or
less posterior maximization will lead to more learners inferring lower types than present in the previous generation.

Scalar expressions have been at the center of many studies
on pragmatic inference. Examples include quantifiers such as
some and most, adjectives such as cold and big, and numerals
such as four and ten. Commonly, their use is taken to pragmatically convey an upper-bound which is not present in their
lexical semantics (Horn 1972, Gazdar 1979). For instance,
while “Bo ate some of the cookies” is semantically compatible with a state in which Bo ate all of them, this utterance is
often taken to convey that Bo ate some but not all, as otherwise the speaker would have said all. A semantically weak
meaning is thus pragmatically strengthened by interlocutors’
mutual reasoning about rational language use (Grice 1975).
Why does such pragmatic strengthening not lead to widespread lexicalization of upper-bounded meanings? To address this question, Brochhagen et al. (2016) explore an evolutionary model that combines functional pressure and iterated learning. This account assumes a prior that favors a lack
of upper-bounds. Here, we demonstrate that state-noise can
mimic the effects of such a cognitive learning bias.
Setup. The simplest possible model distinguishes two kinds
of lexica and two behavioral strategies to use them, a pair
of which constitutes a type. Both lexica specify the truthconditions of two messages in either of two states. Let us
mnemonically label them msome , mall , s∃¬∀ and s∀ , where the
former state is one in which natural language some but not all
holds, and the latter one where all holds. In lexicon Lbound ,
which lexicalizes an upper-bound for some-like expressions,
message msome is only true of s∃¬∀ and mall only of s∀ . In the
English-like lexicon Llack , message mall is also only true of
s∀ , but the meaning of msome is underspecified and lexically
holds in both states. Speakers follow one of two strategies of
language use: literal or pragmatic. The former select a random true message, whereas the latter prefer to send the most
informative messages from those that are true in the observed
state (Grice 1975). This gives rise to probabilistic speaker
behavior P(m | s, τ = hlexicon, usei) which approximates the
following choice probabilities:3
Llack
Lbound
m
mall
m
mall
 some

 some

s∀
0
1
s∀
0.5
0.5
Literal
s∃¬∀
1
0
s∃¬∀
1
0

Figure 3: Noisy iterated learning (γ = 1, σ = 0.4, k = 30).

Discussion. In contrast to the previous case study, we now
considered the effects of noisy perception under asymmetric
data generation where overt linguistic evidence is not always
produced, i.e., acquisition in a world in which not every state
is equally likely to lead to an observable utterance. The outcome is nevertheless similar to the previous one: Noisy perception can cause transmission perturbations that gradually

Pragmatic

2 Knowing k allows learners to compute the likelihood of a type
not reporting k − |dl | state observations. A better but more complex
alternative is to specify a prior over k with learners performing a
joint inference on k and the teacher’s type. For simplicity, we opt
for the former, albeit admittedly artificial, assumption.

s∀
s∃¬∀



msome
0
1

mall

1
0

s∀
s∃¬∀



msome
0
1

mall

1
,
0

3 Concretely, results are obtained for probabilistic speaker behav-

ior following the definitions of Brochhagen et al. (2016). Nothing essential to our main argument and simulation results hinges on
these details, so we background them here for ease of exposition.

1681

where P(m|s, τ) = M[s,m] with M being type τ’s choice matrix.
As pragmatic users of Llack are (almost) indistinguishable
from types with Lbound , the emergence of a predominance
of Llack in a repeatedly learning population must come from
transmission biases. A learning bias in favor of Llack in the
learners’ priors will select for it (Brochhagen et al. 2016),
but here we assume no such cognitive bias. Rather we assume state-noise in the form of parameters ε and δ. The former is the probability of perceiving actual state s∃¬∀ as s∀ ,
P(s∀ |s∃¬∀ ) = ε, and P(s∃¬∀ |s∀ ) = δ. For instance, states may
be perceived differently because different numbers of objects
must be perceived (e.g., quantifiers and numerals) or they
may be more or less hard to accurately retrieve from sensory
information (e.g., adjectives).
Results. To quantify the effects of the dynamics we ran
a fine-grained parameter sweep over ε and δ with 50 independent simulations per parameter configuration. Each simulation started with a random initial population distribution
over types and applied iterated learning with state-noise for
20 generations, after which no noteworthy change was registered. Mean proportions of resulting pragmatic users of
Llack under different noise signatures are shown in Figure 4.
These results suggest that when δ is small and ε high, iterated
noisy transmission can lead to populations consisting of almost exclusively English-like lexica with pragmatic language
use. Similar results are obtained for larger k or γ.

Figure 4: Mean proportion of pragmatic Llack users after 20
generations (γ = 1, k = 5).

could not tease them apart. We assumed no such bias but nevertheless arrived at evolutionary outcomes that comparable to
those predicted if the bias were present. However, this result strongly depends on the types involved. Whether a type
thrives under a particular noise signature depends on the proportion of types confused with it during transmission. The
addition or extraction of a single type may therefore lead to
different results.
At present, it is unclear what role noisy perception should
play in the selection of underspecified meaning. These results
should therefore be taken as suggestive but not indicative of a
relationship between the two. In the case of quantifiers, a possible way to explore this relation may lie in their connection
to empirical work on the verification of quantified statements
(see Szymanik 2016 for a recent overview). The idea being
that some states are easier to verify, e.g., s∀ , and therefore less
confusable with other states than others, e.g., s∃¬∀ .

General discussion
We proposed a general model of iterated Bayesian learning
that integrates systematic noise in agents’ perception of world
states, giving rise to stochastic perturbations that may influence and (potentially, partially) explain language change. We
investigated the model’s predictions in three case studies that
show that iterated noisy transmission can lead to outcomes
akin to those found in natural language. As stressed before,
these results are not meant to suggest noisy perception to be
the sole or main determinant of these phenomena. Instead,
our aim was mainly conceptual and technical in nature.
Beyond technical aspects, we foregrounded two intertwined issues in the cultural evolution of language. First,
the fact that noise signatures may mimic the effects of cognitive biases has consequences for the interpretation of outcomes of acquisition processes. Care must therefore be exercised in reading off the influence of possible learning biases
from data obtained “in the wild” or the laboratory. Noisy perception instead offers a neutral model of cultural evolution
that appeals to neither functional competition nor differential
learnability among types (Reali & Griffiths 2009). Second,
and more importantly, these results can be seen as complementing and stressing the pivotal role of systematic transmission perturbations as explanatory and predictive devices of
language change – independent of the perturbation’s source.
They thereby strengthen and widen the scope of research on
iterated learning by bringing attention to forces beyond inductive biases (cf. Perfors & Navarro 2014).

Conclusion
Discussion. The main goal of this case study was to show
that noisy perception may mimic effects of learning biases.
In the case of Brochhagen et al. the assumed bias was one for
simplicity; learners had an a priori preference for not codifying upper-bounds lexically, which increased their propensity
to infer pragmatic Llack over Lbound even if the witnessed data

Acquisition is a central force shaping linguistic structure. The
consideration of the (imperfect) means by which such knowledge is transmitted is therefore crucial to our understanding
of the cultural evolution of language. Here, we focused on
one factor that may give rise to systematic stochastic perturbation in learning —agents’ noisy perception of the world—
and analyzed its effects in three case studies on (i) vagueness,

1682

(ii) meaning deflation, and (iii) underspecified lexical meaning. Our results suggest that the class of relevant perturbation
sources reaches beyond the well-studied effects of inductive
learning biases. In particular, that some linguistic properties,
such as (i), (ii) and more tentatively (iii), may emerge as a
byproduct of constraints on agents’ perception of the world.

Acknowledgments
TB acknowledges funding from the European Community’s
Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement no.
567652 /ESSENCE/. MF gratefully acknowledges financial support by the Institutional Strategy of the University of
Tübingen (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, ZUK 63).

References
Ahern, C., & Clark, R. (2014). Diachronic processes
in language as signaling under conflicting interests. In
E. A. Cartmill, S. Roberts, H. Lyn, & H. Cornish (Eds.),
Proceedings of EVOLANG 11 (pp. 25–32). Singapore:
World Scientific Press.
Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). The strategic use of
noise in pragmatic reasoning. Topics in Cognitive Science,
7(2), 336–350.
Blume, A., & Board, O. (2014). Intentional vagueness.
Erkenntnis, 79(4), 855-899.
Bolinger, D. (1981). The deflation of several. Journal of
English Linguistics, 15(1), 1–3.
Brochhagen, T., Franke, M., & van Rooij, R. (2016). Learning biases may prevent lexicalization of pragmatic inferences: a case study combining iterated (bayesian) learning
and functional selection. In Proceedings of the 38th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 2081–
2086). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Clark, E. V. (2009). Lexical meaning. In E. L. Bavin (Ed.),
The cambridge handbook of child language (pp. 283–300).
Cambridge University Press.
Dahl, Ö. (1979). Typology of sentence negation. Linguistics,
17(1-2).
Deo, A. (2015). The semantic and pragmatic underpinnings
of grammaticalization paths: The progressive to imperfective shift. Semantics & Pragmatics, 8(1), 1–52.
Franke, M., & Correia, J. P. (to appear). Vagueness and imprecise imitation in signalling games. British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science.
Franke, M., Jäger, G., & van Rooij, R. (2011). Vagueness, signaling & bounded rationality. In T. Onoda,
D. Bekki, & E. McCready (Eds.), JSAI-isAI 2010 (pp. 45–
59). Springer.
Gazdar, G. (1979). Pragmatics, implicature, presuposition
and logical form. New York: Academic Press.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In Studies in the
ways of words (pp. 22–40). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Griffiths, T. L., & Kalish, M. L. (2007). Language evolution by iterated learning with bayesian agents. Cognitive
Science, 31(3), 441–480.
Horn, L. R. (1972). On the semantic properties of logical
operators in english. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Linguistics Club.
Hudson Kam, C. L., & Newport, E. (2005). Regularizing
unpredictable variation: The roles of adult and child learners in language formation and change. Language Learning
and Development, 1(2), 151–195.
de Jaegher, K., & van Rooij, R. (2011). Strategic vagueness,
and appropriate contexts. In Language, games, and evolution (pp. 40–59). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Kirby, S., Dowman, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2007). Innateness
and culture in the evolution of language. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 104(12), 5241–5245.
Kirby, S., Griffiths, T., & Smith, K. (2014). Iterated learning
and the evolution of language. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 28, 108–114.
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015).
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution
of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87–102.
Lassiter, D., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). Adjectival vagueness
in a bayesian model of interpretation. Synthese.
Lipman, B. L. (2009). Why is language vague? (Manuscript,
Boston University)
Merriman, W. E., & Bowman, L. L. (1989). The mutual
exclusivity bias in children’s word learning. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 54(3/4).
O’Connor, C. (2014). The evolution of vagueness. Erkenntnis, 79(4), 707–727.
Perfors, A., & Navarro, D. J. (2014). Language evolution can
be shaped by the structure of the world. Cognitive Science,
38(4), 775–793.
Reali, F., & Griffiths, T. L. (2009). Words as alleles: connecting language evolution with bayesian learners to models of
genetic drift. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 277(1680), 429–436.
Schaden, G. (2012). Modelling the “aoristic drift of the
present perfect” as inflation: An essay in historical pragmatics. International Review of Pragmatics, 4, 261–292.
Smith, K. (2011). Learning bias, cultural evolution of language, and the biological evolution of the language faculty.
Human Biology, 83(2), 261–278.
Szymanik, J. (2016). Quantifiers and cognition: Logical and
computational perspectives. Springer International Publishing.
Tamariz, M., & Kirby, S. (2016). The cultural evolution of
language. Current Opinion in Psychology, 8, 37–43.
van Deemter, K. (2009). Utility and language generation:
The case of vagueness. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
38(6), 607–632.
Williamson, T. (1994). Vagueness. London and New York:
Routledge.

1683

