Emotional and Cognitive Interest: How Creating Situational Interest Affects
Learning with Multimedia
Angela Yoo (ahyoo79@gatech.edu)
Department of Psychology, 654 Cherry St
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

Richard Catrambone (richard.catrambone@psych.gatech.edu)
Department of Psychology, 654 Cherry St
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA

Situational interest is the positive affect and sustained attention
triggered by particular contexts (Hidi & Renninger, 2006).
Some studies show interesting information enhances learning
while others find it hinders learning, producing the seductive
detail effect. Limited evidence suggests the seductive detail
effect is weakened if emotionally interesting information is
relevant to main ideas. The present research shows the
seductive detail effect occurs only under certain conditions.
Harp and Mayer (1997) proposed that generating cognitive,
rather than emotional, interest is more effective for improving
learning by cueing relationships among concepts for easier
processing. Hidi and Renninger (2006) argue distinguishing
between the emotional and cognitive might be artificial.
Present research found benefits from cognitive interest but no
support as to whether cognitive interest is necessarily a distinct
type of interest from emotional interest. There were some
challenges with operationalizing cognitive interest, as well as
validating strategies utilized to manipulate cognitive interest
levels.

text order choice, interest and positive affect regarding the
text, affect and time spent reading, and ultimately between
persistence and test scores (Ainley et al., 2002). This implies
that students’ interests and enjoyment lead to more time and
effort spent on a text, enabling them to learn more effectively.
Interest is typically divided into three categories:
individual, topic, and situational (Ainley, Hidi, & Berndorff,
2002). Individual interest and topic interest, which both
involve attributes of a person, are not considered here
because the focus of the present research is to examine
manipulations of learning material. Situational interest refers
to environmental stimuli and the general structural features
of a situation, such as organization of information,
unexpectedness, text cohesion, use of concrete ideas, and
intensity of triggered emotions (Ainley et al., 2002; Schraw
et al., 1995). Situational interest is briefer in duration than the
other forms of interest but is still characterized by positive
affect and sustained attention toward the material.

Keywords: learning, instruction, situational interest, cognitive
interest, seductive detail effect

Seductive Details

Abstract

Introduction
The idea of creating an interesting experience to enhance
learning is at the forefront of educational issues, particularly
with science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
education and massive open online courses (MOOCs)
(National Governor’s Association, 2011; Norman, 2013).
However, ensuring that interesting features are not detracting
from the primary instructional purpose is difficult. This
challenge of mediating a desire for interest and engagement
with the need to produce effective learning outcomes is
mirrored in educational and cognitive psychology, with
research finding contradictory or mixed results for increasing
interest levels in students (Rey, 2012).

Interest Learning Theory
Empirical support exists for interest learning theory – the idea
that the more interesting learning material is the more likely
a student is to learn and remember the information (Ainley,
Hidi. & Berndorff, 2002; Schiefele, 1991; Schraw, Bruning,
& Svoboda, 1995). This is especially true when measuring
elaborative processing and comprehension, rather than
simple recall or recognition (Schiefele, 1991). Statistically
significant correlations have been found between interest and

Not all research supports interest-based learning. Garner,
Alexander, Gillingham, Kulikowich, and Brown (1991)
found that efforts to artificially induce interest, particularly
with extraneous details, divert the learner’s attention and
reduce the ability to recall relevant information. They termed
these interesting but distracting details “seductive.” These
seductive details were highly memorable to participants on
tests of learning compared to details that were of high
importance but lower interest and also could lead to poorer
recall and transfer scores (Harp & Mayer, 1991).
In a meta-analysis of findings on seductive details, nearly
two-thirds of the studies included in the analysis supported
fully or partially the detrimental effects of seductive details
(Rey, 2012). The data in aggregate appear to demonstrate up
to a small to medium effect size (d = 0.3) for the reduction in
recall and a medium effect size (d = 0.48) for transfer of
knowledge tasks.
Still one-third of the experiments seductive details did not
hurt and sometimes even improved learning (Rey, 2012).
These studies show that particular types of interesting detail,
the learning domain, time limits, and amount of cognitive
load can temper the distracting effects of seductive details.
One example of how mitigating factors result in mixed data
comes from the study by Garner et al. (1991). Researchers

3596

found that moderately relevant and moderately interesting
details were recalled more frequently by participants.
Although the most important details, which were rated
uninteresting, were not remembered as well, the finding that
some of the germane details could be recalled if considered
interesting gives interest learning theory some merit.
Studies considering illustrations that accompany text
indicate that relevance is the key difference in determining
whether details enhance or reduce learning. In the case of
reading text, purely decorative illustrations do not benefit the
understanding of the content of the text, but illustrations that
depict the information, help to organize or interpret
information, or provide memory devices for learning can
moderately benefit the retention of that information (Carney
& Levin, 2002). Any lack of enhanced learning with purely
decorative images could possibly be moderated by other
variables, such as the learner’s prior knowledge (Magner,
Schwonke, Aleven, Popescu, & Renkl, 2014). While
decorative illustrations that incite situational interest can
distract learners with little prior knowledge, illustrations can
enhance learning for students with more prior knowledge.

Cognitive Interest
Instead of adding emotional interest with seductive details,
Harp and Mayer (1997) suggest using cognitive interest as an
alternative way to enhance learning. Harp and Mayer argue
that emotionally interesting seductive details do little to help
cognitively. To generate cognitive interest, instruction on a
topic should signal the underlying structure of relationships
of relevant concepts. Such strategies would include
identifying main ideas, relating information to prior
knowledge, and linking related topics. The idea is that, if
topics are presented in a way that learners find easier to
understand, the topics will seem more interesting. When
comparing performance on both recall and problem-solving
transfer, Harp and Mayer (1997) found that students scored
higher marks if using text and illustrations that helped to
organize and explain a topic (i.e. cognitively interesting
details) than if the text and illustrations included extraneous,
irrelevant content (i.e. seductive details).
A criticism of cognitive interest comes from a
neuroscientific perspective (Hidi & Renninger, 2006).
Separating affective from cognitive processes and, therefore,
emotional from cognitive interest is arguably an artificial
distinction because of the function of the lateral
hypothalamus. The lateral hypothalamus plays a major role
in seeking behavior and is responsible for inducing feelings
of interest and curiosity (Panksepp, 1998). Hidi and
Renninger (2006) claim that, regardless of the stimulus that
triggers interest or regardless of whether the person is
cognitively processing or affectively responding to the
stimulus, the lateral hypothalamus is activated in the brain.

Current Investigation
The present study focused on multimedia, specifically
educational videos. Video was selected as the educational
medium because it would be more directly applicable and

relevant to the growing use of technology in the classroom
with MOOCs and other online formats. Participants in all
conditions watched a video on human digestion that varied
by condition.
Relevance of Interesting Details The purpose of the main
study was twofold: to explore the mitigation of the seductive
detail effect through increased relevance of interesting details
to main ideas and to examine the distinction between
cognitive and emotional interest.
Many of the previous studies have measured learning by
using free recall after learners had been exposed to the
learning material (Garner et al, 1991; Harp & Mayer, 1997;
Harp & Mayer, 1998; Schiefele, 1991; Schraw et al., 1995).
Free recall might not account for prior knowledge sufficiently
or for variables, such as writing abilities or motivation to
write large amounts of text, that could affec performance
(Schiefele, 1991). Due to this possibility that free recall alone
could be an insufficient measure, a post-test score also
measured learning. A pretest score was used to explore the
possibility of prior knowledge as a covariate for the
experimental groups. Both the pre- and post-test consisted of
multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer questions,
but the questions were different for the two forms. Some of
the questions asked students to identify a concept through
recall or recognition while other questions measured required
students to explain causal relationships and make inferences.
The variety of questions was used to overcome any potential
issues with using only free response or essay questions.
By creating situational interest with statements that were
emotionally engaging but less similar to the main idea of the
video, the study was expected to replicate the findings of
seductive detail effect researchers (Garner et al., 1991; Harp
& Mayer, 1997; Mayer et al., 2008; Rey, 2012). However,
performance was predicted to improve with emotionally
interesting details if relevance to the content of the videos
was controlled. When the interesting details did not contain
less relevant additional information, but instead contained
similar information as the main idea, the distracting effect
seen with seductive details was not expected to be found.
Distinguishing Emotional and Cognitive Interests The
second aim of this research was to examine whether
emotional interest and cognitive interest are separate
constructs. The distinction between cognitive and emotional
aspects contradicts the definition of interest, which
necessitates both affective and cognitive changes. Therefore,
the phrase “cognitive interest” is used in the remainder of this
document to refer to interest incited by strategies used by
Harp and Mayer (1997) emphasizing the cognitive processes
of interest. “Emotional interest” will refer to strategies
emphasizing affective processes, as exemplified by most
interest learning researchers, such as Schiefele (1991). The
use of “cognitive interest” and “emotional interest” does not
indicate necessarily a true differentiation between the
cognitive and emotional processes of interest.

3597

For the possibility to remain that emotional interest and
cognitive interest are indeed the same phenomenon, as
proposed by Hidi and Renninger (2006), there should not be
any interactive effects with emotional interest conditions and
cognitive interest conditions. Lack of interaction, however,
would not necessarily indicate that cognitive and emotional
interests are undeniably the same, but the hypothesis that they
are the same would remain tenable. On the other hand, the
presence of significant interactions possibly would suggest
they are indeed different phenomena. Due to the evidence
from Harp and Mayer (1997), learning outcomes were
expected to demonstrate an interactive effect. Learning was
predicted to improve with more cognitive interest compared
to conditions with low interest material or material with
seductive details by increasing the efficiency of processing
the material. However, when there was emotionally
interesting material that was also relevant to the learning
material, adding cognitive interest should not produce any
additional benefits relative to what was already provided by
details that were emotionally interesting and relevant.

Videos ranging from 11.5 to 12 minutes in length and
involving screen capture and narration were used in each of
the six conditions. The types of illustrations that were used in
the screen capture for all conditions were representational
pictures. Representational pictures are those that simply
depict the concepts being described in the audio but do not
provide any type of organizational support for the concepts
(Carney & Levin, 2002). Three of the videos did not include
any features that would add cognitive interest and
manipulated only the amount and relevance of emotional
interest. The first of these three videos for the low cognitive
interest conditions contained only basic facts about human
digestion and served as the control (Table 2). In the highly
relevant emotional interest condition, the video narrative
supplemented the information in the control video with facts
that had been rated as more interesting and more relevant to
the main ideas in a previous pilot study. The video for the
irrelevant emotional interest condition – or the seductive
detail condition – included anecdotes and facts that had been
rated interesting but less relevant to the video’s main idea.

Methods

Table 2: Sample texts from video scripts.

Participants were 93 undergraduates in introductory
psychology courses. The experiment was a 3 x 2 factorial
design with six videos total – one for each condition. Students
were randomly assigned to each of the six conditions (Table
1). One hour-long session was required per participant.

Control
In addition to
producing bile, the
liver functions to
filter your
bloodstream, store
some vitamins and
minerals, and help
to breakdown
some of the excess
hormones in the
blood.

Table 1: Participants in each experimental condition.

Low

Emotional Interest
Relevant
Irrelevant
(Seductive Details)

Low Cognitive
Interest

16

16

16

High Cognitive
Interest

15

15

15

During the experimental session, students completed a
preliminary questionnaire and an exit questionnaire. The first
questionnaire given before the video viewing contained basic
demographic questions including age, year in school, major,
GPA, and SAT scores; Likert-type items regarding interest
levels on science, biology, and anatomy; and a prior
knowledge assessment. The exit questionnaire completed
after viewing that video was divided into two sections. The
first section repeated the same Likert-type items from the
preliminary questionnaire and included a free response
prompt. The final section contained items about the content
of the learning material. One such item was: “True or false:
Chemical digestion begins in the mouth.” Thirteen of the
post-test questions required students to recall or recognize
information presented directly in the videos. Twelve of the
items required students to make inferences based on the
information presented in the videos. The tests were piloted to
determine validity and appropriate levels of difficulty.

Relevant
Emotional
Interest
Because its bileproducing and
blood-filtering
jobs are so
important, the
liver is the
largest human
organ by weight
and regenerates
all its cells
within 30 days.

Irrelevant Emotional
Interest
(Seductive Details)
The liver produces
bile and filters the
blood. Because there
is a shortage of
donors and a great
need for donated
organs, researchers
are experimenting
with 3D-printed
livers for use in
transplant patients.

A second set of videos used the same scripts as the previous
set emotional interest videos but also included explanative
summaries to provide cognitive interest. Explanative
summaries were used in the study by Harp and Mayer (1997)
to create cognitive interest. These explanative summary
paragraphs of 3-6 sentences highlighted major components of
the human digestive system, important steps involving these
components, and some of the causal processes that occur.
Because all the information was presented aurally, the
explanative summaries were also presented through narration
at 6 different points within each video.
Learning was measured with a free recall exercise and a
post-test. For the free recall assessment, participants were
instructed to write everything they could remember from the
video about the digestive process. Raters awarded a point for
each complete and correct statement and 0.5 points for a
partially correct or partially complete statement. The free
recall assessments were scored by the researcher and a second
rater. The interrater reliability for the scores was calculated
to be α = 0.96. For the pre- and post-tests, raters deducted a
point for incorrect answers. No partial points were deducted.

3598

The raw score was then converted to a percentage score for
the post-test. The free recall score was not converted to a
percentage because it is scored on a basis of accumulating
points, unlike post-tests scored on a point-deduction basis.
Even if an attempt was made to convert recall scores to
percentages, comparisons would have been difficult with
mean recall scores around 12% and mean post-test scores of
57%. Comparing patterns of results across the 2 dependent
measures, rather than considering comparably scaled means,
was more important to underscore the reasons for conflicting
results in previous studies.

Results and Discussion
For the free recall exercise, SAT math scores (F = 5.92, p =
0.02), pre-test scores (F = 8.54, p < 0.01), and biology interest
levels (F = 7.13, p = 0.01) were found to covary significantly
with free recall scores. Pre-test scores (F = 10.66, p < 0.01)
and interest in biology (F = 7.87, p = 0.01) also significantly
covaried with the post-test scores. Once the indicated
covariates were considered, MANCOVAs show main effects
for both cognitive (F = 9.32, p < 0.01) and emotional (F =
4.65, p = 0.02) interest for free recall. A significant main
effect for only cognitive interest (F = 4.44, p = 0.04) resulted

for the post-test scores. Interactions were not significant for
either the free recall scores (F = 0.65, p = 0.53) or post-test
scores (F = 0.30, p = 0.74).
The results replicate the findings on cognitive interest of
Harp and Mayer’s 1997 study (Figure1). Compared to the
conditions without cognitive interest, participants learning
from the high cognitive interest materials had higher free
recall (M = 8.52, SD = 4.82) and post-test scores (M = 59.02,
SD = 16.95) when compared to free recall scores (M = 6.84,
SD = 3.40) and post-test scores (M = 55.83, SD = 17.66) of
those in the control condition (Figures 2 and 3).
Such results support the idea that material that is easier to
process for learning also provides some level of situational
interest – cognitive interest being a form of situational
interest – and contributes to improved learning. One possible
problem with this interpretation, however, is that adding
explanative summaries to create cognitive interest
consequently added a second opportunity to hear information
that was being presented in the videos. Repeated exposure to
learning material can improve performance on immediate
recall (Tulving, 1967). Further studies investigating whether
the improvement in learning can be attributed to the
frequency of exposure or to the cognitive interest that arises
from the clarity of organization and concepts is necessary.

Figure 1: Effects of adding explanative summaries for cognitive interest on free recall scores and post-test scores.

Figure 2: Effects of relevance of interesting material on free recall scores and post-test scores.

3599

The results for emotional interest and the relevance of
emotionally interesting details were mixed. Pairwise
comparisons with Sidak-adjusted p values were statistically
significant when comparing free recall results between the
control groups and the seductive detail group (t = 2.80, p =
0.02) (Figure 2). The control group’s scores (M = 8.10, SD =
5.38) were greater on average than the scores for the
seductive detail condition (M = 7.00, SD = 3.77). This result
lends additional support to the seductive detail findings of
Garner et al. (1991), Harp and Mayer (2006), and Mayer et
al. (2008). Details in learning material that are not relevant to
the main learning object appear to be harmful for learning
when learning is measured by the ability to recall
information. However, there were no other significant
differences (t = 2.00, p = 0.15) between the control and the
relevant interest groups (M = 7.85, SD = 3.24) or between the
seductive detail and relevant interest groups (t = 2.00, p =
0.74). These results could suggest that, while relevant
emotional interest can compensate for any distracting aspects
of seductive details, the amount of interest generated in the
relevant emotional interest condition is not enough to be
advantageous compared to low-interest learning material.
However, due to the null results for relevant interest, making
any conclusive statements is difficult.

Perhaps any effects of including such emotionally
interesting information would have impacted affective states
more so than cognitive processes. Further work using a
variety of strategies to measure affect and cognition is
necessary to determine what effects these details have.
As predicted, the format of assessment appears to affect the
measure of learning outcomes (Figure 2). Recall assessments
consisting of writing paragraphs tend to be more difficult to
write, require more information to be encoded, and produce
worse scores compared to assessments that rely on
recognition (Tversky, 1973). Because the post-test questions
relied on a combination of both recall and recognition items
requiring only short answers or marking answer selections,
the detrimental effects of seductive details were no longer
observed. No discernible effects (F = 1.03, p = 0.37) were
found for overall post-test scores across the control (M =
56.77, SD = 19.33), relevant emotional interest (M = 58.45,
SD = 14.78), and seductive detail (M = 56.90, SD = 18.00)
conditions. The difference between the free recall results and
the post-test questionnaire could imply that seductive details
are more harmful when deeper encoding is required. In
contrast, when less encoding is needed for recognition tasks,
seductive details seem to have less of an impact.

Figure 3: Effects of relevance of interesting material on free recall and post-test scores with and without cognitive interest.
Because interactions between cognitive and emotional
interest were not statistically significant (Figure 3), the
current study was unable to provide any further support to the
idea that the two phenomena are distinct constructs. Firstly,
the F values (F = 0.65, p = 0.53 for free recall; F = 0.30, p =
0.74 for post-test scores) were less than one for the
interactions, suggesting other variables at play that could
cause the relationships to appear nonlinear and lead to F
values smaller than 1. Secondly, Hidi and Renninger’s (2006)
proposal that emotional and cognitive interests are part of the
same construct remains tenable, as does Harp’s and Mayer’s
(1997) idea that a dichotomy exists. However, reassessing the
premise of the Harp and Mayer study (1997) provides some
indications as to why finding a distinction would be difficult

using their methods. While the positive results found by Harp
and Mayer (1997) seemed promising for learning based on
cognitive interest, the separation between cognitive and
emotional interest is problematic. Interest is defined as
having both affective and cognitive dimensions, according to
Hidi and Renninger (2006). To distinguish the two
components would suggest that either an entirely different
construct is being studied or that an essential component was
neglected when interpreting the results of the study.
The latter possibility could be the case for the Harp and
Mayer study (1997). When participants were asked to rate
how interesting the learning material was, the average rating
for the passage containing cognitively interesting details was
not significantly different from the passage with emotionally

3600

interesting details, showing that both passages were enjoyed
equally. The interest ratings in all the conditions were greater
than 7 out of a possible 10 points. These results demonstrate
that positive affect was experienced in the cognitive interest
conditions equal to that in the emotional interest conditions.
Even though the researchers conducted a subsequent
experiment to have participants distinguish interest based on
“entertainment” as an approximation of emotion and interest
based on how much the text supported the learner’s
understanding, participants initially interpreted “interest” as
encompassing both these dimensions. Due to the
questionable premise of manipulating only cognitive
components of interest, in addition to the previously
discussed problems of repeated exposure with explanative
summaries, finding nonsignificant results for the interaction
between emotional interest and cognitive interest is
unsurprising.

Acknowledgments
Much gratitude is given to Frank Durso and Paul Verhaeghen
for their guidance, patience, and support.

References

Conclusion
Although positive results for relevant interesting details and
negative results for seductive details were expected,
statistically significant differences were found only for
seductive details. The seductive detail effect, however, did
not appear with the post-test and could indicate that irrelevant
details are problematic only when recall tasks require more
encoding.
The current study was unable to demonstrate a distinction
between the constructs of emotional and cognitive interest.
Therefore, the lack of significant results for any interactive
effects should not be interpreted as indicating that the two
constructs are the same or different.
The difficulty in developing appropriate manipulations and
measures serve to emphasize the importance of careful
planning in the design of instructional material. Generating
interest and possibly the right type of interest to increase
learning outcomes is a challenge. The results of this
experiment and the both corroborating and conflicting results
in the literature illustrate the need for intentionality in the
development of learning content. Failure to make the
appropriate considerations can lead to unintended results or
no effects for the attempts made to improve instruction.
There remains a need for a more substantive basis for
beliefs that interest is a necessary motivating factor for
learning. Additional studies with improved materials are
needed to further explore whether the relevance of highinterest materials can mitigate the detrimental effects of
seductive details and support interest learning theory. Finding
more empirical evidence would support popular
recommendations for stimulating interest in improving
educational outcomes, especially for STEM subjects
(National Governors Association, 2011). There would even
be value to adding to a possible foundation for creating
guidelines on how to select interesting information that is
appropriate for a learning purpose, particularly with
multimedia. If learning improvements cannot be consistently
found, then perhaps this can deter misguided efforts in
encouraging instruction that is interesting but ineffective.

Ainley, M., Hidi, S., & Berndorff, D. (2002). Interest,
learning, and the psychological processes that mediate their
relationship. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(3)
545-561.
Carney, R. N., & Levin, J. R. (2002). Pictorial illustrations
still improve students' learning from text. Educational
Psychology Review, 14(1), 5-26.
Garner, R., Alexander, P.A., Gillingham, M.G., Kulikowich,
J.M., & Brown, R. (1991). Interest and learning from text.
American Educational Research Journal, 28(3), 643-659.
Harp, S. F., & Mayer, R.E. (1997). The role of interest in
learning from scientific text and illustrations: On the
distinction between emotional interest and cognitive
interest. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89 (1), 92102.
Hidi, S., & Renninger, K.A. (2006). The four-phase model of
interest development. Educational Psychologist, 41(2),
111-127.
Magner, U. I., Schwonke, R., Aleven, V., Popescu, O., &
Renkl, A. (2014). Triggering situational interest by
decorative illustrations both fosters and hinders learning in
computer-based learning environments. Learning and
Instruction, 29, 141-152.
Mayer, R. E., Griffith, E., Jurkowitz, I.T.N., & Rothman, D.
(2008). Increased interestingness of extraneous details in a
multimedia science presentation leads to decreased
learning. Journal of Educational Psychology: Applied,
13(3), 329-339.
National Governors Association. (2011). Building a Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math Education Agenda:
An Update of State Actions. Washington, DC: NGA Center
for Best Practices.
Norman, D. (2013, October). MOOCs and Online Education.
Seminar presented at the Georgia Institute of Technology
GVU Brown Bag, Atlanta, GA.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The
foundations of human and animal emotions. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Rey, G.D. (2012). A review of research and a meta-analysis
of the seductive detail effect. Educational Research
Review, 7(3), 216-237.
Schiefele, U. (1991). Interest, learning, and motivation.
Educational Psychologist, 26(3-4), 299-323.
Schraw, G., Bruning, R., & Svoboda, C. (1995). Sources of
situation interest. Journal of Reading Behavior, 27(1), 117.
Tulving, E. (1967). The effects of presentation and recall of
material in free-recall learning. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 6, 175-184.
Tversky, B. (1973). Encoding processes in recognition and
recall. Cognitive Psychology, 5(3), 275-287.

3601

