Enforced pointing gesture can indicate invisible objects behind a wall
Hajime Takahashi (16rmd19@ms.dendeai.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Tokyo Denki University, Ishizaka. Hatoyama
Saitama, 350-0311 Japan

Tetsuya Yasuda (t-yasuda@jumonji-u.ac.jp)
Jumonji University, 2-1-28. Sugasawa Niiza
Saitama, 352-8510 Japan

Harumi Kobayashi* (h-koba@mail.dendai.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Tokyo Denki University, Ishizaka. Hatoyama
Saitama, 350-0311 Japan

Abstract
The pointing gesture is regarded as indicating an object or
location in the environment. People sometimes point to
invisible objects, but the inferential mechanism is not known.
This study examined comprehension of pointing with a bent
index finger at an invisible object behind a wall. The
experimenter pointed at an object using either typical pointing
or “enforced pointing” behind a wall that was either opaque
or transparent. In enforced pointing, the experimenter moved
his arm in an arc movement. The participants guessed which
object was being denoted. The wall was also either relatively
high or relatively low. When the participants looked at typical
pointing, they thought that objects both in front of the wall
and behind the wall were being denoted. However, when they
looked at enforced pointing, they more frequently thought that
objects behind the wall were denoted. People seemed to use
pragmatic knowledge on this “enforced” pointing gesture.
Keywords: gesture; declarative pointing; common ground;
non-linguistic information

Introduction
The pointing gesture usually indicates direction. If any
object or location exists in the indicated direction, such
object or location is interpreted as denoted. Clark (2003)
discussed use of attention-getting gestures of pointing and
placing. He noted that pointing at a referent and placing a
referent are both useful ways to convey information about
referents. In pointing, a person directs the addressee’s
attention to the referent object; for example, a customer may
point at a package of medicine that is difficult for him or her
to reach but is easy for the clerk. In placing, a person puts a
referent object in the area of an addressee’s attention; for
example, a customer may place a package of medicine on
the checkout counter where a clerk waits. These
communications are possible without saying any words. To
communicate smoothly, people must share mutual
understanding of pointing at referents and placing referents
in different situations. Clark (1996) proposed that people
use “common ground” as implicit mutual knowledge in
human communication. Previous research has focused
mostly on language and verbally describable information
included in common ground. Non-verbal information such
as gestures must also be comprehended using common

ground as to how people use gestures in different situations;
however, usage of gestures as common ground has not yet
been thoroughly explored. Pointing gestures are often used
with demonstratives (Coventry et al., 2008; 2014). Pointing
gestures are also used to examine children’s inferential
ability (Doherty et al., 2004; Kobayashi, 2007). In these
studies, the addresser can easily share information about
visible objects using visual joint attention and common
ground.
Kita (2003) discussed that the semiotic processes—that is,
interpretation of a pointing gesture and its referent—and
intended meaning of the overall action must be analyzed in
interpretation of a pointing gesture. The referent of a
pointing gesture can be ambiguous in many situations and in
many ways. People must make correct inferences about the
observed pointing gesture. Tomasello (2008) discussed that
a customer points at an empty glass, and a bartender
understands the request of the customer (“Please fill the
glass”). In other situations—for example, a client and a
glass designer—the client is pointing at an empty glass may
be interested in or selects the design of the glass.
Goodwin (2003) suggests that an “activity framework”
specifies which features of the environment are relevant for
the ongoing activity and, hence, are likely to be the referent
of a pointing gesture. Goodwin also suggests that different
forms of pointing may correlate with particular types of
referents.
Pointing is usually used for visible objects when an
indicator and an observer can jointly attend to the same
object or location. People sometimes point to invisible
objects, but the inferential mechanism is not known.
Kobayashi and Yasuda (2015) examined how people
interpret the experimenter’s pointing with a bent index
finger at an invisible object behind a panel. The
experimenter pointed at bottles that were placed either in
front of the panel or behind the panel using a straight index
finger or a bent index finger, and the participants guessed
which object was being indicated. In the with-obstacle
condition, bent pointing tended to be interpreted as referring
to all the objects, both in front and behind the panel.
However, this tendency was not observed with straight
index-finger pointing. Thus, when the participants looked at

3291

straight pointing, they thought that only the objects in front
of the panel were being indicated. However, when they
looked at bent pointing, they thought that objects both in
front of and behind the wall were being indicated. The
significance level of the shape of the pointing finger’s effect
was substantially large (η2 = 0.804) and the results suggest
that people think bent pointing can refer to objects behind
walls, but straight pointing cannot. The study suggests that
people have “common ground” in their interpretation of
different types of pointing.
This study examined comprehension of pointing with a
bent index finger at an invisible object behind a wall. The
present study examined participants’ interpretation of the
experimenter’s pointing at an object using either typical
pointing or “enforced pointing” behind a wall that was
either opaque or transparent. In enforced pointing, the
experimenter moved his arm in arc movement. The
participants guessed which object was being denoted. The
wall was also either relatively high (28 cm) or relatively low
(14 cm). We examined the effect of pointing movement
because this iconic movement may suggest the indicator’s
intention of “overriding the wall.” We examined the
transparency of the wall because, if the wall is transparent,
“overriding” intention may look ambiguous. The reason is
that objects behind the transparent wall can be indicated
without such effortful movement. However, if the wall is
opaque, the “overriding” intention may be naturally
understood. We also examined the height of the wall. The
enforced pointing movement was more easily understood
when a relatively high (28 cm) wall was used than when a
relatively low (14 cm) wall was used.

Regarding the pointing condition, “typical pointing” was
when the experimenter pointed at the referent with his arm
extended horizontally and his index finger kept bent (Fig.
2); “enforced pointing” was when the experimenter pointed
at the referent with his arm moving in arc and his index
finger kept bent (Fig. 3).

Fig. 1: Experimental setup in “invisible” with
“lengthwise” conditions. Objects were placed 10
cm apart.

Methods
Participants

Fig. 2: Flow of typical pointing

Sixteen Japanese undergraduate university students (M age = 22.0
years; SD = 0.816; 1 female) participated. The experiment was
conducted in accordance with Tokyo Denki University’s code of
ethics.

Experimental setting
Fig. 1 shows the experimental setup. On the table, there
were 4 small bottles (W: 3 cm × H: 7 cm) designated 1, 2, 3,
and 4 with a different color on each bottle. Bottles were
placed 10 cm apart. Bottle #1 was placed 75 cm away from
the edge of the side of the table where the experimenter sat.
The experimenter sat on one side of the table and wore a
black sun visor during the experiment so that participants
could not see the experimenter’s gaze direction. The
participant sat at the table at a right angle to the
experimenter. The panel (W: 14 cm × H: 28 cm) was placed
in the middle of the table between bottles #2 and #3.
Participants were randomly assigned to all conditions.
The experimental conditions consisted of two types each
of pointing (2: typical vs. enforced), visibility (2: visible vs.
invisible), and position (2: lengthwise vs. widthwise).

Fig. 3: Flow of enforced pointing
Regarding the visibility condition, “visible” meant that a
transparent panel was used; the experimenter and the
participant could see all bottles. “Invisible” meant that a
black opaque panel was used; the experimenter could not
directly look at bottles #3 and #4. The participant could see
all bottles. In the obstacle position condition, the height of
the “lengthwise” obstacle was 28.0 cm, and the width was
14.0 cm. The height of the “widthwise” obstacle was 14.0
cm, and the width was 28.0 cm. For example, in the
“visible” with “lengthwise” obstacle condition, there was a

3292

small transparent lengthwise panel on the table (Fig. 4a). In
the “invisible” with “widthwise” obstacle condition, there
was a small black opaque widthwise panel on the table (Fig.
4b).

Fig. 4: Each type of obstacle; “a” is used in
“visible” with “lengthwise” conditions and “b”
is used in “invisible” with “widthwise”
conditions.

Procedure
First, the experimenter and the participant looked at all the
bottles placed on the table. Then, the participant sat on the
experimenter’s chair and looked at the table. Then, the
experimenter put the panel between bottles #2 and #3, and
the participant again looked at the table. Thus, the
participant experienced the experimenter’s view in both
visible and invisible obstacle conditions.
In the typical pointing with invisible widthwise obstacle
condition, the experimenter put the black-opaque widthwise
panel between bottles #2 and #3 and said to the participant,
“I cannot see bottles #3 and #4. Now, I will point at one of
the four bottles.” Then, the experimenter pointed at bottle #3
using the typical index finger. Next, the experimenter
pointed at bottle #3 continuously and said, “Now, I am
pointing at something. What is the color of the bottle you
would guess I am pointing at?” The participant responded
orally using the bottle color. The bottle corresponded to the
distance from the edge of the table: Bottle #1’s distance was
75 cm; #2, 85 cm; #3, 95 cm; and #4, 105 cm. All bottles
were of different colors, and bottle positions were
randomized. In addition, the experimenter wore a sun visor
so that the participant could not see the experimenter’s eye
gaze.
In the enforced pointing condition, the procedure was the
same as with the typical pointing except that enforced
pointing was used. In the visible condition, the procedure
was the same as with the invisible condition except that the
visible condition was used. In each block, the experimenter
pointed at bottle #3, and there were 24 trials in all. Overall,
the order of color bottles of these blocks was
counterbalanced between the participants.
The experimenter’s pointing was trained to show the same
pointing gesture in either the typical pointing or the
enforced pointing in the aspects of speed of movement. In

addition, the angle of his forefinger maintained the same
shape (Fig. 2 and 3).

Results
Fig. 5 shows the participant’s responses when the
experimenter pointed at the object in each pointing and each
visibility condition. A 2 (Pointing: typical, enforced) × 2
(Visibility: visible, invisible) × 2 (Position: lengthwise,
widthwise) three-way ANOVA was performed with the
number of the bottle that the participant responded as the
dependent measure. There was a marginally significant
main effect of Pointing, F(1,15) = 3.479, p = .08, η2 = 0.050.
There was also a significant interaction of Pointing ×
Visibility, F(1,15) = 5.497, p < .05, η2 = 0.015.
To explore the significant Pointing ×Visibility interaction,
the simple main effects of Pointing within each Visibility
and Visibility within each Pointing were analyzed. The
simple main effect test revealed that there was a significant
difference between typical pointing and enforced pointing in
the invisible obstacle, F(1,15) = 7.120, p < .05, η2 = 0.106.
There was also a marginally significant difference between
the visible and invisible obstacles in typical pointing,
F(1,15) = 3.407, p = .08, η2 = 0.029. Other effects were not
significant (all p > .05).
When enforced pointing was used (M = 2.958, SE =
0.166), participants interpreted a farther bottle as being
indicated than when the typical pointing was used (M =
2.427, SE = 0.175) in the invisible obstacle condition.

3293

Fig. 5 Participants’ responses when the
experimenter pointed at bottle #3 using each type
of pointing in each visibility and position
condition. * denotes a significant difference.
Error bars denote the standard errors of the
means.

Discussion
This study examined comprehension of pointing with an
enforced movement of a bent index finger at an invisible
object behind a wall. The study examined participants’
interpretation of an experimenter’s pointing using either
typical pointing or “enforced pointing” at an object behind a
wall that was either opaque or transparent. In enforced
pointing, the experimenter moved his arm in an arc
movement. The participants guessed which object was being
denoted. The wall was also either relatively high (28 cm) or
relatively low (14 cm).
When the participants looked at typical pointing, they
thought objects both in front of the wall and behind the wall
were being denoted. However, when they looked at enforce
pointing with an opaque wall, they more frequently thought
objects behind the wall were denoted. The height of the wall
did not have any effect in this experiment.
Participants interpreted that enforced pointing could
“override” the wall if the wall was opaque. They might
think enforced pointing suggested an overriding trajectory
(Fig. 6) to point to an invisible object behind the wall.
However, for the objects behind the transparent wall,
enforced pointing was not necessary. Thus, this enforced
movement was sufficiently informative for participants to
interpret the indicator’s intention to “override” the wall.
That seems to be the reason why the height of the wall had
no effect.
The study suggested that people use an indicator’s arm
movement and the features of the environment to
comprehend the referent of pointing. The result suggests
that we have “common ground” in terms of interpretation of
different types of pointing. Furthermore, we think the
linguistic-cognitive framework presented by Relevance
Theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1995; Wilson & Sperber, 2004)
may be applied to our result. Discussing Relevance Theory
from a biological perspective, Scott-Phillips (2010) stated
that humans’ and other animals’ every signal carries a
presumption of its own optimal pertinence. Here, non-verbal
signals such as human gestures can be processed as relevant
signals in addition to utterances.
It can be said that the study suffers from reduction of
pointing situations. The study investigated only the
interpretation of enforced pointing in the controlled
experiment. It is necessary to study the production in
addition to the interpretation of enforced pointing in a more
real human environment.

Fig 6: Pointing trajectories

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all participants who participated in
our experiment. This study was partially supported by the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS): Grantin-Aid for Young Scientists (B) # 26870549 (T.Y.) and
JSPS: Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) # 16K04318
(H.K.).

References
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. (2003). Pointing and placing. In S. Kita (Ed.),
Pointing. Where language, culture, and cognition meet
(pp. 243-268). Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Clark, H. H., Schreuder, R., & Buttrick, S. (1983). Common
ground at the understanding of demonstrative reference.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 245258.
Coventry, K. R., Griffiths, D., & Hamilton, C. (2014).
Spatial demonstratives and perceptual space: Describing
and remembering object location. Cognitive Psychology,
69, 46-70
Coventry, K. R., Valdés, B., Castillo, A., & GuijarroFuentes, P. (2008). Language within your reach. Near-far
perceptual space and spatial demonstratives. Cognition,
108, 889-895.
Doherty, M. J., Anderson, J. R., & Howieson, L. (2009).
The rapid development of explicit gaze judgment ability
at 3 years. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 104,
296-312.

3294

Goodwin, C. (2003). Pointing as situated practice. In S. Kita
(Ed.), Pointing: Where language, culture, and cognition
meet (pp. 217-241). Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Kita, S. (Ed.). (2003). Pointing: Where language, culture,
and cognition meet. Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
Kobayashi, H. (2007). The effect of touching object parts on
learning novel object part names among young children
and adults. Studies in Language Sciences, 6, 61-76.
Kobayashi H., & Yasuda T. (September, 2015). Pointing to
an invisible object behind a wall: Comprehension of
pointing with a bent index finger. Proceedings of the
EuroAsianPacific Joint Conference on Cognitive Science
(pp. 477-481), Torino, Italy.
Scott-Phillips, T. C. (2010). The evolution of relevance.
Cognitive Science, 34(4), 583-601.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication.
Cambridge UK: MIT Press.
Tomasello, M. (2014). A natural history of human thinking.
Harvard University Press.

3295

