Expected Utility in Romantic Relationships: Satisfaction as a Cue for Romantic
Partnership Dissolution
Samantha E. Cohen (cohense@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences and Cognitive Science Program, 1101 W. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Peter M. Todd (pmtodd@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences and Cognitive Science Program, 1101 W. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

for and maintaining them. The best-studied aspects of
relationship quality (or utility) include relationship
satisfaction, intensity of love, and level of trust. Metaanalyses have found that measures of relationship quality
more strongly influenced relationship dissolution than either
individual traits (e.g. neuroticism) or external factors (e.g.
social network overlap; Le et al., 2010). Daters may thus
consider the amount of utility, quality, or other valued
attribute produced in a relationship when choosing whether
to exit it and attempt to find a better relationship. This
utilitarian view departs from the traditional cultural
emphasis on the holistic nature and complexities of
romance. However, for a significant portion of human
history, relationships were designed to be mutually
beneficial to a couple and their extended families, and
relationships with little expected gain were avoided.
It is not novel to suggest individuals attempt to get the
best relationship possible (whatever that might be), but few
have connected the study of romantic relationships to
theoretical models of choice. Problems involving searching
for and maximizing resources are well studied within the
foraging literature in biology. Optimal foraging theory
(OFT; Stephens & Krebs, 1986) considers how foragers
maximize their total gain (e.g. calories) in an environment.
Foragers traverse a landscape filled with patches of some
resource (e.g. berry bushes), choosing to enter and obtain
(e.g. consume) those resources before leaving to find new or
better patches. The relationship-foraging model (Cohen &
Todd, 2017) treats the search for successive relationships as
a foraging problem. Entering a relationship could be thought
of as entering a “patch” that provides some mix of
satisfaction, love and other benefits. Relationship foragers
search through a social landscape of potential romantic
partners, choosing to pass by some, entering into a
relationship with others (and reaping the benefits), and
possibly eventually departing in search of another.
Depending on just what sort of patch a relationship is like,
OFT can make predictions about how long people should
stay in the relationship patches they find.
One commonly-studied type of patch is characterized by
resources that are depleted over time as the forager
consumes them. Berry bushes are a common example of this
type of patch, with the ripe berries being continually
consumed until the forager decides to leave. For these

Abstract
The choice to enter and leave a romantic relationship can be
framed as a decision-making problem based on expected
utility of the partnership over time, akin to a forager deciding
whether to stay in a particular patch based on the amount of
resources it provides. We examined the temporal trajectory of
three traits that may correspond to resources in romantic
relationships—trust, love, and satisfaction—to determine
whether they behave like depleting or replenishing patches
from a foraging perspective. All three rise over time in intact
relationships—suggesting replenishment—but plateau or fall
in dissolved relationships—suggesting depletion. Survival
analysis demonstrated that higher ratings of all three quality
variables decreased the risk of romantic dissolution. The
results suggest that these cues are lower in dissolved
relationships, indicating individuals could potentially use
them as cues for leaving an unsatisfactory relationship patch
via aspiration-level cognitive mechanisms.
Keywords: foraging theory; romantic relationships; survival
analysis; relationship dissolution; mate choice

All good things must come to an end, including romantic
relationships. In some cases, it is not until death that we
part, but many relationships end before that point through
someone’s active choice. Relationship dissolution is a highintensity and long-lasting stressor (Simpson, 1987;
Sprecher, 1994), indicating that avoiding it is important to
people. Yet most people seem to enter relationships that
eventually end and are often caught off-guard when it
occurs, indicating that it can be difficult to predict.
Individuals cannot usually determine the expected outcome
of a relationship prior to entering the relationship itself,
meaning they may continuously evaluate their relationship
and decide whether one’s relationship is likely to (or
should) end. Previous work in this choice domain has
tackled the brighter side of romance, such as how
individuals choose a relationship partner (e.g. Beckage,
Todd, Penke, & Asendorpf, 2009), but less work has
examined how individuals decide to move on. What cues do
individuals consider when choosing to end a relationship,
and how are they incorporated into choices?
How long to stay with something typically depends on
what one is getting out of it. Individuals clearly expect to
get something out of romantic relationships, given that
many expend significant time, money, and energy searching

234

bushes, the rate of return (e.g. calories consumed per unit
time) is expected to increase rapidly early on as a forager
enters a patch, with a diminishing rate of return as resources
are consumed. The Marginal Value Theorem (Charnov,
1976) in OFT states that individuals should leave such
depleting patches when the rate of return within the current
patch is less than the rate of return that is expected from the
environment at large, given optimal search behavior and
expected search costs.
But not all patches only deplete over time—some may
deplete and replenish (such as a berry bush with new berries
ripening across weeks), and some may produce a roughly
constant output for extended periods. Immobile barnacles
settled on a tide-pool rock capturing food floating past are
partaking of such long-lasting patches. These and other
animals are known as sit-and-wait foragers (Beachly,
Stephens, & Toyer, 1995), as once they have found a patch
location of this non-depleting type they can stay there
exploiting it for a long time. In such situations, “simply
staying put can make good economic sense” (p. 265), but
leaving is also predicted when patch quality declines or
other circumstances change, such that the forager could get
a better rate of return by looking (and exploiting) elsewhere.
How do relationships compare to these types of patches?
Some aspects seem typically to start high and deplete over
time, such as the novelty of a new partner. But others do not
appear to be capped—there is probably no preset amount of
satisfaction, love, or trust that one can get in a relationship,
unlike the fixed number of ripe berries currently in a bush.
This suggests that various measures of relationship quality
may not only fall but also can replenish over time, and can
even stay level or grow indefinitely.
It is important for specifying the relationship-foraging
model to determine whether any aspect of relationship
quality follows the assumptions of OFT regarding particular
types of patchy resource, whether depleting, or replenishing,
or constant. A depleting patch should show high (or rapidly
growing) initial rate of return, then falling over time. A
replenishing patch would have a rate of return that falls and
rises, possibly repeatedly. Finally, a constant patch would
have a rate of return that rises (possibly very quickly) to a
roughly steady state.
In this work, we assess ratings of three types of quality in
a romantic relationship: satisfaction, love, and trust. We
examine how these factors change over time, to determine
which may be useful in predicting relationship dissolution
given different patch definitions in the relationship-foraging
model. The data come from self-reports from intact and
dissolved romantic relationships.
Previous research has demonstrated that aspects of
quality, especially satisfaction, tend to increase dramatically
at the start of a relationship (Rusbult, 1983) followed by
relative stability or decreasing levels over time (Levenson &
Gottman, 1985; Rusbult, 1983; Sprecher, 1999). In one of
the rare longitudinal works, satisfaction and commitment to
the relationship increased over time (Rusbult, 1983).
Sprecher (1999) measured several aspects of quality at

yearly intervals in couples and found the opposite result:
Satisfaction was significantly lower for both genders and
love was significantly lower for men at the first yearly
interval, but otherwise, ratings were remarkably stable. Only
the longest-lasting couples (those lasting the full 4 year
study period) reported an increase in quality, with a slight
increase in commitment and satisfaction for women in the
final year. Thus, we expect that longer-lasting relationships
will report greater satisfaction, and possibly other quality
variables such as trust, although this pattern will not hold
for love beyond the earliest time points.
These trajectories diverge depending on the eventual
relationship outcome. Among relationships remaining intact
(at least, during the duration of a particular study),
satisfaction and commitment stabilize or slowly increase
over time (Rusbult, 1983; Sprecher, 1999). Individuals
exiting a dissolved relationship report decreased satisfaction
but only slight decreases in love, suggesting relationships
tend to end due to changes in satisfaction rather than love
(Sprecher, 1994; Sprecher 1999). These diverging paths lead
to large disparities in commitment and satisfaction between
couples remaining intact and those ending (Rusbult, 1983;
Simpson, 1987). Hence, we expect that reports on
satisfaction and trust, but not love, to be higher for intact
than dissolved couples.
In the next section we analyze the time-course of selfreported ratings of different types of relationship quality, to
assess their similarity to rates of return for depleting,
replenishing, and constant patches. We then use survival
analysis to test whether these self-reported aspects of quality
influence the likelihood of exiting a relationship (i.e.,
leaving a relationship patch).

Method
A survey was used to assess relationship length versus
quality of intact and dissolved romantic relationships in
undergraduates. All procedures were approved by the
Indiana University Institutional Review Board.

Participants
A sample of 700 undergraduates was collected from the
Indiana University psychology subject pool. To qualify,
participants needed to have at least one romantic experience,
including but not limited to casually going on dates, being
in a committed relationship, or getting married. Forty-five
participants who indicated they had never been in any sort
of romantic relationship or did not indicate whether they
were in a relationship currently were not included in the
analyses. Of the remaining 655 participants, 62.0% were
currently in a romantic relationship. All 655 participants
indicated the type of relationships they were giving us
ratings for (whether their current relationship or their most
recent dissolved relationship); 50.8% were describing
committed relationships (but not engaged or married),
44.4% were casual relationships and early relationships
without a clear classification, 2.4% were engaged or
married, and the remaining 2.3% fell outside these

235

categories. Of participants primarily identifying with a
single racial group (n=616), 72.1% identified as white,
14.90% as Asian, 8.1% as black, and 4.9% as Hispanic or
Latino. Subjects were primarily heterosexual (91.3%)
females (58.6%) between the ages of 18-21 (90.2%).
Participants were compensated with course credit.

n=391, p<.001), love and satisfaction (r=0.29, n=391,
p<.001), and trust and satisfaction (r=0.48, n=655, p<.001).
While love showed a dramatic increase over the first few
months, in line with our prediction, each variable overall
tended to continually increase slightly as duration grew,
rather than forming a curve of diminishing returns with a
plateau (although the curve of trust beyond one year might
be described as a plateau).

Measures
Participants completed a survey for approximately 30
minutes online through Qualtrics. Participants currently in a
romantic relationship (intact couples) were asked to
describe various qualities of their current relationship.
Individuals not currently in a relationship were asked to
imagine their most recent romantic relationship prior to its
dissolution (dissolved couples). Duration of the relationship
was measured from its current state (for intact couples) or
its final duration (for dissolved couples) in months (n=395)
and month- and year-based categorical bins (n=655) (see
Figure 1).
Participants reported three measures of relationship
quality on Likert scales:
 Love: “How in love with your partner are you?”
 Trust: “How much do you trust your partner?”
 Satisfaction: “In general, how satisfied are you
with your current relationship with your partner?”
Love was measured only for participants indicating
they were in love with their partner (meaning a rating is
not available for all participants) and ranged from 1 (not
very) to 9 (intensely) (n=391, M=7.55, SD=1.50). Trust
ranged from 1 (not at all) to 9 (completely) (n=655,
M=6.79, SD=2.05). Relationship satisfaction ranged from
1 (extremely dissatisfied) to 7 (extremely satisfied)
(n=655, M=5.33, SD=1.75). The upper endpoint for the
satisfaction scale was different from the other two scales
because satisfaction is typically measured on a bipolar 7point scale (e.g. Simpson, 1987), so scores are compared
only via correlations.

Figure 1: Distribution of relationship lengths for both
dissolved and intact relationships.
Comparing dissolved and intact couples’ ratings of each
variable, intact couples generally had equal or greater
quality across relationship durations with lower variability.
Looking at all time points together, there was also greater
quality for intact over dissolved relationships as a whole
(Independent Samples T-Test, love: t(391)=5.11, trust:
t(655)=10.02, satisfaction: t(655)=9.58, all p <.001.
The rapid initial rise in love overall is driven largely by
ratings of dissolved relationships, which start at much lower
levels before plateauing. Intact relationships vary in love by
little more than a point across durations. This is somewhat
surprising—were the data longitudinal, we could conclude
that individuals experiencing strong feelings of love early in
a relationship are more likely to stay together. However, for
the present work, we can only say that individuals looking
back on dissolved, low-duration relationships report them as
low in love, while those who are still in them report more
intense feelings of love. Trust shows a slight increase
overall for both intact and dissolved couples (the few data
points for 3-5 year dissolved couples makes that mean value
unreliable). Satisfaction is relatively stable both overall and
for intact couples, but varies widely, rising and falling, for
dissolved couples.

Results
To determine whether love, trust, or satisfaction follow
appropriate rate of return curves to be considered depleting,
replenishing, or constant resources as found in foraging
theory, we plotted their mean trajectories over categorical
duration groups (see Figures 2, 3, and 4, respectively). Note
that each of these trajectories are constructed across
subjects, as we only have zero or one data point on each
scale from each subject. Love (Pearson’s R, r=0.20, n=222,
p=.003) and trust (r=0.11, n=395, p=.02) both weakly but
significantly positively correlated with relationship duration,
but satisfaction did not (r=0.03, n=395, p>.05). This
suggests that love and trust are generally higher at longer
relationship durations, while satisfaction is relatively stable.
The variables were highly intercorrelated, with significant,
moderate relationships between love and trust (r=0.51,

236

Survival Analysis
While the quality-over-time plots are indicative of general
trends, they do not accurately reflect the outcome of all
relationships. Many of the currently intact relationships in
our sample will end after the completion of the study. That
is, the eventual outcome for these relationships is unknown
(or censored), and we should not assume that they will
never end.

Figure 4: Mean intensity of satisfaction for individuals
currently in an intact relationship, reporting a previous
dissolved relationship, and overall. Error bars are ± 1 SE.
To more fully assess how each quality variable interacts
with relationship duration while accounting for these
possible eventual dissolutions, a survival analysis of
relationship duration was run using the lifelines package in
Python 3.5 (Davidson-Pilon, 2016). This analysis measures
the connection of specified variables with the likelihood of
relationship dissolution over time by estimating the number
of relationships currently intact that will eventually dissolve
at any particular duration. If a variable has no impact on
relationship dissolution (and hence inversely duration), then
it is not likely to be a resource that matters in terms of
relationship foraging. However, if a resource increases or
decreases the risk of dissolution (hence, a shorter or longer
duration, respectively), it is something to be actively
avoided or sought out, respectively, from the perspective of
relationship foraging.
A Cox Proportional Hazard model of relationship
duration (in months, available for n=395) was fit
individually to satisfaction, trust, and love to determine how
they affect the risk of dissolution. Dissolved relationships
were coded as observed events, and non-numeric durations
(e.g. “more than 24 months”) were excluded.
Table 1 shows the coefficients for each factor, which
indicate the change each factor causes to the baseline hazard
rate of dissolution based on length of the relationship alone.
A positive coefficient indicates a heightened risk of
dissolution relative to the baseline; a negative coefficient
indicates a reduced risk of dissolution.
All three variables were significantly predictive of
reduced risk of dissolution (p<.001), such that individuals
reporting greater love, trust, or satisfaction would have
longer relationships on average (with love having the

Figure 2: Mean intensity of love for individuals currently
in an intact relationship, reporting a previous dissolved
relationship, and overall. Error bars are ± 1 SE.

Figure 3: Mean intensity of trust for individuals currently
in an intact relationship, reporting a previous dissolved
relationship, and overall. Error bars are ± 1 SE.

237

Table 1: Results of the Cox Proportional Hazards model, where the log of the coefficient indicates the proportional
dissolution risk compared to the baseline hazard rate.
Variable
Love

Events/Observations
73/221

Cox Coefficient (β)
-0.432

eβ
0.649

p
<.001

95% CI
-0.649 to -0.216

Trust

184/395

-0.391

0.677

<.001

-0.512 to -0.270

Satisfaction

184/395

-0.285

0.752

<.001

-0.409 to -0.161

greatest impact and satisfaction the least). This is in line
with our predictions and corroborates the patterns in Figures
2-4 while also considering possible eventual dissolutions
beyond the durations in our data.

are like depleting patches, then OFT predicts that people
will usually decide to leave and break up the relationship
when its quality declines below the level they could expect
to get elsewhere, without necessarily having any other
relationship to move to. If relationships are like nondepleting sit-and-wait patches, then people would not be
expected to leave while quality remains constant (or grows),
but if they encounter another potential relationship of
possibly higher value this could prompt a shift to that new
patch, depending on switching costs. These strategies could
make use of key cognitive comparison abilities.
First, while individuals would benefit from being able to
accurately track their current relationship quality over time,
previous work suggests that they may not be good at it
(Sprecher, 1999). Regardless of the actual change in
relationship quality, humans have a tendency to say that
things have changed for the better. Individuals reporting
annual current ratings of love and satisfaction for four years
show very little significant differences between temporal
samples, but report increases when asked how their feelings
have changed over time (Sprecher, 1999). This suggests that
individuals are not especially accurate at recalling past rates
of return from a relationship, at least explicitly. However,
given the relatively stability of quality after the first few
months, individuals could conceivably hold a single average
of quality and accurately characterize the overall quality of
the relationship. Searchers are generally sensitive though to
the rates of return from other possible relationships
(interdependence theory; Thibaut & Kelley, 1959). That is,
one’s satisfaction with a relationship’s quality can depend
on comparison to the quality one could expect from
currently available alternative mates (Rusbult, 1983;
Simpson, 1987; Thibaut & Kelley, 1959). Thus we might
expect relationship-leaving strategies to depend on
comparison to other current possibilities or to averages of
past experienced quality levels.
Second, by comparing the current relationship quality to a
single previous average level or to the expected level of
another currently possible relationship, individuals can use a
simple aspiration value heuristic to assess the value of
staying in their current relationship. Previous work in
romantic partner choice shows individuals use aspirationlevel heuristics when choosing to enter a new relationship
based on the attractiveness of potential mates at speeddating events (e.g. Beckage et al., 2009), so conceivably,
this mechanism may apply to choosing to exit a relationship
as well. The decision threshold could be based on the gap in

Discussion
Examining changes in relationship quality over time
revealed that longer relationships had reliably elevated
levels of love and trust (but not satisfaction), contrary to our
predictions. Our findings of satisfaction stability across
relationship lengths mirror those of Sprecher (1999), while
our continual rise in trust and love is in line with Rusbult
(1983)’s pattern of satisfaction increase.
As we expected, intact relationships showed significantly
higher and more consistent rates of return in trust and
satisfaction than dissolved relationships, in line with
findings by Rusbult (1983).
However, contrary to
expectations, love was also higher in intact couples than
dissolved couples. Sprecher (1994) previously found that
love, but not satisfaction, generally remains high for
dissolved couples, suggesting dissolution may be based on
satisfaction alone. Results from our survival analysis
showing that greater love was associated with lower
likelihood of dissolution also countered Sprecher’s finding.
All three variables were thus higher in intact than dissolved
relationships, and were predictive of dissolution. This
suggests that these dyadic relationship factors may be used
as criteria for choosing when to exit a relationship, or may
co-vary with other factors predictive of dissolution.
The goal of this work was to examine whether particular
aspects of relationship quality follow the time courses
expected for depleting, or replenishing, or constant resource
patches, to enable characterization of a relationship-foraging
model (Cohen & Todd, 2017). The three qualities of love,
trust, and satisfaction show rising levels over time on
average for all relationships (intact and dissolved),
suggesting that they are replenishing resources. It is
important from a foraging perspective though to consider
dissolved relationships separately, where a decision to leave
the relationship-patch was made by at least one party; there
love seems to plateau, suggesting a constant resource, while
trust and satisfaction may actually decrease somewhat at the
longest duration, suggesting depletion. Here more data is
needed to better specify the form of these functions and
what kind of patches they may conform to.
How might individuals use different aspects of quality to
choose when to leave a relationship patch? If relationships

238

quality between successful and unsuccessful relationships
over time. In our data, the size of this gap generally
increased over time, which would predict continual
dissolutions over time. Individuals may also consider the
length of time spent below an aspiration value, given that a
large gap between initial and long-term quality (for love, at
least) is expected in all relationships in the early stages.
Relationships may be a different type of patch from just
depleting or non-depleting: one where the quality level
(return rate) increases the more the forager puts effort into it
(up to a point). Moreover, the forager does not usually
know how high the return rate will grow until they get there.
(nor know how low the return may fall if it ever does start to
decline). How should an individual decide whether to stay
in such a situation? This may depend on how rapidly the
rate of return is increasing or decreasing at particular stages
of the relationship as a consequence of particular amounts of
effort. New models will be needed to explore this, going
beyond some of the strong simplifying assumptions made in
existing models of non-depleting patch foraging. For
instance, rather than having patches switch from being good
to being bad instantaneously and searchers switch from not
knowing anything about the return rate to knowing it
precisely (Beachly et al., 1995), more realistic models for
relationship foraging should include gradual change in rates
of return and gradual learning of those rates.
A limitation of this work is that each relationship quality
variable was measured at only one point, so intra-individual
change in quality cannot be examined. Instead, we
calculated the expected curves of returns over time using
population averages. These patterns of change in quality do
though mirror those from related longitudinal work. While
not ideal, this replication provides some reassurance that
using single observations per individual gives a relatively
realistic representation, at least of the overall shapes of these
curves, though future iterations of this model should use
longitudinal data. Relatedly, there could have been
systematic differences in ratings between those participants
who were currently in relationships and so were asked to
give current ratings, and participants who were not currently
in relationships and so were asked to recall ratings from
their earlier, now-dissolved relationship. For participants
asked to recall their ratings of quality prior to their
previously relationship’s breakup, it is inevitable that this
type of recall could skew ratings of quality, likely
negatively. In addition, ratings could differ depending on
who initiated dissolution. If the person did the breaking up,
then they may rate their relationship quality as decreasing
before the breakup; but if the person was on the receiving
end, they may not rate quality as declining so much.
Getting data from both parties in multiple relationships
would help address this issue. We only asked for ratings of
love from those participants who indicated they were in
love, which may have skewed results positively (although
they still showed a significant difference between intact and
dissolved relationships). Finally, this work used a college
sample, and the results may not generalize to the overall

population, especially given that most college students are
not yet old enough to have had many long-term
relationships.
Using a new framework, relationship-foraging modelling,
and a technique that is relatively uncommon in cognitive
science research, survival analysis, we found that some
aspects of relationship quality may be considered depleting
or replenishing resources from a foraging perspective,
depending on how the relationship proceeds. Further
research will explore whether thinking about relationships
in terms of resource-filled patches that people can exploit
and deplete or work to replenish themselves over time can
help us understand how and when couples decide to stay or
leave to forage for greener pastures.

References
Beachly, W. M., Stephens, D.W., & Toyer, K. B. (1995).
On the economics of sit-and-wait foraging: Site selection
and assessment. Behavioral ecology, 6(3), 258-268.
Beckage, N., Todd, P. M., Penke, L., & Asendorpf, J.
(2009). Testing sequential patterns in human mate choice
using speed dating. In Proceedings of the 2009 Cognitive
Science Conference, pp. 2365-2370.
Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging, the marginal value
theorem. Theoretical population biology, 9(2), 129-136.
Cohen, S.E. & Todd, P.M. (2017). Relationship foraging:
Does time spent single predict relationship length?
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Davidson-Pilon, C. (2016). Lifelines. Github repository:
https://github.com/CamDavidsonPilon/lifelines
Le, B., Dove, N. L., Agnew, C. R., Korn, M. S., & Mutso,
A. A. (2010). Predicting nonmarital romantic relationship
dissolution: A meta‐analytic synthesis. Personal
Relationships, 17(3), 377-390.
Levenson, R. W., & Gottman, J. M. (1985). Physiological
and affective predictors of change in relationship
satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 49(1), 85-94.
Rusbult, C. E. (1983). A longitudinal test of the investment
model: The development (and deterioration) of
satisfaction
and
commitment
in
heterosexual
involvements. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45(1), 101-117.
Simpson, J. A. (1987). The dissolution of romantic
relationships: Factors involved in relationship stability
and emotional distress. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 53(4), 683-692.
Sprecher, S. (1994). Two sides to the breakup of dating
relationships. Personal Relationships, 1(3), 199-222.
Sprecher, S. (1999). "I love you more today than yesterday":
Romantic partners' perceptions of changes in love and
related affect over time. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 76(1), 46-53.
Stephens, D. W., & Krebs, J. R. (1986). Foraging theory.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Thibaut, N. & Kelley, H. (1959). The social psychology of
groups. New York: Wiley.

239

