Explicit Predictions for Illness Statistics
Talia Robbins (talia.robbins@rutgers.edu)
Pernille Hemmer (pernille.hemmer@rutgers.edu)
Department of Psychology, 152 Frelinghuysen Road
Piscataway NJ, 08901 USA
Abstract
People’s predictions for real-world events have been shown to
be well-calibrated to the true environmental statistics (e.g.
Griffiths and Tenenbaum 2006). Previous work, however, has
focused on predictions for these events by aggregating across
observers, making a single estimate for the total duration
given a current duration. Here, we focus on assessing
predictions for both the mean and form of distributions in the
domain of illness duration prediction at the individual level.
We assess understanding for both acute illnesses for which
people might have experience, as well as chronic conditions
for which people are less likely to have knowledge. Our data
suggests that for common acute illnesses people can
accurately estimate both the mean and form of the
distribution. For less common acute illnesses and chronic
illnesses, people have a tendency to overestimate the mean
duration, but still accurately predict the distribution form.
Keywords: Prediction; Judgment; Health; Cognition

Introduction
Imagine that you have the flu and need to decide whether
you will be better in time to travel to a conference this
weekend. You are now faced with predicting how long you
will be sick. For this inference, you will need to use your
knowledge of real-world statistics, including both the mean
duration and most likely form of the duration distribution.
People have been shown to make optimal predictions for
the duration of many real-world events (Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2006). In these domains, people’s beliefs about
the underlying distribution of quantities (e.g. cake baking
times are captured by a bimodal distribution) have been
shown to be accurate in the aggregate. These findings have
been extended to people’s ability to make predictions for
illness duration (Robbins and Hemmer, in revision). People
were able to make predictions that were consistent with both
the mean and form of illness distributions for common acute
illnesses (e.g. common cold and seasonal flu), but
systematically overestimated the duration of chronic
illnesses (illnesses with which they had significantly less
experience). This suggests they had knowledge of the
correct form of the underlying illness duration distributions.
One limitation of the procedures used in previous
experiments (e.g. Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2006) is that each
participant made only one prediction about a total duration
given its current duration. As such, data was aggregated
over participants to assess the fit of participant data to the
true duration distributions. As Griffiths and Tenenbaum
(2006) explain, this gives a guide to peoples’ implicit beliefs
about the distributions. As such, these experiments do not
allow for an assessment of whether people have knowledge
of the correct form of the underlying illness distribution at

the individual level. Accordingly, these studies could be
illustrating the wisdom of the crowds effect, whereby
aggregating over many individual judgments from a group
of people leads to a response that is closer to the ground
truth than that of a smaller group (Surowiecki, 2004).
To our knowledge, no previous work has assessed the
correspondence between people’s beliefs and the statistics
of the environment—specifically illness statistics—at the
individual level. Therefore, in the current study, we assessed
whether people understood the true statistics for the
durations of different illnesses by asking them directly what
they thought the mean and correct form of illness duration
distributions were. This allowed us to evaluate whether
people have an internal model for real-world statistics that
they can consciously access and use to make predictions.
Understanding illness duration is critical for illness
identification. For instance, imagine you have a cough and
high fever, and thinking you have the flu you try to estimate
how long you will be sick. One thing you will draw on is
your understanding of the real-world distribution of
durations for different illnesses. If your symptoms begin to
fade after three days, this may confirm your suspicion that
you have the flu, since this is within the normal distribution
for the flu. However, if you are still sick after 10 days, you
might begin to believe you have a different illness such as
the common cold, because you know that 10 days is
reasonable within the distribution of duration for the
common cold. This estimation requires an understanding of
the entire distribution of illness duration, rather than just the
mean or some conditional duration. With only the mean of
the distribution, you would not know how much variation in
duration is normal, or at which point a particular illness is
unlikely given the duration of your symptoms.
Illness further provides an interesting example for
prediction because people have different levels of
experience for different illnesses—e.g. common illnesses
such as the cold, or less common illnesses such as bacterial
meningitis. Experience may also differ between acute (e.g.
cold) and chronic (e.g. asthma) illnesses. An acute illness is
defined as one which can be cured with treatment, while a
chronic illness is defined as one that can be managed but not
cured. Differing levels of experience between chronic and
acute illnesses may influence the accuracy of a person’s
prior beliefs, and different priors might be appropriate for
different illnesses, given personal experience.
The observer’s prior beliefs play an important role, as
optimal predictions are assumed to follow Bayesian
principles. Bayes rule gives a principled account of how
people should update their prior beliefs given evidence from
the world. Each time a person experiences an illness, they

2998

should update their prior probability distributions for the
duration of that illness. This would result in illnesses that
are experienced more often having very accurate prior
distributions. For illnesses that are less commonly
experienced, people might adjust their prior beliefs to those
of illnesses for which they have more knowledge of the
correct form of the distribution, when making inferences.
While people might use evidence from other sources when
updating their priors, evidence that is personally
experienced is better integrated than information acquired in
other ways (Sallnas, Rassmus-Grohn, & Sjostrom, 2000).
In this paper, we sought to assess whether the
correspondence of people’s beliefs to Bayesian optimal
predictions in the aggregate (e.g. Griffiths & Tenenbaum,
2006; Robbins & Hemmer, in revision) extended to
estimations for the mean and correct form of illness duration
distributions at the individual level. We further sought to
apply this approach to a domain with direct implications for
real world problems—specifically patient health. In
Experiment 1, we simply asked participants to predict the
mean duration of each of nine illnesses.
In Experiment 2, we sought to assess whether people
could make estimations of the correct form of illness
distributions. To do this, we gave participants four
distribution options—each fit to the true clinical data for
that illness—and asked them to select the distribution form
that best described that illness. Because each of the
distribution options was fit to the clinical data, consistent
selection of the correct distribution would clearly illustrate
that there is a correspondence between people’s internal
model and the true statistics of the environment. This
suggests that they have a cognitive representation of the
form of the distribution of durations that they can
consciously access.

Experiment 1: Mean Estimation
Methods
Participants Ninety-Nine Mechanical-Turk workers from
the United States participated in exchange for $1.
Materials We selected nine illnesses—five acute and four
chronic (see Table 1)—intended to span a range of durations
and familiarity. Familiarity was determined based on
prevalence statistics for the number of people diagnosed
with that illness each year (see Table 1). Table 1 also
includes the source of the clinical data used for the illness
duration distributions.
We first needed to determine the mean and correct form
of the nine illness distributions. Illness durations have been
found to be well modeled by a type of distribution known as
a survival function, which includes Gamma, Exponential,
and Weibull. The Erlang distribution is a special case of the
Gamma distribution, where 𝛼 must be an integer, which is
often used to model illness duration and illness stages in
transmission models of infectious disease, and to infer
parameters from clinical data (Krylova & Earn, 2013). For
this reason, we assume Erlang is the correct distribution for
the nine illnesses. See Figure 1 for the clinical duration

Figure 1: Histograms of clinical data for nine illnesses with
best fitting Erlang distributions. Grey bars show the
frequency of each illness duration, black lines show the
Erlang fit to clinical data. µ gives the distribution mean.
distributions for the nine illnesses used in this experiment,
with corresponding Erlang distribution fits. The clinical data
provides a ground truth for both the mean and form of
distributions to compare to participant responses (see Table
1 for clinical data sources).
Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Griffiths
and Tenenbaum (2006), with the important difference that
we did not condition on the current unit of time. As a
consequence of the units of time available in the
experiment, there may have been an anchoring effect, which
is when people are systematically influenced by starting
points regardless of whether they are informative (e.g.
Chapman & Johnson, 1999). By not providing the units of
measure, we eliminate any possible anchoring effect. Our
current procedure provides a truer picture of people’s ability
to estimate the mean because they are not given a frame of
reference. Participants simply made a prediction about the
total duration of each of the nine illnesses. The question
read: “Given that you meet someone with illness X, what do
you think will be the total duration of their illness?”
Participants responded by typing in a number and selecting
a unit of time from a dropdown menu presented on the
computer screen. The experiment was performed using the
Qualtrics interface. The order of presentation was
randomized.
Participants were also asked to categorize each illness

2999

Table 1: Sources for Clinical Data (in order of prevalence)
Illness
Source of Clinical Data
(Prevalence/10,000)
Acute (in order of prevalence)
Bacterial Meningitis (.14)
Kilpi & Anttila (1991)
Mononucleosis (5)
Cameron et al. (2006)
Appendicitis (9)
Singh et al. (2014)
Seasonal Flu (1250)
Kohno et al. (2010)
Common Cold (2360)
Gwaltney, J. (1967)
Chronic (in order of prevalence)
COPD (4.5)
Shavelle (2009)
Asthma (800)
American Lung
Association (2012)
http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes
Type II Diabetes (860)
/statistics/duration/fig1.htm

Chronic Heart Disease (1130)

Proudfit et al. (1983)

using one of five labels: “Lasts a short time, will go away
completely even without treatment”, “Can vary in length,
requires immediate treatment, but can be cured”, “Is long
term, requires treatment, but can eventually be cured”,
“Lasts the rest of a person’s lifetime, treatment can only
manage symptoms, it cannot be cured, but does not
necessarily cause death”, “Varies in length, treatment can
only manage symptoms, cannot be cured, eventually causes
death”. Participants were also asked several basic
demographic questions (e.g. age and experience with the
nine illnesses) which are not analyzed here.

Results
Given that participants could respond with any unit of time,
we first normalized participant responses to the unit of time
for the clinical distributions. Responses were then filtered
for outliers. Data was excluded in the following way:
unreasonably large responses (defined as those 3 standard
deviations greater than the mean response for a given
illness) and participants who had more than two data points
excluded based on the above criteria. The responses
analyzed were 85 for appendicitis, 90 for the seasonal flu,
90 for the common cold, 87 for bacterial meningitis, 77 for
mononucleosis, 90 for COPD, 90 for chronic heart disease,
90 for type II diabetes, and 90 for asthma.
First, we examined people’s ability to characterize the
durations of acute and chronic illnesses. Chronic illnesses
are lifelong, which is a critical difference from acute
illnesses which are curable. To determine whether
participants had basic knowledge of the illnesses they were
making estimations about, we examined their responses to
questions asking to characterize each illness. For the
common acute illnesses—common cold and seasonal flu—
92% of participants correctly responded that the illnesses
were short term and curable. For the less common acute
illnesses—appendicitis and bacterial meningitis—81% and
66% of participants respectively labeled these illnesses as
short term. For the four chronic illnesses 74%-84% of
participants correctly responded that these illnesses were
lifelong. This clearly shows that people understand the
chronicity of the chronic and common acute illnesses.
We first evaluated the accuracy of participant’s mean

Figure 2: Red bars show the percentage of participants that
were X number of standard deviations from the mean.
Positive numbers indicate estimations above the mean, and
negative numbers indicate estimations below the mean.
responses (see Table 2). A qualitative evaluation of the data
illustrates that participant responses were close to the true
mean for more prevalent acute illnesses (i.e. common cold
and seasonal flu), and that participants overestimated the
duration of chronic illnesses, similar to the pattern found by
Robbins & Hemmer (in revision).
In order to evaluate whether participant responses were
accurate relative to the true mean of the empirical illness
distributions, we used a two one-sided t-test approach (e.g.
Limentani et al., 2005). We used this approach as it allows
us to test for practical equivalence (e.g. Rogers, Howard, &
Vessey, 1993). A one-sample t-test might find a significant
difference between a population mean of seven days and a
participant response mean of eight days. While this
difference is significant, it places too rigid a standard for our
purposes, leading to an inaccurate conclusion that
participants do not understand the mean of that illness. For
this reason, we set a criterion considering accuracy to be
within one standard deviation of the mean of the empirical
illness distributions (standard deviations for each illness are
displayed in Figure 2). We then conducted a t-test on either
end of this threshold to determine if participant responses
were significantly greater than the lower threshold, and
significantly less than the upper threshold.
We found that for mononucleosis and the common cold,

Table 2: True and estimated illness durations
Illness
True Duration Participant Response
Acute
Appendicitis
Seasonal Flu
Common Cold
Bacterial Meningitis
Mononucleosis
Chronic
COPD*
Type II Diabetes
Chronic Heart Disease
Asthma

% using unit of time (correct unit is bolded)
Hours Days
Weeks Months Years

39 hours
3.9 days
5.1 days
5.5 days
10 weeks

471.6(SD=969.5) hours
8.9(SD=4.5) days
6.3(SD=3.2) days
37.3(SD=44.0) days
9.3(SD=13.0) weeks

8.4
2.1
1
2
1

32.6
37.9
65.3
10.5
9.5

39.0
56.8
33.6
45.3
35.8

12.6
3.2
0
36.8
32.6

7.4
0
0
5.3
21.1

6 years
12 years
13 years
15 years

36.6(SD=22.0) years
36.0(SD=22.5) years
26.4(SD=20.0) years
42.5(SD=25.7) years

0
0
0
4.2

1
1
1
1.1

0
0
2.1
0

5.3
5.3
2.1
2.1

93.7
93.7
94.7
92.6

* COPD stands for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease

3000

responses were within the one standard deviation of the true
mean—meaning the estimates were practically equivalent to
the true mean (upper threshold: Mononucleosis: t(76)=-6.1
p<.01, Common cold: t(89)=-6.9. p<.0; lower threshold:
Mononucleosis: t(76)=5.1. p<.01, Common cold:
t(89)=13.4. p<.01). For the other seven illnesses, responses
were found to be greater than the lower end of the threshold,
but not less than the higher end of the threshold, suggesting
a pattern of overestimation, (Appendicitis: t(84)=4.3. p<.01,
Seasonal flu: t(89)=13.0, p<.01, Bacterial meningitis:
t(86)=7.1, p<.01, COPD: t(89)=14.9, p<.01, Type II
diabetes: t(89)=20.4, p<.01, Chronic heart disease:
t(89)=20.0. p<.01, Asthma: t(89)=13.2. p<.01).
Given that participants were not within the one standard
deviation threshold for seven illnesses, we wanted to further
examine how misaligned they were for each illness.
Therefore, we calculated the percentage of participants at
each standard deviation from the mean (see Figure 2). For
the common cold and mononucleosis, the majority of
participants (approx. 80%) were within one standard
deviation, as illustrated in the TOST. For the seasonal flu
more than 70% of participants were within four standard
deviations of the mean, which may seem like a large
deviation from the correct response, however it is also
important to note that the standard deviations varied greatly
between illnesses. For the seasonal flu, the standard
deviation was only 1.73 days, meaning that more than 70%
of participants responded within 6.8 days of the true mean.
Conversely, for the least prevalent acute illnesses,
appendicitis and bacterial meningitis, only 34% and 38% of
participants respectively were within four standard
deviations of the true mean, with some participants being up
to 80 standard deviations away (for appendicitis this
corresponded to 1416 hours or 59 days). This illustrates that
participants had lower agreement, and less accurate mean
estimations for these illnesses.
For the chronic conditions, fewer participants were within
four standard deviations of the mean, with 31% for COPD,
100% for type II diabetes, 61% for chronic heart disease,
and 47% for asthma. Participant responses were all within
four standard deviations of the mean for type II diabetes
because the standard deviation is 24 years.
We then examined whether the absence of a time anchor
influenced the unit of time participants used to respond (see
Table 2). For the acute illnesses, multiple units of time can
be used to express the same value; i.e., a one week long
illness can be characterized as seven days or one week. For
seasonal flu and common cold, more than 80% of
participants responded with either the clinical (days) or the
adjacent and reasonable (weeks) unit of time. For
mononucleosis, approximately 66% of participants used the
clinical or adjacent unit of time. For the least prevalent acute
illnesses—appendicitis
and
bacterial
meningitis—
participants used the clinical or adjacent unit of time only
40% and 55% of the time. For the four chronic illnesses,
92% to 95% of participants chose the clinical unit of time.
The results suggest that participants could reliably use the

clinical unit of time when estimating durations of prevalent
acute illnesses and chronic illnesses.

Experiment 2: Distribution Form Estimation
Methods
Participants Forty Mechanical-Turk workers from the
United States participated in exchange for $2. The
participants had not participated in Experiment 1.
Materials The same nine illnesses from Experiment 1 were
used. We selected four distributions as response options in
the distributional form task: Erlang, Gaussian (a.k.a.
Normal), Uniform, and Bimodal. These distributions were
chosen as they can reasonably describe illness durations.
The Erlang, which was always the correct answer, was
chosen because illness distributions have been found to be
well modeled by this distribution and provide a good fit for
all the clinical distributions. Normal was chosen because the
bell-curve is ubiquitous, and in some cases is very close to
the Erlang distribution. This allows us to evaluate how well
participants can discriminate very similar distributions.
Bimodal was chosen because for chronic illnesses it might
be reasonable to assume that there is one group of people
who die immediately, and another group that lives with the
illness for a longer time. Lastly, uniform was chosen
because simple Bayesian prediction models assume a single
uninformative (or uniform) prior (e.g. Gott, 1993). Selecting
the uniform form of the distribution might suggest observers
using a heuristic insensitive to prior beliefs.
Distributions were presented to participants as histograms
of the average total duration of an illness. For each illness,
the presented histograms were created by producing the best
fit to the true clinical data for that illness for each of the four
distributions. In this way, participants’ choice of distribution

3001

Figure 3: Screenshot of experimental interface for sample
question (seasonal flu). Distribution types, top left to bottom
right, are: Uniform, Normal, Erlang, and Bimodal.

would be based solely on distribution form. The histograms
were presented with descriptive captions. The captions for
each distribution form were consistent for all illnesses.
Captions described several critical points on the graph using
frequencies out of 100 (see Figure 3). The descriptions for
each distribution form were matched to illustrate the same
number of points on the histogram. Four naïve raters
evaluated the relationship between the descriptors and the
histograms and in all cases found them to be well-matched
and easily understood. The experiment was presented using
the Qualtrics interface.
Procedure Participants were first shown instructions on
how to read graphs in our task. They then completed a
training task, with two training sessions of four trials each.
For each trial, participants were shown one histogram
(illustrating one of the four distributions types used
throughout this experiment) and asked to match it to one of
four captions. The training trials were designed to illustrate
duration without referencing illnesses. One set depicted the
amount of time it takes for a person to turn into a zombie
after being bitten, and the second set depicted the number of
licks it takes to get to the center of a tootsie pop.
After the training task, participants were asked to choose
the appropriate histogram from the four distribution options
for each of the nine illnesses (presented one at a time) by
selecting it with a radio button. Both question and choice
order were randomized.

Participants chose Erlang more often than Uniform for eight
out of nine illnesses: seasonal flu X2(1,N=38)=18.0, p<.01,
common cold X2(1,N=38)=19.0, p<.01), bacterial meningitis
X2(1,N=38)=9.8, p<.01, mononucleosis X2(1,N=38)=17.0,
p<.01, COPD X2(1,N=38)=13.3, p<.01, chronic heart
disease X2(1,N=38)=7.9, p<.01, type II diabetes
X2(1,N=38)=8.8, p<.01, and asthma X2(1,N=38)=4.7, p=.03.
Erlang was chosen significantly more than Bimodal for
five of nine illnesses: seasonal flu X2(1,N=38)=9.7, p<.01,
common cold X2(1,N=38)=4.5, p=.03, bacterial meningitis
X2(1,N=38)=8.0, p<.01, COPD X2(1,N=38)=9.2, p<.01, and
type II diabetes X2(1,N=38) =23.6, p<.01.
Participants chose Erlang significantly more than Normal
for two out of nine illnesses: seasonal flu X2(1,N=38)=8.1,
p<.01, and common cold X2(1,N=38)=8.4, p<.01. As shown
above, Erlang was chosen significantly more often than any
other distribution for both seasonal flu and common cold.

Results
Data were excluded if participants answered two or more
questions incorrectly in each of the two four trial trainingsets. This removed two participants’ data from analysis.
First, we assessed the proportion of trials for which
participants chose the clinical distribution (Erlang).
Participants chose Erlang 42% of the time, which was
significantly greater than chance (25%), based on a onesided Binomial test (p<.01). It was also chosen significantly
more often than any of the other distributions: Normal
X2(1,N=342)=11.8, p<.01, Uniform X2(1,N=342)=93.9,
p<.01, and Bimodal X2(1,N=342)=48.0, p<.01.
While participants selected Erlang with the greatest
frequency overall, we were further interested in how
frequently they chose the correct response for each
individual illness. We performed a one-sided Binomial test
and found that for six of nine illnesses, participants
performed better than chance (i.e. significantly more than
25% of
participants chose the Erlang distribution):
seasonal flu (53%, p<.01), common cold (50%, p<.01),
bacterial meningitis (42%, p=.016), mononucleosis (42%,
p=.016), COPD (45%, p<.01), type II diabetes (47%,
p<.01). Participants did not select any of the other
distributions at a level higher than chance. See Figure 4 for
the proportion of participants that chose each distribution
option for the nine illnesses.
Lastly, we performed a chi squared test to determine
whether participants selected the Erlang distribution
significantly more often than the other distribution choices.

Figure 4: Red bars show the percentage of participants that
chose a distribution choice.

General Discussion
We evaluated people’s ability to estimate the mean and
correct form of duration distributions at the individual level
within the domain of health. Examining people’s
representations of illness duration statistics is important,
because it allows us to understand the correspondence
between people’s beliefs and the statistics of the
environment—in this case—illness statistics. In addition,
these experiments shed light on people’s internal
representations of real world statistics.
Our most interesting finding is that participants appeared
to have knowledge of the correct form of the underlying
illness distribution, choosing the assumed clinical
distribution (Erlang) more frequently than any other
distribution. When broken down by illness, they chose the
clinical distribution more frequently for the most prevalent
acute illnesses: seasonal flu and common cold.
While participants often inferred the form to be the
normal distribution, this may be explained by the similarity
of many of the normal fits to the Erlang fits. This occurred
because the normal distributions were truncated by a lower
duration bound of zero. We deliberately included the
Normal distribution because of the potential confusability
with the clinical distribution. As such, the fact that
participants still chose the clinical distribution as the correct
form overall, suggests they have strong beliefs about the

3002

form of illness duration distributions and that these
correspond to the environmental statistics. It is important to
note that research has illustrated that people often fail at
graphical interpretation (e.g. Gerteis et al., 2007), which
makes participant performance in this task impressive.
When examining participants’ estimates for the mean, we
found that for more prevalent acute illnesses (i.e., common
cold and seasonal flu), they were able to accurately estimate
the mean duration. We also found a pattern of
overestimation for chronic illnesses and less-prevalent acute
illnesses which was similar to the pattern of overestimation
found by Robbins and Hemmer (in revision).
The pattern of overestimation for chronic illnesses might
be explained by people applying a probabilistic model of
life expectancy to their understanding of the distribution
form for illness durations.
Because they have little
experience with chronic illnesses, and they understand that
chronic illnesses are life-long, their overestimation might be
due to a strategy of applying parameters from the true
distribution of lifespans (adjusted slightly to account for
decreased life-expectancy with a chronic illness) to their
knowledge that illnesses follow the form of an Erlang
distribution. Their ability to select the appropriate
distribution form for these illnesses suggests that they can
use knowledge of the form of other illness distributions
even if they do not have enough experience to set the
parameters accurately. This overestimation might also be
adaptive in terms of planning for the future. For chronic
illnesses, it may be safer to assume a longer duration to plan
sufficiently for the future, i.e., retirement savings.
A logical next step for this work would be to ask
participants to independently generate distributions, rather
than asking them to select from a limited number of options.
Goldstein & Rothschild (2014) have shown that participants
can generate these distributions when presented with data,
which suggests that this method could be used to evaluate
peoples’ internal representations of real-world statistics.
Our results illustrate that people hold accurate
representations for both the form and mean of duration
distributions of prevalent acute illnesses. Significantly, the
most prevalent acute illnesses—the com mon cold and
seasonal flu—are also the ones for which participants
consistently demonstrate knowledge of the correct
distribution form, and accurately predict the mean at the
individual level. This suggests a prior belief that is better
calibrated to the true environmental statistics for illnesses
participants have experience with. Taken together, the data
suggests that people have an internal representation of
illness statistics that they can consciously access—
indicating that people can not only combine illness
experiences with rational statistical updating, but also have
accurate knowledge of these prior distributions.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation grant #1453276.

References
American Lung Association (2012). Trends in Asthma

Morbidity and Mortality.
Cameron, B., Bharadwaj, M., Burrows, J., Fazou, C.,
Wakefield, D., Hickle, I., … Lloyd, A. (2006). Prolonged
illness after infectious mononucleosis is associated with
altered immunity but not with increased viral load.
Journal of Infectious Disease, 193, 664-671.
Chapman, G.B., & Johnson, E.J. (1999). Anchoring,
activation, and the construction of values. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 79, 115-153.
Gerteis, M., Gerteis, J.S., Newman, D., & Koepke, C.
(2007). Health Care Financing Review, 28, 31-45.
Goldstein, D. G. & Rothschild, D. (2014). Lay
understanding of probability distributions. Judgment and
Decision Making, 9, 1-14.
Gott, J.R. (1993). Implications of the Copernican principle
for our future prospects. Nature, 363, 315–319.
Griffiths, T.L., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2006). Optimal
predictions in everyday cognition. Psychological Science,
17, 767–773.
Gwaltney, J. (1967). Rhinovirus infections in an industrial
population: II. Characteristics of illness and antibody
response. JAMA, 202, 494-500.
Kohno, S., Kida, H., Mizuguchi, M., & Shimada, J. (2010).
Efficacy and Safety of Intravenous Peramivir for
Treatment of Seasonal Influenza Virus Infection.
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 54, 4568-4574.
Kilpi, T., & Anttila, M. (1991). Severity of childhood
bacterial meningitis and duration of illness before
diagnosis. Lancet, 338, 406.
Limentani, G.B., Ring, M.C., Ye, F., Bergquist, M.L.,
McSorely, E. O. (2005) Beyond the t-test: Statistical
equivalence testing. Analytical Chemistry, 221A-226A.
Proudfit, W. J., Bruschke, A. V. G., MacMillan, J. P.,
Williams, G. W. & Sones, M. S. (1983). Fifteen year
survival study of patients with obstructive coronary artery
disease. Circulation, 68, 986-997.
Robbins, T. & Hemmer, P. (in revision). Optimal
predictions in illness cognition.
Rogers, J.L., Howard, K.I., & Vessey, J.T. (1993). Using
significance tests to evaluate equivalence between two
experimental groups. Psychon B Rev, 113, 553-565.
Rothberg, M.B., Haessler, S.D., & Brown, R.B (2008).
Complications of viral influenza. AM J Med 121, 258-264.
Sallnäs, E.L., Rassmus-Grön, K., Sjöström, C. (2000).
Supporting presence in collaborative environments by
haptic force feedback. Journal ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 7, 461-476.
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The Wisdom of Crowds. New York,
NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Shavelle, R.M., Paculdo, D.R., Kush, S.J., Mannino, D. M.,
Strauss, D. J. (2009). Life expectancy and years of life lost
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Findings from
the NHANES III Follow-up Study. International Journal
of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 137:148.
Singh, M., Kadian, Y.S., Rattan, K.N. & Jangra, B. (2014).
Complicated appendicitis: Analysis of risk factors in
children.African Journal of Paediatric Surgery,11,109-13.

3003

