Explaining Enculturated Cognition
Regina E. Fabry (regina.fabry@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 F
35394 Giessen, Germany

in at least some cognitive processes. In the present context,
embodiment is understood as the bodily manipulation of
epistemic resources (Menary, 2010; Rowlands, 1999), e.g. by
initiating and executing eye movements and hand
movements. Second, the present account of enculturation
rests on on the assumption that cognitive practices are cases
of strong embedded cognition (Menary, 2015). This amounts
to the idea that at least some cognitive processes are realized
by the integration of cerebral, extra-cerebral bodily, and
environmental components. We will see in the course of this
paper that the theoretical commitments to strong embodied
and embedded cognition are supported by empirical research.

Abstract
Many of our cognitive capacities are shaped by enculturation.
Enculturation is the temporally extended transformative
acquisition of cognitive practices such as reading, writing, and
mathematics. They are embodied and normatively constrained
ways to interact with epistemic resources (e.g., writing systems,
number systems). Enculturation is associated with significant
changes of the organization and connectivity of the brain and of
the functional profiles of embodied actions and motor programs.
Furthermore, it has a socio-culturally structured dimension,
because it relies on cumulative cultural evolution and on the
socially distributed acquisition of cognitive norms governing the
engagement with epistemic resources. This paper argues that we
need distinct, yet complementary levels of explanation and
corresponding temporal scales. This leads to explanatory
pluralism about enculturated cognition, which is the view that we
need multiple perspectives and explanatory strategies to account
for the complexity of enculturation.

Shaping the Brain and the Rest of the Body
Enculturation is associated with significant changes to the
organization and connectivity of the brain and to the
functional profiles of embodied actions and motor programs.
Learning driven plasticity (LDP) is a potent principle
governing ontogenetic brain development, according to
which structural changes of the organization and connectivity
of brain areas lead to new neuronal functions (Ansari, 2012;
Menary, 2015). LDP is not an open-ended process that leads
to the unlimited realization of new neuronal circuits. Rather,
it is constrained by the functional biases of certain cortical
units that contribute to the development of new neuronal
connections. This is suggested by empirical and conceptual
work on neural reuse (Anderson, 2010, 2015) and neuronal
recycling (Dehaene, 2005, 2010). The idea is that especially
evolutionarily recent cognitive practices need to allocate and
re-exploit already existing structural and functional
connections of brain areas and integrate them into new
neuronal circuitry. The scope of neural reuse in each
particular case depends on the functional and structural biases
of specific brain areas and on the functional proximity of uses
to which these areas can be put (Anderson, 2015).
Neural reuse – and its component process of neuronal
recycling that is associated with the acquisition of reading,
writing, or mathematics – is a guiding principle of LDP. This
is especially important in cases of enculturation. The reason
is that it helps explain how cognitive practices can be
acquired, given that there was not sufficient evolutionary
time for the development of brain circuits unequivocally and
exclusively dedicated to them.
The assumption that enculturation is defined as the
acquisition of embodied cognitive practices gives rise to the
idea that LDP is complemented by a genuinely bodily form
of transformation. According to the principle of learning
driven bodily adaptability (LDBA), new bodily ways to

Keywords: enculturation; neural plasticity; neural reuse;
embodied cognition; cognitive niche construction; cumulative
cultural evolution; cultural learning; reading acquisition;
explanatory pluralism

Introduction
Many cognitive processes are shaped and facilitated by our
successful acquisition of cognitive practices such as reading,
writing, or mathematics. Cognitive practices are
evolutionarily recent, embodied interactions with writing
systems, number systems, and various other epistemic
resources in our local environment (Fabry, 2017; Menary,
2015). Given the evolutionary recency of cognitive practices,
with reading, writing, and mathematics dating back to
approx. 3000 BC (Donald, 1991), the question arises how
their acquisition can be explained from an empirically
informed perspective. The purpose of the present paper is to
sketch an explanatory framework that can help close the
current gap in thinking about the phylogenetic and
ontogenetic emergence of cognitive practices. The proposal
is that competence in the performance of cognitive practices
is the result of enculturation.
Enculturation is defined as the acquisition of cognitive
practices during ontogeny. It is a temporally extended process
that augments and transforms our overall cognitive
capacities. There are two background assumptions that
inform the conceptualization of enculturation. First, it is
committed to a robust variant of embodied cognition
(Menary, 2015). On this view, the embodied interaction with
the local environment plays an indispensable functional role

349

interact with the socio-culturally structured environment
emerge in the course of enculturation. LDBA guides the
ontogenetic trajectory of skilled motor action. The resulting
development of new motor patterns and action routines is
constrained by extra-cerebral bodily biases, e.g., by the
functional potential of the overall morphology of human
bodies and their constitutive parts (Dounskaia, van Gemmert,
& Stelmach, 2000; Furuya & Altenmüller, 2015; Phillips,
Ogeil, & Best, 2009). The employment and allocation of
bodily resources available to the human organism bring about
the embodied adaptation to new cognitive practices in close
co-ordination with LDP. In this sense, the functional biases
of brain areas are complemented by the biases of functional
units of the rest of the body. It is important to note that the
overall possibility space of cognitive practices is not only
defined, but also delimited by the anatomical and
physiological properties of the human body.

socio-culturally transmitted human cognitive capacities
(Boyd, Richerson, & Henrich, 2011; Henrich, 2016).
According to Kline’s (2015) recent framework for the
investigation of teaching, direct active teaching is of vital
importance for human scaffolded learning. It is defined by the
“[…] manifestation of relevant information by the teacher to
the pupil, as well as the pupil’s interpretation of that
information as generalizable” (Kline, 2015, p. 12). In contrast
to other forms of teaching and learning that are ubiquitous in
the animal kingdom, e.g., social tolerance or opportunity
provisioning, direct active teaching is specific to humans. It
is likely to have co-evolved with genuinely human ways of
cognitive niche construction. If correct, cumulative cultural
evolution and scaffolded learning, where the latter might be
the result of trans-generationally emerged socio-cultural
processes (Heyes, 2012), mutually influence and constrain
each other.
In sum, enculturation is a complex phenomenon that
requires the synthesis of several explanatory components
targeting the cerebral, the extra-cerebral bodily, and the
socio-cultural dimensions of cognitive practices. This leads
the question how we can combine these components in such
a way that we will end up with an explanation of
enculturation that is both conceptually coherent and
empirically plausible without running risk of committing
mereological fallacies. The suggestion of the present paper is
to analyse enculturation at three levels of explanation and
corresponding time scales.

Interacting with the Cognitive Niche
The present account of enculturated cognition is committed
to the view that cognitive practices are distributed across the
brain, the rest of the body, and the local environment. This
leads to the assumption that our understanding of LDP and
LDBA needs to be complemented by considerations of
the embodied interaction of cognitive systems with the
cognitive niche. The cognitive niche can be defined as the
incrementally, trans-generationally structured socio-cultural
environment that provides human organisms with epistemic
resources for the completion of cognitive tasks (Bertolotti &
Magnani, 2016; Clark, 2006, 2008; Kendal, 2011; Sterelny,
2003, 2012; Stotz, 2010). Examples of resources in the
cognitive niche include writing systems, number systems,
and notational symbol systems. In addition, the cognitive
niche is also characterized by socio-cultural institutions like
kindergartens, schools, or universities. Cognitive practices
are shared by a large number of individuals in the cognitive
niche. Therefore, the skilful performance of cognitive
practices is constrained by sets of cognitive norms. These
norms regulate the interaction with epistemic resources
(Menary, 2007, 2016). They need to be learned and
automatized in the course of enculturation (Menary, 2013).
Since cognitive practices are socio-cultural phenomena,
their acquisition is itself a socio-culturally structured
process. This process is characterized by scaffolded learning
(Clark, 1997; Estany & Martínez, 2014; Wood, Bruner, &
Ross, 1976). The notion of scaffolded learning refers to the
idea that the acquisition of a cognitive practice is a systematic
process of novice-expert interaction in the cognitive niche.
This interaction is structured by the current developmental
stage of the novice and a specific set of skills and knowledge
that needs to be acquired in the long run (Vygotsky, 1978).

Levels and Time Scales of Explanation
Levels of explanation are defined by the conceptual and/or
empirical tools, by the research questions, and by the
individuation and operationalization that are employed to
account for (a component of) a certain target phenomenon
(Dennett, 1969; Drayson, 2012, 2014; Metzinger, 2013). In
this sense, levels specify the scope and the epistemic tools of
explanation. Following Drayson (2012), it is reasonable to
include Kim’s distinction of the vertical and the horizontal
into our meta-theoretical consideration of explanation: “The
term ‘vertical’ is meant to reflect the usual practice of
picturing micro-macro levels of a vertical array, with the
micro underpinning the macro. In contrast, we usually
represent diachronic causal relations on a horizontal line,
from past (left) to future (right) […]” (Kim, 2005, p. 36). This
distinction adds a temporal dimension to the individuation of
levels of explanation. Accordingly, levels of explanation
correspond to specific temporal scales. For the present
considerations, we can distinguish three levels of explanation
and corresponding time scales.
First, on a sub-personal level of explanation, we can
provide an account of the cerebral and extra-cerebral bodily
functions that underlie the acquisition of cognitive practices.
On this level of explanation, we focus on the corresponding
physiological time scale. This temporal scale is defined by
time intervals that have a duration of hundreds of
milliseconds to several seconds. The time intervals are

Socio-Cultural Learning
It is conceivable that scaffolded learning is the result of
evolutionary processes that have shaped specific types of

350

determined by the full range of electrophysiological,
neuroimaging, and eye-tracking paradigms and the resulting
statistical analyses. This explanatory component is concerned
with the consideration of LDP and LDBA.
Second, on a personal level of explanation, we can
investigate the diachronic unfolding of specific changes of
the human organism as a whole that characterize the
ontogenetic process of enculturation. This level of
explanation corresponds to an organismic timescale. First, we
can develop an account of the temporal unfolding of the
novice’s ongoing interaction with experts in a particular
domain. This helps specify the various stages of the
acquisition of cognitive practices and the ways in which it
relies on the scaffolding by other cognitive agents. Second,
from this perspective we can provide an account of the
properties of epistemic resources in the cognitive niche as
they are relevant for the acquisition and on-going realization
of cognitive practices. Finally, we can identify the set of
cognitive norms that are acquired and applied in the course
of the acquisition of a certain cognitive practice.
Third, the supra-personal level of explanation is also
relevant for a full-fledged account of enculturation. The
reason is that contemporary cases of enculturation are
rendered possible by evolved biological principles and the
inter-generational transmission of practices, skills, and
epistemic resources. On this view, enculturation is
constituted by the interdependence of evolved cerebral and
extra-cerebral bodily biases and of the on-going large-scale
process of cognitive niche construction. Therefore, it seems
reasonable to introduce an additional type of diachronic
explanation, namely a supra-personal level of explanation
that focuses on an evolutionary time scale comprising
hundreds to thousands of years.

and theoretical evaluations emphasize the crucial importance
of the left ventral occipito-temporal (vOT) area (Dehaene,
2005, 2010; McCandliss, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2003; Price &
Devlin, 2003, 2004; Vogel, Petersen, & Schlaggar, 2014).1
Recent studies indicate that its activation level peaks in
beginning readers and that its decrease, by way of
comparison with the level of neuronal activation at t1, is
associated with reading proficiency (Ben-Shachar,
Dougherty, Deutsch, & Wandell, 2011; Brem et al., 2010;
Maurer et al., 2006). Second, there is a significant increase of
functional connectivity between the left vOT area and lefthemispheric frontal and temporal areas that are reliably
associated with language processing and production
(Dehaene et al., 2010; Gaillard, Balsamo, Ibrahim, Sachs, &
Xu, 2003; Turkeltaub, Gareau, Flowers, Zeffiro, & Eden,
2003). It is in virtue of LDP that new structural and functional
connections can be realized as a solution to new and
challenging processing needs.
LDP is complemented by LDBA. In the case of reading
acquisition, LDBA is mainly realized by the developmental
trajectory of eye movements. In general, eye movement
patterns in reading are constituted by the alternation between
fixations and saccades (Rayner, 2009; Rayner et al., 2001,
2007). Eye movements are necessary because of the acuity
limitations of the visual field. The functional biases of the
ocular-motor system, e.g., the saccadic latency and the
saccadic span, constrain the developmental trajectory of
reading. Research paradigms employing eye-tracking
methodologies are specifically interested in evaluating the
span or amplitude of saccades, the duration of fixations, and
the landing positions or locations of fixations with regard to
certain target words embedded in syntactically and
semantically structured linguistic items. Comparisons of
novice and proficient readers reveal that proficient readers
display a decrease of fixation durations, refixations (i.e.,
several fixations targeted at the same word), as well as an
increase of saccadic amplitudes (Huestegge et al., 2009;
Joseph & Liversedge, 2013; Seasseau et al., 2013). These
findings suggest that ocular-motor patterns adapt to the
demands and requirements of processing structured linguistic
material.
On a personal level of explanation and at an organismic
time scale, reading acquisition is characterized by scaffolded
learning and structured novice-teacher interactions. In the
case of alphabetic writing systems, reading instruction puts a
particular emphasis on phonics instruction (Rayner,
Foorman, Perfetti, Pesetsky, & Seidenberg, 2001). Phonics
instruction conveys the alphabetic principle, according to
which graphemic units of an alphabetic writing system
correspond to phonemic units of the target language (Castles
& Coltheart, 2004; Dehaene, 2010; Snowling, 2000; Ziegler
& Goswami, 2006). In the vast majority of cases, the
alphabetic principle can only be understood and applied if

Reading Acquisition: A Paradigm Case of
Enculturation
To illustrate the considerations, conceptual distinctions,
and the meta-theoretical assessment of the account of
enculturation, I will now consider reading acquisition as a
paradigm case of enculturation. At first sight, reading poses
a challenge to researchers, because it requires an explanation
of how we are able to acquire reading, given that there was
not sufficient evolutionary time for dedicated brain areas to
develop. Dehaene (2010) refers to this as the “reading
paradox.”
On a sub-personal level of explanation and at a
physiological time scale, this paradox can be solved by
considering LDP and its guiding principle, i.e., neural reuse.
There is now much empirical evidence suggesting that the
brain undergoes significant plastic changes in the course of
reading acquisition at times t1, t2, and t3. First, many studies
1 Intriguingly, recent data from fMRI experiments indicate that
the left vOT area is also significantly associated with writing and its
acquisition (Ludersdorfer, Kronbichler, & Wimmer, 2015; Purcell,
Jiang, & Eden, 2017; Purcell, Napoliello, & Eden, 2011; Rapp &

Lipka, 2011). This provides further support for the idea of neural
reuse, because it establishes that one particular brain area has a
certain bias that makes it suitable to contribute to functionally
distinct, yet partly overlapping neural circuits.

351

novices receive extensive instruction and scaffolded tutorials
provided by teachers and other caregivers. These tutorials
provide detailed information about the cognitive norms
underlying reading, e.g., by progressively increasing the
complexity of phoneme-grapheme correspondences in the
training materials. In addition, there are other types of metalinguistic awareness that need to be made explicitly available
to novice readers. Beginning readers are already proficient
speakers of their native language and are able to apply
fluently syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic norms in their
everyday conversations. However, they usually lack the
explicit insight that utterances are made up of sentences and
that sentences are constituted by the combination of words
(Frith, 1985; Rayner et al., 2001). To novices, these basic
properties have to be made explicitly available in order to put
them in the position to apply the knowledge about it
automatically and fluently at later stages of reading
acquisition. Furthermore, novices need to be acquainted with
the norm that alphabetic writing systems are decoded from
left to right and from the top to the bottom of a page
(Dehaene, 2010). In sum, explicit reading instruction is a
good example of scaffolded learning and of the socioculturally structured transmission of knowledge and skills.
The history of writing systems is a good example of
cumulative cultural evolution (Henrich, 2016). This example
needs to be approached on a supra-personal level of
explanation and at an evolutionary time scale. The first
writing system we know of is the cuneiform system. It dates
back to approx. 3000 BC and was pictorial in origin. The
cuneiform system was cumulatively refined in the service of
an accurate representation of abstract ideas and relations that
were especially relevant for trade and the organization of
social communities. Furthermore, the functional biases of the
brain and the rest of the body constrained the properties of
symbols, e.g., the arrangement of lines or inter-letter spacing
(Dehaene, 2010). Linearity, the grouping of symbols, and
grammatical norms were not pre-given properties of early
writing systems. Rather, they gradually evolved over
hundreds of years. Tracing back the development of
alphabetic writing systems, Donald characterizes the
evolutionary trajectory as a “[…] progression from a
primarily visual medium, inventing completely new
representations like lists of numbers, to a medium which,
increasingly, tried to map the narrative products of the
language system” (Donald, 1991, 289). In sum, then,
contemporary writing systems are the direct result of
cumulative cultural evolution. They were afforded by the
socially structured need of a system that can represent
transactions, relations, genealogies, and so forth.

only one explanation of a certain target phenomenon or a
specific set of target phenomena in the long run (Colombo &
Wright, 2017; Kellert, Longino, & Waters, 2006). It is
informed by unificationism and by reductionism.
Unificationism is the idea that there will always be one set of
principles that is able to unify previously distinct kinds of
explanation targeted at a certain phenomenon. Reductionism
about theory formation is the idea that we will gain new
knowledge if we discover low-level principles to which
previously entertained higher-level explanations can be
reduced (Colombo & Wright, 2017). The present analysis of
enculturation and the distinction of complementary levels of
explanation and corresponding time scales leads to the view
that it is at least unlikely, if not impossible, that
unificationism and reductionism are meta-theoretical
principles that will lead to a complete and exhaustive account
of enculturation. This is the reason why the present account
of enculturated cognition is an example of explanatory
pluralism about theory formation in the cognitive sciences.
Explanatory pluralism is the view that there will always be
more than one and only one explanation of a specific target
phenomenon (Van Bouwel, Weber, & de Vreese, 2011; Dale,
2008; de Jong, 2001). This stance towards enculturation
promises to arrive at a better understanding of the complexity
of the phylogenetic and ontogenetic development of
cognitive practices and of the temporal unfolding of
enculturated organism-niche interactions. Thus, the positive
proposal is that the phylogenetic and ontogenetic components
of enculturation on sub-personal, personal, and suprapersonal levels of explanation are required for the prospect of
a full-fledged and complete account of enculturation. The
consideration of reading acquisition as a paradigm case of
enculturation can lend support to the idea that we need the
pluralistic explanatory stance in order to account for the vast
set of empirical results and empirically informed
considerations applying to enculturation.

Concluding Remarks
Enculturation is a temporally extended process that
transforms our overall cognitive capacities. In this paper, I
have argued that enculturation is a complex phenomenon that
needs to be approached on at least three levels of explanation
and corresponding time scales. The reason is that
enculturation spreads across the brain, the rest of the body,
and the cognitive niche. Explanatory pluralism allows us to
do justice to these dynamics, because it provides us with an
explanatory strategy that is able to track the ontogenetic and
phylogenetic component processes of enculturation. The
application of this strategy to the cases of reading acquisition
shows that the present account of enculturation has the
conceptual resources to connect initially disparate lines of
empirical research. The suggestion is that the present account
of enculturation promises to provide us with a better
understanding of the ways in which our cognitive processes
are shaped and re-shaped by the delicate interaction of the
brain, the rest of the body, and the cognitive niche.

Towards Explanatory Pluralism
The previous considerations suggest that we need at least
three levels of explanation and corresponding temporal scales
to unveil the complex dynamics that give rise to
enculturation. This suggestion is at odds with explanatory
monism, according to which there will always be one and

352

Drayson, Z. (2012). The uses and abuses of the personal/subpersonal
distinction. Philosophical Perspectives, 26(1), 1–18.
Drayson, Z. (2014). The personal/subpersonal distinction.
Philosophy Compass, 9(5), 338–346.
Estany, A., & Martínez, S. (2014). “Scaffolding” and “affordance”
as integrative concepts in the cognitive sciences.
Philosophical Psychology, 27, 98–111.
Fabry, R. E. (2017). Betwixt and between: The enculturated
predictive processing approach to cognition. Synthese, 1–36.
Frith, U. (1985). Beneath the surface of developmental dyslexia. In
K. E. Patterson, J. C. Marshall, & M. Coltheart (Eds.),
Surface dyslexia.Neuropsychological and cognitive studies of
phonological reading (pp. 301–330). Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum.
Furuya, S., & Altenmüller, E. (2015). Acquisition and reacquisition
of motor coordination in musicians. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1337(1), 118–124.
Gaillard, W. D., Balsamo, L. M., Ibrahim, Z., Sachs, B. C., & Xu,
B. (2003). fMRI identifies regional specialization of neural
networks for reading in young children. Neurology, 60(1),
94–100.
Henrich, J. P. (2016). The secret of our success: How culture is
driving human evolution, domesticating our species, and
making us smarter. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Heyes, C. (2012). Grist and mills: On the cultural origins of cultural
learning. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences, 367(1599), 2181–2191.
de Jong, H. L. (2001). Introduction: a symposium on explanatory
pluralism. Theory & Psychology, 11(6), 731–735.
Kellert, S. H.; Longino, H. E.; Waters, C. K. (2006). Introduction:
the pluralist stance. In C. K. Kellert, S., Longino, H., &
Waters (Ed.), Minnesota studies in philosophy of science, vol.
19: scientific puralism (pp. vii–xxix). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Kendal, J. R. (2011). Cultural niche construction and human
learning
environments:
Investigating
sociocultural
perspectives. Biological Theory, 6(3), 241–250.
Kim, J. (2005). Physicalism, or something near enough. New
Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Kline, M. A. (2015). How to learn about teaching: An evolutionary
framework for the study of teaching behavior in humans and
other animals. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 38, 1–70.
Ludersdorfer, P., Kronbichler, M., & Wimmer, H. (2015).
Accessing orthographic representations from speech: The
role of left ventral occipitotemporal cortex in spelling.
Human brain mapping, 36(4), 1393–1406.
Maurer, U., Brem, S., Kranz, F., Bucher, K., Benz, R., Halder, P.,
Steinhausen, H.-C., et al. (2006). Coarse neural tuning for
print peaks when children learn to read. NeuroImage, 33(2),
749–758.
McCandliss, B. D., Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2003). The visual
word form area: Expertise for reading in the fusiform gyrus.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), 293–299.
Menary, R. (2007). Cognitive integration: Mind and cognition
unbounded. Basingstoke, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Menary, R. (2010). Dimensions of mind. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 9(4), 561–578.
Menary, R. (2013). The enculturated hand. In Z. Radman (Ed.), The
hand, an organ of the mind: What the manual tells the mental
(pp. 349–367). Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Menary, R. (2015). Mathematical cognition: A case of
enculturation. In T. Metzinger & J. M. Windt (Eds.), Open
MIND (pp. 1–20). Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Menary, R. (2016). Pragmatism and the pragmatic turn in cognitive

References
Anderson, M. L. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental
organizational principle of the brain. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 33(4), 245–266.
Anderson, M. L. (2015). After phrenology: Neural reuse and the
interactive brain. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Ansari, D. (2012). Culture and education: New frontiers in brain
plasticity. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(2), 93–95.
Ben-Shachar, M., Dougherty, R. F., Deutsch, G. K., & Wandell, B.
A. (2011). The development of cortical sensitivity to visual
word forms. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(9),
2387–2399.
Bertolotti, T., & Magnani, L. (2016). Theoretical considerations on
cognitive niche construction. Synthese, 1–23.
Van Bouwel, J., Weber, E., & de Vreese, L. (2011). Indispensability
arguments in favour of reductive explanations. Journal for
General Philosophy of Science, 42(1), 33–46.
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011). The cultural niche:
Why social learning is essential for human adaptation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108(Supplement 2), 10918–10925.
Brem, S., Bach, S., Kucian, K., Guttorm, T. K., Martin, E., Lyytinen,
H., Brandeis, D., et al. (2010). Brain sensitivity to print
emerges when children learn letter-speech sound
correspondences. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(17), 7939–7944.
Castles, A., & Coltheart, M. (2004). Is there a causal link from
phonological awareness to success in learning to read?
Cognition, 91(1), 77–111.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world
together again. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2006). Language, embodiment, and the cognitive niche.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(8), 370–374.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and
cognitive extension. New York: Oxford University Press.
Colombo, M., & Wright, C. (2017). Explanatory pluralism: An
unrewarding prediction error for free energy theorists. Brain
and Cognition, 112, 3–12.
Dale, R. (2008). The possibility of a pluralist cognitive science.
Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial
Intelligence, 20(3), 155–179.
Dehaene, S. (2005). Evolution of human cortical circuits for reading
and arithmetic: The “neuronal recycling” hypothesis. In S.
Dehaene, J.-R. Duhamel, M. D. Hauser, & G. Rizzolatti
(Eds.), From monkey brain to human brain: A Fyssen
Foundation Symposium (pp. 133–157). Cambridge, Mass:
MIT Press.
Dehaene, S. (2010). Reading in the brain: The new science of how
we read. New York: Penguin Books.
Dehaene, S., Pegado, F., Braga, L. W., Ventura, P., Filho, G. N.,
Jobert, A., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., et al. (2010). How
learning to read changes the cortical networks for vision and
language. Science, 330(6009), 1359–1364.
Dennett, D. C. (1969). Content and consciousness. London, New
York: Routledge & K. Paul.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind : Three stages in the
evolution of culture and cognition. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press.
Dounskaia, N., van Gemmert, A. W. A., & Stelmach, G. E. (2000).
Interjoint coordination during handwriting-like movements.
Experimental Brain Research, 135(1), 127–140.

353

science. In D. Engel, Andreas K., Friston, K., & Kragic (Ed.),
Where is the action? The pragmatic turn in cognitive science
(pp. 219–237). Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (2013). The myth of cognitive agency: Subpersonal
thinking as a cyclically recurring loss of mental autonomy.
Frontiers in Psychology, 4.
Phillips, J. G., Ogeil, R. P., & Best, C. (2009). Motor constancy and
the upsizing of handwriting. Human Movement Science,
28(5), 578–587.
Price, C. J., & Devlin, J. T. (2003). The myth of the visual word
form area. NeuroImage, 19(3), 473–481.
Price, C. J., & Devlin, J. T. (2004). The pro and cons of labelling a
left occipitotemporal region “the visual word form area.”
NeuroImage, 22(1), 477–479.
Purcell, J. J., Jiang, X., & Eden, G. F. (2017). Shared orthographic
neuronal representations for spelling and reading.
NeuroImage, 147, 554–567.
Purcell, J. J., Napoliello, E. M., & Eden, G. F. (2011). A combined
fMRI study of typed spelling and reading. Neuroimage,
55(2), 750–762.
Rapp, B., & Lipka, K. (2011). The literate brain: The relationship
between spelling and reading. Journal of cognitive
neuroscience, 23(5), 1180–1197.
Rayner, K., Foorman, B. R., Perfetti, C. A., Pesetsky, D., &
Seidenberg, M. S. (2001). How psychological science
informs the teaching of reading. Psychological Science in the
Public Interest, 2(2), 31–74.
Rowlands, M. (1999). The body in mind: Understanding cognitive
processes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Snowling, M. J. (2000). Dyslexia (2nd ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishers.
Sterelny, K. (2003). Thought in a hostile world: The evolution of
human cognition. Malden, Mass: Blackwell.
Sterelny, K. (2012). The evolved apprentice: How evolution made
humans unique (Vol. 2012). Cambridge, Mass: The MIT
Press.
Stotz, K. (2010). Human nature and cognitive–developmental niche
construction. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences,
9(4), 483–501.
Turkeltaub, P. E., Gareau, L., Flowers, D. L., Zeffiro, T. A., & Eden,
G. F. (2003). Development of neural mechanisms for reading.
Nature Neuroscience, 6(7), 767–773.
Vogel, A. C., Petersen, S. E., & Schlaggar, B. L. (2014). The
VWFA: It’s not just for words anymore. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 1–10.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
psychological processes. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press.
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in
problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 17(2), 89–100.
Ziegler, J. C., & Goswami, U. (2006). Becoming literate in different
languages: Similar problems, different solutions.
Developmental Science, 9(5), 429–436.

354

