Gender or Community: What Drives STEM Interest Among Middle School
Students?
Evans Smalley (evans.smalley@wright.edu)
Department of Math and Statistics, Math/Microbiology Bldg 103
3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy, Dayton, OH 45435-0001

Jennifer Kaminski (jennifer.kaminski@wright.edu)
Department of Math and Statistics, Math/Microbiology Bldg 103
3640 Colonel Glenn Hwy, Dayton, OH 45435-0001
Abstract
Much attention has been given to increasing women’s and
girls’ interest and participation in STEM fields. One way of
increasing STEM interest is to target STEM-gender
stereotypes by presenting students with female stereotypedisconfirming exemplars. However, the exemplar approach
has had mixed effectiveness in adolescent populations. The
present study examined middle school students’ interest in
STEM fields and their communal goal interest. Participants
were given different interventions that either presented a
female exemplar of a scientist or leveraged communal goals.
Results found no gender differences in STEM interest, but a
correlation between communal goal endorsement and a belief
that STEM careers are compatible with communal goals. The
intervention that leveraged communal goals effectively
increased STEM interest for some students, while the
exemplar interventions were ineffective. These findings
suggest that with regard to STEM interest in early
adolescence, endorsement of communal goals may be a more
influential factor than gender category membership.
Keywords: Science, Technology Engendering and Math,
Gender, Communal Goals, Adolescents

Introduction
As the world becomes more reliant on technology, there is a
growing interest in how to increase participation in science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) fields. Of
particular concern is the underrepresentation of women in
STEM fields.
For example, in 2012, only 20% of
bachelors’ degrees in physics, engineering, and computer
science were earned by women (National Science
Foundation, 2015). The gender disparity is more
pronounced at higher levels. For example, women earned
40% of bachelor’s degrees in mathematics and statistics but
only 20% of master’s and doctoral degrees in these fields
(NSF, 2015).
What explains the gender differences in levels of STEM
interest and participation, and when do these differences
emerge? An interesting part of the situation is the fact that
there are no substantial gender differences in early
mathematics and science ability (see Hill, Corbett, & St.
Rose, 2010 for discussion), but there are differences in
attitudes toward mathematics and science (e,g, Ganley &

Lubienski, 2016; Hyde, Fennema, & Lamon, 1990). As
early as elementary and middle school, girls tend to perceive
themselves as less competent in mathematics than do boys
(Ganley, & Lubienski, 2016; Herbert & Stiptik, 2005). In
middle school and high school, boys are more likely to state
that they are interested in math and science than girls
(Cunningham, Mulvaney, & Sparks, 2015; Hill, Corbett, &
St. Rose, 2010).
One factor that may contribute to students’ attitudes
toward mathematics and science is the pervasive stereotypes
that scientists and mathematicians are men (Eccles, 1987;
Fennema, 1985; Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002).
Young children in the United States tend to draw men when
asked to depict a scientist or mathematician (Chambers,
1983; Steele, 2003). There is evidence that gender and the
strength of gender identity are correlated with preference for
mathematics, mathematics identity, and math-gender
stereotypes (Nosek, Banaji, & Greenwald, 2002).
Because it is possible that gender-STEM stereotypes
negatively impact women and girls participation in STEM,
many interventions have been developed to break common
stereotypic misconceptions by presenting stereotypedisconfirming exemplars to students. For example, reading
about the successes of women in STEM and non-STEM
fields has been shown to boost women’s performance on
math examinations (McIntyre, Paulson & Lord, 2003).
The proposed mechanism behind these exemplars is that
encountering a particular stereotype-defying example will
encourage participants to expand their notion of
membership in the stereotyped category. In this instance,
presenting examples of women who are successful in STEM
fields would prompt a change in the perceived membership
of the category of “scientist” or “mathematician”. By
extension, presenting a highly feminine exemplar as
successful in a stereotypically male domain like STEM may
be effective because it forces the perceiver to include all
feminine characteristics in their category definition of who
may be successful in STEM fields and discourages
subtyping.
Although the power of stereotypes and representation
biases cannot be denied, the stereotype explanation leaves
questions about gender differences in STEM participation.
Women and girls continue to select out of STEM fields,
even as women continue to gain representation in other high

3197

achieving, stereotypically male disciplines like law and
medicine (Snyder, Dillow, & Hoffman 2009; Wang, Eccles
& Kenny, 2013). This suggests that other factors such as
motivation and personality characteristics may be
contributing to the gender disparity in STEM fields. In
addition, there may be practical problems with designing
STEM participation interventions based simply on
expanding students’ perception of STEM “membership”
because these theories assume that students will see the
exemplar as similar to themselves. How would
characteristics such as race, socio-economic background,
geographic region, and culture be appropriately included in
exemplars to appeal to all students?
Indeed, despite their success with adult women,
exemplars often generate mixed effects, especially among
adolescents. Exposure to highly feminine exemplars actually
weakens future goals to take optional math and science
among adolescent girls who are disidentified with STEM
fields and decreases adolescent girl’s sense of efficacy and
short-term expectations of success in math and science
(Betz & Sekaquaptewa, 2012). This evidence suggests that
using highly feminine exemplars to influence the future
career plans of adolescent girls does not target the cleanest
and most effective mechanism of STEM interest and
identification.
These counterintuitive effects may stem from the
complicated relationship adolescent girls have with gender
stereotypes. During adolescence, especially early
adolescence, girls’ self-perceived math ability begins to
decline relative to boys’ (Wigfeild, Eccles, Mac Iver,
Reuman & Midgely, 1991). In light of this intricate
relationship between budding identity development and
harsh cultural stereotypes, it is not surprising that
interventions designed to leverage mechanisms tied to
gender stereotypes yield adverse or mixed results.
Considering the baggage accompanying gender-STEM
stereotypes during adolescence, it is important to explore
other theories and mechanisms that could shed light on this
phenomenon. One such theory is the goal congruity
perspective. The goal congruity perspective posits that
women highly value communal goals like intimacy,
working together and helping others. This valuation is at
odds with stereotypes about STEM fields portraying careers
involving those fields as individualistic and isolating. In
fact, compared to other high achieving careers, STEM
careers are perceived as actually hindering the path to attain
goals like helping others (Diekman, Brown, Johnson &
Clark, 2010). These stereotypes work to portray STEM
careers as incompatible with communal goals, leading to
disinterest in pursuing math and science domains for those
individuals that value communal goals.
Thus, the
mechanism behind the goal congruity perspective attempts
to increase the degree to which goal affordance beliefs, or
beliefs about what actions or pursuits will best facilitate the
attainment of specific goals, align STEM careers with
communal goals. In this way it might be possible to
increase positivity toward STEM careers among individuals

who value communal goals (Diekman, Clark, Johnston,
Brown & Steinberg, 2011).
Indeed, this idea maps well on to the difference in female
representation within STEM fields. According to 2013
census data, women make up 61% of social scientists, a
field that has high communal goals stereotypicallity
compared to only 27% and 13% of computer workers and
engineers respectively, fields with low communal goal
steryotypicallity (Landivar, 2013).

The current study
This study seeks to examine STEM interest in an adolescent
population and to test several interventions designed to
increase STEM interest. Specifically, we will consider the
role of gender and communal goal endorsement. The use of
exemplars, along with manipulations of female
stereotypicality has yielded mixed results in this population,
while the communal goal approach remains untested. It is
predicted that adolescents will endorse communal goals and
that the intervention targeting communal goals will yield the
greatest increase in STEM interest, in particular a future
desire to purse science and math, compared to exemplar
focused interventions.

Method
Participants
Ninety-four seventh grade students (41 male, 53 female) at
middle school in the Midwestern United States were
recruited for this study. The majority (93%) of the sample
self identified as White. Parental consent as well as
participant consent was obtained.

Materials
The experiment included three phases: (1) measure of
communal goal interest and pretest of STEM interests (2) an
intervention designed to increase STEM interests and (3)
posttest of STEM interest. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three conditions (feminine exemplar,
neutral exemplar, or communal goals) that varied the
intervention.
Interventions. Participants were exposed to either a
stereotypically feminine exemplar (feminine condition), a
female but stereotypically neutral exemplar (neutral
condition), or a group exemplar designed to speak to
communal goals (communal condition). The intervention
text appears in Appendix A exactly as it was presented to
participants. All exemplars were identical except for the
necessary manipulations.
The material presented to participants consisted of a short
paragraph written form the perspective of the exemplar
detailing their hobbies and what they enjoy about their job.
A picture followed this short paragraph. In the communal
condition the picture included an ethnically diverse group of
men and women, and in the feminine and neutral conditions
the picture included an ethnically ambiguous woman.

3198

Exemplars were portrayed as a “profile of a scientist”
(feminine and neutral conditions) or the “profile of a team
of scientists” (communal condition).
This profile was
sourced from a website that aims to connect students to
female mentors working in STEM fields and can be found
in full in Appendix A.
The manipulations of feminine stereotypicality (feminine
and neutral conditions) were taken from Clark, Fuesting, &
Diekman, 2016. This manipulation consisted of hobbies
that were independently rated as highly feminine (knitting,
watching romantic comedies and yoga) or neutral on
feminine stereotypicality (running, watching nature
documentaries and photography). The hobbies for the
communal condition were simply “working and spending
time together.”
Following the intervention manipulation, participants
were asked to complete a writing assignment. In this task,
they first read a list of daily tasks the exemplar would
perform. Then they were asked to write about what they
think an average day would be like if they were a scientist
doing a similar job (Appendix A). This writing exercise was
timed; all participants were instructed to write for five
minutes. The daily tasks were manipulated to reflect or not
reflect communal goals similar to the manipulation in Clark,
Fuesting, & Diekman, 2016. For the feminine and neutral
conditions the daily tasks consisted mainly of solitary work
and problem solving (ex: “Look up and read about past
research to help you develop new experiments.”). In the
communal condition the daily tasks reflected working with
others (ex: “Brainstorm with your fellow researchers about
past research to help you develop new experiments.”).
Communal Goals Scale. The nine-question communal
goals scale (Clark, Fuesting, & Diekman, 2016) was used to
assess communal goal identification. Participants were
asked to rate the importance to them of nine goals, like
helping others, intimacy, relationships with others and
working with people, on a seven-point Likert scale.
Measures of STEM Interest. Three measures were used to
assess STEM interest: a measure of future goals (Betz &
Sekaquaptewa, 2012), a measure of STEM positivity and a
measure of STEM goal attainment (Clark, Fuesting, &
Diekman, 2016). The measure of future goals asked
participants to rate their likelihood of taking science and
math classes in high school and college on a seven point
Likert scale. The measure of positivity asked participants to
rate how positive they feel towards a STEM career and how
much they would enjoy being successful in a STEM career
on a seven point Likert scale. The STEM goal attainment
measure contains two questions that ask participants to rate
on a seven point Likert scale the extent to which a career in
STEM fields would “fulfill goals like intimacy, working
with people and helping people” and to what extent such a
career would fulfill their own goals of intimacy, working
with people and helping people.

Procedure
Students took part in this study as an extension of their daily
math class. Participants were first administered consent
forms. Participants then completed a pen and paper pre-test
questionnaire consisting of the communal goals scale, the
two question future goals scale, the two question STEM
positivity scale, and the two question STEM goal attainment
scale. Participants were also asked to list their top three
favorite academic subjects.
Participants were then exposed to the exemplar
intervention materials that aligned with their assigned
condition (feminine, neutral or communal). Participants
were then given a uniform amount of time (5 minutes) to
complete the writing assignment corresponding to their
condition: the feminine and neutral condition received the
non-communal manipulation and the communal condition
received the communal manipulation.
Following this writing assignment participants were
administered a post-test consisting of the future goals scale,
the STEM positivity scale and the goal attainment scale.
Participants were then thanked and debriefed.

Results
Effects of gender and communal goal endorsement.
The communal goals scale, the future goals scale, the STEM
positivity scale and the goal attainment scale were each
assessed on a 1 (low) to 7 (high) likert scale. These four
scales were averaged to yield mean scores for each
participant on each measure. Eleven participants were
removed from analysis. One participant was removed due
to incomplete responses and ten were removed as outliers
due to reporting a communal goals score or a measure of
STEM interest score that was greater than 2.5 standard
deviations from the mean of the entire sample.
Overall, participants reported high communal goals scores
and pre-test STEM interest scores (Table 1). Eighty percent
of participants reported an average communal goal score of
5 or above and only two participants reported an average
communal goal score below 4. There were no gender
differences on ratings of communal goals or measures of
STEM interest, ANOVA with gender as a factor F(1,80)s <
1.52, ps > .22.
To consider whether participants’ communal goal
endorsement affected STEM interest, correlations between
participants’ communal goals ratings and their STEM
interest scores were examined. Pearson correlation found
that communal goals scores were positively correlated with
STEM goal attainment scores r(82) = .35, p < .01.
Communal goals scores were not correlated with future
goals scores r(82) =. 18, p >.05 or STEM positivity scores
r(82) =.10, p > .05.
Table 1. Mean Ratings of Communal Goal Endorsement
and STEM Interest Measures. Standard deviations are in
parentheses.

3199

Boys
Girls

Communal
Goal
Endorsement
5.67 (.73)
5.86 (.68)

STEM Interest Measures
Future
Positivity
Goals
5.94(.86)
6.13(.88)

5.57(1.5)
5.40(1.3)

Goal
Attainment
5.77(.96)
5.80(.93)

significantly by 15%, paired sample t-test t(11) = 2.40, p <
.05. However, none of the changes in the other conditions
were statistically different than 0, ts < = 1.74, ps > .11. Figure
1 presents the percent increase in future goals scores across
the three conditions, split by high and low communal goals
ratings.

Effectiveness of the Interventions.
Feminine
Exemplar
Percentage Increase
in STEM Future Goal Score

Because communal goals scores were positively correlated
with goal attainment scores, it is possible that the effects of
the interventions may be different for participants with high
and low communal goals scores. To consider the effect of
communal goal endorsement, a median split was performed
based on communal goal ratings, (median =5.78) which
resulted in 46% of participants below the median and 54%
or participants at or above the median.
To examine the effectiveness of the three different
interventions and possible interactions with communal goal
endorsement, a 2(gender) X 2(communal goals: high, low)
X 3(condition: feminine, neutral, communal) repeated
measures ANOVA was conducted with pretest and posttest
STEM interest (time) as the within repeated measures.
There was a significant interaction of time and gender on
future goals, F(1,68) = 4.04, p < .05, ηp2 =.06. Overall,
girls’ post-intervention future goals scores decreased (M =
6.13, SD = .88 to M = 6.03, SD = .87) while boys’ ratings
increased (M = 5.93, SD = .86 to M = 6.19, SD = .71). A
significant interaction between time and communal goals
emerged for goal attainment, F(1,68) = 9.05, p <. 01, ηp2 =
.11. Goal attainment scores decreased (M = 5.96, SD = .86;
M = 5.43, SD = 1.2) for participants with high communal
goal ratings and increased for participants with low
communal goal ratings (M=5.59, SD = .99; M = 6.00, SD =
.91).
There were no significant interactions with time, condition,
or gender on any of the measures of STEM interest F(2,70)s
< 2.46, ps > .08. However, a significant interaction
between time, condition and communal goals on future
goals scores was observed F(2,69) = 5.879, p < .01, ηp2 =
.14. This result suggests that condition produced different
changes to STEM interest ratings (in particular future goals)
as a function of participants’ communal goal score.
To explore the interaction between time, condition, and
communal goals and further investigate the effectiveness of
each intervention on future goals scores, separate ANOVAs
were conducted on future goals with communal goals scores
as a covariate on each intervention condition.
The
communal condition evidenced a significant interaction
between time (pretest and posttest STEM interest) and
communal goals F(2,25) = 6.44, p < .01, ηp2 = .46. No
significant effects of time, communal goals or interactions
between time and communal goals were observed in the
feminine or neutral conditions, F(2,27)s < 2.17, ps > .08.
This suggests that only participants in the communal goal
condition had significant changes in their STEM future goal
ratings. In the communal condition, future goal scores for
participants with low communal goal scores increased

Neutral
Exemplar

25

Communal
Goal
Communal
Goal Level

20
15

High

10

Low

5
0
-5
-10
-15

Figure 1: The percent increase in STEM Future Goal
scores by experimental intervention condition and split into
high and low communal goals groups. Error bars represent
standard error of the mean.

Discussion
The goal of the present research was to examine
adolescents’ STEM interest and the relationships to gender
as well as communal goal endorsement.
Several
interventions designed to increase STEM interest were
tested. Previous research has suggested that girls are less
interested in STEM fields than boys are, and that exposing
students to examples of female scientists will increase
STEM interest. However, we found no gender differences
on any measure of STEM interest.
Further, the
interventions presenting a highly stereotypically feminine
exemplar or a female but stereotypically neutral exemplar
did not improve STEM interest among female or male
participants.
While the interventions involving female exemplars did
not increase STEM interest, the communal goals
intervention did. This intervention was designed to increase
recognition of the communal aspects of work in STEM
fields. Participants with low communal goal scores who
received this intervention increased their future goals scores,
suggesting they were more likely to take optional science
and math classes in high school and college. This increase in
STEM interest was only observed in the low communal
goals category possibly because participants in the high
communal goals category reported future goals scores at
ceiling on both the pre-test and post-test measures.
It was found that this sample of adolescents evidenced
high average communal goal endorsement overall.

3200

Approximately 80% of participants averaged a score at or
above 5 on a seven-point scale.
Communal goal
endorsement was also positively correlated with goal
attainment scores, or the belief that a career in STEM fields
would fulfill both communal goals in general, and
specifically the participants’ communal goals.
These findings lend support to the goal congruity
hypothesis of STEM interest. A simple, 10-minute
intervention emphasizing the role of communal goals in
STEM fields was able to significantly and positively affect
one measure of STEM related future goals of students who
did not score at ceiling on the communal goals scale. In
comparison, more traditional interventions centered on
exemplars and the emphasis of femininity produced no
significant change in any measure of STEM interest.
Of course this is not to say that the power and influence
of gender stereotypes should be discounted, certainly they
do play a role in the decision to pursue a STEM career
(McIntyre, Paulson & Lord, 2003; Nosek, Banaji, &
Greenwald, 2002). However, our data suggests that during
early adolescence valuing communal goals, like working
with and helping others, may possibly be a more influential
factor than gender category membership on STEM interest.
Simply attributing STEM interest to the influence of gender
stereotyping may be somewhat of an oversimplification.
Thus, our data suggests that emphasizing communal goals
in this population may be a more effective and practical way
to increase STEM interest than more traditional
interventions that emphasize stereotype-disconfirming
exemplars and femininity.
There are limitations to this study. The sample was taken
from one school district and was not racially diverse. In
addition, our participants appeared to have high communal
goal desires causing possible ceiling effects, which might
have obscured other findings. Future studies should explore
this finding with a larger, more diverse sample and a
modified communal goals scale to attempt to combat ceiling
effects.

References
American Association of University Women. (2010). Why
so few? Women in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. Washington, DC. AAUW.
Betz, D. E., & Sekaquaptewa, D. (2012). My fair physicist?
Feminine math and science role models demotivate young
girls. Social Psychological And Personality Science, 3(6),
738-746.
Chambers, D. W. (1983). Stereotypic images of the
scientist: The draw-a-scientist test. Science Education, 67,
255–265.
Clark, E. K., Fuesting, M. A., & Diekman, A. B. (2016).
Enhancing interest in science: Exemplars as cues to
communal affordances of science. Journal Of Applied
Social Psychology, 46(11), 641-654.

Cunningham, B.C., Mulvaney, K. H. ,& Sparks, D., (2015).
Gender
Diﬀerences
in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Interest, Credits
th
Earned, and NAEP Performance in the 12
Grade. Retrieved
from

https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2015/2015075.pdf
Diekman, A. B., Brown, E. R., Johnston, A. M., & Clark, E.
K. (2010). Seeking congruity between goals and roles: A
new look at why women opt out of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics careers. Psychological
Science, 21(8), 1051-1057.
Diekman, A. B., Clark, E. K., Johnston, A. M., Brown, E.
R., & Steinberg, M. (2011). Malleability in communal
goals and beliefs influences attraction to stem careers:
Evidence for a goal congruity perspective. Journal Of
Personality And Social Psychology, 101(5), 902-918.
Eccles, J. S. (1987). Gender roles and women’s
achievement-related decisions. Psychology of Women
Quarterly, 11, 135–172.
Fennema, E. (1985). Attribution theory and achievement in
mathematics. In S. R. Yussen (Ed.), The development of
reflection. New York: Academic Press.
Ganley, C. M., & Lubienski, S. T. (2016). Mathematics
confidence, interest, and performance: Examining gender
patterns and reciprocal relations. Learning and individual
differences, 47, 182-193.
Herbert, J. & Stipek, D. (2005). The emergence of gender
difference in children’s perceptions of their academic
competence. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 26(3), 276–295.
Hill, C., Corbett, C., & St. Rose, A. (2010). Why so few?
Women in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics. Washington, DC, AAUW. Retrieved from
https://www.aauw.org/files/2013/02/Why-So-FewWomen-in-Science-Technology-Engineering-andMathematics.pdf
Hyde, J.S., Fennema, E., & Lamon, S. J. (1990). Gender
differences in mathematics performance: a meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 107(2), 139-155.
Landivar, l., C. (2013). Disparities in STEM employment by
sex, race and hispanic origin. American Community
Survey Reports, ACS-24, U.S. Census Bureau,
Washington, DC
McIntyre, R. B., Paulson, R. M., & Lord, C. G. (2003).
Alleviating women’s mathematics stereotype threat
through salience of group achievements. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 83–90.
National Science Foundation, National Center for Science
and Engineering Statistics. (2015). Women, Minorities,
and persons with disabilities in science and engineering:
2015 Special Report NSF 15-311. Arlington, VA.
Retrieved from http://nsf.gov/statistics/wmpd/
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002).
Math = male, me = female, therefore math ≠ me. Journal
Of Personality And Social Psychology, 83(1), 44-59.
Snyder, T.D., Dillow, S.A., & Hoffman, C.M. (2009).
Digest of edu- cation statistics, 2008 (NCES 2009-020).

3201

Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National
Center for Education Statis- tics, Institute of Education
Sciences.
Steele, J. (2003). Children’s gender stereotypes about math:
The role of stereotype stratification. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 33, 2587–2606.
Wang, M., Eccles, J. S., & Kenny, S. (2013). Not lack of
ability but more choice: Individual and gender differences
in choice of careers in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. Psychological Science, 24(5), 770-775.
Wigfield, A., Eccles, J.S., Mac Iver, D., Reuman, D.A., and
Midgley, C. (1991). Transitions during early adolescence: Changes in children’s domain-specific selfperceptions and general self-esteem across the transition to
junior high school. Developmental Psychology, 27, 552–
565.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from the Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education
(#R305A140214).

Appendix A: Stimuli
Feminine and Neutral Conditions.
Profile of a Scientist:
Name: Lisa Johnson
Biography:
Lisa is an electrical engineer. She enjoys yoga, watching
romantic comedies and knitting (In Neutral Condition:
running, watching nature documentaries and photography)
Lisa Says:
I am Electrical Engineer at the NASA Glenn
Research Center. I work on Power System Development
for future NASA missions. Specifically, I support the
development of a power processing unit for high power,
high voltage electric propulsion applications and the
development of a flywheel energy storage system.
Flywheel energy storage, or storing energy
mechanically in a rotating wheel, offers an alternative to
traditional chemical energy storage systems, such as
batteries, for future missions.
Every day I work to solve problems and learn new
things. I figure out how to implement new technologies all
the time and I go home everyday knowing that I made a
difference!
Writing Activity:
Listed below are some typical daily tasks that a scientist
like Lisa would perform. Imagine you are also a scientist
doing work in an environment similar to Lisa’s. What do
you think your average day would be like? Please write a
few sentences describing what you think it would be like
if you worked as a scientist like Lisa.
Daily Tasks of a Scientist:
• Check a database for updates on ongoing
experiments.

•
•
•
•
•

Look up and read about past research to help you
develop new experiments.
Watch videos of other scientists presenting their
recent findings
Update a lab notebook with information about the
progress and status of your experiments
Work out data analysis problems by yourself
Make a PowerPoint presentation of your recent
experimental results to email to a supervisor

Communal Condition.
Profile of a team of Scientists:
Name: NASA Power Team
Biography:
The NASA Power Team is made up of six electrical
engineers. They enjoy working and spending time together
The Power Team Says:
We are a team of six Electrical Engineers at the
NASA Glenn Research Center. We work closely together
on Power System Development for future NASA
missions. Specifically, we support the development of a
power processing unit for high power, high voltage
electric propulsion applications and the development of a
flywheel energy storage system.
Flywheel energy storage, or storing energy
mechanically in a rotating wheel, offers an alternative to
traditional chemical energy storage systems, such as
batteries, for future missions. This technology also has the
potential to help people here on Earth in many ways.
Every day we work together to solve problems and
learn new things. Together, we figure out how to
implement new technologies all the time. Each of us goes
home everyday knowing we made a difference!
Writing Activity:
Listed below are some typical daily tasks that scientists
like The NASA Power Team would perform. Imagine
you are also a scientist doing work in an environment
similar to the NASA Power Team. What do you think
your average day would be like? Please write a few
sentences describing what you think it would be like if
you worked as a scientist like the NASA Power Team.
Daily Tasks of a Scientist:
• Talk with team members about updates on ongoing
experiments.
• Brainstorm with your fellow researchers about past
research to help you develop new experiments.
• Attend presentations from other scientists about
their recent findings
• Update your team coordinator with information
about the progress and status of your experiments
• Work out data analysis problems with your other
members of your lab team.
• Present your recent experimental results to your
supervisor with your team members.

3202

