Generalizing relations during analogical problem solving in preschool children: does
blocked or interleaved training improve performance?
Jean-Pierre Thibaut
jean-pierre.thibaut@u-bourgogne.fr
LEAD-CNRS, UMR 5022, University Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Pôle AAFE – Esplanade Erasme
21000 DIJON. FRANCE

Micah B. Goldwater
micah.goldwater@sydney.edu.au
The University of Sydney, School of Psychology, Brennan MacCallum Building (A18), NSW 2006 Australia

Abstract
Analogical reasoning, the mapping of structured relations across
conceptual domains, is commonly recognized as essential to
human cognition, but young children often perform poorly in the
classical A:B::C:? analogical reasoning task. Particularly, young
children have trouble when the objects in the task are not
strongly associated with each other, and/or when there are strong
associative lures among the potential answers. Here, we examine
whether successive trials that repeat the same relation needed to
solve the analogy can help overcome some of the challenges
with weakly associated items. In the first of two experiments,
our results were mixed. In the second, we simplified the design,
and were able to more clearly show a benefit of repeating
relations across consecutively solved problems.
Keywords: Analogical reasoning; development.

Introduction
Analogical reasoning lies at the core of human cognition
(Holyoak, 2012; Hofstadter & Sander, 2013). It refers to the
transfer of a structured set of relations from a source domain
to a target domain, which can often generate insights into
how to solve novel problems and generate new ideas (e.g.,
Gick & Holyoak, 1980; Lindsey, Wood & Markman, 2008).
A typical way to research and assess analogical thinking
ability is the A:B::C:D analogy (e.g., dog:doghouse::bird: ?
solution “Nest”, in which the “lives in” relation must be
abstracted).
Many experiments have been devoted to the study of
ontogenetic changes in analogical reasoning ability
(Gentner, 1988; Holyoak, Junn, & Billman, 1984; Richland,
Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006; Thibaut, French, & Vezneva,
2010b). Children’s analogical reasoning capacities improve
as their knowledge of the involved relations, or their
abilities to resist irrelevant information increase (e.g.,
Goswami, 1992). Several models have been proposed in
order to explain these changes. They fall roughly into two
subclasses: models that try to explain development of
analogical reasoning by emphasizing the increase of
structured knowledge about the world (Goswami, 1992) and
models that emphasize the maturation of control processes,
such as working memory or response inhibition (Halford,
Wilson, & Phillips, 1998; Richland et al., 2006).
Richland et al. (2006) and Thibaut and colleagues
(Thibaut, French, & Vezneva, 2008, 2010b; Thibaut,
French, Vezneva, Gérard, & Glady, 2011) posited that while

knowledge of relations is necessary for analogical
reasoning, it is insufficient. They claimed that cognitive
control processes are also critical for strategically inhibiting
irrelevant information and responding consistently with the
task main goal. Thibaut et al. interpreted their results as
showing that younger children’s difficulties with analogy
making arose because of insufficiently developed control
processes, specifically inhibition. In one experiment
involving semantic A:B::C: ? analogies with four possible
responses Thibaut, French, and Vezneva, (2010b) compared
weak and strong analogies (i.e., analogies in which the items
of the A:B and C:D pairs were weakly, or strongly,
associated). Results revealed poorer results in weak (e.g.,
shirt:suitcase::toy:box) analogies than in strong ones,
especially when the number of distractor items was high
(i.e., three vs. one). Importantly, the authors controlled to
ensure that the children knew the semantic relations within
the pair (i.e., the semantic relations between A and B, and
between C and D). Thus, children’s failure to map the A:B
pair on the potential C:D target pair could not be explained
by a lack of knowledge. They showed that a greater number
of distractors led to poorer performance in the case of weak
analogies. They suggested that for strongly associated A:B
and C:D item pairs, children were not interfered with by the
semantic distractors. In contrast, when the problem involved
weakly associated items, mapping the A:B pair onto the C:D
pair requires more than simply accessing the obvious
semantic dimensions of the items.
The authors characterized analogy-making as a search
through a space of features and potential relations. The
number of relations holding between any A:B pair is
potentially large because, depending on the context, any
number of different relations might be relevant (French,
1995). As mentioned above, the structure of the search
space and the presence or absence of competing nonanalogical solutions have an effect on the search, especially
for young children, who have greater difficulty handling the
cognitive load associated with a more elaborate search of
the space of possible solutions.
The notion of “searching in a semantic space” was
directly investigated in an eye-tracking study by Thibaut
and French (2016; Thibaut, French, Missault, Gérard, &
Glady, 2011). The authors used an eye-tracker because
cognitive monitoring is difficult to assess with the sole

3308

performance measures (i.e., error measures and reaction
times) that are usually used in the literature (e.g.,
Rattermann & Gentner, 1998; Richland et al., 2006).
In a A:B::C:D format, they found key differences between
adults and children in the temporal organization of their
respective search profiles. First, adults focused on the A and
B pair at the beginning of the trial, paying less or no
attention to C and to stimuli in the solution set. Later they
focused on C and the Target, which they compared with the
semantically related distractor. By contrast, children
devoted more time on C on which they actively focused
during the entire trial and was used as an anchor stimulus,
compared to A and B for adults, and that the Target and the
semantic distractor were focused on earlier by children than
by adults. These results suggest that children might fail in
analogical reasoning tasks because they do not pay
sufficient attention to A and B or do not include them in
their search for the “one that goes with C”.
This analysis led us to the central prediction of the present
paper. We started with the general hypothesis that young
children find it hard to follow the instructions, that is, to
integrate A and B in their exploration of C and the solution
set. However, as Thibaut et al (2010b) showed, strongly
associated items constrain the search space sufficiently for
children to readily map the relevant relation, with no ill
effects of distractors. Here we examine whether presenting
successive trials that require the same relation to solve the
analogy will improves its use. That is, perhaps the semantic
search does not need to start from scratch with weakly
associated items if the relevant relation was still active in
memory when the next item with the same relation is
introduced. This account would predict that a blocked
presentation of trials, which presents blocks of successive
trial with same relation, would outperform an interleaved
presentation format which would alternate between relations
on successive trials (see Rohrer & Pashler, 2010). An
advantage for blocked presentation would also be consistent
with structural alignment accounts that emphasize that
comparing pairs of objects bound by the same relation
should help abstract that relation and generalize it to more
disparate sets of objects because the process of comparison
itself serves to shift attention to common relations and away
from superficial differences between objects (Gentner,
2010). That is, multiple strongly associated pairs objects
bound by the same relation should help children recognize
when that relation applies to more weakly associated
objects.
On the other hand, models of memory and discrimination
learning predict benefits from interleaved presentation
(Rohrer & Pashler, 2010). That is, spacing out instances of
the same relation may elicit deeper processing each time it
is retrieved, strengthening its memory compared to
sequential presentations, which may reduce the attention
paid to the repeated item (e.g., Greene, 1989). Additionally,
spacing has been shown to aid not just memory, but
generalization in young children (Vlach, Ankowsky, &
Sandhofer, 2012) potentially because at each new instance,

only the most relevant information is re-activated (i.e, the
information common to both initial and later items), while
irrelevant information is forgotten. Further, interleaving
may build on the advantages of temporally spacing out
examples by also filling in the temporal gaps with problems
that rely on distinct structural relations. This interleaving of
different relations can often aid learning and problem
solving by setting up useful contrasts, sharpening the
understanding of each relation.
In two experiments, we directly test the prediction that a
blocked presentation will improve performance, shared by a
semantic-search account and a structural-alignment account,
against the prediction that interleaved presentation will
improve performance, made by memory and discrimination
learning accounts.

Experiment 1
In the first experiment, we aimed to test (1) whether
accuracy using a relation improved over multiple trials
wherein that specific relation solved the analogy (2) whether
Weak trials specifically benefitted from following Strong
trials and 3. whether these benefits depended on either a
Blocked or Interleaved presentation.

Methods
Participants
Subjects were 47 4-5-year-old preschool children (M = 56
months; range, 49 to 64 months). Their participation to the
experiment was submitted to informed consent of their
parents.
The subjects were equally divided into two groups:
Blocked group (N = 24; M = 55 months; range, 49-62
months) and Interleaved group (N = 23; M = 57 months;
range, 50-64 months). Participants were randomly assigned
to the blocked or the interleaved condition.
Materials
The experiment consisted of 2 practice trials, 12 learning
trials and 4 posttest trials, which occurred with a minute
delay after the learning trials. (See Table 1 for the list of
trials). Analogies were of the A:B::C:? format and were
composed of 7 items (colored pictures; see Figure 1). The
problem consisted of the A:B pair (the source), the C item
(the target), and an empty rectangle. The solution set was
composed of four stimuli: the analogical answer, two
distractors that were semantically related to the C item, and
1 distractor that was not semantically related to C. Positions
of the different alternatives were counterbalanced across
trials. There were two types of analogies, called “strong”
and “weak”. Strong and weak analogies were defined in
terms of the semantic association strength within each pair
of pictures defining an analogy, that is between A and B,
and between C and the analogical target. It was determined
by university students. They were asked to rate to what
extent each item of the pair made them think of the other
one. It was stressed that the task was to rate how strongly

3309

the two items were associated in their mind. The ratings
were on a 1-to-7 scale. The strongly associated trials were
composed of strongly associated A-B and C- T(arget) pairs,
and the weakly associated trials were composed of weakly
associated A-B and C-T(arget) pairs. The mean C-Target
association strength was 3.53 (SD = 1.11) for the weak
analogies, and 4.89 (SD = 1.44). for the strong.
In both learning conditions, there were 4 relations (tool
for, produces, contains, becomes). For each relation, there
were 3 learning trials, composed of 2 strong analogies and 1
weak analogy. In half of the trials, the two strong analogies
were introduced before the weak trial whereas the reverse
was true for the other half of trials. In the blocked condition,
the three trials for one relation came in a row (either weak,
strong 1, strong2, or strong1, strong2, weak, with two
relations starting with a strong analogy and two relations
with a weak analogy) whereas in the interleaved condition,
each of the 4 relations was displayed once in a row,
followed by another exemplar of the four relations. Two
relations out of 4 started with a weak analogy and two
relations by a strong. This was done in such a way that in
both conditions the same “weak-strong-strong” or “strongstrong-weak” sequence were introduced for each relation.
The 4 posttest trials were weak trials, one per relation. There
were four versions of the blocked condition and four
versions of the interleaved condition to counterbalance the
order of the presentation of the relations, exemplars within
the relations (e.g., which weak exemplar was in the post-test
and which in the learning phase), which relations had strong
exemplars first and which had weak.
The trials were presented to the children on a screen
through a PowerPoint file.
Procedure
Children were individually tested in their school, in a
quiet room. In both the blocked and the interleaved
conditions, the 7 items defining one trial were displayed
simultaneously. There were two practice trials. In the first
practice trial, the task was explained to children as follows:
“Let me explain how it works. At first, you have to find why
these two pictures [showing A and B] go well together. So,
why do you think [A] goes with [B]? OK! You see this one
[showing C]? It is alone. What you have to do is to find one
picture in these four images [showing the four answer
options] that goes well with this one [C] in the same way as
this one [B] goes with [A] so the two pairs of pictures go
together. Which picture goes up there [showing the empty
slot] with [C] like [B] with [A]? The child gave an answer
and justified his/her choice. Then, the experimenter
rephrased the entire trial, explaining and emphasizing why
“A and B” and “C and Target” go together for the same
reason. During the second practice trial, they were asked to
do the same. When children did not attend to the A:B pair
while explaining their choice, they were asked to do so, and
care was taken to ensure that they understood the
instructions during the training trials. In the relational
learning phase, they were asked to do the same thing that

was explained to them during the experiment trials and to
justify their answer afterward. No feedback was given for
the relational learning trials. The experiment was then
interrupted for one minute. The experimenter and the child
talked freely. Then, the four test trials, one per relation,
were introduced as novel trials.

Contains- Weak 1

?

analogical

semantic

semantic

unrelated

Contains- Strong 1

?

analogical

semantic

semantic

unrelated

Figure 1: Two examples of analogies used for the
“contains” relation, one “weak” and one “strong”.
Analogical: Analogical answer; Semantic: Distractor
semantically related to the C item; Unrelated: distractor
semantically unrelated to C.
At the end of the experiment, children’s understanding of
the semantic relation between A and B and between C and
Target was assessed. They were shown the A:B pairs and
were asked why the two items of each pair went together.
The same was true for the C:Target pairs (see Thibaut et al.,
2011, for more details).

Results
We first removed all the trials in which children could not
identify one of the two semantic relations, either A:B or
C:D. As a result, 49 trials out of 752 trials (the majority of
them for “car producing exhausts) were removed from

3310

subsequent analysis. We first ran a two-way ANOVA on the
proportions of correct answers for weak analogies with
Position of weak (Before strong, After strong, At test) as a
within factor and Presentation (Blocked, Interleaved) as a
between-subject factor. It revealed a significant main effect
of Position of weak, F (2, 90) = 3.50, p < .05, η² = .07. See
Table 1. A Tukey HSD test revealed that the weak analogies
were marginally significantly better understood when they
were introduced after strong items rather before strong (p =
.056) or at test (p = .075) with 24%, 39% and 25% of
correct answers for the weak before the strong items, after
the strong and at test, respectively. There was a decline for
the weak items at test, which failed to reach significance, p
= .074, compared to the second weak item). There was no
main effect of Presentation and no interaction. A three-way
ANOVA was conducted on the percentage of correct
answers for strong stimuli, with Type of trials (Before weak,
After weak), Position (First, Second strong) as within
factors, and Presentation (Blocked, Interleaved) as a
between factor. It revealed a main effect of Position, F (1,
45) = 6.00, p < .05, η² = .12), with the second strong higher
than the first strong (M = 49% and 60%, for the first and
second respectively). There was no main effect of Position
and no significant effect of Presentation, and no interaction
between any of the factors.
Table 1: E1 Means (SD’s) for the proportion of accurate
responses for each trial type
Blocked
Interleaved
Strong 1
.49 (.22)
.49(.25)
Strong 2
.55(.26)
.65(.20)
Weak, before Strong
.27(.36)
.22(.29)
Weak, after Strong
.35(.40)
.43(.43)
Weak, after delay
.23(.21)
.27(.20)
Discussion
Results were mixed. On the one hand, for both Strong and
Weak items, there were main effects of Position, suggesting
that repeating relations improves performance. While the
numerical increase of Weak trials following a Strong
appears to be the root of the main effect of Position for
those trials, post-hoc tests specifically looking at a benefit of
a Weak trial following a Strong did not find a significant
advantage contrasting it with either one of the other
positions alone. In addition, there was no significant
difference between a Blocked and an Interleaved mode of
presentation, and not a significant effect specifically for
Weak trials following Strong ones. Further, even after a
delay of just one minute, there was quite low performance
for weak items at test, perhaps due to that interruption.
Indeed participants engaged in an informal discussion with
the experimenter and this might have contributed to
decrease their attention.

Experiment 2

Because of the mixed results, perhaps due to a lack of
power, we simplified the design for the second experiment.
First the teaching/test phase distinction was abolished. The
same four relations were used with four trials each without
any delay between trials. Another simplification was that the
two strong analogies were always introduced before the
weak analogies. The idea was to test whether weak
analogies, that are more difficult than the strong analogies,
would get more positive influence from strong analogies in
the Blocked or in the Interleaved condition. The design of
E1, with some Weak trials appearing after a delay and
others before the Strong trials, may have prevented any
potential benefit that a blocked presentation could provide.
This simplified design will have a greater potential to detect
any effect of Presentation. In addition, any effect of
Presentation would show that experience with a specific
relation improves performance over an above a general
order effect which may simply reflect more general
improvement at performing the task. The same hypotheses
as in Experiment 1 apply here.

Methods
Participants
Subjects were 57 4-5-year-old preschool children (M = 55.4
months; range, 49 to 63 months). Their participation to the
experiment was submitted to informed consent of their
parents.
The subjects were equally divided into two groups:
Blocked group (N = 29; M = 54 months; range, 49 to 62
months) and Interleaved group (N = 28; M = 56 months;
range, 50 to 63 months). Participants were randomly
assigned to the blocked or the interleaved condition.
Materials
The same set of analogies as in Experiment 1 was used,
except for three pictures that were replaced in this novel
version. In the two presentation conditions, the two strong
analogies were always introduced before the two weak
analogies. In the Blocked, the four analogies (trials)
illustrating one relation (e;g., contains) were introduced
before the four analogies depicting the next relation (e.g.,
tools for) were introduced. In each case, the two strong trials
were introduced before the two weak trials. In the
interleaved case, one strong analogy from each of the four
relations were first introduced. It was followed by the
second strong analogy of each of the fours relations which
in turn was followed by the first and the second weak
analogies. There were four versions of the blocked condition
and four versions of the interleaved condition in which the
order of presentation of the first and second strong, and of
the first of second weak was modified.
Procedure
The same procedure as in Experiment 1 was used here,
except that there was no test phase. The experiment started
with two practice trials, and was followed by the 16 learning

3311

trials. There was no feedback in the learning trials.
Results

Proportion of Accurate Responses

We ran a three-way ANOVA, with Presentation (Blocked,
Interleaved) as a between factor, Analogy type (Strong,
Weak), and Item Position (First, Second) as within subject
factors. It revealed that strong analogies were significantly
better understood than weak analogies (52 vs 30%), F(1, 55)
= 43.45, p < .0001, η² = .44, and that the blocked
presentation gave better results than the interleaved
presentation, F(1, 55) = 8.22, p < .01, η² = .13 (M= 46% vs
36%). The key association strength x presentation
interaction was also significant, F(1, 55) = 4.22, p < .05, η²
= .07,showing that the difference between strong and weak
analogies was larger in the interleaved case than in the
blocked case. However, to examine effects on the Weak
Trials specifically, we conducted a Presentation (Blocked,
Interleaved) X Position (First, Second) mixed-effects
ANOVA, which showed a main effect of Presentation, with
Blocked (M = 38%) eliciting higher accuracy than
Interleaved (M = 21%). F(1, 55) = 12.24, p < .005, η² = .18
(no other effects approached significance). See Figure 2.
1
0,9

Blocked

0,8

Interleaved

0,7
0,6
0,5
0,4
0,3
0,2
0,1
0
Strong 1 Strong 2 Weak 1

Weak 2

Figure 2: E2 Means and standard errors for proportion of
accurate responses.

Discussion
Overall, the experiment showed that the Blocked condition
led to better results than the Interleaved condition: seeing
the four trials illustrating a given relation in a row led to
better results than seeing the same relation in an interleaved
way. Importantly, Presentation interacted with Association
strength because the difference between Blocked and
Interleaved conditions was concentrated in the Weak trials
when analyzed alone. That is, examining Figure 2 clearly
shows that Presentation order had little effect on the Strong
trials, but did effect the Weak trials. When Weak trials
directly followed Strong in the Blocked condition, this
elicited more accurate use of the repeated relation.

Taking the two experiments together, a clear picture
starts to emerge. Both experiments showed effects of the
position of individual trials, generally supporting the idea
that the use of a relation in one analogy problem can
constrain the semantic search in a subsequent problem. The
more simple design of E2 revealed an overall advantage of
blocked presentation, supporting a semantic-search or
structural alignment account, and suggests that the design of
E1 was not sensitive to this advantage. In addition, while
potentially an overall order effect could explain the effect of
position in E1, in E2 the Blocked advantage is independent
of an overall order effect, as the trials were matched in
terms of the number of trials preceding them.
In Experiment 2, children in the blocked condition can
first discover or build the relation using the two strong
trials, then apply it to the following weak items that appear
immediately after, without being interfered by the other
relations. This limits memory decline between the strong
and the weak trials. In the interleaved case, the larger
decline between strong and weak items suggests that the
interval between the weak and strong items was too
important to allow a strong-to-weak generalization. Or the
relations interfered one with the others.
While we showed preliminary support for the Blocked
advantage further research is needed to confirm this
advantage, and to clarify what kind of effects, if any, exists
for sequence and presentation on Strong trials. For example,
in E1 the second Strong trial was performed at a higher rate
than the first, but during E2, it was the reverse! Both
experiments were properly counter-balanced, so this
difference is not due to item-differences. Additionally, if the
Blocked advantage is further confirmed, then further
research needs to test how blocking trials supports
analogical problem solving. At the moment it is unclear
whether this potential advantage is rooted in aiding the
strategic retrieval of the relevant relational representation
without changing that representation (as deficits in strategic
semantic retrieval often explains poor reasoning
performance in young children, Whitaker et al., 2017), or
whether the successive trials allow for the children to
abstract the relational commonalities, creating a
representation less tied to the specifics of highly associated
objects. Regardless, at this point, there is little evidence that
the kinds of memory processes that specifically produce
spaced and interleaved advantages in other domains seem to
not play a crucial role in strengthening the use of relational
representations in analogical problem solving. Interleaved
schedules seem most helpful when the primary challenge
concerns refining representations to aid discrimination. Our
data suggests that this kind of “relational fine-tuning” or
discriminating among similar relations is not a primary
cause for children’s poor performance.
Here their effect, if any, was in favor of the Blocked
trials. However, they may be crucial in helping to establish
longer-lasting relational representations, given the post-test
results from E1 showing the advantages from Blocked
presentation may be quite short-lived. One way to test for

3312

lasting effects of the blocked presentation, would be to add
the same set of weak trials at the end of the experiment and
compare how participants behave in that case. A lasting
difference between the two conditions in favor of the
blocked trials would be strong argument in favor of this
condition. Understanding how relational representations can
be robust to temporal delays is a crucial direction for future
research.

Acknowledgement
This research has been supported by a Région de Bourgogne
Franche-Comté Grant Pari-2015 and Australian Research
Council Grant DP150104267.

References
Blaye, A., & Chevalier, N. (2011). The role of goal
representation in preschoolers’ flexibility and inhibition.
Journal of experimental child psychology, 108(3), 469-83.
Evans, T. (1968). A program for the solution of geometricanalogy intelligence test questions. In M. Minsky (Ed.),
Semantic information processing (pp. 271-353).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forbus, K. D., Usher, J., & Lovett, A. (2008). CogSketch:
Open-domain sketch understanding for cognitive science
research and for education. Proceedings of the fifth
eurographics workshop on sketch-based interfaces and
modeling.
French, R. M. (1995). The Subtlety of Sameness: A Theory
and Computer Model of Analogy-Making. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155–170.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child Development, 59(1), 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34(5),
752-775.
Goswami, U. (1992). Analogical Reasoning in Children.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Greene, R.L. (1989). Spacing effects in memory: Evidence
for a two-process account. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15(3),
371-377.
Gruber, O., & Goschke, T. (2004). Executive control
emerging from dynamic interactions between brain
systems mediating language, working memory and
attentional processes. Acta Psychologica, 115(2-3), 10521.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 21(6), 803-64.
Hofstadter, D., & Sander, E. (2013). Surfaces and essences:
Analogy as the fuel and fire of thinking. Basic Books.

Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning.
The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning, 234-259.
Holyoak, K. J., Junn, E. N., & Billman, D. O. (1984).
Development of analogical problem-solving skill. Child
Development, 55(6), 2042–2055.
Linsey, J. S., Wood, K. L., & Markman, A. B. (2008).
Modality and representation in analogy. Artificial
Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and
Manufacturing, 22(02), 85-100.
Lovett, A., Tomai, E., Forbus, K. D., & Usher, J. (2009).
Solving geometric analogy problems through two-stage
analogical mapping. Cognitive science, 33(7), 1192-231.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children’s Development of Analogical Reasoning:
Insights from Scene Analogy Problems. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 94(3), 249-273.
Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2010). Recent research on human
learning challenges conventional instructional strategies.
Educational Researcher, 39(5), 406-412.
Thibaut, J. P., & French, R. M. (2016). Analogical
reasoning, control and executive functions: A
developmental investigation with eye-tracking. Cognitive
Development, 38, 10-26.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., Missault, A., Gérard, Y., &
Glady, Y. (2011). In the Eyes of the Beholder: What EyeTracking Reveals About Analogy-Making Strategies in
Children and Adults. Proceedings of the Thirty-third
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
453–458).
Thibaut, J. P., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2008). Analogymaking in children: the importance of processing
constraints. In B. C. Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 475-480). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., & Vezneva, M. (2010).
Cognitive load and semantic analogies: Searching
semantic space. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(4),
569-74.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R. M., Vezneva, M., Gérard, Y., &
Glady, Y. (2011). Semantic analogies by young children:
testing the role of inhibition. In B. Kokinov, A.
Karmiloff-Smith, & N. J. Nersessian (Eds.), European
Perspectives on Cognitive Science. New Bulgarian
University Press.
Vlach, H. A., Ankowski, A. A., & Sandhofer, C. M. (2012).
At the same time or apart in time? The role of
presentation timing and retrieval dynamics in
generalization. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38(1), 246
Whitaker, K. J., Vendetti, M. S., Wendelken, C., & Bunge,
S. A. (2017). Neuroscientific insights into the
development of analogical reasoning. Developmental
Science.

3313

