Geometry-based Affordances
Sterling Somers (sterling@sterlingsomers.com)
Institute of Cognitive Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive
Ottawa, On., Canada

Abstract
A representational approach to ecological psychology is
presented. This paper identifies a computational-level
commonality in ecological psychology research related to
passability of apertures. It is argued that a cognitive
mechanism capable of comparing the geometric properties of
an environment and the geometric properties of the agent can
be used to support judgments for action in space.
Keywords: affordances; ecological psychology; spatial
representation.

Introduction
Two of the most central proposals in ecological psychology
are the concept of affordances and the theory of direct
perception. Gibson describes an affordance as properties
that objects offer to animals that have the capacity to
perceive it (Gibson, 1986). This position, shared with
Michaels and Carello (Michaels & Carello, 1981), maintains
that the semantics of an action, by which I mean how an
agent knows what actions can be performed given the
objects in its environment, are properties of that object.
Because the action semantics are encoded in the
environment, they are claimed to be directly perceived.
Chemero & Turvey (2007) divide ecological
psychologists into two
camps: Gibsonian and
representationalist. Gibsonians maintain that affordances are
directly perceived, while representationalists (e.g. Vera &
Simon, 1993) maintain that affordances (the actions an
object affords) are inferred. This paper presents a
representationalist position that is inspired by affordance
research. However, the representations proposed in both
theory and model are non-static and do not include
semantically-laden representations of the environment. An
example of a semantically-laden representation, with respect
to action, is to label a feature of the environment as a
‘doorway’, such that doorways are features of the
environment that can be passed-through.
The representationalist approach presented here is not
necessarily inconsistent with a Gibsonian approach. The aim
of the theory presented is to leverage the appropriate
framework to make use of the computational cognitive
architecture, ACT-R (Anderson & Lebiere, 1998), in order
to identify a plausible set of information processing steps
involved in an aperture-passage affordance.

Gibsonian Positions
There are two main theoretical positions in favor of direct
perception. The first, Gibson’s own theory, has already been
described above. Although I will provide no argument
against this position here, I agree with Chemero (2003), that

Gibson’s position represents a non-standard ontology, in
which the environment is not simply made up of physical
properties but also semantic properties. I will assume that
this alternative ontology is sufficient to reject Gibson’s
position for the purposes of this paper. For an argument
against Gibson’s position and related affordance-as-property
positions, I refer the reader to Chemero (2003).
The second Gibsonian position is that action semantics
are emergent properties which arise from the interaction
between an animal and its environment (Chemero, 2003;
Chemero & Turvey, 2007; Stoffregen, 2003). While
Chemero (2003) differs slightly in the terms he uses
(relations instead of properties, to avoid certain
philosophical problems), neither author’s version addresses
how the emergent properties or semantic-laden relations
arise.
The theory presented here, the theory of geometric
affordances, is inspired by research on aperture passage but
also attempts to be commensurate with traditional
representationalist views popular in the cognitive sciences.
Briefly, this paper proposes that one of the mechanisms
which can inform action properties (such as passability) is a
geometric comparison between the features of the
environment and current or possible future geometric
properties of the body.
The aim of this paper is to illustrate, by way of example,
how a represenationalist approach, which posits cognitive
mechanisms, leaves open the possibility to develop unifying
theories about different experimental findings within the
affordance literature. The research reviewed in the
following section is ecological psychology research
regarding the affordance of passability of an aperture. The
purpose of this brief review is to illustrate how a
representationalist approach can posit a cognitive
mechanism that compares the geometric properties of an
environment with the geometric properties of the agent. I
term these affordances, geometry-based affordances. I
maintain that geometry-based affordances are only one class
of possibly many types of affordances.

Aperture Passability Research
Research into the passability of apertures, such as doorways, has shown that there is a body-size/aperture-width
ratio at which apertures are judged to be passable (Fath &
Fajen, 2011; Higuchi, Seya, & Imanaka, 2012; Wagman &
Taylor, 2005; Warren & Whang, 1987). With different
degrees of commitment, the central aim of that research is to
show that a passability affordance can be directly perceived.
In Warren and Whang (1987), for example, they show
that people judge apertures as passable only when the ratio

3221

between the aperture width and body width is greater than 1.
Warren and Whang argue that we perceive the width of
apertures in units of body width. The theory they propose is
that we see the width of the doorway in units of eye-height.
Since eye-height is in a constant proportion to shoulder
width, we are effectively perceiving in units of shoulderwidth. Instead of seeing a doorway, estimating its width,
estimating body width, and making a determination
regarding passability; we simply perceive apertures as either
passable or impassible.
In a related study by Fath and Fajen (2011), participants
view simulated environments while wearing a headset. In a
set of experiments, Fath and Fajen modified the visual
properties available to the participants. For example, they
eliminate the ground plane, making the estimate of eyeheight implausible. They argue that the visual properties
related to body-width-scaled units are not the only
properties that can be used to make passability judgments.
They propose that visual information related to head-sway
and stride length (both while walking towards the aperture)
can be calibrated to body-width and used in lieu of eyeheight, to directly perceive passability.
Other studies such as those by Higuchi, Seya, and
Imanaka (2012) and Wagman and Taylor (2005) have
participants holding objects. Chang, Wade, and Stoffergen
(2009), furthermore, studied passability for people grouped
in dyads. Higuchi, Takada, and Matsuur ( 2004), finally,
studied passability for novel wheelchair users.
When taken together, it is not clear whether a direct
perception account can extend to situations such as dyads.
Judging aperture passage for yourself plus another
individual seems to require the building of a representation
of the total width of yourself and your compatriot.
Especially considering the methodology in Chang et al.
(2009), where participants are paired with different people
during the course of the experiment. Because the optical
information from the environment does not change, then
another source of information seems modulate judgment.
Regardless of the source, it seems as though two pieces of
information are used to make a passability judgment: optical
information and some-as-yet-to-be-determined source. It is
unclear how the ecological psychologist can maintain that
the judgment is direct.
A second, perhaps more important, aspect to consider is
the methodology used in, for example, Warren and Whang
(1987) and Higuchi et al. (2012). The experiments in these
studies include a methodology where participants walk
through the apertures of various sizes, rotating their
shoulders as needed. In Warren and Whang there is also a
condition where participants judge whether they can pass
through apertures, without rotating their shoulders. In all of
these cases what the participant seems to be doing is making
a judgment about passibility with respect to a future
configuration of their body. Judgment in these cases does
not seem to be based upon their current body width but,
rather, the width of their body after they have rotated their
shoulders. If that is the case, then it is not clear that

passability can be directly perceived in these cases. Instead,
it seems as if the passability judgment is based upon a
representation of the future state of the body. Such a
representation can be plausibly drawn from memory or the
result of a simulation.

A Representation-Based Theory
The theory being presented is an information processing
theory about the steps involved in passability judgments of
the kind exhibited in previous aperture passage research. At
a functional level the theory of geometric affordances posits
a geometric comparison process that compares the
geometric properties (width, depth, height) of an aperture
against a current or stored body posture. The geometric
comparison is used both when judging whether an aperture
is passable as well as a top-down metric to control shoulder
rotation during passage.
The information relevant to body postures is derived from
body schemas. Although previous affordances research have
rejected the notion of body schemas (e.g. Carello,
Grosofsky, Reichel, Solomon, & Turvey, 1989) there
reasonable evidence for their existence and their role in
motor planning and performance.

Evidence for Body-Schemas
Schwoebel and Coslett (2005) identify three types of body
representations: body schemas that represent the positions of
the body parts and is used to plan motor movements, the
body structure that is a topological map of body part
locations, and a body image which is a lexical-semantic
representation of the body detailing body part names, their
function, and their relationship to related artifacts. Since
body schemas are central to the information processing
theory being proposed, a brief summary of evidence for the
existence of body schemas will be presented in this
subsection.
Neural evidence provides support for the functional role
of body schemas as real-time representations of the body.
Firing-rates in parietal area 5 of primates supports the idea
of encoding arm postures both when the arm is occluded
and when a realistic, fake arm is visible, suggesting both
somatosensory and visual input is used to create body
schemas (Graziano, Cooke, & Taylor, 2000).
There is strong evidence for the use of body schemas in
motor simulation. For example, the hand laterality paradigm
has been used to study the link between imagined
movement and actual movement (e.g. Parsons, 1987). There
are two aspects of the laterality paradigm. The first involves
making judgements of laterality (left vs. right) and the
second involves simulating arm orientations. The reaction
time for both tasks was relative to orientation differences
between the participant’s arm and the target arm. Simulated
movements were strongly correlated with actual
movements.
There is also evidence of a physiological overlap between
imagined and actual movements (Decety, 1996; Lotze et al.,
1999). The fMRI work by Lotze et al. (1999) also supports

3222

the view that the main difference between imagined and
actual motor movements is inhibitory signals from cortical
motor areas to cerebral regions, inhibiting actual
movements. Sirigu et al. (1996) also show that only patients
with parietal damage do not show a correlation between the
times for actual and imagined finger movements.
Finally, Schwoebel, Coslett and Buxbaum (Coslett,
Buxbaum, & Schwoebel, 2008; Schwoebel, Coslett, &
Buxbaum, 2001) provide evidence for Forward Modeling.
Forward Models have been theorized to be used to develop
representations of body schemas based partially from
efferent copies of planned motor movements. What is
particularly interesting in their work is the dissociation
exhibited by a patient (JD) between body schemas due to
purposeful movement and body schemas for passive
movement. JD had accurate reach and pointing ability when
moving her hand to a target in both occluded-hand and nonoccluded hand conditions, suggesting that she had an
accurate representation of the position of her arm and hand.
However, JD’s pointing and reaching ability were impaired
when her arm was moved by an experimenter (passive
movement), suggesting that, in those cases, she did not build
an accurate representation of her arm posture. As pointed
out by Schwoebel and Cosslett (2005), this dissociation
suggests that JD had an intact ability to generate posture
representations from an internal model based on predicated
movements (Forward Model).
The above findings in combination imply that humans
have representations of the biomechanical constraints of our
bodies. If reaction times for imagined movements mimics
reaction times for actual movement, then this suggests that
the simulated movement has similar kinematic and
biomechanical properties as real movements. The fact that
there is a strong neurological overlap between simulation
areas and areas responsible for actual movements suggests
that motor movements are encoded in the same format for
simulation as they are for actual movements. It can be
inferred that some form of biomechanical representation has
to exist to support biomechanically-accurate simulations.
This offers compelling evidence that the biomechanical
constraints of the body are also likely represented (in order
to support simulation). It stands to reason that simulation
can produce predictions of body posture in simulated motor
planning in much the same was as forward modeling does
for active motor behavior.
The theory being forwarded here assumes that we store
body schemas of biomechanical constraints. This would be
useful for motor planning because it would reduce the
complexity of choosing a goal posture. For example,
shoulder rotation would require only three representations: a
body schema for relaxed, non-rotated posture; and a body
schema for full rotation to the left; and full rotation to the
right. Although the body is capable of rotating any angle
between constraints, it would be costly to store them all.
Instead, biomechanical constraints can provide sufficient
conditions for an action (fully rotated shoulders might be
sufficient for passing through an aperture), which is suitable

for planning. Online motor control during action could then
be used to control and produce only the necessary motor
movements to carry out the action for a particular
circumstance.

Information Processing Theory
It is useful to divide the processes proposed in this theory
into two phases: the judgment phase and the performance
phase. In the judgment phase, we first determine if we can
pass through an aperture at all. The performance phase
occurs once we have judged an aperture as passable and
begin to walk through it. The performance phase can be
subdivided further into three sub-phases: rotation initiation,
rotation, and rotation termination. The following section
will outline how body schemas are used in the passability
judgment.

Judgment Phase
Although it is discussed very little in the previous aperturepassage literature, before we ever attempt to pass through an
aperture, we must first make a judgment of whether passage
is at all plausible. Anecdotally, this must be the case
because we simple do not often find ourselves trying to
squeeze through apertures smaller than our bodies. This
process has to be more complex than the direct perception
theory proposes because passage cannot be judged purely on
current posture. That is, optical information tuned to a nonrotated posture can only inform passibility judgments where
no postural change is required. However, in order to judge
passability in the condition where some degree of shoulder
rotation is required, the optical information would somehow
have to be tuned to a future state of the shoulders. It is
unclear how a direct perception approach could account for
this.
Geometric affordance theory proposes that a positive
passability judgment results from two possible cases. In the
first case, body geometry is estimated from a body schema
of the current body posture. This information can then be
used top-down in a visual search to find apertures of an
appropriate size. If the vision system is able to return a
feature in the environment that meets those constraints, the
returned apertures are considered passable. In this case, the
agent can simply walk through the aperture. If no
environmental feature is returned by the vision system, the
second case proceeds. Note that the representations used in
this phase are non-static: they are current (based on current
body posture) and can include other sources of information
including visual or proprioceptive (such as estimates of
body size while carrying objects, or in a dyad).
In the second case, a potential series of memory requests
are made for stored body schemas that closely match the
current body posture (e.g. standing) and current action
capabilities (e.g. supportive of walking action) but are
relaxed on an increasing number of postural details (e.g. no
need to match with respect to the upper-half of the body). In
the case of a simple doorway-like aperture, a reasonable
memory request would be for a posture that affords walking

3223

(e.g. a standing posture) but allows for variation in torso
posture (such as shoulder rotation). As discussed in the
previous subsection, storing only the biomechanical
constraints vastly reduces the search space for a suitable
posture. If a suitable schema is returned, the geometric
properties of that schema are used to filter visual results in
the same manner described above for the for the first case.
In the second case, the retrieved body schema functions as a
goal state for the motor system during the rotation phase.
That is, the motor system will try to achieve the posture at
the biomechanical constraint (e.g. shoulders fully rotated)
regardless if that posture is necessary for the desired action.

Rotation Phase
Another aspect of aperture passage with no known
discussion in the affordances literate is the need for some
trigger that starts the rotation. One possibility is that the
agent plans to rotate at some specific point and initiates
rotation upon arrival. A second possibility, and the one
explored here, is that there is a bottom-up environment
trigger that is responsible for initiating the rotation. The
theory proposed here is that the visual system performs
bottom-up obstacle avoidance and that the presence of the
edges of the aperture triggers the rotation. When the edges
of the aperture are within a multiple of the agent’s rotation
radius, the vision system pushes information into the visual
buffer, and the agent can respond by carrying out the motor
plan.
Recall that during the judgment phase a stored body
schema memory may be recalled and used as a goal state for
the motor system to achieve the affordance. In Warren and
Whang’s (1987) first experiment there is a multi-second
delay between what I am describing as the judgment phase
and the rotation phase (while the participants walks to the
aperture). It is proposed that once a body schema is
retrieved it is maintained in working memory. When the
presence of the obstacle (aperture edges) is pushed in to the
visual buffer, combined with the presence of a body schema
in memory, the agent can then carry out the motor rotation
plan. Note that for shoulder rotation, the goal state will be a
biomechanical constraint, e.g. fully-rotated shoulders.
However, we know from Warren and Whang (and
intuitively) that we do not rotate our shoulders to maximum
rotation every time we rotate. Instead the theory assumes
that rotation completion is controlled by a vision-action loop
in the dorsal visual stream (Milner & Goodale, 2008).

Rotation Completion Monitoring
In their Two Visual Streams Hypothesis, Milner and
Goodale propose a functional distinction between the dorsal
visual stream and the ventral visual stream (Goodale &
Milner, 1992; Milner & Goodale, 2008). They propose that
the ventral stream composes what they call vision-forperception and that the dorsal stream composes what they
call vision-for-action. While the ventral stream is used for
planning action and carrying out unpracticed action, the
dorsal stream is used for moment-to-moment visual

updating of actions that are comparatively more
automatized.
The theory proposes that a moment-to-moment visual
updating can occur through rapid repetition of the original
top-down visual filter process described above (i.e. the
current body schema is used in a top-down visual search to
determine if there are any environmental features that meet
those constraints). This moment-to-moment visual updating
continues until (in this case) the shoulders have rotated
enough to produce a match between the body-width of the
agent and the width of the aperture. Although a
biomechanical constraint was originally retrieved in the
judgment phase, the agent need not always rotate the
shoulders maximally. This process ends once the shoulders
have rotated sufficiently to pass through the aperture. In
other words, the goal state of the motor system was to fully
rotate the shoulders, but a moment-to-moment visual update
limits the total rotation by comparing the geometric
properties of the current body schema (rotated shoulder in
this example) to the geometric properties of the aperture. If
an aperture is found as a result of the visual search, that
means an aperture with sufficient geometric constraints has
been found (for whatever posture the body is currently in).
In this way, there can be a limited number of stored
biomechanical constraints but a large variance in
intermediate postural change (a large variance in shoulder
rotation). Note these processing steps are the exact same
steps used in the judgment phase.

Computational Model Support
A computational model of the shoulder rotation experiments
in Warren and Whang (1987) and in Higuchi et al. (2012)
was developed as an initial test of the overall theory. The
model was modeled in an extension to Python ACT-R
called ACT-R 3D (Somers, 2016). At a high-level, the
model follows the information processing description
described above. Importantly, with respect to affordance
research, the model is not semantically informed about the
aperture in its environment.
It would not be atypical for an ACT-R model to be
semantically informed. It is fairly customary for a model to
use what is termed a ‘visual icon’ with a chunk identifying
to the programmer what visual information the agent is
‘seeing.’ Although semantic information is not contained in
the visual icon, it would not be atypical for a production to
be pre-programmed to respond to the contents of the chunk
in the visual icon.
The visual system in ACT-R 3D is slightly less informed.
There is, in the agent’s 3D environment, nothing labeled as
an aperture. In fact, an aperture is negative space between
environment features (such as walls) and cannot in fact be
labelled in ACT-R 3D. Although the walls in the 3D
environment are labelled, the agent has no access to those
labels.
Instead, the agent has a goal to walk forward and in order
to carry out this goal, it looks for obstacles. Upon finding an
obstacle (the wall), the agent then uses a top-down visual

3224

search for features that might be passable in the manner
described in previous sections. Put simply, the agent does a
visual search for empty space in front of it that meets the
geometric constraints of the agent’s body (or an achievable
body posture). In this way the agent does not in fact
represent the aperture as an aperture. Importantly, this also
means that agents of different sizes will make different
passability judgments.
The task the model must perform is to walk through an
aperture, rotating the shoulders as needed, or avoid walking
to apertures that it thinks it cannot pass through. As
described above, if the agent does perform shoulder
rotation, a moment-to-moment visual update occurs to
determine if the agent should stop rotating. A single model
is used for both small and large agents in slow and fast
walking conditions, walking through apertures of various
sizes, modeling experiments in Warren and Whang (1987);
as well agents holding bars of various lengths and walking
through apertures of various sizes in Higuchi et al. (2012).
The measure of fit to Warren and Whang was with respect
to total rotation which is influenced partially by the number
of agents who decide to pass through an aperture of a given
size, rotation speed, and walking speed. There were four
conditions to fit: 2 (size: small vs. large) x 2 (speed: slow
vs. fast); with Pearson correlations ranging from 0.91 and
0.98. The same model was then given bars of different sizes
and performed the experimental conditions given in Higuchi
et al. (2012). Although the fit was not as good in this case,
as it showed a strong over-rotation in one condition; the fit
was still reasonable, especially with the exclusion of the
results for the over-rotated condition. The measure was
rotation angle as well as the safety margin made between
the end of the bar and the edge of the aperture, producing a
Pearson’s correlation of 0.84 for absolute rotation and 0.89
with respect to safety margin.
The success of the model is encouraging, given that the
accuracy of the results are dependent on the timing
involved, which is a product of the information processing
steps (in the form of productions) that the agent carries out.

make a estimation of the total geometric properties.
Currently neither the theory nor the model define processes
for including accompanying objects (in the bar experiments,
the agent has special access to the dimensions of the bar).
However, the advantage with the model is that there is a
clear question that can be incorporated into a unified theory
in the future.
In the same manner the model (and theory) also assumes
that the geometric properties of the environment can be
suitably perceived. The details of this process are not yet
modeled, however, we can assume that aspects such as eyeheight, head-sway, and stride-length, can all be combined to
creates a representation of the aperture width. In that
respect, the model would be very much in line with findings
from the aperture-passage literature.
The model can also help answer questions about
representational content. The model presented here is part of
a series of models that address whether A/S ratio or spatial
margin (between edges of the agent and edges of the
aperture) might be used as a metric for aperture passage.
The model presented here implement an analog of spatial
margin to judge the fit between aperture width and body
width, supporting Higuchi et al. (2012).
The model also helps explain over rotation evident in
Warren and Whang (1987) and Higuchi et al. (2012).
Because the processes during the rotation completion
monitoring affect timing, they also introduce a degree of
variance in the rotation. The model does not rotate perfectly
each time and exhibits similar over rotation to human
performance.

Extensions

Addressing Difficulties with Direct Perception

The proposed processing description given above could
easily be extended to include other affordances as well. For
example, Stefanucci and Geuss (2010) researched aperture
passage that required a ducking action. There is no
principled reason why the same model could not be used to
model those experiments as well. Since the problem is
largely geometric, followed by a postural change, there is no
principled reason why that postural change could not be for
a ducking action. The same process could also be used for
any situation that requires a postural change in order to
accommodate the size of the body.
Secondly, not all affordances are purely geometric but
could involve a geometric comparison process. Grasping,
for example, has a number of elements, one of which could
involve a judgment of whether the target object would fit in
a grasp.

The first difficulty pointed out in the first section that direct
perception has to contend with is a person-plus-other
system. In cases like these, there is no invariant property of
the body that can act as units to directly perceive: there are
measures beyond the body that affect the judgment. The
theory presented in this paper also has to be extended to
account for situations like these. When an agent is part of a
person-plus-other system, the theory proposes that the agent
could combine representations, including body schemas, to

The term ‘affordance’, though convenient, does not come
without certain theoretical baggage. The aim of this paper is
not to dismiss or discredit ecological psychology or the
notion of direct perception but, rather, to compliment it with
an information processing description. The term,
‘representation’, need not carry the kind of baggage that it
may have historically. The representations used in the model

Discussion
There was a number of difficulties pointed out in the first
section that affordances based upon direct perception has to
contend with. This section will address those difficulties but
will also describe an interesting fallout from using an
affordance-based approach.

Conclusion

3225

are, for the most part, not static and semantically-laden. For
example, each agent learns their own body schemas before
experiments by performing ‘exercises’, storing and updating
new representations for biomechanical constraints.
Furthermore, the environment is not labelled in any way.
Agents in the simulation have to determine what apertures
are passible individually.
Adapting affordance research to a representationalist
framework opens some doors for research. This work is
mainly philosophical, arguing for the need to unify research
in a way that is falsifiable. The theory here presented relies
on a cognitive mechanism capable of comparing the
geometric properties of an environment with the geometric
properties of an agent or agent-plus-object systems. This
high-level presentation of the theory does, admittedly, offer
very little detail about the working of the mechanism but
does so in the hope of inciting research into the area.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). The Atomic
Components of Thought. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Ltd.
Carello, C., Grosofsky, A., Reichel, F. D., Solomon, H. Y.,
& Turvey, M. T. (1989). Visually Perceiving What is
Reachable. Ecological Psychology, 1(1), 27–54.
Chang, C.-H., Wade, M. G., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2009).
Perceiving affordances for aperture passage in an
environment-person-person system. Journal of Motor
Behavior, 41(6), 495–500. h
Chemero, A. (2003). An Outline of a Theory of
Affordances. Ecological Psychology, 15(2), 181–195.
Chemero, A., & Turvey, M. T. (2007). Gibsonian
Affordances for Roboticists. Adaptive Behavior,
15(4), 473–480.
Coslett, H. B., Buxbaum, L. J., & Schwoebel, J. (2008).
Accurate reaching after active but not passive
movements of the hand: Evidence for forward
modeling. Behavioural Neurology, 19(3), 117–125.
Decety, J. (1996). The neurophysiological basis of motor
imagery. Behavioural Brain Research, 77(1–2), 45–
52.
Fath, A. J., & Fajen, B. R. (2011). Static and dynamic visual
information about the size and passability of an
aperture. Perception, 40(8), 887–904.
Gibson, J. J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlb.
Goodale, M. A., & Milner, A. D. (1992). Separate visual
pathways for perception and action. Trends in
Neurosciences, 15(1), 20–5.
Graziano, M. S., Cooke, D. F., & Taylor, C. S. (2000).
Coding the location of the arm by sight. Science (New
York, N.Y.), 290(5497), 1782–1786.
Higuchi, T., Seya, Y., & Imanaka, K. (2012). Rule for
Scaling Shoulder Rotation Angles while Walking
through Apertures. PLoS ONE, 7(10), 1–8.
Higuchi, T., Takada, H., Matsuura, Y., & Imanaka, K.
(2004). Visual estimation of spatial requirements for

locomotion in novice wheelchair users. Journal of
Experimental Psychology. Applied, 10(1), 55–66.
Lotze, M., Montoya, P., Erb, M., Hülsmann, E., Flor, H.,
Klose, U., … Grodd, W. (1999). Activation of
Cortical and Cerebellar Motor Areas during Executed
and Imagined Hand Movements: An fMRI Study.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(5), 491–501.
Michaels, C. F., & Carello, C. (1981). Direct Perception. (J.
J. Jenkins, W. Mischel, & W. W. Hartup, Eds.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Milner, A. D., & Goodale, M. A. (2008). Two visual
systems re-viewed. Neuropsychologia, 46(3), 774–
785.
Parsons, L. M. (1987). Imagined spatial transformation of
one’s body. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
General, 116(2), 172–191.
Schwoebel, J., & Coslett, H. B. (2005). Evidence for
Multiple, Distinct Representations of the Human
Body. Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(4), 543–553.
Schwoebel, J., Coslett, H. B., & Buxbaum, L. J. (2001).
Compensatory coding of body part location in
autotopagnosia: Evidence for extrinsic egocentric
coding. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 18(4), 363–381.
Sirigu, A., Duhamel, J.-R., Cohen, L., Pillon, B., Dubois,
B., & Agid, Y. (1996). The Mental Representation of
Hand Movements After Parietal Cortex Damage.
Science, 273(5281), 1564–1568.
Somers, S. (2016). ACT-R 3D : A 3D Simulation
Environment for Python ACT-R. In D. Reitter & F. E.
Ritter (Eds.), 14th International Conference on
Cognitive Modeling (pp. 107–112). University Park,
PA.
Stefanucci, J. K., & Geuss, M. N. (2010). Duck! Scaling the
height of a horizontal barrier to body height.
Attention, Perception & Psychophysics, 72(5), 1338–
1349.
Stoffregen, T. A. (2003). Affordances as Properties of the
Animal-Environment System. Ecological Psychology,
15(2), 115–134.
Vera, A. H., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Situated Action: A
Symbolic Interpretation. Cognitive Science, 17(1), 7–
48.
Wagman, J. B., & Taylor, K. R. (2005). Perceiving
Affordances for Aperture Crossing for the PersonPlus-Object System. Ecological Psychology, 17(2),
105–130.
Warren, W. H., & Whang, S. (1987). Visual guidance of
walking through apertures: body-scaled information
for affordances. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Human Perception and Performance, 13(3), 371–83.

3226

