Gestural Hesitation Reveals Children’s Competence on Multimodal
Communication: Emergence of Disguised Adaptor
Kazuki Sekine (kazuki.sekine@mpi.nl)
Radboud University/ Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
Wundtlaan 1, 6526 XD Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Abstract
Speakers sometimes modify their gestures during the process
of production into adaptors such as hair touching or eye
scratching. Such disguised adaptors are evidence that the
speaker can monitor their gestures. In this study, we
investigated when and how disguised adaptors are first
produced by children. Sixty elementary school children
participated in this study. There were ten from each school
year (from 7 to 12 years of age). They were instructed to
remember a cartoon and retell its story to their parents. The
results showed that children did not produce disguised
adaptors until the age of 8. The disguised adaptors
accompany fluent speech until the children are 10 years old
and accompany dysfluent speech until they reach 11 or 12
years of age. These results suggest that children start to
monitor their gestures when they are 9 or 10 years old.
Cultural influences and cognitive changes were considered as
factors to influence emergence of disguised adaptors.
Keywords: co-speech gestures; disguised
elementary school children; speech dysfluency.

adaptors;

Introduction
Researchers have examined the development of gestures in
children in terms of when the frequency or repertoire
increases and how the relationship between a gesture and
speech changes with age. The present study focused on
spontaneous suppression of gesture production during
speech. Analyzing when and how children try to not
produce gestures would provide insight into when children
become aware that their gestures are socially
communicative.
The present study focuses on co-speech gestures
(hereafter simply referred to as ‘gestures’) that
spontaneously co-occur during speech and that have no
standard of well-formedness, unlike sign language, but are
created idiosyncratically on the fly (McNeill, 1992). A
gesture typically has three phases: preparation, stroke, and
retraction. In the preparation phase, the hand moves from a
position of rest. The stroke phase is the central part of a
gesture that conveys substantial information. The relevant
meaning represented by this phase is usually expressed in
the concurrent speech. Sometimes, a hold phase, where the
hand is held in mid-air at the same position, occurs before
and/or after the stroke phase.
As children prefer to use speech as a means of
communication, the frequencies of gestures that appear
around the first word and are used alone without speech,
such as deictic gestures and symbolic gestures, decreases
(Volterra & Iverson, 1995). In their place, gestures that cooccur with meaningful words, called “co-speech gestures”,
appear around the period. Goldin-Meadow & Butcher

(2003) observed that gestures begin synchronizing with
speech both semantically and temporally in the transitional
phase to the two-word speech period, at about 18 months of
age. Given that gestures are not often used solely but are coproduced with speech, gestures and speech seem to form an
integrated system during this period (Goldin-Meadow &
Butcher, 2003).
Previous research has shown that speech and co-speech
gesture develop hand-in-hand even after two-word period.
Mayberry & Nicoladis (2000) observed that longitudinally
bilingual children between 2- and 3-and-half years old
produce more gestures when they speak either language that
allows them produce a longer utterance, as measured by the
mean number of morphemes (Mayberry & Nicoladis, 2000).
They concluded that gestures are closely related to
morphosyntax level. This conclusion is indirectly supported
by Fujii’s (1999) study showing that the frequency of
gestures does not correlate with vocabulary in the preschool
period. McNeill (1992) observed that by the end of the
preschool period, the frequency of gestures ascends to near
adult levels. Once children start having formal education,
they gradually develop the ability to create a coherent
narrative by using language devices such as anaphora
expressions, substitutions, ellipses and connectives
(Wigglesworth, 1990). Research has shown that as children
acquire spoken referential expressions for making coherent
discourse, they also use gestures to mark introduced or
maintained referents in the narrative (McNeill, 19992), and
the number of gestures consistently increases during the
elementary school period (Colletta et al., 2014; Sekine &
Furuyama, 2010). Thus, these previous studies indicate that
gesture and speech develop hand-in-hand across the
development. However, it is not clear if children start
monitoring their gestures or become aware of gestures as
information resources that their listeners can make use of.
Studies on self-repair in speech have asserted that to
correct one’s speech, the speaker has to monitor his or her
speech process continuously, and thus, correction of speech
errors is considered to reflect the speaker’s ability to
monitor speech (Karmiloff-Smith, 1986). Based on this
assumption, it seems that determining when children start to
correct their gestures would provide insight into
understanding when they start monitoring their gestures.
However, unlike speech in which the message is delivered
by aligning linearly linguistic elements that exist
independently, a gesture conveys a meaning globally at
once, and any decomposition into elements is dependent on
the whole (McNeill, 1992). Because of the linearity in
speech, it is easier to understand where speech errors
occurred and how the speaker corrected them than errors in

3113

gestures. In contrast, gestures are mostly continuous and
some of their parameters change simultaneously. This
makes it difficult to determine whether and where a speaker
has corrected a gesture. Considering these differences in
semiotic characteristics, this study focused on a specific
type of gestural correction; i.e., disguised adaptors.
Adaptors are movements that help persons to satisfy
personal needs, manage emotions, and adapt to their
environment such as touching one’s hair or adjusting one’s
glasses (Ekman & Friesen, 1969). At times it is observed
that a speaker stops making a gesture in the middle of
production and switches it to an adaptor to hide the gesture.
Such movements may be able to say socially preferable in
the situation. In this study, this kind of behavior is termed a
disguised adaptor, which is defined as a gesture that is
altered into an adaptor before or during the stroke phase of
the gesture.
It can be observed in daily conversation that when a
speaker is asked a question by the listener in the middle of
her gesture and speech production, she stops producing the
gesture, and puts her hand on her head or eye to scratch as if
it feels itchy, like shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 indicates a
scene in which the speaker on the right was retelling an
episode of cartoon that she had watched to the listener on
the left ((1) in Figure 1). When she was describing the
figure of the drainpipe with a gesture, the listener started
asking her whether one character was in the birdcage (2). At
that moment, she stopped her gesture in the middle, and put
her right hand on her head and scratched it until the listener
finished the question (3).

Speaker (on the right side):
[soko made (1)ikitakutte, sono mado no (2)tokoro nikou‘(he) (1)wants to go there, and (2)at the place where the
window is , like this-’
Listener (on the left side):
[torikago (3)no naka ni haitteiruno?]
‘is (he) (3)inside the cage?’
Figure 1: Halt of a gesture by listener’s question.
Here, and in subsequent examples, the square brackets
represent the start and end points of the motion of the
speaker’s hands, boldface marks the stroke phrase of the
gesture phrase, underline indicates a motionless hold phase,
and double underline represents the duration in which a
disguised adaptor, such as touching the body or clothes. ‘%’
indicates a smacking sound, ‘*’ represents self interruption,
and ‘:’ in speech indicates an elongated phonation. The
numbers used in figure, correspond to the numbers in the
transcription, which in turn indicate the places where

gestures occurred. In the transcription, the first chunk is the
original Japanese speech and the second chunk is the
English translation.
Similar behaviors to the one in Figure 1 can be observed
in other situations, for example when one raises his hand to
catch a taxi, but misses it, or in which one is waving to her
friend, and then quickly becomes aware of mistaken
identity. In these situations, they often switch the hand
movements to self-contact behaviors such as scratching
head or eyes as if it is meant to be. Interestingly, literature
on Tourette’s syndrome, a chronic neurological disorder
characterized by multiple involuntary movements and
uncontrollable vocalizations called tics, has documented the
correction of tic movements made by patients. Sottofattori
and Nicolai (2007) observed that the patients can modify
tics or odd movements into other movements like gestures
in a natural conversation. For example, when a tic affects
the right or left arm, the patient tries to move the forefinger
straight with the tic as if it were a deictic gesture. All these
cases suggest that when we are aware of mistake of hand
movement or when we are interrupted in executing our hand
movements, we often change the hand movement to a more
socially acceptable movement such as scratching a body
part or producing gestures.
In the light of development of gestures in children, it is
important to examine whether typically developing children
also are able to modify body movement into a more socially
acceptable one. Because if children perform this kind of
correction, it implies that they can monitor their gestures. If
they already know that gestures can be seen as information
resource by their listeners and they can detect errors in their
gestures or speech, they may try to modify their gestures
into more socially acceptable movement, such as scratching
the neck.
Suppose that gesture and speech interacts in the
production process (McNeill, 1992), and then gestural
correction may affect or be affected by speech errors or
dysfluencies. Thus, the relationship between disguised
adaptors and speech errors should also be investigated.
Karmiloff-Smith (1986) found that the percentage of speech
repairs denoting sensitivity to the linguistic system, such as
the determiner functions of articles, adjectives and
possessives, increased during the elementary school period.
Given these findings, it is predicated that the number of
disguised adaptors also increases during this period as
children acquire an ability to monitor their expressions. In
addition, if disguised adaptors are due to difficulties in
retrieving words, they would co-occur with filled pauses,
unfilled pauses, or speech errors, rather than with intact
linguistic elements, because previous studies have shown
that adaptors tend to occur with speech dysfluencies while
the speaker is retrieving words (Fujii, 1997; Pine, Bird, &
Kirk, 2007). However, if a disguised adaptor does not cooccur with speech dysfluencies, it might occur influenced by
other factors such as cultural or cognitive factors. For
instance, cognitive capacity or cultural pressure to produce
or inhibit gestures may control the emergence of disguised

3114

adaptors. Under this hypothesis, this study examined when
disguised adaptors emerge during the elementary school
period and how this emergence is related to speech.

before or during the stroke phase without any pause, and 2)
the direction of the gesture suddenly changed when it is
altered into adaptor. To analyze the temporal relationship
between disguised adaptors and speech fluency, their
combinations were categorized into the following six types:
DA (disguised adaptor), FP (filled, pause), IS (intact speech
that was completely articulated, such as Noun or Verb
phrases), PR (the preparation phase of a gesture), SE
(speech error), and UP (unfilled pause). The orders were as
follows:

Method
Participants
Sixty elementary school children and their parents
participated in this study. There were ten children from each
grade, 1st to 6th grade. Half were boys. In this study, each
grade is referred to by their mean age, 7- to 12-years-olds
(7-year-olds, M=7;0, Range 6;9-7;4. 8-year-olds, M=7;11,
range 7;9-8;10, 9-year-olds. M=9;4, R= 9;0-9;6, 10-yearolds, M=10;0, R=9;7-10;5, 11-year-olds, M=11;4, R= 10;911;11, 12-year-olds, M=12;0, R=11;5-12;10). All the
participants were native monolingual Japanese speakers
from middle-class families, and the children attended public
or private elementary schools in Tokyo, Japan.

Material and Apparatus
Each child watched a seven-minute animated color cartoon
of the Tweety and Sylvester series, titled ‘Canary Row’
(Warner Brothers, Inc.). This cartoon was displayed on a
14-inch color computer monitor (Panasonic CF-F8). A miniDV camcorder (Sony HDR-HC9) was used to record the
children’s gesture and speech.

Procedure
The experiments were conducted in a quiet room in the
participant’s home or a local community center.
Each child was instructed to remember the cartoon story
shown on the computer monitor and retell it to his or her
parent as a listener in as much detail as possible. The parent
was allowed to respond to the child by nodding their head or
by using back channels during the child’s narration. The
whole session was recorded using the mini-DV camcorder
on a tripod.

1. PR → IS+DA
After the preparation phase started, a disguised adaptor
occurred with intact speech.
2. PR → FP+DA
After the preparation phase started, a disguised adaptor
occurred with a filled pause.
3. PR → UP+DA
After the preparation phase started, a disguised adaptor
occurred with an unfilled pause.
4. PR → FS+DA
After the preparation phase started, a disguised adaptor
occurred with a filled pause.
5. PR → FS (FS) →IS+DA
After the preparation phase started, a false start or a number
of false starts occurred. Then, a disguised adaptor occurred
with intact speech.
6. PR→ FP and/or FS → FP+DA
After the preparation phase started, a false start and/or filled
pause occurred. Then, a disguised adaptor occurred with a
filled pause.

Results

Coding
Speech data. All narratives were verbatim transcribed. From
the transcriptions, the mean number of clauses was then
calculated. A clause was loosely defined as a combination
of a noun phrase and a verb phrase). The mean number of
unfilled pauses, which was defined as periods of silence
longer than 200 msec. (Beattie, 1983), filled pauses, such as
‘unttoo’ (umm) or ‘eeetto’ (ehhh), and speech errors,
including repetitions, replacements or false starts, were
measured in order to ascertain the relationship between
speech fluency and production of disguised adaptors.
Gesture data. First, co-speech gestures were identified.
Hand movements were classified as gestures only when they
had an identifiable beginning and a clear end and were
synchronized with speech. After identifying which
movements were gestures, the total number of gestures was
counted. Next, disguised adaptors were identified. We
coded a hand movement as a disguised adaptor if two
criteria were met; 1) A gesture was altered into adaptor

Number of gestures, clauses, pauses, and speech errors
To calculate the frequency of gestures and the proportion of
unfilled pauses for each age, the total number of gestures
and the total amount of time spent for unfilled pauses were
divided by the total speaking time. To calculate the
frequency of filled pauses and speech errors, the total
number of filled pauses and speech errors were each divided
by the mean number of clauses (Table 1). After performing
an angular transformation on the proportion of unfilled
pauses in the speaking time, an ANOVA was conducted on
each index (Table 1). A main effect of age group was found
for the gesture frequency, F (5, 54) = 3.86, p= .005, the
proportion of unfilled pauses in the speaking time, F(5, 54)
= 2.44 p= .046, and the proportion of speech errors in
clauses, F(5, 54) = 2.49, p= .042. A post hoc comparison
(Tukey, p < .05) showed that 12-year-olds produced
gestures more frequently than 7-, 9- and 10-year-olds did
and that the proportion of unfilled pauses during the
speaking time was significantly greater for 7-year-olds
(47%) than for 12-year-olds (33%). There was no significant
age-group difference in the total number of clauses or
frequency of speech errors. These results indicate that the
proportion of unfilled pauses gradually decreases during the
elementary school period, whereas the frequencies of

3115

gestures and speech errors increase in the late elementary
school period.
Table 1: Number of Clauses, Gestures, Pauses, and Speech Errors.
Age
-Frequency of gestures
per second
-Total number of clauses
-Proportion of unfilled
pauses in speaking time
-Filled pauses per clause
-Speech errors per clause

7

8

9

10

11

12

0.12 (0.06)

0.14 (0.09)

0.10 (0.09)

0.09 (0.06)

0.19 (0.13)

0.27 (0.17)

62.4 (29.93)

69 (20.42)

77.8 (24.68)

77.3 (15.58)

91.9 (20.90)

78.6 (19.47)

0.47 (0.19)

0.40 (0.11)

0.38 (0.08)

0.34 (0.06)

0.36 (0.08)

0.33 (0.08)

0.38 (0.25)
0.26 (0.15)

0.29 (0.17)
0.20 (0.10)

0.26 (0.07)
0.21 (0.12)

0.39 (0.31)
0.38 (0.19)

0.31 (0.18)
0.28 (0.11)

0.25 (0.10)
0.36 (0.20)

Number of children who produced a disguised adaptor
In total, 22 disguised adaptors were observed. The absolute
number of disguised adaptors produced by each age group
was three times for 9-year-olds, three times for 10-yearolds, twelve times for 11-year-olds, and four times for 12year-olds. Three 9-year-olds, three 10-year-olds, five 11year-olds, and two 12-year-olds produced a disguised
adaptor at least once during their narrations. There were no
7- or 8-year-olds who produced disguised adaptors. A
Fisher's exact test was used to examine the relationship
between the age of the group and the number of children
who produced disguised adaptors. There was a significant
association between them (Fisher’s exact test, p = .03). A
residual analysis was conducted to find out where the
significant differences among age groups were. The analysis
indicated that 11-year-olds produced disguised adaptors
more often than the other age groups did.

Tweety, the right hand movement seems to be part of the
preparation phase to depict the building that Tweety is in.
However, while saying ‘sono’, which functions as a filled
pause and also means an article “the” in English, she
stopped production of the gesture’s stroke and modified it
into a disguised adaptor of rubbing her right eye with her
right hand ((2) in Figure 2). After that, an unfilled pause,
which lasted about 2 seconds, occurred until the next word
started. During this pause, she retracted the disguised
adaptor and described in speech the place where the cat
went to find the bird. This case can be interpreted as being
that she first tried to depict the building that the cat goes
into by using both speech and gestures. However, because
she could not remember the proper name for it, she
abandoned the gesture in the middle of the production and
modified it into a disguised adaptor.
Temporal relationship between speech and disguised
adaptor
Each disguised adaptor could be categorized into one of six
types (Table 2). The most frequent type was the cooccurrence of a disguised adaptor and intact speech (Type
1), followed by a combination of a disguised adaptor and
intact speech after a false start(s) (Type 5) and
synchronization of a disguised adaptor and a filled pause
after a speech error and/or filled pause (Type 6).

ntto: saisho: sono neko ga: tweety o: sagashi ni: it-te:
[de mi-ta
mi-ta
nekotan] ttsut-te: sorede [(1)%
(2)sono ] (2.07) (3)sagashi ni it-ta tokoro wa: inu:
toka neko wa dame tte iu omise de

Table 2: Number of cases categorised into temporal relationships

‘well, at first, the cat went to look for Tweety and (he) said
“(he) saw, saw the pussy cat,” then, well the place where
(he) went to look for the cat was a shop where dogs and cats
were not allowed’
Figure 2: A 11-year-old girl telling a story.
Figure 2 shows a typical case of a disguised adaptor in
which an 11-year-old girl described the first of eight scenes,
in which Sylvester the Cat goes into a building to catch
Tweety Bird who lives there. Regarding the scene where
Tweety said that he saw the cat, “mita mita neko tan ttutte
sorede”, the girl raises her right arm and puts her fingers
into an O-shape ((1) in Figure 2). Given that she uses the
right side of the space and a hand shape as if it is holding an
object while talking about where Sylvester went to find

Types 1)
1. PREP → Intact speech + DA
2. PREP → Filled pause + DA
3. PREP → Unfilled pause + DA
4. PREP → Speech error + DA
5. PREP → Speech error (→Speech
error) → Intact speech + DA
6. PREP → Filled pause and/or
Speech error → Filled pause + DA
Total

Absolute number (%)
7 (32)
3 (14)
2 (9)
1 (5)
5 (23)
4 (18)
22 (100)

1) Abbreviations and notations: DA (disguised adaptor), PREP
(preparation phase), → (order of temporal direction), +
(synchronization of elements)

To see whether disguised adaptors were related to word
searches, the six types were further classified into two

3116

groups in terms of whether the disguised adaptor occurred
with a speech error, (un)filled pause, or intact speech
element. The former group is termed the dysfluent speech
combination and includes Types 2, 3, 4, and 6, whereas the
latter group is named the fluent speech combination and
includes Types 1 and 5. The number of children who
produced each combination was counted for each age group.
Three 9-year-olds, three 10-year-olds, three 11-years-olds,
and one 12-year-old produced fluent speech combinations.
Five 11-year-olds and one 12-year-old produced dysfluent
speech combinations. No children aged 9 or 10 produced
dysfluent speech combinations. A Fisher's exact test was
used to examine the relationship between age group and
each combination. A significant association was found only
in the dysfluent speech combination (Fisher’s exact test, p =
.002). In contrast to the fluent speech combinations
produced by 9- to 12-years-olds, dysfluent speech
combinations were not produced by 9- and 10-year-olds,
and all of 11-year-olds produced dysfluent speech
combinations.
Figure 3 show a 9-year-old boy who produced a fluent
speech combination. The figure shows him explaining a
scene in which Sylvester got inside Tweety’s apartment, but
was struck by the bird’s owner with an umbrella. While he
was talking about the umbrella, he raised his right hand and
shaped his hand as if it were holding an umbrella ((1) and
(2) in Figure 3). However, without finishing the preparation
as a gesture, he moved his hand to his eye to scratch it as a
disguised adaptor. Unlike the girl in Figure 1, who produced
a dysfluent speech combination, his speech did not contain
obvious speech errors or pauses. Thus, his disguised adaptor
may have been caused by other factors besides a word
search (this point is taken up in the discussion section).

sorede ouchi no naka ni hait-ta n dakedo
sono
kainu[shi no obaachan ga] dete[(1)ki-te (2)kasa de: (3)#
(4)nagurare-te: tsugi wa are ]
‘and (he) got inside the house, the grandma, the owner
comes out and (he) is struck with an umbrella, and the next
is, umm’
Figure 3: A 9-year-old boy telling a story.

Discussion
The present study investigated disguised adaptors as an
index of a child’s ability to monitor his or her own gestures
by focusing on the relationship between disguised adaptors
and speech flow. The results showed that the gesture
frequency and the proportion of speech errors increase with
age, especially in the late elementary school period, whereas

the proportion of unfilled pauses decreases with age. The
increase in speech errors suggests that children tend to
dedicate much effort to planning coherent narratives
especially from the age of 10. Considering pauses may
reflect cognitive processes underlying speech planning
including word search, syntax, conceptual and articulation
planning (Schönpflug, 2008), it is considered that children
gradually acquire the ability to plan speech quickly during
their elementary school years.
In this study, disguised adaptors were produced by
children who were more than 9-years-old. None of the 7and 8-year-olds used disguised adaptors at all. This result
indicates that children become aware of their gestures as an
informational resource for listeners from the age of 9
onwards. In other words, they acquire the ability to monitor
their gestures from the age of 9.
The analysis of the temporal relationship between a
disguised adaptor and speech fluency suggests that
disguised adaptors are caused by not only speech dysfluency
but also other factors. Children from 9- to 12-years-old
produce fluent speech combinations, but only the higher
graders produced dysfluent speech combinations. This
implies that disguised adaptors of 11- and 12-year-olds are
partly caused by the act of searching for an adequate word
or planning a sentence. In these cases, children may notice
that they have to stop speaking to retrieve a word or re-plan
a sentence, and accordingly they modify their gestures to a
disguised adaptor in the middle of gesture production.
Based on these results, I will discuss why disguised adaptors
appear around the age of 9 years in terms of cultural and
cognitive factors
Cultural influence
Previous studies on the gestures of elementary-school-age
children suggest a cultural influence. Some studies have
reported that the frequency of gestures consistently
increases during the elementary school years. These trends
appear across cultures, although most of the studies were on
children in Indo-European language cultures (e.g., Colletta
et al., 2014). However, this study on Japanese children
showed that the frequency of gestures decreases temporarily
in the middle grades compared with in the lower grades or
higher grades. This difference may come from their
educational environment. In Japan, sometimes pupils are
implicitly and explicitly warned by their teacher to avoid
fidgeting or moving their hands when the teacher or another
child is speaking or sometimes even when they themselves
speak. In fact, speakers in Asia sometimes learn not to
gesticulate (Neu, 1990). These findings suggest that
Japanese children as young as 9-years-old attempt to
embody the rule about hand movement during
communication. This may be related to why disguised
adaptors produced by 9- and 10-year-olds do not
synchronize dysfluences. Because they seem to start noting
that their hand movements can be read by someone as
symbols, even when they do not have a problem with word
search, they may try to suppress their hand movements.

3117

Cognitive change
As a factor influencing the emergence of disguised adaptors
from the age of 9 or 10, one may consider cognitive changes
occurring during this period. Piaget & Inhelder (1969)
suggested that the period is considered to be the concrete
operational stage at which abstract logical thought is first
applied to the physical world. Karmiloff-Smith (1986), who
investigated the development of metalinguisitc awareness in
4- and 12-year-olds, found that many children from 9 years
onwards explicitly have metalinguistic awareness. Thus,
children in the middle grades of elementary school seem to
develop metacognitive knowledge to notice that there are
underlying rules or mechanisms in the physical world and
human communication. At same time, they may also
become aware that gestures are informational resources for
the listener. Because children in this period are sensitive to
such rules, they start monitoring their expressions to check
whether the message in the expression is adequate given the
communicative context. This awareness seems to result in
the emergence of disguised adaptors and an increase of
speech errors in children in the later years of elementary
school. Ito and Tahara (1985) found that 10-year-olds had
poorer usage of the postpositional particle WA in
comparison with other age groups. The speculated that
because children in this period are just beginning to notice
and attempt to grasp the multifunctional nature of language
devices, their performance seems to decline temporarily.
This suggests that the ages of 9 and 10 can be seen as the
transitional period in which Japanese children begin
noticing the communicative function of gesture and
linguistic system, and monitoring them.
Examining when children suppress gestures contributes to
an understanding of children’s gestural development. Just as
certain self repairs in speech that are spontaneously made by
children during narratives reflects metalinguisitc awareness
that they have acquired (Karmiloff-Smith, 1986), the
emergence of disguised adaptors implies that children have
an awareness of gestures. This study showed that although
the production of gestures may be mostly an unconscious
process (Goldin-Meadow & Butcher, 2003), the speaker can
notice that she is producing a gesture after she raises her
hand for a gesture, and that this awareness begins at about 9
years of age. Future task is exmaning whther disguised
adaptors are rubost phenomonen by collectiong more data
from other age groups and from other cultuore groups.

References
Beattie, G. (1983). Talk: An Analysis of Speech and Nonverbal Behaviour in Conversation. Open University
Press: Milton Keynes.
Colletta, J. M., Guidetti, M., Caprci, O., Cristilli, C., Demir,
O. E., Kunene-Nicolas, R. N., & Levine, S. (2014).
Effects of age and language on co-speech gesture
production: an investigation of French, American, and
Italian children's narratives. Journal of Child Language,
42, 122-145.

Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1969). The repertoire of
nonverbal behavior: Categories, origins, usage, and
coding, Semiotica, 1, 49- 98.
Fujii, M. (1997). Effects of self-touching behavior on the
performance of lexical Retrieval. Japanese Journal of
Psychology, 68, 187-196.
Fujii, M. (1999). Effects of gestures in communication:
Developmental investigation of speech and gesture.
Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 47, 87-96.
Goldin-Meadow, S., & Butcher, C. (2003). Pointing toward
two-word speech in young children, in: S. Kita (Ed.),
Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet
(pp.84-107).Mahwah, N.J., Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ito, T., & Tahara, S. (1985). A psycholinguistic approach to
the acquisition of multifunctionality in Japanese particles
wa and ga. Descriptive and Applied Linguistics, 18, 121-131.

Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1986). From meta-processes to
conscious access: Evidence from children’s metalinguistic
and repair data. Cognition, 23, 95–147.
Kendon, A. (1980). Gesticulation and speech: Two aspects
of the process of utterance. In M. Key (Ed.), The
relationship of verbal and nonverbal communication (pp.
207-227). The Hague, the Netherlands: Mouton.
Mayberry, R. I., & Nicoladis, E. (2000). Gesture reflects
language development: Evidence from bilingual children.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 192-196.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and Mind, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Neu, J. (1990). Assessing the role of nonverbal
communication in the acquisition of communicative
competence, in R. C. Scarcella, E. S., Andersen & S. D.
Krashen (Eds), Developing Communicative Competence
in a Second Language (pp.121-138). New York: Newbury
House.
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1969). The Psychology of the
Child. New York: Basic Books.
Pine, K. J., Bird, H., & Kirk, E. (2007). The effects of
prohibiting gestures on children’s lexical retrieval ability.
Developmental Science, 10, 747–754.
Schönpflug, U. (2008). Pauses in elementary school
children’s verbatim and gist free recall of a story.
Cognitive Development, 23, 385-394.
Sekine, K. & Furuyama, N. (2010). Developmental change
of discourse cohesion in speech and gestures among
Japanese elementary school children. Rivista di
psicolinguistica applicata, 10, 97-116.
Sottofattori, S. M., & Nicola, F. (2007). Self-Manipulation
and the Tourette’s syndrome, in Proceedings of the 3rd
Conference of the International Society for Gesture
Studies, pp.46-47. Chicago, America, June.
Volterra, V., & Iverson, J.M. (1995). When do modality
factors affect the course of language acquisition? in: E,
Karen, J. S. Reilly (Eds.), Language, Gesture, and Space
(pp. 371-391). Hillsdale, N.J., Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Wigglesworth, G. (1990). Children's narrative acquisition:
A study of some aspects of reference and anaphora. First
Language, 10, 105-125.

3118

