Head and Heart Metaphors for Moral Decision Making:
Conceptual or Communicative?
Rose K. Hendricks (rhendricks@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Paul H. Thibodeau (paul.thibodeau@oberlin.edu)
Department of Psychology, 120 W. Lorain St.
Oberlin, OH 44074 USA
Abstract
When faced with a moral dilemma, following your head
versus your heart can result in very different decisions. Earlier
work has argued that people who “self-locate” in the head
tend to make more rational and less emotional decisions to
moral dilemmas than those who “self-locate” in the heart. We
replicate this finding, suggest an alternative interpretation of
the result, and then extend it with a novel experiment. In a
metaphor framing task, we manipulated the salience of the
head/heart metaphors—by using them (a) in a single sentence,
(b) a more elaborate paragraph, or (c) by emphasizing one in
contrast to the other. We found that people who received the
head metaphor made more rational decisions than those who
received the heart metaphor, but only in the high salience
condition that contrasted the two metaphors. This finding
illustrates the communicative value of metaphor, which can
be enhanced through comparison.
Keywords: metaphor; decision making; rationality; emotion

Introduction
In the novel and movie Sophie's Choice, a Polish woman,
Sophie Zawistowska, is arrested by the Nazis and sent to the
Auschwitz death camp. On arrival, she is "honored" for not
being a Jew by being allowed a choice: One of her children
will be spared the gas chamber if she chooses which one
should be killed. If she does not choose, both of them will be
killed.
Many moral dilemmas, like Sophie’s, can be construed as
a contrast between two extremes, involving a rational,
utilitarian option (choose one child to die so that only one
life is lost) and an emotional option (forgo choosing; both
children die, but you did not play a direct role in either
death). Why do some people decide to use their head to
make the rational choice, while others follow their heart in
choosing the emotional option?
One possibility for why some people make more rational
decisions than others appeals to a role for conceptual
metaphor (Fetterman & Robinson, 2013; Lakoff & Johnson,
1980). In English, the “head” is associated with cold,
rational decision making. We use instructions like “use your
head” to encourage emotional detachment in favor of
carefully deliberated judgment. The “heart,” on the other
hand, is associated with hotter, more emotional thinking.
Telling someone to “follow their heart” often implies that

they should ignore a cost-benefit calculus in favor of a more
impulsive decision.
Recent work has argued that these “head” and “heart”
metaphors (or metonymies) do more than describe different
modes of thinking. They may also represent different ways
of thinking about the self: some people “self-locate” in their
head; others “self-locate” in their heart (Fetterman &
Robinson, 2013). On this view, people who conceptualize
thinking as a process that happens in their head will tend to
make more rational decisions, while people who
conceptualize thinking as something that happens in their
heart will tend to make more emotional decisions.
Evidence for this theory comes from a series of studies in
which people were asked: “Irrespective of what you know
about biology, which body part [the head or heart] do you
more closely associate with your self?” Then participants
completed personality measures, general knowledge
questions, or they answered a series of moral dilemmas.
Fetterman and Robinson (2013) found roughly a 50-50 split
in how people identified with the head versus the heart,
which, in turn predicted responses to the other measures:
head-locators characterized themselves as more rational and
interpersonally cold on the personality measures, answered
more of the general knowledge questions correctly, and
suggested more utilitarian responses to the moral dilemmas,
compared to the heart-locators.
Given the study design, however, it is difficult to know
whether people really self-locate in the head or heart, and
whether individual differences in self-location tendencies
predict behavior. That is, an alternative interpretation of the
finding is that people have some sense of their typical
cognitive style—whether they tend to base their decisions
on more rational or emotional motivations—which is what
people report for the self-location question. On this view,
one might expect the same results if participants had been
asked if they consider themselves to be more rational or
emotional decision makers (as opposed to a question about
self-location). In addition, how people respond to the selflocation question may influence their performance on
subsequent measures. People who say that they self-locate
in their “head” may be inclined to demonstrate their
headiness by adopting a more rational strategy to the moral
dilemmas, for example.

2187

These concerns relate to long-standing questions about
what can be inferred about mental representation from
patterns of language use (Keysar & Bly, 1995; McGlone,
2011; Murphy, 1996). For example, when someone says, “I
followed my heart” are they really imagining that their
decision was made in their heart? Or is this phrase merely a
conventional expression that has come to mean something
like “I made the emotional choice”?
In the current paper, we explore these concerns, and
address novel theoretical questions about metaphor framing,
by manipulating the salience of instructions to “use one’s
head” or “follow one’s heart” in moral decision making.
There were three conditions in the experiment. In the lowsalience condition, the phrase “use your head” or “follow
your heart” was embedded in the instructions of the task—
which involved responding to the five moral dilemmas that
were used by Fetterman and Robinson (2013). In the
medium salience condition, participants were presented with
a discussion about Plato’s theory of the self, which was said
to emphasize the head or the heart; the given metaphor was
repeated in different ways throughout a paragraph that
preceded the moral dilemmas. In the high salience
condition, participants received the same information as
those in the medium salience condition, with an additional
explicit contrast: they were told either that the “head and not
the heart” or the “heart and not the head” is where the self is
located.
We expected that the high-salience condition would elicit
the strongest effect: with the emphasis on head-location, in
explicit contrast to heart-location, leading to more rational
responding (and vice versa). An explicit comparison
between the two metaphors should highlight the underlying
difference between a rational and emotional approach to the
moral dilemmas (Edwards, Williams, Gentner, &
Lombrozo, 2014; Markman & Gentner, 1996).
This result would support an alternative interpretation of
Fetterman and Robinson (2013)’s work. First, it would
illustrate that, at least in some circumstances, more salient
metaphors are more influential. In the original study, the
metaphors were highly salient, since they were explicitly
contrasted with one another in a forced choice task. Second,
it would suggest that these particular metaphors are
informative because of their conventional, idiomatic
meaning, rather than their role in the mental representation
of self-location (Keysar, Shen, Glucksberg, & Horton, 2000;
Thibodeau & Durgin, 2008).
This result would also represent a novel contribution to
the metaphor framing literature, which has found that
linguistic metaphorical frames can shape how people think
about issues like immigration (Landau, Sullivan, &
Greenberg, 2009; Jia & Smith, 2013), cancer (Hauser &
Schwarz, 2013; Hendricks & Boroditsky, 2015), and crime
(Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013). For instance,
metaphorically framing crime as a “virus” has been found to
increase support for societal reform as a means of crimereduction, whereas a “beast” frame leads people to support
more enforcement-oriented approaches to crime-reduction

(Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013). The current work
extends these findings by investigating whether an explicit
contrast, designed to make the underlying entailments of the
metaphor more salient, leads to stronger metaphor framing
effects.
Before conducting the experiment, we first replicated the
original study (Fetterman & Robinson, 2013). We present
the results of the replication, which confirm the original
findings, and then discuss the results of our follow-up
experiment.

Methods
Participants
500 and 1,000 people were recruited from Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk to participate in Studies 1 and 2,
respectively. Data was excluded from participants who did
not submit a correct completion code and from participants
who answered more than 3 (of 5) attention check questions
incorrectly, leaving data from 484 and 945 participants for
analysis in Study 1 and Study 2, respectively. Participants
who completed Study 1 were not eligible to participate in
Study 2.

Procedure
Study 1 Study 1 was a replication of Fetterman & Robinson
(2013, Study 5). At the beginning of the study, participants
were asked: “Irrespective of what you know about biology,
which body part do you more closely associate with your
self?” They were required to choose either the head or the
heart. Next participants considered five moral dilemmas,
similar to and including the Sophie’s Choice example from
the introduction. Each dilemma had one rational response
and one emotional response (see Appendix). After the five
dilemmas they answered an attention check question about
each dilemma, and finally completed the Big Five Inventory
(BFI; John & Srivastava, 1999). The BFI measures
individuals’ extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
neuroticism, and openness to experience. In the original
studies, Fetterman and Robinson (2013) included the
measure of conscientiousness as a predictor of how people
responded to the moral dilemmas. For consistency, we also
include conscientiousness in the analyses below, although
the results do not differ if this measure is excluded.
Study 2 The procedure for Study 2 was identical to Study 1,
except that instead of choosing the body part that they most
associate with the self, participants randomly received one
of the two metaphorical frames at one of three salience
levels.
In the low salience condition, the metaphor was
instantiated only in the instructions for responding to the
moral dilemmas:

2188

Next you will read short scenarios and should
report what you would do if you were in them.
There are no right or wrong answers to the

questions. Just [follow your heart/use your head] to
make the judgment that you think is right. Please
read each carefully because you will be asked to
answer other questions about them later.

nested models and present standardized regression
coefficients to conduct hypothesis tests (Menard, 2002).

Results

The medium and high salience conditions included
passages that instantiated the metaphors more explicitly than
the low salience condition. The beginning of the medium
and high salience passages were identical:

Study 1: Replication

Plato said that there are three parts of the soul. The
first is our appetites or desires; the second is hotblooded emotion; and the final is rational,
conscious awareness. But these three parts of
ourselves do not play equal roles in making us who
we are. The [head/heart] is the most crucial for
defining who we are. The [head/heart] is where we
find our true self.
The medium salience passage continued:
If we are to live a long and prosperous life, we
must always listen to our [head/heart]. George
Washington, Abe Lincoln, and Michelle Obama
are just a few of the incredibly successful people
who have followed Plato’s advice in never losing
sight of the fact that their [head/heart] holds the
key to who they truly are.
In the high salience condition, the emphasized metaphor
was explicitly contrasted with the alternative. Thus, the high
salience passage instead said:
If we are to live a long and prosperous life, we
must always listen to our [head/heart, even if it
conflicts with our heart/head]. George Washington,
Abe Lincoln, and Michelle Obama are just a few of
the incredibly successful people who have
followed Plato’s advice in never losing sight of the
fact that their [head/heart] holds the key to who
they truly are, even if it means disregarding what
their [heart/head] tells them.
After the passages, all participants responded to the same
five dilemmas used in Study 1 and answered the same
attention check questions. They were then asked whether
they remembered encountering the phrase “follow your
heart” or “use your head” earlier in the experiment. This
recognition memory question was included as a test of the
salience manipulation. As expected, participants were more
likely to remember the metaphor in the more salient
conditions, B = .75, SE = .10, p < .001.
Analysis Mixed effect logistic regression models were used
to analyze the data from both studies (Jaeger, 2008).
Metaphor (head versus heart) was treated as a betweensubjects fixed effect in both studies; salience (low, medium,
high) was treated as a between-subjects fixed effect for the
analysis of Study 2; participants and moral dilemmas were
treated as random effects in both studies. We compare

In Study 1, more people identified with the head metaphor
(63%) than the heart metaphor (37%), χ2(1) = 32.80, p <
.001. We tested whether participants’ choice of metaphor
predicted how they solved the moral dilemmas by
comparing
two
nested
models.
In
the
first,
conscientiousness was included as a predictor of
participants’ judgments; in the second model, participants’
chosen metaphor was added, which significantly improved
fit, χ2(1) = 19.84, p < .001. People who identified with the
heart metaphor solved the moral dilemmas more
emotionally (M = .52, SD = .25) than people who identified
with the head metaphor (M = .41, SD = .29), B = .68, SE =
.15, p < .001, as did more conscientious participants, B =
.28, SE = .11, p = .012. These findings replicate the basic
patterns reported by Fetterman & Robinson (2013).
We also conducted analyses by item to test whether
particular dilemmas were driving the effect. We found an
effect of metaphor for dilemmas that elicited more
ambivalent responses overall. That is, there was a stronger
consensus among participants on how to respond to
dilemmas 1 (rationally) and 3 (emotionally); there was no
effect of participants’ choice of metaphor on these
dilemmas, ps > .3. There was less consensus among
participants on how to respond to dilemmas 2, 4, and 5;
these dilemmas showed differences as a function of which
metaphor people chose, ps < .001 (see Table 1).
Table 1. Proportion of emotional responses overall, for
head-locators, and for heart-locators by dilemma.
Dilemma
Overall
Heart
Head
1
.70
.73
.69
2
.36
.49
.29
3
.14
.13
.14
4
.50
.61
.44
5
.57
.66
.51
In other words, head-locators did not simply choose the
rational response to each dilemma (and vice versa for heartlocators). They were also sensitive to the content of the
dilemmas. For this reason, we focus on responses to
dilemmas 2, 4, and 5 in the experiment.

Study 2: Metaphor Framing
We tested whether the metaphor used to describe the task
and the salience of the metaphor affected participants’ moral
judgments. We focus on data from dilemmas 2, 4, and 5,
since these dilemmas elicited more ambivalent responses
overall, and were influenced by participants’ choice of
metaphor in Study 1.

2189

The analysis revealed no main effect of metaphor, χ2(1) =
1.73, p = .189, or salience condition, χ2(1) = 0.53, p = .467.
But it did reveal an interaction between metaphor and
salience condition, χ2(1) = 4.34, p = .037, as well as an
effect of conscientiousness, χ2(1) = 9.52, p = .002.
As shown in Figure 1, there was no effect of the metaphor
frame in low, B = .01, SE = .19, p = .964, or medium, B =
.08, SE = .21, p = .681, salience conditions. There was an
effect of the metaphor in the high-salience condition, B =
.70, SE = .27, p = .011. When the instructions emphasized
the “heart” in explicit contrast to the “head,” people
responded to the dilemmas more emotionally (and vice
versa).

Dilemma

2

5

Heart
Head

Proportion Emotional

3
4

0.7

-0.1

0.6

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Cramer’s V
Figure 2. Effect size by item (moral dilemmas 1-5) for the
metaphor preference task in Study 1 and bin the highsalience condition of Study 2. The further the bar extends to
the right (from 0), the more congruent the responses (i.e.
heart and emotional responding; head and rational
responding). Bars extending to the left (of 0) indicate a
pattern of incongruent responding (i.e. heart and rational;
head and emotional).

0.5

0.4

0.3

S1: Choice
S2: High salience

1

Choice
Study 1

Low

Medium

Discussion

High

Study 2: Salience

Figure 1. Proportion of dilemmas solved emotionally in
Study 1 (choice) and in Study 2 by metaphor and salience
conditions. Error bars denote standard errors of the means.
The effect of the salience manipulation appeared to be
fairly linear for the “heart” condition—with people
responding more emotionally as the salience of the “heart”
metaphor increased, B = .21, SE = .10, p = .030. The effect
of the salience manipulation seems to have been more
abrupt in the “head” condition. There was no difference in
how participants responded to the low- and medium-salient
versions of the instructions that emphasized the “head”
metaphor, p = .311; participants responded marginally more
rationally to the high-salient version, compared to mediumsalient version, of the instructions that emphasized the
“head” metaphor, p = .057.
Figure 2 illustrates the effect of metaphor preference
(Study 1) or metaphor frame (from the high-salience
condition of Study 2) on each of the moral dilemmas. It
shows that the metaphor people identified with in Study 1
had the biggest effect on judgments of the 2nd, 4th, and 5th
moral dilemmas. These were the same dilemmas that were
most influenced by the salient metaphor frames in Study 2.

In this work, we first replicated prior work by Fetterman &
Robinson (2013) showing that people who identified with a
heart metaphor for the self responded more emotionally to
moral dilemmas, while people who identified with a head
metaphor for the self responded more rationally to moral
dilemmas. The original finding was interpreted as evidence
for an individual difference in self-location grounded in
conceptual metaphor. However, we have argued that there
are alternative interpretations of the finding. Most notably,
the heart and head metaphors are conventional expressions
that correspond to emotional and rational modes of thinking,
respectively. People have some self-awareness about how
they make decisions—more rationally or more emotionally.
When asked to choose between identifying with the heart or
head, emotional decision makers choose the heart, while
rational decision makers choose the head.
In a follow-up experiment, we examined whether
metaphorically framing the locus of a person’s decisions as
either in the head or in the heart would lead them to make
more rational decisions (in the case of the head) or
emotional decisions (in the case of the heart). We also
explored the role of salience in this process: using the
metaphors in a single phrase (low salience), a more
elaborate paragraph (medium salience), or by emphasizing
one in direct contrast with the other (high salience).

2190

We found an effect of the metaphor framing manipulation
in the high-salience condition but not the low or medium
salience conditions, suggesting that an explicit contrast
between the metaphors was important for influencing
behavior on the decision making task. In the high salience
condition, since people were exposed to both metaphors,
they had the opportunity to compare the two metaphors. In
fact, in order to truly comprehend the passage, they needed
to compare their passage’s dominant metaphor to the
alternative. In Fetterman & Robinson’s (2013) work and in
our Study 1, choosing the locus of the self also encourages,
and perhaps even requires, participants to explicitly
compare the two metaphors’ entailments in order to choose
the one they believe describes them most accurately.
Comparison has been found to be particularly effective in
communicating the intended meaning of analogies
(Edwards, Williams, Gentner, & Lombrozo, 2014;
Markman & Gentner, 1996). This work suggests that
explicitly comparing metaphor frames to each other may
similarly highlight their differences and amplify their effects
on cognition. In other words, we found that the head and
heart metaphors used in this work were both conceptual and
communicative.
All participants in these experiments were in the United
States, so the implications about heart and head metaphors
for decision making may not generalize to members of other
cultures. It may be productive for future research to
investigate interactions between cultural background and
metaphor frames for decisions.
In addition, this work may have implications for the
development of Deliberate Metaphor Theory (DMT; Steen,
2008), which argues that metaphors are most influential
when they are used deliberately. That is, DMT emphasizes
the social and pragmatic context in which figurative
language is used, although the details of the theory (e.g.,
what constitutes a deliberate metaphor?) have yet to be
ironed out, and empirical tests of the predictions made by
the theory have received limited support (see, e.g., Gibbs,
2015a, 2015b; Thibodeau, In press). Thus, the current work
may give researchers a novel case for thinking about one
pragmatic signal—explicitly negating one metaphor in favor
of another—that a metaphor has been used deliberately.
Explicitly contrasting metaphors clearly signals deliberate
use.
To advance Deliberate Metaphor Theory, it would be
worthwhile to try and provide a more mechanistic account
of the effect we have demonstrated. For instance, one might
argue that the metaphors were used “deliberately” in all
three salience conditions of the experiment. But we only
found an effect when the two metaphors were contrasted
with one another. An open question, therefore, is whether
the contrast served as more of a pragmatic cue for
participants to use the emphasized metaphor, or whether the
contrast served to bring out the meaning of the head and
heart metaphors more clearly—by highlighting an alignable
difference between and the underlying meaning of the
phrases (Gentner & Markman, 1994).

Future work should also explore the role of comparison in
metaphor processing more generally. Experiments that
examine metaphor framing—for persuasion, instruction, and
explanation—typically present participants with only one
frame (e.g., Jia & Smith, 2013; Landau, Sullivan &
Greenberg, 2009; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011, 2013).
The current work suggests that explicitly contrasting
metaphors may facilitate metaphorical reasoning.

Acknowledgments
We thank Adam Fetterman for sharing the stimuli from the
work we replicated (Fetterman & Robinson, 2013). This
material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. DGE-1650112.

References
Edwards, B. J., Williams, J. J., Gentner, D., & Lombrozo, T.
(2014). Effects of comparison and explanation on
analogical transfer. In P. Bello, M. Guarini, M. McShane,
& B. Scassellati (Eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 445450). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Fetterman, A. K., & Robinson, M. D. (2013). Do you use
your head or follow your heart? Self-location predicts
personality, emotion, decision making, and performance.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105(2),
316–334.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural
alignment in comparison: No difference without
similarity. Psychological science, 5(3), 152-158.
Gibbs, R. W. (2015a). Does deliberate metaphor theory
have a future? Journal of Pragmatics, 90, 73-76.
Gibbs, R. W. (2015b). Do pragmatic signals affect
conventional metaphor understanding? A failed test of
Deliberate Metaphor Theory. Journal of Pragmatics, 90,
77–87.
Hauser, D. J., & Schwarz, N. (2014). The War on
Prevention: Bellicose Cancer Metaphors Hurt (Some)
Prevention Intentions. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin.
Hendricks, R.K. & Boroditsky, L. (2016). Metaphor &
emotion: Metaphorical frames for coping with hardship.
In Papafragou, A., Grodner, D., Mirman, D., & Trueswell,
J.C. (Eds.) (2016). Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Jaeger, T.F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards Logit
Mixed Models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4),
434-446.
Jia, L., & Smith, E. R. (2013). Distance makes the metaphor
grow stronger: A psychological distance model of
metaphor use. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 49(3), 492–497.
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big-Five trait
taxonomy: History, measurement, and

2191

theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory
and research (Vol. 2, pp. 102–138). New York: Guilford
Press.
Keysar, B. & Bly, B. (1995). Intuitions of the transparency
of idioms: Can one keep a secret by spilling the beans?
Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 89-109.
Keysar, B., Shen, Y., Glucksberg, S., & Horton, W. S.
(2000). Conventional language: How metaphorical is
it?. Journal of Memory and Language, 43(4), 576-593.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Landau, M. J., Sullivan, D., & Greenberg, J. (2009).
Evidence That Self-Relevant Motives and Metaphoric
Framing Interact to Influence Political and Social
Attitudes. Psychological Science, 20(11), 1421–1427.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and
differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
Cognition, 24(2), 235-249.
McGlone, M.S. (2011). Hyperbole, homunculi, and the
hindsight bias: An alternative evaluation of conceptual
metaphor theory. Discourse Processes, 48(8), 563-574.
Menard, S. (2002). Applied Logistic Regression Analysis
Second Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
Inc. Murphy, G.L. (1996). On metaphoric representation.
Cognition, 60, 173-204.
Steen, G. (2008). The paradox of metaphor: Why we need a
three-dimensional model of metaphor. Metaphor and
Symbol, 23(4), 213-241.
Thibodeau, P. H. (In press). The Function of Metaphor
Framing, Deliberate or Otherwise, in a Social World.
Metaphor and the Social World.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS One,
6(2), e16782.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2013). Natural
language metaphors covertly influence reasoning. PloS
One, 8(1), e52961.
Thibodeau, P., & Durgin, F. H. (2008). Productive
figurative communication: Conventional metaphors
facilitate the comprehension of related novel
metaphors. Journal of Memory and Language, 58(2), 521540.

high tide will be upon them, and unless she is unstuck, they
will all be drowned except the woman, whose head is out of
the cave. Fortunately, (or unfortunately,) someone has with
him a stick of dynamite.
There seems no way to get the pregnant woman loose
without using the dynamite which will inevitably kill her;
but if they do not use it everyone will drown. What would
you do if you were in this situation?
Rational = I would let them light the stick of dynamite
Emotional = I would NOT let them light the stick of
dynamite
3.A trolley is running out of control down a track. In its path
are five people who have been tied to the track by a mad
philosopher. Fortunately, you could flip a switch, which will
lead the trolley down a different track to safety.
Unfortunately, there is a single person tied to that track.
Would you flip the switch or do nothing?
Rational = I would flip the switch
Emotional = I would do nothing
4. In the novel and movie Sophie's Choice, a Polish woman,
Sophie Zawistowska, is arrested by the Nazis and sent to the
Auschwitz death camp. On arrival, she is "honored" for not
being a Jew by being allowed a choice: One of her children
will be spared the gas chamber if she chooses which one
should be killed. If she does not choose, both of them will
be killed. Would you choose one of your children to be
killed in the same situation?
Rational = I would choose a child to be killed
Emotional = I would NOT choose a child to be killed
5. In 1842, a 23ship struck an iceberg and more than 30
survivors were crowded into a lifeboat intended to hold 7.
As a storm threatened, it became obvious that the lifeboat
would have to be lightened if anyone were to survive. The
captain reasoned that the right thing to do in this situation
was to force some individuals to go over the side and drown
or everyone would drown. Would you support pushing
some people off the boat so at least some people could
survive?
Rational = I would support pushing people off the boat
Emotional = I would NOT support pushing people of the
boat

Appendix: Moral Dilemmas
1.You are an inmate in a concentration camp. A sadistic
guard is about to hang your son who tried to escape and
wants you to pull the chair from underneath him.
He says that if you don’t he will not only kill your son but
some other innocent inmate as well. You don’t have any
doubt that he means what he says. What would you do?
Rational = I would pull the chair
Emotional = I would NOT pull the chair
2.A pregnant woman leading a group of people out of a cave
on a coast is stuck in the mouth of that cave. In a short time

2192

