“He’s pregnant": simulating the confusing case of gender pronoun errors in L2
English
Chara Tsoukala (c.tsoukala@let.ru.nl)
Centre for Language Studies
Radboud University

Stefan L. Frank (s.frank@let.ru.nl)
Centre for Language Studies
Radboud University

Mirjam Broersma (m.broersma@let.ru.nl)
Centre for Language Studies
Radboud University
Abstract
Even advanced Spanish speakers of second language English
tend to confuse the pronouns ‘he’ and ‘she’, often without
even noticing their mistake (Lahoz, 1991). A study by AntónMéndez (2010) has indicated that a possible reason for this error is the fact that Spanish is a pro-drop language. In order to
test this hypothesis, we used an extension of Dual-path (Chang,
2002), a computational cognitive model of sentence production, to simulate two models of bilingual speech production of
second language English. One model had Spanish (ES) as a
native language, whereas the other learned a Spanish-like language that used the pronoun at all times (non-pro-drop Spanish, NPD_ES). When tested on L2 English sentences, the bilingual pro-drop Spanish model produced significantly more gender pronoun errors, confirming that pronoun dropping could
indeed be responsible for the gender confusion in natural language use as well.
Keywords: L2 pronoun errors, language transfer, Dual-path
model, bilingual sentence production

Introduction
Second language (L2) speech errors have been employed in
the past as a means to understand bilingual speech production as well as the acquisition process of a foreign language
(Antón-Méndez, 2010; Poulisse, 1999). Certain L2 errors are
observed more often due to discrepancies between the first
language (L1) and the L2. For example, if the expression
of a message in the L2 requires the inclusion of a specific
feature that would not be necessary in the L1, then speakers
of these two languages may produce a speech error in their
L2 due to L1 transfer (Odlin, 1989). In this study, we focus
on a gender-related L2 pronoun error that has been observed
among native speakers of Spanish and Italian; namely, errors
involving the third person singular nominative pronouns ‘he’
and ‘she’. Even advanced Spanish speakers of L2 English occasionally confuse the two pronouns, referring to an actress
as ‘he’ or a father as ‘she’, often without even noticing their
mistake (Lahoz, 1991). At first, this phenomenon seems surprising because the Spanish language does have two equivalent pronouns (‘él’ for ‘he’ and ‘ella’ for ‘she’), and also a
very strong separation between the two genders, even more
so than in English. For instance, depending on the suffix a
word can be feminine or masculine (e.g., maestro - teacher

[masculine], maestra - teacher [feminine]; niño - child [masculine, a.k.a. boy], niña - child [feminine, a.k.a. girl]). This
means that the gender mistakes that Spanish speakers make
in English cannot be attributed to the lack of familiarity with
the distinction. Furthermore, the challenge the English pronoun system poses for native speakers of Spanish could not
be due to its inherent difficulty, as this would mean that most
non-native speakers of English, regardless of their L1, would
produce the same mistake. As Lahoz (1991) noted, a low
proficiency level of the native Spanish speakers is not a reason either. This was also demonstrated in the experiments
of Antón-Méndez (2010), where the participants showed an
intermediate to upper intermediate knowledge of English. Finally, note that the gender mismatch error cannot be classified
as a syntactic error; the produced sentence is grammatically
correct, but it conveys the wrong meaning.
A hypothesis which has been put forward (Lahoz, 1991;
Antón-Méndez, 2010) regarding the cause of errors in the use
of English pronouns is the pro-drop status of the Spanish but
not the English language. In pro-drop languages, nominative
personal pronouns are often omitted (1b) because the number
and person information is conveyed in the conjugated verb
(Davidson, 1996), whereas in English the omission of the pronoun would result in an ungrammatical sentence (2b).
1.(a) Él/ella tiene un perro (Spanish)
(b) tiene un perro
2.(a) He/she has a dog (English)
(b) * has a dog
It is hard to imagine, however, how the pro-drop feature of
the L1 might result in a gender pronoun error (“He’s walking", when referring to a woman) instead of an omission (“Is
walking"), which would be the case in a direct language transfer.
As a matter of fact, native speakers of Spanish have been
noted to produce another gender-related pronoun error in English, this time regarding possessive pronouns (‘his’, ‘her’).
Due to the high frequency of this type of errors, a lot more

3392

emphasis has been given to the misuse of these pronouns
than the subject pronouns (White, Muñoz, & Collins, 2007;
Anton-Mendez, 2011). The reason that English possessive
pronouns pose a challenge for native speakers of Spanish
is most likely that in Romance languages the possessive
pronoun agrees in gender and number with the possessum,
namely the noun that follows, whereas in Germanic languages such as English the possessive pronoun refers to the
antecedent. For example:
i. His daughters are on vacation.
[his: 3rd person masculine singular]
ii. Sus hijas están de vacaciones.
[sus: 3rd person feminine plural]
Due to the different information encoding Spanish speakers of English may occasionally make gender mistakes such
as “He called her mother", where ‘her’ refers to the antecedent (‘he’) and not a different female person. This is because ‘mother’ is female, and a Spanish speaker would use
that gender information to construct the possessive pronoun
in Spanish. The resulting error in English is, of course, confusing, as a speaker of English would not guess that ‘her’ in
this case refers to the same subject (‘he’). The gender error in
the case of L2 English possessive pronouns seems clearly due
to L1 transfer, because the properties of Spanish are directly
applied to English. In the case of the subject pronoun gender
errors, on the other hand, it is not evident that the pro-drop
feature of one language would lead to a gender error in L2.
The present study addresses only the latter type of errors.
Antón-Méndez (2010) has investigated the hypothesis that
the pro-drop feature of Spanish is responsible for the gender
pronoun errors in L2 English (“pro-drop hypothesis"). She
conducted an experiment eliciting semi-spontaneous speech
in English, where she compared native Spanish and native
French speakers of L2 English with respect to the pronoun errors they produced. French was chosen as it is a Romance language that is similar to Spanish in several aspects, but which,
in contrast to the Spanish language, is not a pro-drop language. Each test group consisted of 20 participants who were
comparable in terms of education, age of English acquisition, frequency of use and proficiency. The participants were
shown 43 illustrations and were asked questions designed to
elicit pronoun production. The subjects were instructed to
respond freely, and the pronoun errors they produced were
recorded. The types of reported errors fall in the following
categories: person errors (e.g., ‘I’ instead of ‘you’), number
errors (e.g., ‘I’ instead of ‘we’), gender errors (‘he’ instead
of ‘she’ and vice-versa), animacy errors (e.g., ‘he’ instead of
‘it’), omission errors (e.g., ‘is swimming’), insertion errors
(e.g., ‘the boy he played’ instead of ‘the boy played’) and
other errors (e.g., ‘it’ instead of ‘there’ in ‘there is’).
Spanish speakers of L2 English indeed made significantly
more gender errors (4.30%) compared to other types of pro-

noun errors and to the French group (0.68%)1 . The pronoun errors recorded were not due to erroneous transfer of
the Spanish L1 grammar, as the Spanish speakers made no
omission errors (‘is swimming’); thus, in none of the items
of Antón-Méndez’s experiment did the subjects omit a pronoun, which would have been the case in a grammatical transfer. Importantly, even though there were slightly more ‘he’
than ‘she’ errors (he: 5.68%, she: 2.98%), the difference is
not statistically significant. Therefore, the Spanish speakers were not using a default pronoun (e.g., always ‘he’ instead of ‘she’). The use of ‘he’ as the default pronoun would
have suggested that another factor might underlie the error,
for instance, the difficulty that the English phonology poses
for speakers of Spanish. The Spanish phonology does not
contain the phonemes /S/ in ‘she’ and /h/ in ‘he’, therefore
one explanation for the gender pronoun issue could be at the
phonological level. In the present study we focused only on
the pro-drop feature, not because we disregard the potential
role of the phonology, but because we wanted to investigate
whether the pro-drop feature has the capacity of causing this
type of gender errors in L2.
In order to focus on the pro-drop feature, we simulated
bilingual sentence production using computational cognitive
modeling. The pro-drop feature is not the sole difference between the French and Spanish languages, and one could argue that the differences in the error patterns between the two
groups could have been partially attributed to confounding
factors, for instance, to a different L2 English teaching system in Spain and France.
Using computational modeling we can remove all possible confounds and therefore minimize the variance by focusing only on the phenomenon of interest, which in this case
is the pro-drop feature and its possible effect on L2 English
pronouns. For this reason, we modified Dual-path (Chang,
2002), a computational cognitive model of sentence production, to account for bilingualism. We then compared L2 English speech production of simulated native speakers of Spanish (ES) on the one hand, to L2 production of simulated native
speakers of a Spanish-like language (‘non-pro-drop Spanish’,
NPD_ES) on the other hand. The latter contained all the features of the Spanish language (lexicon, allowed structures)
except the pro-drop feature; therefore, pronouns needed to be
used at all times. All input languages (ES, NPD_ES and EN)
were artificially generated and based on the Spanish and English language, using a subset of their lexica and syntactic
structures. If the bilingual Spanish-English (ES-EN) Dualpath model produces significantly more subject pronoun errors in English than its Spanish-like non-pro-drop equivalent
(NPD_ES-EN), it will be clear that the pro-drop feature of the
Spanish language is the reason for this particular L2 error in
the simulation, as the two simulated languages differ only in
their pro-dropness. If this is the case, we will have confirmed
1 The percentages are calculated by Antón-Méndez (p.

129, Table
6) and they represent the frequency of the gender pronoun mistake
(68 and 10, respectively) with respect to the total number of pronouns produced where this particular mistake could have occurred.

3393

that the pro-drop feature has the capacity to lead to gender
pronoun errors in L2 English.

Method
In order to simulate Spanish speakers of L2 English, we
developed two bilingual models using a modified version
of Dual-path which is a connectionist model based on the
Simple Recurrent Network (SRN; Elman, 1990) achitecture
(Chang, 2002).

Bilingual Dual-path model
Dual-path (Figure 1) learns to convert a message into a sentence by predicting the sentence word by word (“next word
prediction"). It has two pathways (hence the name) that influence the production of each word; the meaning system which
learns concepts, roles and event semantics, and the sequencing system which is an SRN that learns to abstract syntactic
patterns. Both paths influence the word output layer. The
sequencing system consists of one recurrent hidden layer (of
30 units in our simulations) and two “compress" layers (of 12
units each) that are placed between the input word, the hidden
layer and the output word.
The meaning system learns to map the input word onto a
concept, which is linked to a specific thematic role (that is
given for each sentence through fixed connections). The fixed
connections allow the separation between concepts and roles,
which, in turn, enables the model to generalize and to produce words in novel places. The thematic role is connected to
the hidden layer, and so is the “event-semantics" layer. The
hidden layer spreads the activation to the next thematic role
(in the meaning path, and the “compress" unit in the syntactic
path), which is in turn linked to a specific predicted concept
that is used as input to the output word layer, along with the
“compress" unit.
In the original model, all layers use the tanh activation
function, except the output layer that uses softmax. In the
modified version of the model, we also employed softmax for
the predicted role layer. This led to a stricter selection of the
upcoming thematic role which helped overcome a difficulty
that the model had with learning the correct articles regarding
gender and definiteness (e.g., ‘a’ vs ‘the’). Furthermore, our
version has a “target language" layer in the meaning path that
is used as an additional input to the hidden layer, along with
the “event-semantics" layer. The “target language" denotes
the intended spoken language and helps the model handle
more than one language. The modified model can be found
at https://github.com/xtsoukala/dual_path .

Input languages
Message Dual-path is trained using randomly generated
sentences paired with their meaning (Chang, Dell, & Bock,
2006).
The meaning (message) contained information
regarding four thematic roles (AGENT, PATIENT, ACTION,
RECIPIENT). A concept (e.g., ‘WOMAN’ for the English
word ‘woman’ or Spanish word ‘mujer’) was assigned to
each thematic role depending on the meaning that needed

to be expressed (e.g., in the sentence “the woman run -s"
the message would include AGENT=WOMAN, DEF).
Furthermore, the message contained event-semantic information (denoted as ‘E’), which gave information regarding
the tense (PRESENT or PAST) and aspect (SIMPLE or
PROGRESSIVE). The message contained information about
the target language (ES or EN) as well. This information was
given at the beginning of the sentence along with the roles
and the event-semantics, so that the model knew whether it
was supposed to produce an English or Spanish sentence.
Structures The allowed structures for all languages were
the following (where ‘S’, the subject, is omitted in the prodrop case):
1. (S)V: (Subject) - Verb, e.g., “He runs"
2. (S)VO: (Subject) - Verb - Object, e.g., “She kicked the ball"
3. (S)VIODO: (Subject) - Verb - Indirect Object - Direct Object, e.g., “He gave the girl a book"
4. (S)VDOIO: (Subject) - Verb - Indirect Object - Direct Object, e.g., “He gave a book to the girl"
The sentences in English and in non-pro-drop Spanish
always started with a pronoun, and the sentences in pro-drop
Spanish never started with a pronoun but always with a verb.
Lexicon The total lexicon consisted of 34 nouns: 11 male
(‘man’, ‘boy’, ‘father’, ‘brother’, ‘dog’, ‘hombre’, ‘niño’,
‘padre’, ‘hermano’, ‘perro’, ‘maestro’), 11 female (‘woman’,
‘girl’, ‘mother’, ‘sister’, ‘cat’, ‘mujer’, ‘niña’, ‘madre’, ‘hermana’, ‘gata’, ‘enfermera’) and 12 inanimate (‘ball’, ‘stick’,
‘toy’, ‘kite’, ‘key’, ‘bag’, ‘pelota’, ‘palo’, ‘juguete’, ‘cometa’,
‘llave’, ‘bolso’), 24 verbs (e.g., ‘give’, ‘show’, ‘walk’,
‘throw’, ‘present’, ‘dar’, ‘lanzar’, ‘presentar’, ‘nadar’, ‘caminar’) and 26 function words (e.g., articles (‘a’, ‘the’, ‘un’,
‘una’, ‘el’, ‘la’), pronouns (‘he’, ‘she’, ‘él’, ‘ella’) and auxiliary verbs (‘is’, ‘was’, ‘está’, ‘estaba’)).
The model treats the verb lemma (‘give’) and the suffix
(‘-s’) as two different units. Note that syntactic information
(such as ‘verb’, ‘noun’) is not given explicitly, but is learned
by the model during training through the syntactic path. The
syntactic gender was also learned implicitly during training
through the article of Noun Phrases (NP) and pronouns. Semantic gender (e.g., ‘ACTRESS, F’, ‘ACTOR, M’) was not
included in the model.
Thematic roles could be expressed using either an NP
with definite (DEF) or indefinite (INDEF) articles (e.g., ‘the
woman’, ‘a woman’) or the pronoun (PRON) equivalent
(‘she’).

3394

Figure 1: Bilingual Dual-path model
Example The following message would be the same across
languages:

100
90
Percentage correct sentences (%)

AGENT=WOMAN, PRON;
ACTION=GIVE;
PATIENT=INDEF, KEY;
RECIPIENT=DEF, GIRL;
E=SIMPLE, PRESENT, AGENT, PATIENT, RECIPIENT
and it would be expressed linguistically in the following
manner for the three languages:

3. ella d -a a la niña una llave . [NPD_ES]

Training
The two models were trained on 2000 randomly generated
sentences (training set) and tested on 500 unseen sentences
(test set). The models contained almost identical sets, with
the only difference that the NPD_ES model expressed the
subject pronoun at all times, whereas the ES model never did
and always started with a verb. For each model we ran 100
simulations using the same input, but different random initial
weights per simulation, as the input and the weights are the
only non-deterministic parts of the model. The models were
trained for 20 epochs, where 1 epoch corresponds to a full
iteration of the training set (2000 sentences). At the beginning of each epoch, the training set was shuffled. In order
to simulate late L2 acquisition, we first trained the models
for 20 epochs using Spanish input only, and then used the
fully trained weights as initial weights for the bilingual models. The bilingual input consisted of newly generated (2000
training and 500 test) sentences, this time using 50% (prodrop or non-pro-drop according to the model) Spanish and
50% English. We excluded from the analysis 7 simulations
that did not manage to learn at least 75% of the test set by

70
60
50

train NPD_ES-EN
train ES-EN

40
0

1. she give -s the girl a key . [EN]
2. d -a a la niña una llave . [ES]

80

5

10
Epochs

test NPD_ES-EN
test ES-EN
15

Figure 2: Performance on the training and test sets over the
training period (20 epochs) averaged over 93 simulations for
the two bilingual models. Performance is measured in percentage of correctly produced Spanish and English sentences.

the end of the training in one of the two models, leading to
a total of 93 simulations. Both bilingual models were able
to perform equally well by the end of the training, reaching
99.69% correct for ES-EN and 99.70% correct for NPD_ESEN (Figure 2) on the test set that contained English and Spanish sentences.

Results
In order to assess the performance of the two bilingual models on L2 pronouns, we focused only on the English sentences
(50% of the test set). If a pronoun error was detected and the
sentence was grammatical, it was classified as a gender pronoun error. We compared the performance of the two bilingual models with regard to the gender pronoun error production. If the models had a comparable performance we would
not be able to confirm that the pro-drop feature has the capacity to lead to gender pronoun errors in L2 English. If, on the
other hand, the NPD_ES model made fewer gender pronoun

3395

Mean % of gender errors

101

NPD_ES-EN

ES-EN

100

10-1

10-2

5

10
Epochs

15

Figure 3: Production of English gender errors (in log scale)
averaged over 93 simulations for the two bilingual models.
Note that the gaps in the non-pro-drop model are because
log(0), for 0% error rate, is not defined, and therefore not
plotted.
errors than the ES model it would indicate that the pro-drop
feature is a possible explanation.
The non-pro-drop Spanish-English (NPD_ES-EN) bilingual model (Figure 3) produced almost no gender pronoun
errors (maximum percentage: 0.11%) whereas the bilingual
model based on pro-drop Spanish (ES-EN) initially produced
9.75% pronoun errors, gradually dropping to 0.05%.
Crucially, the ES-EN model never reached 0% (minimum
error rate: 0.02%) whereas the NPD_ES-EN model did. Following visual inspection, we ran a z-test for proportions from
epoch 5 onwards to test for a difference in error rate between
the models. The difference is significant (z=7; p<.001).

Discussion
Our simulations showed that a bilingual model with L1 prodrop Spanish and L2 English produced significantly more
gender pronoun errors than a similar model with L1 non-prodrop Spanish. These sentences were grammatically correct:
the only error they contained was a pronoun with incorrect
gender. Given that the only difference between the two L1s
was the pro-drop feature, we have demonstrated that the prodrop nature of Spanish can indeed cause the gender pronoun
error as observed in L1 Spanish speakers of L2 English.
Why the pro-drop feature does not lead to a direct language
transfer (“is walking") in either the model or humans remains
to be investigated, as the current simulations and results do
not explain how pro-dropness in L1 could lead to gender errors in L2. Nevertheless, having a computational model that
simulates the gender pronoun errors in L2 English can point
us in the right direction. Our hypothesis for the occurrence of
the gender error is that the gender information is not as crucial for the message planning, at least in the subject position,
of a pro-drop language, and is therefore weaker or omitted,

even when producing sentences in a non-pro-drop L2.
It is important to point out that the Dual-path model does
not contain a phonological level (Garrett, 1988). One might
have thought that the reason Spanish speakers confuse the
words ‘he’ and ‘she’ is because of the difficulty the English
phonology poses for native speakers of Spanish. However,
our simulations have produced gender errors without having
any phonological representations. This does not mean that
phonology could not play a role, but rather that it is not the
only possible explanation.
It is also crucial to note two simplifying assumptions in
these simulations. First, as mentioned in the Method section,
the input for all three languages (EN, ES, NPD_ES) was artificially generated and it only represented a subset of the actual
languages. In general, using natural input would be preferable as it would increase the validity and naturalness of the
results. However, the benefit of miniature languages that are
typically used in cognitive modeling is that they can be easily manipulated. For instance, in the simulations described
here we were able to add and remove the pro-drop feature at
will, leaving everything else the same, and thus to isolate this
important feature from confounding factors.
Second, a crucial simplifying assumption in the miniature
language is the absence of full NP subjects. We therefore repeated the simulations using new input for all languages, this
time including 50% pronouns at the subject position and 50%
noun phrases. Preliminary simulations show no gender errors
in either model, which means that further research is needed
using more natural language input, starting with a more naturalistic proportion of pronouns and NPs in the subject position
based on English and Spanish corpora.

Conclusion
Computational modeling can be used to validate or generate
linguistic hypotheses while focusing on specific factors of interest and minimizing the variance. In this study, we have addressed the question as to whether the pro-drop feature of the
Spanish language has the capacity to cause the gender pronoun errors that Spanish speakers of L2 English have been
shown to produce (Lahoz, 1991; Antón-Méndez, 2010). The
reported simulations showed that the model with L1 pro-drop
Spanish produced more gender pronoun errors in L2 English
than the model with L1 non-pro-drop Spanish, which is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the pro-drop hypothesis.

Acknowledgements
The work presented here was funded by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) Gravitation Grant
024.001.006 to the Language in Interaction Consortium.

References
Antón-Méndez, I. (2010). Gender bender: Gender errors in
L2 pronoun production. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 39, 119–139.

3396

Anton-Mendez, I. (2011). Whose? L2-English speakers’
possessive pronoun gender errors. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 14, 318–331.
Chang, F. (2002). Symbolically speaking: A connectionist
model of sentence production. Cognitive Science, 26, 609–
651.
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic. Psychological Review, 113, 234.
Davidson, B. (1996). ‘Pragmatic weight’ and Spanish subject
pronouns: The pragmatic and discourse uses of ‘tú’ and
‘yo’ in spoken Madrid Spanish. Journal of Pragmatics, 26,
543–565.
Elman, J. L. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive
Science, 14, 179–211.
Garrett, M. F. (1988). Processes in language production.
Linguistics: The Cambridge survey, 3, 69–96.
Lahoz, C. M. (1991). Why are he and she a problem for Spanish learners of English? Revista Española de Lingüística
Aplicada, 129–136.
Odlin, T. (1989). Language Transfer: Cross-Linguistic Influence in Language Learning. Cambridge: CUP.
Poulisse, N. (1999). Slips of the tongue: Speech errors in first
and second language production (Vol. 20). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
White, J., Muñoz, C., & Collins, L. (2007). The his/her
challenge: Making progress in a ‘regular’ L2 programme.
Language Awareness, 16, 278–299.

3397

