Highly Proficient Bilinguals Maintain Language-Specific Pragmatic Constraints on
Pronouns: Evidence from Speech and Gesture
Zeynep Azar (zeynep.azar@mpi.nl)
Radboud University, Center for Language Studies, Nijmegen
International Max Planck Research School for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Ad Backus (A.M.Backus@uvt.nl)
Tilburg University, Department of Culture Studies
Warendelaan, 5037 AB Tilburg, The Netherlands

Aslı Özyürek (asli.ozyurek@mpi.nl)
Radboud University, Center for Language Studies, Nijmegen
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen,
Donders Center for Cognition, Nijmegen
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands

pragmatic information such as contrast and emphasis (e.g.
Enç, 1986). The alternation between overt pronouns and
dropped arguments is determined by discourse-pragmatics in
those languages unlike in non-pro-drop languages such as
English. Studies looking at heritage speakers who had lower
proficiency in their pro-drop language than in their non-prodrop language found an increase in the frequency of pronouns
or a loss of the pragmatic constraints on the use of pronouns
in the pro-drop language (Paradis & Navarro, 2003; Polinsky,
1995; Silva-Corvalan, 1994). On the other hand, studies
looking at heritage speakers who are exposed to the pro-drop
language more regularly and who have high proficiency in
both languages found no cross-linguistic influence (CerrónPalomino, 2016; Keating, Jegerski & van Patten, 2016;
Montrul, 2004). Most studies, however, have focused on
Spanish as a pro-drop language and English as a non-prodrop language in the United States.
In this paper, we look at language contact influence on
subject pronouns studying Turkish heritage speakers in the
Netherlands. Pronouns are less frequently used in pro-drop
Turkish than in non-pro-drop Dutch, and they are
pragmatically marked forms in Turkish (Enç, 1986) (similar
to Spanish) but not in Dutch. Additionally, unlike previous
studies in this domain, we examine not only patterns in the
pro-drop language but also in the non-pro-drop language. We
ask whether bilingual speakers maintain differences between
Turkish and Dutch in terms of pragmatic constraints on the
use of pronouns. Furthermore, as a novel contribution to
research on cross-linguistic influence on subject pronouns,
we extend our investigation to the visual modality of
language, i.e. co-speech gestures. Studies of multimodal
narratives have shown that speakers’ gestures are sensitive to
the amount of information encoded in speech. When referents
are maintained in discourse, speakers not only reduce content
of the referring expression by using pronouns or null forms,

Abstract
The use of subject pronouns by bilingual speakers using both a
pro-drop and a non-pro-drop language (e.g. Spanish heritage
speakers in the USA) is a well-studied topic in research on
cross-linguistic influence in language contact situations.
Previous studies looking at bilinguals with different proficiency
levels have yielded conflicting results on whether there is
transfer from the non-pro-drop patterns to the pro-drop
language. Additionally, previous research has focused on
speech patterns only. In this paper, we study the two modalities
of language, speech and gesture, and ask whether and how they
reveal cross-linguistic influence on the use of subject pronouns
in discourse. We focus on elicited narratives from heritage
speakers of Turkish in the Netherlands, in both Turkish (prodrop) and Dutch (non-pro-drop), as well as from monolingual
control groups. The use of pronouns was not very common in
monolingual Turkish narratives and was constrained by the
pragmatic contexts, unlike in Dutch. Furthermore, Turkish
pronouns were more likely to be accompanied by localized
gestures than Dutch pronouns, presumably because pronouns in
Turkish are pragmatically marked forms. We did not find any
cross-linguistic influence in bilingual speech or gesture
patterns, in line with studies (speech only) of highly proficient
bilinguals. We therefore suggest that speech and gesture
parallel each other not only in monolingual but also in bilingual
production. Highly proficient heritage speakers who have been
exposed to diverse linguistic and gestural patterns of each
language from early on maintain monolingual patterns of
pragmatic constraints on the use of pronouns multimodally.
Keywords: bilingualism; heritage speakers; gesture; crosslinguistic influence; pronoun; pragmatics; discourse

Introduction
The use of subject pronouns by bilingual speakers of a prodrop (e.g. Spanish) and a non-prop language (e.g. English) in
contact situations has been a commonly studied test case of
cross-linguistic influence. Pro-drop languages habitually
drop arguments and use overt pronouns mainly to mark

81

but they also reduce the frequency of gestures related to
referents (Azar & Özyürek, 2015; Perniss & Özyürek, 2015).
Additionally, referents that are uniquely identified in speech
are more likely to be accompanied by gestures (So, Kita &
Goldin-Meadow, 2009), suggesting gesture is tightly linked
to speech. Whether this link extends to pragmatic marking of
pronouns, that is whether languages that mark pronouns
pragmatically in speech are more likely to mark them with
gestures as well, has not been investigated so far.
Furthermore, nothing is known about the multimodal nature
of the cross-linguistic transfer in this domain.
As for gestures of bilingual speakers, in particular
proficient L2 learners have been reported to show crosslinguistic influence in how frequently they gesture overall
(So, 2010; see Cavicchio & Kita, 2013 who found no crosslinguistic influence) and in their motion verb expressions
(Brown & Gullberg, 2008; Özçalışkan, 2016). Gestural
transfer in the contexts of language contact and for
differential pragmatic marking of pronouns on the other hand
is an unexplored research topic. Thus, as a novel contribution
to bilingualism research, we investigate whether heritage
speakers who are highly proficient in their two languages
maintain pragmatic constrains on the use of subject pronouns
in speech and gesture or whether there is cross-linguistic
influence in the two modalities.
An earlier study that looked at the use of subject pronouns
by adult Turkish heritage speakers in the Netherlands
(Doğruöz, 2007) found no cross-linguistic influence in the
quantity of subject pronouns in informal interviews, though a
few cases of the 1st person pronoun were attested where
monolinguals would not use a pronoun, e.g. in the
immediately preverbal positions. We contribute to the
literature on the use pronouns by Turkish-Dutch bilingual
adult speakers in the Netherlands with a more controlled
study (with respect to the discourse content) and in the
context of narratives eliciting third-person references.
Furthermore, we study not only Turkish narratives but also
Dutch narratives produced by the same set of speakers.
Finally, we take the multimodal aspects of reference
production into account and investigate the use of gestures to
mark subject referents by Turkish-Dutch bilinguals for the
first time.

Bilingual participants filled in a survey regarding their
language history, current language use, and language
proficiency in Turkish and Dutch. All bilingual speakers were
born and raised in the Netherlands; their parents immigrated
from Turkey to the Netherlands as young adults. Bilinguals
were exposed primarily to Turkish at home until they started
school at around the age of 4. They reported to mainly speak
Dutch at school and mostly mix the two languages at home
and among friends. Bilinguals rated their overall reading,
speaking and comprehension proficiency higher in Dutch
than in Turkish on a 5-point Likert scale (see Table 1). As a
measure of oral fluency, we calculated articulation rate
(number of syllables/ articulation time) (cf. De Jong, &
Wempe, 2009 for the script) for each participant using
samples of around 30 seconds from the narratives we
collected (the stimuli and procedure explained below).
Bilinguals did not differ significantly from monolinguals in
Turkish t(38) = 1.994, p = .053 or in Dutch t(38) = 0.934, p =
.356. Bilinguals’ articulation rate was not significantly
different between their Turkish and Dutch, either, t(19) =
2.047, p = .954, suggesting they have similar levels of oral
fluency in both languages (see Table 2).
Table 1
Self-rated Bilingual Proficiencies (1 = native; 5 =
beginner), Mean (SD)
Speaking
Comprehension
Overall
Turkish
2.50 (1.32)
2.25 (0.79)
2.40 (1.27)
Dutch
1.30 (0.47)
1.10 (0.31)
1.50 (0.76)
Table 2
Monolingual and Bilingual Speakers’ Articulation Rates,
Mean (SD)
Monolingual
Bilingual
Turkish
4.81 (0.55)
4.44 (0.63)
Dutch
4.62 (0.71)
4.42 (0.57)

Stimuli
We used two short silent videos (cf. Azar, Backus &
Özyürek, 2016) to elicit narratives. Three characters were
engaged in joint activities; cooking in one video and office
work in the other. Figure 1 illustrates stills from each video.

Method
Participants
20 Dutch monolingual speakers studying in Nijmegen (14
females; age mean = 21.5), 20 Turkish monolingual speakers
studying in Istanbul (17 females; age mean = 22.2) and 20
bilingual speakers (14 females; age mean = 23.3) studying in
Nijmegen participated in our study in return for payment or
course credits. Note that “monolingual” speakers in our study
have some knowledge of English but they speak only one of
the two languages that are of interest for this study.

Figure 1: Stills from the stimulus videos featuring kitchen
(upper row) and office activities (bottom row)

82

speakers to maintain subjects with pronouns as defaults forms
rather than using pronouns to mark pragmatic information
due to Dutch being a non-pro-drop language.

Procedure
Participants were invited to a quiet room in pairs and were
assigned the role of either speaker or addressee (the
assignment was random in monolingual sessions). The
speaker watched the stimulus videos one by one on a
computer screen. Once each video ended, the computer
screen turned white and the speaker told the addressee what
they had watched. The addressees were instructed that after
each narrative, they could ask clarification questions and that
they would be given two short written questions about each
narrative. The purpose of this was to ensure that the speakers
included enough details in their narratives and that the
addressees paid attention. Once the instructions were given,
the experimenter left the room and came back after each
narrative with the questions for the addressee. The bilingual
participants repeated the task once in Turkish with a Turkish
monolingual addressee and once in Dutch with a Dutch
monolingual addressee. The addressees were not
confederates and there was at least two weeks between the
two sessions. The order of the two videos was counterbalanced across participants. For bilinguals, the order of
language was counterbalanced as well. All sessions were
videotaped.

(1) a. Een meisjei probeerde een pot open te maken.
A girli tried to open a jar.
b. Diei kreeg hem niet open.
pronoun
Thati (the girl) did not open it.
(2) c. Ondan sonra kızk geliyor.
Then girlk is coming.
d. Øk çocuğa yardım ediyor.
(She)k is helping the boy.
e. Ok da kağıtları diziyor.
Shek, too, is sorting paper.

null form
pronoun

Gesture Coding We coded gestures temporally aligning with
maintained subjects in speech, specifically with subject
pronouns. We analyze gestures that anchored subjects in
gesture space (i.e. index-finger and whole hand points). In
Figure 2, the subject in (b) is maintained from (a) and marked
with a pronoun in speech in Turkish and with an index-finger
pointing gesture. The pronoun in speech is given in bold and
the gesture and the character the pronoun refers to are
highlighted in pictures.

Data Coding
We coded and analyzed speech from the speakers of each
pair. We transcribed the video narratives using the standard
orthography of each language and coded gestures with the
frame-by-frame video annotation software ELAN (cf.
Lausberg., & Sloetjes, 2009).
Speech Coding We divided the narratives into clauses,
utterances with a single subject argument and a single
predicate. We coded only clauses with an animate subject
argument (referring to the human characters in the stimulus
videos) and marked whether the subject argument was
maintained from the previous clause or not. We analyzed
only clauses with maintained subjects since pronouns as
reduced forms are used most frequently in those contexts (cf.
Azar et al., 2016 for Turkish and Dutch). We further coded
each maintained subject argument for one of the three
possible referring expression types: noun phrase (NP),
pronoun (third person and demonstrative pronouns) and null
form. (1b) in Dutch and (2d, 2e) in Turkish illustrates clauses
with maintained subjects. Subject arguments are underlined
and subscripts index coreferentiality. Following Paradis and
Navarro (2003), we coded Turkish subjects for pragmatic
marking: contrast (disambiguation between two possible
referents) or emphasis (highlighting information).
Additionally, we also coded whether pronouns referring to
subjects that are marked for emphasis were accompanied by
the emphatic marker dA ‘also’ (as in 2e). This clitic has been
suggested to be a focus marker in Turkish (Enç, 1986) and
has been shown to accompany pronouns when used for
maintained subject arguments by monolingual Turkish
speakers (Azar et. al., 2016). We did not code pragmatic
marking for Dutch subjects because we expect Dutch

Figure 2: Index-finger pointing gesture referring to the
character in the video (highlighted) and temporally aligning
with maintained subject pronoun in speech (in bold)

Predictions
With regard to monolinguals, we expect speech and gesture
to parallel each other in terms of the information they encode
and therefore we expect cross-linguistic differences in the
frequency of pronouns in speech and frequency of gestures
marking pronominalized referents. In speech, we expect to
find few pronouns in Turkish and in contexts where subject
arguments are pragmatically marked for contrast or
emphasis. Considering pronouns are marked forms in
Turkish but not in Dutch, we predict that Turkish
monolingual speakers will mark subject pronouns with
gestures more than Dutch speakers. In terms of bilinguals we
can anticipate the following scenarios for speech.
Influence of Dutch on bilingual Turkish: Based on studies
that found cross-linguistic influence from non-pro drop
English on pro-drop Spanish in subject pronouns of Spanish

83

heritage speakers in the States (e.g., Silva-Corvalan 1994),
we expect bilinguals to have loosened the pragmatic
constraints on the use of pronouns. Bilinguals in Turkish
might use pronouns also when the subjects are not
pragmatically marked and might accompany subjects that are
marked for emphasis with the emphatic marker dA less
frequently than monolinguals.
No cross-linguistic influence: Taking into account the
literature which did not find cross-linguistic influence on
subject pronouns for bilinguals with high proficiency in both
languages (e.g. Cerrón-Palomino, 2016; Keating, Jegerski &
van Patten, 2016), we predict that bilinguals will maintain
pragmatic constraints on the use of pronouns.
As for gestures, based on theories suggesting that speech
and gesture parallel each other in production (Kita &
Özyürek, 2003; So et al., 2009), we expect the crosslinguistic influence on gestures to align with patterns of
influence in speech. Alternatively, considering some L2
studies have found cross-linguistic transfer on gesture but not
on speech (Özçalışkan, 2016), we may observe crosslinguistic influence on gesture modality only. Speakers may
extend the pragmatic marking of pronouns with gestures from
Turkish to Dutch and gesture with Dutch pronouns more
frequently than Dutch monolinguals. Alternatively,
bilinguals might loosen the pragmatic marking of gestures in
Turkish as an influence from Dutch and gesture with
pronouns less than monolinguals in Turkish.

between the two F(1, 66.657) = 4.174, p = 0.045. We further
broke down the interaction and performed mixed linear
models for Turkish and Dutch with language status
(monolingual vs. bilingual) as fixed effect, following the
same procedure as before. The model that best explained the
variance for both Turkish and Dutch data was the simplest
model with fixed effect language status. We did not find a
main effect for language status F(1,40) = 0.852, p = .362 for
Turkish but for Dutch F(1,40) = 4.721. p = .036. Bilingual
speakers used more pronouns in Dutch than monolinguals.
Figure 3 illustrates the mean proportions of pronouns
referring to subject arguments in monolingual and bilingual
narratives by language.

Analyses and Results

Figure 3: Mean proportions of maintained subject pronouns
in monolingual and bilingual narratives across Turkish and
Dutch. The error bars represent standard errors of the mean.

We performed arcsine transformation on ratio values for
analyses though we report untransformed values. We
analyzed the data using Linear Fixed Effects Models in IBM
SPSS statistics 20. We started with the simplest model with
fixed effects only, and built more complex models by adding
random intercepts. We compared each ‘more complex’
model to the previous simpler one in each step and in case of
a significant difference we picked the model with the lower
log-likelihood value. Bonferroni correction for multiple
comparisons was applied for each model.

Since we did not predict the findings in bilingual Dutch, we
compared the use of the other two referring expressions we
coded in speech, noun phrase (NP) and null form, across
monolingual and bilingual Dutch to understand whether the
higher use of pronouns by bilinguals could be driven by the
lower use of one of the other two forms. We found that the
bilinguals used null forms less frequently (although
marginally) than monolinguals in Dutch t(30.790) = -2.047,
p = .049 (M = 0.132; 0.246 respectively).
Next, we looked at whether monolingual and bilingual
speakers differed in the pragmatic marking of pronouns in
Turkish. Out of all subjects that were encoded as pronouns,
82% in monolingual and 78% in bilingual narratives was
marked for either emphasis or contrast. In total, there were 49
subject referents in monolingual Turkish and 44 subject
referents in bilingual Turkish that were marked for emphasis
and referred to with pronouns in speech. 88% of those
pronouns in monolingual Turkish and 84% in bilingual
Turkish was accompanied by the emphatic marker dA. Thus,
bilinguals were similar to monolinguals in Turkish in terms
of the pragmatic constrains on the use of pronouns in speech.

Pronouns in Speech
We calculated the ratio of subject arguments referred to with
a pronoun (subject pronouns) out of all maintained subject
arguments in narratives per participant. We performed linear
mixed model on subject pronouns with the following fixed
effects: language type (Turkish vs. Dutch), language status
(monolingual vs. bilingual) and the interaction between
language type and language status. We started with the fixed
effects only, and built more complex models by adding
random intercepts and slopes for participants, language type
and language status. The model that best described the
variance of the data had random intercepts for participants
and random intercepts for language type (Turkish or Dutch)
varying by participants random slopes.
We found a significant effect for language type F(1,
66.657) = 316.119, p < .001 and for language status F(1,
45.204) = 4.600, p = .037 and a significant interaction

84

Pronouns Marked with Gestures
We calculated the ratio of gesturally marked subject
pronouns out of all subject pronouns in speech per
participant. We performed linear mixed model on gesturally
marked subject pronouns with fixed effects language type,
language status and the interaction of the two, following the
same procedure as in our speech analyses. The model that
best described the variance of the data had random intercepts
for participants and language type (Turkish or Dutch)
varying by participants random slopes. We found a
significant effect for language type F(1, 69.358) = 10.062, p
= .002, showing Turkish speakers were more likely to mark
pronouns with gestures than Dutch speakers. We did not find
a significant effect for language status F(1, 92.697) = 0.078,
p = .781 and no significant interaction between the fixed
effects (language type and language status) F(1, 64.913) =
.001, p = .979, suggesting bilinguals did not differ from
monolinguals in terms of marking pronouns with gestures in
either language. See Figure 4 for the mean values of
gesturally marked pronouns.
Even though we found pronouns were more likely to be
gesturally marked in Turkish than in Dutch, both in
monolingual and bilingual speech, this could be due to an
overall higher frequency of gestures in Turkish than in Dutch
rather than an effect modulated by pragmatics. As a control,
we looked at whether speakers per language group differed
in how likely they are to gesturally mark a noun phrase (NP),
the other overt referring expression type that we coded for
speech. We performed mixed linear models on the ratio of
gesturally marked NPs, following the same procedure as in
our pronoun analyses. We did not find a main effect for
language F(1, 56) = 0.410, p = .525, suggesting Turkish and
Dutch speakers did not differ in how likely they were to mark
NPs with gestures, contrary to what we found for pronouns.
Turkish monolingual speakers gestured with NPs (M = 0.33,
SE = .083) as often as Dutch monolinguals (M = 0.28, SE =
.126), suggesting the cross-linguistic difference we found for
pronouns can be explained by the difference in the pragmatic
status of pronouns across Turkish and Dutch and this effect
is sensitive to the referring expression type used in speech.
We did not find a main effect for language status F(1, 56) =
2.551, p = .116 or an interaction of language and language
status F(1, 56) = 1.144, p = .289. Bilinguals did not differ
from monolinguals in Turkish (M = 0.42, SE = .120) or in
Dutch (M = 0.31, SE = .135) in terms of how frequently they
marked NPs with gestures.

Figure 4: Mean proportions of gesturally marked maintained
subject pronouns in monolingual and bilingual narratives
across Turkish and Dutch. The error bars represent standard
errors of the mean.
of Turkish heritage speakers in the Netherlands. We
compared bilingual speech and gesture productions to those
of monolinguals in Turkish and Dutch.
We showed that monolingual Turkish speakers used
pronouns infrequently to maintain subject referents in
narratives and mostly when the referents were pragmatic
marked. Additionally, in line with our predictions, Turkish
monolingual speakers were more likely to gesturally mark
pronouns than Dutch monolingual speakers, suggesting
linguistic forms that are pragmatically marked in speech (i.e.
pronouns in pro-drop Turkish) are more likely to be marked
with gestures as well.
Bilingual speakers did not differ from monolinguals in their
pro-drop language, Turkish, in terms of how likely they were
to use pronouns to maintain subject referents. Furthermore,
we did not find any differences between monolingual and
bilingual speakers in Turkish in terms of pragmatic
constraints on the use of pronouns. Bilinguals used pronouns
in Turkish to maintained referents that were marked for
pragmatics, either for emphasis or contrast and they used the
emphatic marker dA in similar ways to monolinguals. Our
findings suggest that heritage speakers who were raised
bilingually and who have high proficiency in both languages
as well as using them daily, seem to have mastered the
pragmatic constraints on the use of pronouns and to maintain
them.
Although we did not expect any differences between
monolingual and bilingual Dutch speech, we found that
bilingual speakers used more pronouns and fewer null forms
in Dutch than monolingual speakers. We suggest that
bilingual speakers might have used coordinated clauses
which allows null forms in Dutch less often than
monolinguals and therefore dropped referents less often.
However, since the use of null forms is not the main focus of
our paper, we will not investigate this possibility further.
As for the visual modality, bilinguals maintained pronouns
as marked forms in Turkish similar to monolingual speakers.

Discussion
In this study, we investigated whether there is cross-linguistic
influence on the use of pronouns in narratives by heritage
speakers who have high proficiency in both languages they
speak. We specifically focused on the pragmatic constraints
on the use of pronouns and we studied both speech and
gestures for the first time in this domain looking at narratives

85

Bilinguals did not extend Turkish gestural marking to their
Dutch narrative productions, either. Our findings are in line
with those of Cavicchio & Kita (2013) who looked at the
overall gesture rate in L2 narratives, but differ from others
which found cross-linguistic transfer of gesture with regard
to the overall gesture rate (So, 2010) or motion verb
expressions (Brown & Gullberg, 2008; Özçalışkan, 2016).
To conclude, we show that speech and gesture parallel each
other at the discourse-pragmatic level: Forms that are
pragmatically marked in speech are more likely to be marked
with gestures as well, extending the literature on crosslinguistic gestural differences in monolingual narratives.
Furthermore, we provide the first evidence that the parallel
relation between speech and gesture (cf. So et al., 2009)
extends to the domain of crosslinguistic influence in contact
situations: When the influence is not evident in speech, it is
not observable in gesture as well, at least with regard to
pronoun use in the narratives of heritage speakers. Heritage
speakers with high proficiency in both languages maintain
pragmatic constraints on the use of subject pronouns, both in
speech and gesture. Our findings therefore align with the
studies that did not find cross-linguistic influence on the
speech of highly proficient heritage speakers (e.g. CerrónPalomino, 2016; Keating, Jegerski & van Patten, 2016). This
suggests that proficiency in the heritage language may be an
important determinant of the cross-linguistic influence on the
use of pronouns in narratives in both modalities of language.
We suggest that studying bilingual gestures in addition to
speech, especially in domains that show cross-linguistic
influence in speech, will contribute to more complete theories
of bilingualism. A better understanding of whether spoken
and visual modalities undergo the same processes will
provide valuable insight into the scope of cross-linguistic
influence and language change beyond what we can learn
from studies of speech alone.

Science Society (pp. 1295-1300). Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Brown, A. & Gullberg, M. (2008). Bidirectional
crosslinguistic influence in L1-L2 encoding of Manner in
speech and gesture: A study of Japanese speakers of
English. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 30, 225251.
Cavicchio, F. & Kita, S. (2013). English/Italian bilinguals
switch gesture parameters when they switch languages.
Proceedings of TiGeR 2013 (pp. 305-309).
Cerrón-Palomino, A. (2016). (No) English interference on
U.S. Southwest Spanish? A look at variable subject
expression in Phoenix Spanish-English bilinguals.
Sociolinguistic Studies, 10(3), 383–408.
Doğruöz, A. S. (2007). Synchronic variation and diachronic
change in Dutch Turkish: A corpus based analysis.
Doctoral Dissertation, Tilburg University, the Netherlands.
Enç, Mürvet. (1986). Topic switching and pronominal
subjects in Turkish. In D.I. Slobin and K. Zimmer (Eds.),
Studies in Turkish linguistics (pp. 195-209). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
de Jong, N.H. & Wempe, T. (2009). Praat script to detect
syllable nuclei and measure speech rate automatically.
Behavior Research Methods & Instrumentation, 41 (2),
385-390.
Keating, G. D., Jegerski, J. & van Patten, B. (2016). Online
processing of subject pronouns in monolingual and heritage
bilingual speakers of Mexican Spanish. Bilingualism:
Language and Cognition, 19 (1), 36–49.
Kita, S., & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does cross-linguistic
variation in semantic coordination of speech and gesture
reveal? Evidence for an interface representation of spatial
thinking and speaking. Journal of Memory and Language,
48(1), 16-32.
Lausberg, H. & Sloetjes, H. (2009). Coding gestural behavior
with the NEUROGES-ELAN system. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 41(3), 841-849.
Montrul, S. (2004). Subject and object expression in Spanish
heritage speakers: A case of morphosyntactic convergence.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 7 (2), 125–142.
Paradis, J. & S. Navarro (2003). Subject realization and
crosslinguistic interference in the bilingual acquisition of
Spanish and English: What is the role of input? Journal of
Child Language, 30(2), 371-393.
Perniss, P. M., & Özyürek, A. (2015). Visible cohesion: A
comparison of reference tracking in sign, speech, and cospeech gesture. Topics in Cognitive Science, 7(1), 36-60.
Polinsky, M. (I995). Cross-linguistic parallels in language
loss. Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 14 (1&2), 87-123.
Özçalışkan, Ş. (2016). Do gestures follow speech in
bilinguals’ description of motion? Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 19 (3), 2016, 644–653.
Silva-Corvalan, C. (1994). Language contact and change.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
So, W. C., Kita, S. & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2009). Using the
hands to identify who does what to whom: Gesture and
speech go hand in hand. Cognitive Science, 33, 115-125.

Acknowledgments
This research is funded by the Center for Language Studies,
Radboud University Nijmegen, the Netherlands and partially
by the Erasmus Staff training grant granted to the first author
by the International Office Radboud University. The Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics also provided technical
support. We thank Dr. Pamela Perniss for the stimulus video
featuring cooking activities. We also thank Dr. Ayşe Caner
and Dr. Nihan Ketrez for providing the location and
participants for data collection in Istanbul, Turkey.

References
Azar, Z. & Özyürek, A. (2015). Discourse management:
Reference tracking in speech and gesture in Turkish
narratives. Dutch Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4(2), 222240.
Azar, Z., Backus, A., & Özyürek, A. (2016). Pragmatic
relativity: Gender and context affect the use of personal
pronouns in discourse differentially across languages. In A.
Papafragou, D. Grodner, D. Mirman, & J. Trueswell (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive

86

