How the truth can make a great lie:
An empirical investigation of the folk concept of lying by falsely implicating
Alex Wiegmann (Alex.Wiegmann@psych.uni-goettingen.de) 1*
Pascale Willemsen (Pascale.Willemsen@rub.de) 2*
1
2

University of Göttingen, Department of Cognitive Science, Gosslerstr. 14, 37170 Göttingen
Institute for Philosophy II, Ruhr-University Bochum, Universitätsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum
*
both authors contributed equally to this research

(for instance on the murder rate, African American
unemployment, or tax deficits), and suspiciously loose
speech.
In this paper, we will empirically test the possibility that
lying is not tied to semantic falsity but rather about false
implicatures. We hypothesise that at the core of people’s
concept of lying is the discrepancy between what the speaker
believes to be true and the belief she believes to create in the
addressee by what she says or by what she implies by saying
it.

Abstract
Is it possible to lie despite not saying anyhing false? While the
spontaneous answer seems to be ‘no’, there is some evidence
from ordinary language that a lie does not require what is said
to be believed-false. In this paper, we will argue for a pragmatic
extension of the standard definition of lying. More specifically,
we will present three experiments which show that people’s
concept of lying is not about what is said, but about what is
implied by saying it that way. We test three Gricean
conversational maxims. For each one of them we demonstrate
that if a speaker implies something misleading, even by saying
something semantically true, it is still considered lying.

Conversational Implicatures

Keywords: lying; concept of lying, deceiving; Grice;
conversational implicature

Introduction
According to the standard philosophical definition of lying,
an agent lies if she makes “a believed-false statement to
another person with the intention that that other person
believes that statement to be true” (Mahon, 2008). Such a
definition of lying entails four necessary conditions, namely
the Statement Condition, the Untruhfulness Condition, the
Addressee Condition, and the Intention-to-Deceive Condition.
According to Intention-to-Deceive Condition, a lying agent
aim to deceive. In order to deceive, however, the lie needs to
be directed at someone capable of forming false beliefs
(Addressee Condition; for a critical perspective see
Rutschmann & Wiegmann, 2017). The means to deceive the
addressee is said to be a linguistic statement. The Statement
Condition is not limited to verbal or written statements but
further includes other linguistic symbols. Finally, this
statement need to be uttered untruthfully. Untruthfulness does
not require the uttered statement to be objectively false but
that the speaker believes his statement to be false. As a
consequence, an agent might be lying even if what she
believes to be false turns out true. In an empirical study,
Wiegmann, Samland, and Waldmann (2016) demonstrated
that lay people’s intuitions about lying are in line with the
Untruthfulness Condition
However, there seem to be cases in which lies do not even
require that the agent believes what is said to be false.
Benjamin Franklin famously said that “Half a truth is often a
great lie”. So-called lies of omission seem quite frequent in
ordinary conversations. The American elections 2016 provide
many interesting examples in which both presidential
candidates were criticized for lying, even though what they
said was not, strictly speaking, false. Those cases include
oversimplifications, using outdated or misleading statistics

Many philosophers and linguists believe that what is
relevant for a conversation is not only what we say but also
what we imply by saying it. According to Grice (1975), every
conversational context rests on the assumption that both
speakers share a conversational goal, for instance making a
decision on where to travel, or discussing various political
opinions. Conversational goals can be introduced in various
ways, most easily by direct questions, such as “Where shall
we go for the summer holidays next year?”. In light of this
shared goal, both speakers can expect the other to be
cooperative, that is to make their “conversational contribution
such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the
accepted purpose or direction of the talk exchange in which
[they] are engaged.” (Grice, 1975, p. 46) In order to make
pursuing this joint conversation goal as efficient as possible,
four Maxims should be obeyed:
1.
Quantity
• Make your contribution as informative as required
(for the current purpose of the exchange)
• Do not make your contribution more informative
than is required
2.
Quality
• Do not say what you believe to be false
• Do not say that for which you lack adequate
evidence
3.
Relation (Be relevant!)
4.
Manner
• Avoid obscurity of expression
• Avoid ambiguity
• Be brief (avoid unnecessary prolixity)
• Be orderly
Violations of these maxims at the level of what is said are
very typical in ordinary language—so typical that we are
seldom surprised when people do it. Non-literal speech such
as irony (“If you want to have a heavenly summer experience,

3516

I recommend London! Warm and sunny all day!"), metaphors
(“You’re a peach!”), or hyperbole (“This is the best cake I
have ever eaten in my entire life.”) provide the most obvious
examples in which people immediately infer what is meant
beyond what is said (cf. Viebahn, in press). Such an inference
is possible because we expect our conversational partner to be
cooperative, and therefore interpret even violations of the
conversational maxims as furthering the joint communicative
goal (cf. Dinges, 2015).

Lying and Falsely Implicating
If there is such a thing as lying by falsely implicating, it
might work very similarly. A speaker utters something that
violates a conversational maxim. The addressee immediately
tries to infer what this utterance might contribute to the joint
conversational goal. However, most crucially, in addition to
violating a maxim, the speaker also violates the Cooperative
Principle. For the addressee, there is yet no indication that the
Cooperative Principle has been violated.
We suggest that lying is not only a matter of what is said
but also of what is implied (cf. Meibauer, 2005). If a person
intentionally violates a maxim in order to create a belief in the
addressee which the speaker believes to be false, this violation
is considered a case of lying, irrespective of what is said is
true at a semantic level. If this hypothesis is correct, then the
Untruhfulness Condition under its semantic reading is too
limited to adequately capture the folk concept of lying. Rather,
central to the folk concept of lying is a discrepancy between
what the speaker believes to be true and what he believes to
make the listener believe. Whether this belief is generated by
what is said or what is implied by so saying seems to be
secondary.

Experiment 1: Violating the Maxim of Quantity
According to Grice, the Cooperative Principle requires the
agent to make their contribution as informative as required,
and to not omit relevant information. In our first experiment,
we test whether violations of the Maxim of Quantity are
considered lies. Our hypothesis presupposes that deceiving by
violating conversational maxims is only possible of the
addressee believes the speaker to be cooperative, that is to
share with her a conversational goal. Consequently, we
created vignettes in which to agents conversationally interact
and agent A asks a question. Agent B, however, intentionally
omits information which he believes to be relevant to agent A
but which might also get B into trouble.
In the literature on lies of omission, two variants are
discussed. On the one hand, a speaker might completely
refrain from making a declarative statement. In our
experiment, the speaker suggests changing the topic and asks
a question in return. On the other hand, lies of omissions might
also be told by using half-truths (Vincent and Castelfranchi,
1981). In the experimental condition Half-Truth, the speaker
provides an answer to the question, and, thus, makes a
statement. However, he omits the relevant, yet potentially
troublesome piece of information. Again, the speaker is not
untruthful as he believes his statement to be true. We predict

that participants will consider both scenarios instances of
lying.

Methods
The experiment was run online in the U.K (same in all
following experiments) using Prolific Academics. 474
participants started the experiment, 451 were included in the
analysis (we excluded participants who did not finish the
survey, went through it in less than 40 seconds, or failed an
attention check – we used the same criteria in all following
experiments). 50% identified as male, 50% as female. Mean
age was 32 years and participants earned £ 0.20 for their
participation (same amount in all experiments).
Participants first read general instructions (same procedure
in all following experiments). They were then randomly
assigned to one of four conditions in a 2 (vignette: Couple vs.
Car) * 2 (deception: ChangeTopic vs. Half-Truth) betweensubjects design. They were presented with one of two
vignettes, namely either Couple or Car. The Couple vignette
reads as follows.
Couple: Peter and Jane have been a couple for a year now.
They are very happy and just moved in together. Peter trusts
Jane, but he knows about her ex- fiancé Steven who still tries
to win Jane back. Thus, Peter is very jealous and does not like
Jane meeting Steven. Jane is sometimes thinking about getting
back together with Steven. As they work in the same company,
they have coffee from time to time to talk about their joint
projects. Today, Jane and Steven have coffee after lunch to
finalize a cost calculation they are supposed to send to their
client the next morning. After a few minutes, Steven asks Jane
if they could talk about each other and getting back together.
Jane tells Steven that they don’t have much time and need to
focus on the project.
In the evening, Peter and Jane have dinner. Peter asks Jane
“What did you do during your lunch break?”
In the ChangeTopic Condition, the story continued as
follows:
To avoid mentioning that she saw Steven during lunch, Jane
quickly changes the subject and says:
“Let's talk about something other than work. How was the
football training?”
Just as Jane intended, Peter never asks about her lunch
break and does not believe Jane met with Steven.”
In the Half-Truth Condition, the ending was changed to:
“To avoid mentioning that she saw Steven during lunch,
Jane tells Peter only half the truth, omitting her meeting with
Steven:
“I had lunch at the cafeteria. Then I had a coffee and went
back to the office. It was such a busy day.”
Just as Jane intended, Peter never asks about her lunch
break and does not believe Jane met with Steven.
After reading the vignettes, participants were asked: “Do
you rather agree or disagree with the following statement:
Jane lied to Peter”; and they could choose between “I
(rather) agree” and “I (rather) disagree” (same test question
and response options in all following experiments except of
Experiment 3c).

3517

Results and Discussion
The results of the experiment are summarized in Figure 1.
In the Couple condition, only 30% (34 out of 113) consider
Jane’s behaviour as a case of lying in ChangeTopic. However,
65% (74 out of 113) did so in Half-Truth. The difference
between ChangeTopic and Half-Truth in the Couple vignette
is statistically significant, χ2 (df = 1, N = 226) = 28.37, p <
0.001. Moreover, agreement in ChangeTopic is significantly
below chance (50%) level (binomial test, 34 out of 113, test
value = .5, p < .0.0001), whereas agreement in Half-Truth is
significantly above chance level, (binomial test, 74 out of 113,
test value = .5, p < .0.01).
In the Car condition, 56% (60 out of 107) agreed that Nick
lied to Kathy when Nick changed the topic. In contrast, 69%
(81 out of 118) did so in Half-Truth. The difference between
ChangeTopic and Half-Truth in Car is marginally significant
χ2 (df = 1, N = 225) = 3.79, p = 0.0516. ChangeTopic is not
significantly different from chance (binomial test, 60 out of
107, test value = .5, p = .2459), but Half-Truth is above
chance level (binomial test, 81 out of 118, test value = .5, p <
.0.0001). Comparing Car and Couple showed a significant
difference for ChangeTopic, χ2 (df = 1, N = 220) = 15.17,
p < 0.001, but no difference for Half-Truth, χ2 (df = 1,
N = 231) = 0.26, p = 0.61.
The results of our first experiments allow for a more
nuanced view on whether we can lie by omission. If an agent
deceives by answering to a question but omits facts which are
relevant to the question, the agent is judged to have lied.
However, changing the topic and omitting an answer
altogether is not considered a case of lying.

Figure 1: Proportions of lie judgments as a function of
vignette and kind of deception in Experiment 1

of two conditions (vignette: Couple vs. Car) in a betweensubjects design. Here is the vignette for Couple.
Couple: Peter and Jane have been a couple for a year now.
They are very happy and just moved in together. Peter trusts
Jane, but he knows about her ex-fiancé Steven who still tries
to win Jane back. Thus, Peter is very jealous and does not like
Jane meeting Steven. Jane is sometimes thinking about getting
back together with Steven. As they work in the same company,
they have coffee from time to time to talk about their joint
projects.
Today, Jane and Steven have coffee after lunch to finalize a
cost calculation they are supposed to send to their client the
next morning. After a few minutes, Steven asks Jane if they
could talk about each other and getting back together. Jane
tells Steven that they don’t have much time and need to focus
on the project. Steven has been sick the whole week, but he
has nevertheless been at work.
In the evening, Peter and Jane have dinner. Peter asks
Jane:
“You told me about this project with your ex-fiancé. Did
you see him today?”
To avoid confirming that she saw Steven during lunch, Jane
says:
“Steven has been sick the whole week.”
Just as Jane intended, Peter does not believe Jane met with
Steven.

Results and Discussion
The results of the experiment are summarized in Figure 2.
Let us start with the Couple vignette. The clear majority of
participants, 81% (84 out of 104) considered Jane’s behaviour
a case of lying. This proportion is significantly different from
chance (50%) level (binomial test, 84 out of 104, test
value = .5, p < .0.0001). For the Car vignette, we obtained
similar results. 76% (79 out of 104) considered Nick’s
behaviour a case of lying. This proportion is significantly
different from chance (50%) level (binomial test, 79 out of
104, test value = .5, p < .0.0001). Comparing Car and Couple
showed no significant difference, χ2 (df = 1, N = 208) = 0.71,
p = 0.40. Again, even though the agent was being truthful
under a said-based definition of lying, people consider the
agents’ responses as lies.

Experiment 2: Violating the Maxim of Relation
The Maxim of Relation requires a speaker to only provide
relevant information. In this experiment, we altered the
vignettes used in experiment 1 such that the speaker provides
information which is completely irrelevant to the actual
question, but which seems relevant. All information that is
given is true, and, thus, the Untruthfulness Condition of the
standard definition of lying is not met.

Methods
220 participants started the experiment, 208 were included
in the analysis (44% identified as male, 56% as female). Mean
age was 34 years. Participants were randomly assigned to one

Figure 2: Proportions of lie judgments as a function of
vignette in Experiment 2

Experiment 3: Violating the Maxim of Manner
The Maxim of Manner is not so much concerned with what
is said, but how it is said. In this experiment, we empirically
test whether the violation of its sub-maxims lead to an answer
being considered a lie. Experiment 3 is therefore divided into
sub-chapters, with section a) investigating Ambiguity and

3518

Context-Sensitivity, section b) Obscurity, and section c) the
maxim of Order. In all conditions, what the speakers says is
true under a semantic reading, and the speaker is being
truthful. However, the speaker deceives the addressee by
using ambiguous terms, or terms whose reference is highly
context-dependent, or by presenting information in an order
that does not reflect the temporal order of events.
In Experiment 3 c, we also address a potential objection to
our experiments. It might be argued that the results we have
gotten so far are a mere artefact of our experimental design.
The argument might go like this: Lying is typically considered
a case of deceiving or misleading. In all experiments presented
so far, we only asked people whether they agreed or disagreed
that the agent lied, and we did not give any alternative options.
However, it is well-known that deceiving others for one’s own
benefit is morally condemned. Thus, participants might have
agreed to lie statement only to express their disapproval, while
not in fact believing that the agent lied. If we had also asked
participants whether the agent deceived, agreement with the
lie statement might decline. We believe that this point is well
taken. In Experiment 3, we therefore added a new independent
variable, namely the number of questions asked after the
scenarios.

Results and Discussion
The results of the experiment are summarized in Figure 3.
For the Couple vignette, the clear majority of participants,
83% (80 out of 96) considered Jane’s behavior a case of lying.
This proportion is significantly different from chance (50%)
level, (binomial test, 80 out of 96, test value = .5, p < .0.0001).
For the Car vignette, we obtained similar results. 80% (81 out
of 101) considered Nick’s behaviour a lie. This proportion is
significantly different from chance (50%) level (binomial test,
81 out of 101, test value = .5, p < .0.0001). Comparing Car
and Couple revealed no significant difference, χ2 (df = 1,
N = 197) = 0.32, p = 0.57.
In both conditions, participants believed that the speaker
told a lie, even though what the speaker said was true and
believed to be true. The results put additional pressure on
advocates of a semantically grounded understanding of the
Untruthfulness condition and the Statement Condition.

Exp. 3a) Ambiguity
Methods 204 participants started the experiment, 197 were
included in the analysis. 42% identified as male, 58% as
female. Mean age was 34 years. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions (vignette: Couple vs. Car)
in a between-subjects design.
Car: Nick is a car salesman. He is currently trying to sell a
small car. Nick’s wife is the boss of the company. They have
been a couple since high school. She drives the same model as
the one Nick is trying to sell. She is satisfied with her car and
the thinks that the boot is spacious enough.
Kathy is interested in buying the car. However, she needs
the car for grocery shopping, and to take her two kids to their
rugby matches. Thus, she needs a spacious boot. Kathy
wonders if the car’s boot is big enough for her daily needs.
She asks:
“I always need to move a lot of stuff in the boot. This one
looks rather small to me. Do you believe that the boot is big
enough?”
Nick realizes that Kathy might not buy the car if he can't
convince her that the boot is big enough for her daily needs.
To avoid mentioning that he only knows one person who
drives the car and who is very happy with the boot’s size, Nick
says:
“My wife has the same car and shared your worries, but
then she was surprised how spacious the boot is. Also my boss
has never had any problems with the boot. And even my first
love in high school with her three kids says that the boot is big
enough.”.
Just as Nick intended, Kathy believes that Nick knows three
different people who are satisfied with the size of the boot. She
does not believe that the three people are in fact one and the
same person.

Figure 3: Proportions of lie judgments as a function of
vignette in Experiment 3a

Exp. 3b) Obscurity
Methods 210 participants started the experiment, 206 were
included in the analysis. 45% identified as male, 55% as
female. Mean age was 34 years. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions (vignette: Couple vs. Car)
in a between-subjects design. They were presented with one
of the following stories.
Car: Nick is a car salesman. He is currently trying to sell
his brother’s car which has 55,000 miles on it. Nick’s brother
needs to get as much money for the car as possible. For this
reason, he set the milometer back to 25,000 miles before
asking Nick to sell it. As a consequence of the manipulation,
the milometer shows 30,000 miles less than actually driven.
Nick has decided to ask for 5000 GBP. Nick knows that if a
client learned about the manipulated milometer, Nick won’t
be able to sell the car for 5000 GBP.
Kathy is interested in buying the car. Kathy is surprised that
a 10-year old car has only 25,000 miles on it. She says to Nick:
“Is this milometer accurate?”
To avoid mentioning that the milometer does not show the
correct distance driven with this car (55,000 miles), Nick
mentions that the milometer measures distances perfectly
accurate, in the sense that if you drive one mile the tolerance
is less than 0.1% (i.e., the milometer measures something
between 1,758 and 1,762 yards):
“The milometer is super accurate and only allows for a
0.1% tolerance”.
Just as Nick intended, Kathy believes that the milometer
shows the correct distance driven with the car, and she does
not believe that the milometer was set back.

3519

“The traffic on my way to the company was really busy. I
worked on this big project I told you about recently. I wrote a
couple of emails to clients and started writing my application
for the higher position in our company. I shortly visited
Steven, discussed a few question about our joint project and
drove home.”
Just as Jane intended, Peter thinks that meeting Steven was
the last thing she did at work.
In the OneQuestion Condition, participants were asked:
“Do you rather agree or disagree with the following
statement: Jane lied to Peter”. Participants could choose
between “I (rather) agree” and “I (rather) disagree”. In
FiveQuestions, participants were asked: “Do you rather agree
or disagree with the following statement:
Jane deceived Peter.
Jane's behaviour was morally bad.
Jane did not want to hurt Peter's feelings.
Jane's behaviour is blameworthy.
Jane lied to Peter.
And could choose for each statement between “I (rather)
agree” and “I (rather) disagree”.

Results and Discussion The results of the experiment are
summarized in Figure 4. The clear majority of participants,
90% (93 out of 103) considered Jane’s behavior a case of
lying. This proportion is significantly different from chance
(50%) level (binomial test, 93 out of 103, test value = .5,
p < .0.0001).
For the Car vignette, the results are similar. 78% (80 out of
103) agreed that Nick lied to Kathy. This proportion is
significantly different from chance (50%) level, (binomial
test, 80 out of 103, test value = .5, p < .0.0001).
Comparing Car and Couple showed a significant difference,
χ2 (df = 1, N = 206) = 6.10, p < 0.05, with higher lying rates
for the Couple vignette.

Figure 4: Proportions of lie judgments as a function of
vignette in Experiment 3b

Exp. 3c) Order
Methods 407 participants started the experiment, 386 were
included in the analysis. 46% identified as male, 54% as
female. Mean age was 35 years.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions in a 2 (vignette: Couple vs. Car) x 2 (number of
questions: OneQuestion vs. FiveQuestion) in a betweensubjects design.
Couple: Peter and Jane have been a couple for a year now.
They are very happy and just moved in together. Peter trusts
Jane, but he knows about her ex-fiancé Steven who still tries
to win Jane back and works in the same company as Jane.
Thus, Peter is very jealous and does not like Jane meeting
Steven. Jane is sometimes thinking about getting back
together with Steven.
Today, the traffic on Jane’s way to work was very busy. At
work, Jane always do the things that feels most important for
her first and the things she does not consider important last.
Peter knows about this habit. He also knows that today Jane
is supposed to meet to talk about a joint project but also that
the project is not very important. Today, Jane first wants to
see Steven. This is not because she thinks that the project is
the most important thing to do today but rather because she
aches for Steven. So she visits him for a few minutes and
discusses a few questions about a joint project. She then works
on a big project of a client. Afterwards, she writes a couple of
emails to clients and before she drives home she started
writing an application for a higher position in her company.
In the evening, Peter and Jane have dinner. Peter wants to
know about Jane’s day:
“When did you meet Steven?”
To avoid mentioning that seeing Steven was the first thing
she did, she does mention this event last:

Results and Discussion The results of the experiment are
summarized in Figure 5. Let us start with the standard (One
Question) Couple vignette. The clear majority of participants,
(74%, 68 out of 92) agreed that Jane lied to Peter. This
proportion is significantly different from chance (50%) level
(binomial test, 68 out of 92, test value = .5, p < .0.0001). In
the 5Question variant of the Couple vignette, we found a
similar pattern. The clear majority of participants (75%, 74 out
of 99) considered Jane’s behaviour a case of lying. This
proportion is significantly different from chance (50%) level,
(binomial test, 74 out of 99, test value = .5, p < .0.0001). There
was no significant difference between the OneQuestion and
the FiveQuestion variant of the Couple vignette, χ2 (df = 1,
N = 191) = 0.02, p = 0.90.
In the standard (OneQuestion) Car condition, the clear
majority of participants (86%, 83 out of 96) considered
Nicks’s behaviour a case of lying. This proportion is
significantly different from chance (50%) level (binomial test,
83 out of 96, test value = .5, p < .0.0001).
This pattern was similar for the 5Question variant of the Car
vignette. The clear majority of participants (79%, 78 out of
99) considered Nick’s behaviour a case of lying. This
proportion is significantly different from chance (50%) level
(binomial test, 78 out of 99, test value = .5, p < .0.0001). There
was no significant difference between the OneQuestion and
the FiveQuestion variant of the Couple vignette, χ2 (df = 1,
N = 195) = 1.992, p = 0.16.
Deceiving by mentioning the relevant facts in reversed
order was considered lying. Furthermore, providing
participants with the opportunity to express their moral
evaluation of the agent and allowing them to indicate that the
agent did only deceive another person (in contrast to: lied to)
did not affect lie judgments.

3520

true and what he believes to communicate by saying
something. Second, such an adaption allows for
untruthfulness to be demonstrated without making a
statement. If our account is appropriate, we believe that an
agent may lie by falsely implicating by answering with a
question in return (“Did you see your ex-fiancé today?”—
“Are going to ask me this question every day now? What is
wrong with you?), by requesting (“Don’t you ever ask me this
again!”), etc. Additional research is required on the extent to
which we should re-interpret the Statement Condition in a
more pragmatic fashion.

Acknowledgments

Figure 5: Proportions of lie judgments as a function of
vignette and number of questions in Experiment 3c

General Discussion
Do people consider utterances that are not semantically
wrong but pragmatically misleading lies? In this paper, we
showed that for something to be a lie, subjective falsity at the
semantic level is not necessary. A speaker might say
something which is both true and which he believes to be true.
What seems to be at the heart of people’s concept of lying is
that the speaker believes to create a belief in the addressee
which he himself believes to be false. Whether this false belief
is the result of a wrong statement or a false implicature seems
to be secondary. In three experiments, we tested whether the
violation of three Conversational Maxims would lead to
something semantically true being considered a lie. For all the
Maxims (Quantity, Relation, and Manner) this effect showed.
When the speaker violates the Maxim of Quantity by
omitting relevant information (Exp. 1), participants
considered such a statement to be a lie. These results support
those philosophers and linguists who have argued for lies of
omissions to be actual lies. However, those results put
pressure on a semantically grounded understanding of the
standard definition of lying and on authors who have denied
that lies of omissions can be actual lies (Mahon 2003; Dynel
2011). Furthermore, Experiments 2 and 3 also indicate that
said-based definitions cannot account for people’s concept of
lying. Our results rather indicate that lying occurs at the level
of pragmatics, by deceiving others through falsely
implicating.
There are two argumentative lines one might want to argue
for in line of our results. The most radical way to deal with
our results is to reject the standard definition of lying and to
search for a radically new definition that focuses on
pragmatics alone. We believe such a dismissal of the standard
definition to be too rash. The standard definition seems to
adequately capture the folk’s intuitions in most cases of lying.
However, things get messier around the edges. Alternatively,
we suggest a reinterpretation that allows us to adequately map
folk intuitions by making as few changes as possible. First, the
Untruthfulness Condition seems more appropriately
understood at the level of pragmatics. In line with previous
research, we suggest maintaining a subjective understanding
of untruthfulness, but to decouple it from what is said in the
semantic sense. Accordingly, an agent is being untruthful if
there is a discrepancy between what the agent believes to be

This project was supported by the Leibniz Association
through funding for the Leibniz ScienceCampus Primate
Cognition at Georg-August University Goettingen., the
Konrad-Adenauer Foundation, and the Research School at
Ruhr-University Bochum.
We would like to thank Emanuel Viebahn for challenging
discussions and his comments on a previous version of this
paper.

References
Dinges, A. (2015). Innocent implicatures. Journal of
Pragmatics, 87, 54-63.
Dynel, M. (2011). A web of deceit: A Neo-Gricean view on
types of verbal deception, International Review of
Pragmatics, 3: 139–167.
Franklin, B. (1758). Poor Richard improved. Accessed Dec.
16, 2013 via USinfo.org maintained by the U.S. Department
of State Bureau of International Information Programs, U.S.
Department of State.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P Cole & J. L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Volume 3: Speech
Acts (pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Mahon, J. E. (2003). ‘Kant on lies, candour and reticence,’
Kantian Review, 7: 101–133.
Mahon, J. E. (2016). The definition of lying and deception. In
E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2016).
Meibauer, J. (2005). Lying and falsely implicating. Journal of
Pragmatics, 37, 1373-1399.
Rutschmann, R., & Wiegmann, A. (2017): No need for an
intention to deceive? Challenging the traditional definition
of lying. Philosophical Psychology. Advanced online
publication.
Viebahn, E. (in press). Non-literal lies. Erkenntnis.
Vincent, J. M., & Castelfranchi, C. (1981). On the art of
deception: How to lie while saying the truth. Possibilities
and limitations of pragmatics, 8-14.
Wiegmann, A., Samland, J., & Waldmann, M. R. (2016).
Lying despite telling the truth. Cognition, 150, 37–42.

3521

