How can I help? 24- to 48-month-olds provide help
specific to the cause of others’ failed actions
Sophie Bridgers (sbridge), Sara Altman (skaltman), and Hyowon Gweon (hyo@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Abstract

you are the source of your failure, you might seek help; if the
machine is broken, you might try a different one.

When young children see others fail to achieve a goal, they
spontaneously help. But there are many reasons why someone
might fail, and consequently, many ways to help. In order to
help effectively, we need to understand why someone is failing, so we can address the cause. One important distinction is
whether the failure is due to the agent’s own actions or something external to her in the world. Here we show that 24- to
48-month-olds can use their past experience to reason about
the probable cause of another person’s failure and provide help
appropriate for that cause. Children’s help targeted the world
when their prior knowledge suggested that the source of failure was external to the agent, and targeted the person’s actions
when this source appeared to be internal to the agent.
Keywords: social cognitive development; prosocial behavior;
causal reasoning; theory of mind; helping

Previous work suggests that even infants can infer the
causes of their own failed actions, and respond appropriately to achieve their goals (Gweon & Schulz, 2011). In
this study, children were given covariation evidence indicating either that a toy sometimes worked and sometimes did
not (regardless of the agent), or worked for some agents but
not others. In the former case, when children failed to activate the toy, they reached for a new toy, suggesting they attributed their failures to the toy and not to their own actions.
In the latter case, they were more likely to hand the toy to
their mother, suggesting they inferred that their failures were
due to something about their own actions and not the toy. In
this case, infants were able to determine the source of their
failures because they had observed others’ interactions with
the toy. Without such information, they would not have been
able to determine why they had failed; they might not know
what to do without a knowledgeable agent’s help. Critically,
this agent’s help would be most effective is she could directly
address the cause of the child’s failure.

Introduction
Imagine a frustrated traveler at a train station, fumbling with
a ticket machine. Chances are someone will offer help, but
how this person helps might depend on the situation. If the
helper sees that the traveler is inserting the bill in the wrong
direction, she might kindly re-orient the bill; however, if the
helper knows that the ticket machine is out of order, she might
direct the traveler to another machine nearby.
Humans are remarkably helpful creatures from an early age
(Tomasello, 2009). Although preverbal infants may not yet
be able to offer help with ticket machines, they will pick up
objects others have dropped and pass them back, and show
someone struggling to reach inside a box an easier way to get
in (Warneken & Tomasello, 2006). As in the ticket machine
example, however, helping others is not only a decision of
whether to help, but also a decision of how to help.
The decision of how to help is sometimes straightforward.
When someone is struggling to hold open a door, there is typically only one way to help. In many contexts, however, it is
not so clear what kind of help is needed. In order to figure
out how to help others, we need to understand why someone
is struggling. Critically, more often than not, it is up to the
helper, rather than the helpee, to determine exactly what kind
of help is needed. If the traveler knew the reason why she
was failing to insert her bill, she might have already solved
the problem. When deciding how to help, therefore, it is critical to determine the source of an actor’s failure: whether the
failure is due to the actor herself, or due to the external world.
We routinely make these judgments about our own failed
actions. If everyone else bought a ticket from the machine but
somehow you cannot, you are likely using the machine incorrectly. However, if everyone experienced occasional failure,
perhaps the machine is not reliable. Furthermore, these inferred reasons inform our decisions about what to do next: if

Here, we ask whether young children can reason about the
cause of others’ failures to inform their decisions of how
to help. There are reasons to believe that even very young
children may be able to do this. Studies with toddlers and
preschoolers suggest that young children can provide help
not only when the helpee’s needs are straightforward and
observable (e.g., picking up dropped objects, Warneken &
Tomasello, 2007), but also when her needs are more internal
and abstract (e.g., beliefs, goals, competence). For instance,
12-month-olds are more likely to point out the location of a
dropped object if their social partner has not seen it fall than
when she has seen it (Liszkowski, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
2008); 18-month-olds can use their social partner’s prior experience to infer different goals from the same failed action
and help her achieve that goal (Buttelmann, Carpenter, &
Tomasello, 2009). Preschoolers (42-month-olds) can reason
about other peoples’ action capabilities to predict from whom
someone else will ask for help (Paulus & Moore, 2011), and
even anticipate that their social partner needs help before she
does and pre-emptively intervene to help her achieve her ultimate goal (Bridgers, Jara-Ettinger, & Gweon, 2016; Martin
& Olson, 2013).
However, inferring the possible causes of others’ failed
goal-directed actions might be more challenging than reasoning about the goals themselves, as the child must decide between (at least) two competing hypotheses which may or may
not be observable in the failed action itself. Furthermore, us-

162

Procedure The experiment began with a warm-up phase in
which a confederate and experimenter engaged the child in
reciprocal games (e.g., rolling a ball back and forth through
a tube) in order to help the child feel comfortable with
the researchers, and promote general helping behavior (see
Cortes Barragan & Dweck, 2014). After approximately 5
minutes of warm-up, the confederate excused herself from
the room, explaining that she had work to do.

ing this inferred cause to generate the appropriate helpful behavior is also a nontrivial task, and arguably more difficult
than helping in contexts in which there is one clear way to
help. Even though prior work suggests that preverbal infants
can make these inferences about their own failures and decide what to do to achieve their own goals, applying the same
inferences to others’ actions and providing the most effective
help may be more challenging. Indeed, there is a body of
research suggesting that reasoning about one’s own actions
may precede, and is a necessary precursor to, reasoning about
others (e.g., Sommerville & Woodward, 2005; Sommerville,
Woodward, & Needham, 2005).
The current study investigates 24- to 48-month-olds’ abilities to reason about the causes of others’ failed actions and
offer help accordingly. Children observed an adult fail to activate a toy because she either (a) used the toy incorrectly,
or (b) chose a faulty toy. We then gave children the choice to
help by either handing the person a working toy or by demonstrating the correct way to use the toy. Individually, both options were perfectly reasonable ways to help, and within the
repertoire of behaviors children have exhibited in prior work
(e.g., Warneken & Tomasello, 2006). The critical question
here, however, is whether children will provide help that best
addresses the likely cause of this person’s failure (i.e., the toy
or her own actions).

Next came the play phase in which the child gained experience with the toys. The experimenter did not pedagogically
demonstrate how the toys worked, but instead behaved as if
she were exploring the toys and discovering what they did.
She took one toy out at a time and showed it to the child. In
the Broken Toy condition, the toys were oriented such that
the yellow side was on top. She noticed the yellow button,
pressed it, and reacted positively to the music that played. She
also encouraged the child to press the yellow button and again
reacted positively, saying, “Music! The yellow side plays music!”. She then turned the toy around in her hands until she
discovered the red button on the opposite side, and expressed
mild surprise, as if she did not expect it to be there. She
pressed the red button and also encouraged the child to do so,
acting perplexed and disappointed that it did not play music.
The experimenter then took the second toy out, which she
and the child explored in the same way (i.e., the experimenter
pressed each button, and then encouraged the child to do so).
This second toy was always the broken toy, so neither button
played music. This process was repeated with the third toy,
which functioned the same as the first (i.e., the yellow button played music, but the red button did nothing). The child
and experimenter then explored each toy again, taking turns
pressing the buttons. In the Wrong Action condition, everything was the same except that the toys were placed with the
red side up, such that the red button was discovered first, and
then the yellow. By the end of this phase, all children experienced that pressing the yellow buttons on two of the toys
played music (and one was inert), and that none of the red
buttons played music.

Experiment
In our experiment, we created a situation in which children
were faced with two ways to help. We manipulated the cause
of the helpee’s failure, which made one way more effective than the other. We recruited 24- to 48-month-olds, who
were slightly older than children in other studies that reported
spontaneous helping behaviors (e.g., Warneken & Tomasello,
2006; Cortes Barragan & Dweck, 2014), as the ability to help
others appropriately based on the cause of their failure might
require richer representations about others’ goal-directed actions and more sophisticated inferential abilities.

Methods

In the helping phase, the experimenter placed toys back
on the tray and covered them with the felt. The toys were
placed as they were during the play phase: yellow-side-up in
the Broken Toy condition, and red-side-up in the Wrong Action condition. The child sat approximately 6 ft away from
the tray, either by him-/herself or with a parent. The experimenter then called the confederate back into the room and
explained that she and the child were playing with toys that
played music. The confederate said, “I love music!” and knelt
down behind the tray, facing the child. She appeared to select
a toy at random from behind the felt; the child could not see
which toy was chosen.

Participants Fifty-two 24- to 48-month-olds (M(SD) =
2.78(.48)yrs, 44% female) from a museum in Palo Alto, CA
participated. An additional 15 children were excluded from
analysis due to parental interference (n = 9), experimenter error (n = 1), shyness (n = 3), or lack of video recording (n = 2).
We randomly assigned children to one of two conditions: the
Broken Toy condition (n = 26; M(SD) = 2.78(.54)yrs) or the
Wrong Action condition (n = 26; M(SD) = 2.78(.43)yrs).
Stimuli We constructed 3 identical-looking toys. One side
of each toy was covered in yellow felt and had a yellow button
in the center. The opposite side was covered in red felt and
had a red button in the center. The yellow button on two toys
played music, while the yellow button on the third toy was inert. On all 3 toys, the red buttons were always inert. The toys
were placed on a white-plastic tray and covered with grey felt.
See Figure 1 for a schematic of the toys and procedure.

The confederate then moved the tray (which contained 2
of the 3 toys, covered by the felt) off to one side (counterbalanced) and placed her chosen toy in front of her. She pressed
the button on top (the yellow button in the Broken Toy condition; the red button in the Wrong Action condition), and the

163

Figure 1: Schematic of the play phase and the helping phase and the toys used in both conditions.
toy did not play music. The confederate remarked, “Hmm,
no music!” and pressed the button again, expressing disappointment and saying, “Still no music! I really want to play
music!” She then put one hand on the tray, and at the same
time, slid her toy with the other hand such that it was parallel
with the tray but on her opposite side. Once the toy and tray
were equidistant from the confederate, she removed her hand
from the toy and removed the felt from the tray to reveal the
two other toys. She then gestured to both the toy and the tray
and asked, “Can you help me play music?” The toy and tray
were far enough apart (approx. 2 ft) and from the child (approx. 5 ft) that s/he could not approach both simultaneously.
If the child did not respond, the confederate and experimenter provided planned prompts, waiting 5 seconds in between, until the child responded. The last of these prompts
involved the confederate moving closer to the child (approx.
2 ft.) and placing the tray and the toy within the child’s reach
but still far enough apart that the child could only reach to
one location at a time.
In summary, the only difference across conditions was
whether the non-obvious button (i.e., the button on the bottom
of the toy) that the experimenter revealed to the child during
the course of the play phase was non-functional (Broken Toy
condition) or functional (Wrong Action condition). In both
conditions, the confederate pressed the obvious button (i.e.,
the button on top) and the toy did nothing.

the confederate to press it (e.g., telling her to do so; handing
or pointing to a toy yellow side up); “unsuccessful” responses
included pressing or directing the confederate to press the red
button on any toy or the yellow button on the confederate’s
toy. In the Wrong Action condition, a behavior was coded as
“successful” if a child flipped and pressed the yellow button
or directed the confederate to do so (e.g., telling her to press
it, flipping a toy and handing or pointing to it yellow-sideup). Thus, in the Wrong Action condition, a behavior could
be successful regardless of which toy a child’s first response
targeted, whereas in the Broken Toy condition, only behavior
directed toward the toys on the tray could be successful. The
first and second author transcribed and coded children’s behavior and a researcher blind to the hypotheses coded these
transcriptions for reliability; agreement was 100%.

Predictions and Results
Children in both conditions saw the same set of toys and a
confederate fail in the same way (she pressed an obvious button on top of a toy and it did not play music). Furthermore, in
response, all children could approach either the confederate’s
toy or a toy on the tray. What differed across conditions was
the likely cause of the confederate’s failure. We manipulated
the source of failure by varying whether the obvious button
on top of the toy was functional on 2 of the 3 toys (i.e., yellow button; Broken Toy condition) or non-functional on all 3
toys (i.e., red button; Wrong Action condition).
We predicted responses to vary across conditions depending on the source of the confederate’s failure. In the Broken
Toy condition, the likely reason for her failure was the toy and
not her own action. Thus, it was more helpful to get a new
toy (a toy on the tray) than to act on the confederate’s toy. In
the Wrong Action condition, however, the likely reason was
the confederate’s action and not the toy, suggesting that children could help by approaching the confederate’s toy to correct her action (there was less need to get a new toy). Thus,
we predicted that more children would approach the “toys on
the tray” in the Broken Toy condition than in the Wrong Action condition. As predicted, children were significantly more

Coding We were interested in children’s first helping response after the confederate’s failure to activate the toy (i.e.,
her first button press). The key dependent measure was the
target toy of this behavior, coded as either the “confederate’s
toy” or the “toys on the tray”. All children who responded
fell into one of these two categories.
Additionally, we looked at the consequence of children’s
first helping responses. We coded whether their behavior
was “successful or “unsuccessful” in achieving the confederate’s goal of playing music. In the Broken Toy condition,
a child’s first response was coded as “successful” if the child
pressed the yellow button on a toy from the tray or directed

164

complex than in the Broken Toy condition, as children had
to reveal the non-obvious button on the bottom of a toy. In
the Broken Toy condition, children simply had to point out
another obvious button on a different toy. Despite this difference, children’s help did not differ across conditions (twotailed, Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.01) and was remarkably successful overall. The majority of children engaged in successful helping behavior (44/52, 85%), and this trend was consistent within each condition (Broken Toy: 19/26, 73%; Wrong
Action: 25/25, 100%). In the Broken Toy condition, children’s help could only be successful if they approached the
“toys on the tray”. Of the children who did this, 100% of
them were successful. In the Wrong Action condition, children’s help could be successful if they approached either the
“toys on the tray” or the “confederate’s toy”. One child was
dropped from this analysis because the camera angle prevented clear visual access to the nature of her helping behavior, but all children included provided successful help.
Finally, as an exploratory analysis, we re-coded children’s
first responses as “correct” (Broken Toy: “toys on tray”;
Wrong Action: “confederate’s toy”) or “incorrect”. We fit
a generalized linear model with correctness as the outcome
variable, condition as a categorical predictor variable, and
age as a continuous predictor variable. This analysis revealed
no difference in children’s tendency to behave “correctly” by
condition or age (condition: β = −.364, z = −.471, p = .638;
age: β = 1.533, z = 1.614, p = 0.107).

Figure 2: Proportion of children whose first response was directed to the confederate’s toy (blue) or the toys on the tray
(red) in the helping phase. Error bars: bootstrapped 95% CI.

likely to direct their help toward a toy on the tray in the Broken Toy condition than in the Wrong Action condition (73%
vs. 27%; two-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test, p = 0.002).
We then looked at children’s responses within each condition. In the Broken Toy condition, it was clear that the confederate was acting on the broken toy, and that children could
offer help only by approaching a toy on the tray. No action
on the confederate’s toy could yield music. We thus predicted
that children in this condition would preferentially direct their
help toward a toy on the tray. Indeed, children were more
likely to approach the “toys on the tray” than the “confederate’s toy” (19/26; two-tailed binomial test, p = 0.029).
In the Wrong Action condition, children could, in principle, help the confederate by showing the yellow button on either the confederate’s toy or a toy on the tray. In fact, unlike
in the Broken Toy condition, the outcome of their help was
probabilistic, as there was a 33% chance that any toy children
chose to flip over would be broken. However, there were reasons to expect a preference for the confederate’s toy in the
Wrong Action condition. First, children might have been inclined to approach the toy on which the confederate had just
acted. Second, by acting on the object with which she failed,
children can guarantee that they are offering help to achieve
her specific goal to activate that toy. Finally, while approaching a toy on the tray changes two variables (both the object
and the agent), by acting on the confederate’s toy, children
can more clearly disambiguate the cause of her failure. Thus,
we expected that children might show a mild preference for
the confederate’s toy, although we did not have a strong a priori prediction. The results showed that the majority of children in the Wrong Action condition did approach the “confederate’s toy” (19/26, two-tailed binomial test, p = 0.029).
See Figure 2 for a summary of children’s first responses.
Our secondary measure of interest was the success of children’s helping responses (i.e., did their help enable the confederate to achieve her goal of playing music?). Successful
behavior in the Wrong Action condition was arguably more

Discussion
Our results suggest that 2- and 3-year-old children were able
to infer the likely cause of another person’s failure and offer help that appropriately addressed this cause. Rather than
simply helping the confederate with the toy she previously
tried but failed to activate, or offering her a new toy across
the board, children selectively approached the confederate’s
toy or a new toy depending on the source of the confederate’s
failure. More specifically, when children’s prior knowledge
suggested that the confederate was failing due to something
about the world (e.g., a faulty toy), they provided help that
changed this external variable (i.e., acting on a new toy in the
same way). But when her own action was the likely culprit,
children helped by keeping the world constant and showing
her the correct action to take (i.e., acting on the same toy but
in a different way). Moreover, beyond simply directing their
help toward the likely cause, they provided assistance that
successfully fulfilled the confederate’s goal.
These results support the idea that young children are not
just motivated to help (Tomasello, 2009); they are also motivated (and able) to provide help that is appropriate and effective. From a brief training with the causal structure of simple
toys, children as young as 2 years of age were able to use their
prior experience to infer the cause of the actor’s failure, and
intervene in a way that specifically targeted this cause.
In the Broken Toy condition, the toy was clearly the cause
of the confederate’s failure, and the only way to help was

165

to get her a new toy. In the Wrong Action condition, the
confederate’s action was clearly the cause of her failure, but
there was more than one way to help: you could show her the
right action on her toy or another toy. Children in this condition appeared sensitive to this response ambiguity. Although
most children approached the confederate’s toy (19/26; 73%)
and revealed the functional button on the bottom, some (7/26;
27%) approached the toys on the tray and flipped one of these
toys over instead. Therefore, although the children who approached the tray may have thought the confederate’s toy was
broken, their behavior suggests they still attributed the confederate’s failure to her action.

toy works? This is an interesting question we might explore
in future studies.
In addition to reasoning about the confederate’s goal, it
is possible that children were reasoning about her knowledge and beliefs. This possibility is particularly salient in
the Wrong Action condition. The confederate held the incorrect expectation that the red button played music and expressed frustration upon failure. Thus, a rich interpretation
of children’s helping behavior (in this case, flipping over the
toy) is that they acted on the toy to correct the confederate’s false belief. Although considerable evidence from the
literature on Theory-of-mind development suggests children
are unable to represent others’ mistaken beliefs until around
age 4 (e.g., Gopnik & Slaughter, 1991; Wellman, Cross, &
Watson, 2001), some work suggests children the age of our
participants might be capable of such belief reasoning, especially in contexts in which they are motivated to help others (Buttelmann et al., 2009; Southgate, Chevallier, & Csibra,
2010).
Although this is an interesting possibility, it is important
to note that it was not necessary to attribute a mistaken belief to the confederate in order to provide appropriate help in
our task. Children could have selected the appropriate action
by simply attributing ignorance about the functionality of the
toys instead of a false belief. Thus, understanding the exact
nature of the representation that motivated children’s behavior remains an important question for future research.
The absence of age-related trends raises the question of
when children might be able to offer help that addresses the
cause of others’ failed actions. As previously discussed, 16month-olds are capable of distinguishing between external
and internal sources of their own failed actions and will intervene accordingly (Gweon & Schulz, 2011). Our current work
extends these findings in an important direction, suggesting
that the causal inference that supports how we respond to our
own failed actions may also support how we help others remedy theirs. Thus one might naturally ask: Would 16-montholds also use this reasoning to choose how to help?
In order to succeed in our task, children must (1) have the
ability to infer the cause of failure for others’ goal-directed
actions, (2) have the knowledge to figure out how best to help,
and (3) select and execute the more effective action. One possibility is that even though preverbal infants can reason about
the cause of agents’ failures, they may fail to recruit this reasoning in helping decisions due to constraints in their working
memory or executive function. Additionally, prior work suggests that although one-year-olds can provide help when the
helping action is constrained, they struggle when the situation
is more open-ended (Svetlova, Nichols, & Brownell, 2010).
However, it is possible that we may find similar abilities in
infants in a simple paradigm that minimizes such demands.
We are currently exploring this possibility.
Finally, our findings have implications for understanding
the nature of early instrumental helping. Much of the prior
work on the development of helping behavior has focused

Though children in the Wrong Action condition could have
helped the confederate by revealing the functional button on
the confederate’s toy or on a toy from the tray, children still
preferentially approached the confederate’s toy. While this
tendency could be a simple inclination to approach a toy that
someone else has chosen before, it could also reflect more sophisticated reasoning about how best to help the confederate.
First, showing the confederate the correct action on the same
toy directly helps her achieve her specific goal of making that
toy play music. Second, by acting on the confederate’s toy,
children can effectively hold the “toy” variable constant and
vary just the “action” variable. Thus, even though the probability of providing effective help is the same (67%) for any
of the toys, the outcome of the action is more informative
when the child acts on the confederate’s toy. If this action is
successful (i.e., the toy plays music), then the confederate’s
action was wrong; if this action is unsuccessful, the confederate has a broken toy. By contrast, acting in a new way on
a different toy can only be informative for the confederate if
the action is successful. The exact reasoning underlying children’s preference for the confederate’s toy remains unclear
and is an avenue for future work.
The content of children’s helping behavior provides a more
nuanced picture of their reasoning about the confederate.
Children not only seemed to reason about the confederate’s
observable, failed action but also her internal mental states.
In the Broken Toy condition, all of the children who successfully helped indicated that the confederate should try to press
the yellow button on one of the toys on the tray. However,
none of these children provided exhaustive information about
the functionality of the toys (i.e., they did not reveal the nonfunctional red button on the bottom). This suggests that the
children were sensitive to the fact that the confederate’s goal
was to play music, rather than to learn how the toys worked.
This finding is consistent with prior research showing that
4- to 5-year-olds adjust the amount of information they provide depending on whether their social partner wants to know
how a toy works or simply wants to see what the toy does:
children were more likely to provide information that fully
disambiguated the causal system for the former than for the
latter goal (Gweon, Chu, & Schulz, 2014). Would children in
our current age range similarly demonstrate the other side of
the toy if the confederate expressed a desire to learn how the

166

on whether and why young children help (e.g., Warneken &
Tomasello, 2006; Cortes Barragan & Dweck, 2014; Svetlova
et al., 2010). Though our experiment instead focuses on the
how of early helping, it is still reasonable to ask whether children in our task were really offering help to the confederate
or if they responded for another reason, such as a desire to
socially interact, or a personal desire to hear the music (see
Paulus & Moore, 2012). Although the selectivity in children’s
helping responses in our study provides suggestive evidence
that children were not simply motivated to interact with the
confederate, our experimental design does not allow us to
completely disentangle the different possible motivations behind their helping behavior. However, this distinction is not
critical for our current purposes. Our main interest in this
study was whether children can infer the likely cause of others’ failures, and whether such causal reasoning can lead to
behaviors that are consequentially effective in helping others
achieve their goals.
In fact, children’s behaviors in our study suggest that another important motivator for our prosocial behaviors may be
our curiosity and desire to understand causal relationships
(Gopnik, 1998). When we see someone struggling at the
ticket machine, we might want to help not only because we
want to help her but also because we want to know why she
is failing. Children in our study might have been motivated
by similar reasons; such actions would not only help others
achieve their goals but also help children themselves learn
about the world.
By using what we know, we can better help others. Although deciding how to help in the real-world can be a challenging, open-ended problem, humans can figure out why
others fail and the best way to help. Our work suggests that
even toddlers are able to solve this problem using their own
experience as a guide. While young children are constantly
helped and taught by others, the ability to harness this knowledge to figure out how to effectively help others themselves
is present early in life.

Cortes Barragan, R., & Dweck, C. S. (2014). Rethinking natural altruism: Simple reciprocal interactions trigger children’s benevolence. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 111(48), 17071–17074.
Gopnik, A. (1998). Explanation as Orgasm. Minds and Machines, 8(1), 101–118.
Gopnik, A., & Slaughter, V. (1991). Young children’s understanding of changes in their mental states. Child Development, 62, 98–110.
Gweon, H., Chu, V., & Schulz, L. E. (2014). To give a fish
or to teach how to fish? Children weigh costs and benefits
in considering what information to transmit. In Proceedings of the 36th annual conference of the cognitive science
society (pp. 559–564).
Gweon, H., & Schulz, L. (2011). 16-Month-Olds Rationally
Infer Causes of Failed Actions. Science, 332(6037), 1524–
1524.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2008).
Twelve-month-olds communicate helpfully and appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant partners. Cognition,
108(3), 732–739.
Martin, A., & Olson, K. R. (2013). When Kids Know Better:
Paternalistic Helping in 3-Year-Old Children. Developmental Psychology.
Paulus, M., & Moore, C. (2011). Whom to ask for help?
Children’s developing understanding of other people’s action capabilities. Exp. Brain Research, 211, 593–600.
Paulus, M., & Moore, C. (2012). Producing and understanding prosocial actions in early childhood. Advances in Child
Development and Behavior, 42, 275–309.
Sommerville, J., & Woodward, A. (2005). Pulling out the
intentional structure of action: the relation between action
processing and action production in infancy. Cognition,
95(1), 1–30.
Sommerville, J., Woodward, A., & Needham, A. (2005). Action experience alters 3-month-old infants’ perception of
others’ actions. Cognition, 96(1), B1–B11.
Southgate, V., Chevallier, C., & Csibra, G.
(2010).
Seventeen-month-olds appeal to false beliefs to interpret
others’ referential communication. Developmental Science.
Svetlova, M., Nichols, S. R., & Brownell, C. A. (2010). Toddlers’ prosocial behavior: From instrumental to empathic
to altruistic helping. Child Dev, 81(6), 1814–1827.
Tomasello, M. (2009). Born (and Bred) to Help. In Why we
cooperate (pp. 1–25). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human infants and young chimpanzees. Science,
311(5765), 1301.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2007). Helping and cooperation at 14 Months of age. Infancy, 11(3), 271–294.
Wellman, H., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis
of theory-of-mind development: The truth about false belief. Child Development, 72(3), 655–84.

Acknowledgments
We thank Fernanda Kramer and Angelina Garron for help
with data collection and coding, three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments, the Palo Alto Junior Museum
& Zoo, families who participated, and our funding sources:
John Templeton Foundation Varieties of Understanding grant
(HG), NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (SB).

References
Bridgers, S., Jara-Ettinger, J., & Gweon, H. (2016). Children
consider others’ expected costs and rewards when deciding
what to teach. In A. Papafragou, D. grodner, D. Mirman,
& J. C. Trueswell (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th annual
conference of the cognitive science society. Austin, TX.
Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009).
Eighteen-month-old infants show false belief understanding in an active helping paradigm. Cognition, 112(2), 337–
342.

167

