How could a rational analysis model explain?
Samuli Reijula (samuli.reijula@helsinki.fi)
TINT / Social and Moral Philosophy
PO BOX 24, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland
Abstract
Rational analysis is an influential but contested account of how
probabilistic modeling can be used to construct nonmechanistic but self-standing explanatory models of the mind.
In this paper, I disentangle and assess several possible
explanatory contributions which could be attributed to rational
analysis. Although existing models suffer from evidential
problems that question their explanatory power, I argue that
rational analysis modeling can complement mechanistic
theorizing by providing models of environmental affordances.
Keywords: probabilistic modeling; rational analysis;
scientific explanation; mechanism; affordance

1. Introduction
During the past two decades, probabilistic modeling has
become one of the most visible strands of cognitive modeling
alongside connectionism, dynamical systems, and rule-based
approaches. Curiously, against the general trend in the
psychological sciences where theorizing is increasingly
anchored in neuroscience findings, probabilistic modeling of
higher cognition has been a characteristically top-down
endeavor. Without making any substantial commitments
about the underlying cognitive mechanisms, probabilistic
modeling has been applied to complex aspects of human
cognition, which still largely remain beyond the reach of
mechanistic research methods. Models of human memory,
categorization, causal learning, concept learning, and
conditional inference, to mention a few applications, often
show an impressive fit to empirical data, and the novel
analyses of cognitive capacities provided by the models
appear to have shed new light on the nature of the studied
phenomena.
However, how does that shedding light actually occur –
how do such computational probabilistic models explain?
Although probabilistic modeling, in principle, does not rely
on any particular method of explanation (and not all models
aim to be explanatory), modelers often refer to the idea of
rational analysis as the account of how and why their models
help us understand the mind (Anderson 1990; Oaksford &
Chater 2007). The striking claim made by rational analysis
(RA) modelers is that by treating higher cognitive capacities
as forms of inductive inference, we can predict behavior, and
explain a lot about human cognition without making any
assumptions about the underlying representations and
processes. This agnosticism about implementation is
typically justified by making reference to a rationality
assumption: We know that human agents tend to be well-

adapted to their environment, and hence a careful analysis of
the cognitive task encountered by the mind, coupled with an
assumption of the optimality of human behavior in the task,
results in a putatively powerful methodology of prediction
and explanation.
However, it is a widely-held view in the philosophy of
science that explanations, also in the cognitive sciences,
should track causal mechanisms, and the way that RA
purports to sidestep the evidential and explanatory problems
arising from the causal complexity of cognition has given rise
to a strongly polarized debate (see, e.g., Jones & Love 2011).
On the one hand, the way that the new mathematical methods
in probabilistic modeling can capture the interplay of
structure and learning in human thought has led to the
emergence of an exciting research paradigm. On the other
hand, the proponents of non-mechanistic (or even noncausal) explanation need to show when and how it is that such
models genuinely explain rather than only redescribe or
merely formally unify various phenomena (see Colombo &
Hartmann 2017). Failing to do that, rational analysis could
simply be seen as the last breath of the autonomist dream of
studying the mind independently from the brain.
The goal of this paper is to advance the debate by
disentangling various explanatory contributions which can be
attributed to RA models. By relying on the influential
contrastive-counterfactual account of explanation, I
distinguish between three possible explanatory contributions:
Uncovering (a) constitutive dependencies in cognitive
systems (i.e. dependencies between parts and wholes), (b)
environment-behavior dependencies, and (c) environment–
optimal behavior dependencies.1 I argue that often the option
(c) best describes the nature of the new understanding
provided by RA models: In many cases, RA models should
be interpreted as being explanatory not of human behavior as
such, but of environmental affordances. Consequently, well
conducted modeling of environmental affordances can
complement mechanistic theorizing by providing resources
for understanding the possible space of behavior of agents.

2. Probabilistic modeling and rational analysis
2.1 Procedure of rational analysis
The idea of rational analysis modeling dates back to John
Anderson’s work on human memory and categorization in
The Adaptive Character of Thought (1990). Having already
worked on his ACT* cognitive architecture, the new
methodology put forward in the book reflected Anderson’s

1

To be clear, probabilistic models are also used for purposes other
than explanation (e.g., prediction, hypothesis generation). This
paper, however, only examines their explanatory import.

2975

increasing worries that the research methods of the time could
not really uncover cognitive mechanisms. Lacking a clear
picture of what it is that cognitive mechanisms do (i.e. what
the psychological explananda are), the available evidence of
cognitive processes and their neural implementation was
insufficient to uncover the mechanistic architecture of the
human mind (Anderson 1990, pp.23–26). Compared to
bottom-up research strategies, rational analysis begins from
the other end:
[…] We can understand a lot about human cognition
without considering in detail what is inside the human
head. Rather, we can look in detail at what is outside the
human head and try to determine what would be optimal
behavior given the structure of the environment and the
goals of the human. (Anderson 1990, p.3)
According to Anderson, careful mathematical modeling of
the environment and task structure combined with an
assumption about the optimality of human behavior leads to
a new self-standing research strategy for understanding the
mind: “As this book is evidence, a rational analysis can stand
on its own without any architectural theory" (ibid.). By
providing a precise model of what the mind does, rational
analysis can constrain the search space for cognitive
mechanisms, and, putatively, put the scientific study of the
mind on a firm foundation.
This view of the role of computational modeling
immediately brings to mind Marr’s (1982) account of multilevel theorizing. However, whereas Marr provides no
systematic account of how computational-level theories are
to be constructed, RA modeling has predominantly
proceeded according to the six-step cycle proposed by
Anderson (1990, p.29):
1. Specify precisely the goals of the cognitive system
2. Develop a formal model of the environment to which the
system is adapted
3. Make minimal assumptions about computational
limitations
4. Derive the optimal behavior function, given items
1 through 3
5. Examine the empirical evidence to see whether the
predictions of the behavior function are confirmed
6. Repeat, iteratively refining the theory
These steps embody an account of how a large part of
probabilistic cognitive modeling is done. However, two
further assumptions of RA should be made explicit. First, the
derivation of optimal behavior in steps 2-4 typically employs
probability calculus (not logic) as the normative baseline
theory of rational behavior. Secondly, the link between model
predictions (step 4) and observed behavior of humans (step
5) is formed by an assumption about the optimality of the
observed behavior (see quoted passage above).

Below I illustrate this process with an example. However,
a comment on the status of the approach in cognitive science
is in place: Obviously, not all probabilistic modelers endorse
the rational analysis framework (see Brighton & Gigerenzer
2008; Danks 2015; Frank 2013). Focusing on RA is useful
for two reasons, however. The approach is undeniably
influential, and its core commitments have been endorsed by
a large group of well-known modelers (e.g., Anderson 1990;
Oaksford & Chater 1994; Griffiths & Tenenbaum 2009). A
further advantage of focusing on RA has to do with the fact
that often the theoretical commitments of mathematical
modelers can be hard to pin down. In some cases, the
ambiguities are surely due to the modelers themselves not
being clear about where their commitments (about how to
understand explanatoriness, optimality, etc.) lie. Rational
analysis is a clear account of the conceptual foundations of
probabilistic cognitive modeling, and provides a starting
point, or at least a foil, for explicating such commitments.
To illustrate the rational analysis process, I now briefly
introduce Mike Oaksford and Nick Chater’s (1994, 2007)
analysis of the Wason selection task.

2.2 The information gain model
Wason selection task is one of the most famous laboratory
experiments discussed in the literature on human rationality.
In the original form of the task, participants are given four
cards, each of which has a letter on one side and a number on
the other. The participants’ task is to determine whether the
rule “If there is a vowel on one side of the card (p), then there
is an even number on the other side (q)” holds. More
precisely, they are asked to select those cards which must be
turned over to discover whether the rule is true or false. The
famous finding from the task and its several replications is
that only a small minority (less than 10%) select the correct
cards (vowel, odd number) corresponding to the falsifying
instance. That is, judged in the light of logic, most
participants fail to perform in a rational way.
Oaksford and Chater (O&C) challenge the irrationality
claim by arguing that logic-based theories of inference and
rationality misrepresent the participants’ behavior in the task.
O&C’s own information gain model suggests that people’s
apparently irrational way to test a hypothesis should actually
be seen as optimal strategy for uncertainty reduction. The gist
of O&C’s reinterpretation is that instead of engaging in
deductive reasoning, participants interpret the task as an
inductive one. They do not try to falsify the rule, but instead
they try to determine which of two hypotheses holds:
a) Independence model, MI: P(q|p) = P(q) or
b) Dependence model, MD: P(q|p) is high, higher than P(q).2
Being initially equally uncertain about both hypotheses,
participants aim to reduce this uncertainty as much as
possible by turning as few cards as possible.

2

In Oaksford & Chater 2007, P(q|p) was set to 0.9. See ibid. for
the underlying account of conditional inference and for the
mathematical details.

2976

The rational analysis proposed by O&C relies on three core
principles:
1) Higher cognition can be modeled as probabilistic
(Bayesian) computation.
2) The likelihoods and prior probabilities required by the
model can be acquired from the analysis of the
environment structure.
3) Behavior of human agents constitutes an optimal response
to the task.
The model is constructed roughly as follows. To formalize
the idea of uncertainty reduction, O&C adopt the optimal data
selection paradigm, and interpret uncertainty reduction as
optimizing expected information gain. Information gain
𝐼" (𝐷) from turning over a card (D) is defined as 𝐼 𝑀( |𝐷 −
𝐼 𝑀( where the Shannon information3 𝐼(𝑀( ) can be derived
from the probabilities of the hypotheses before and after
observing data, 𝑃(𝑀( ) and 𝑃(𝑀( |𝐷). The required posteriors
can be obtained by the Bayes’ rule from the likelihoods
𝑃(𝐷|𝑀( ) and the prior probabilities of the hypotheses.
Reflecting initial ignorance, the priors were set to 0.5 and
hence the rest of the crucial model specification is built into
the likelihoods, which reflect the nature of the four-card task.
Oaksford and Chater (1994) show in detail how the required
likelihoods can be read off the contingency tables describing
the two hypotheses.
From these derivations, it follows that the base rates of p
and q have a central role in determining which behavior is
optimal. They describe how frequently positive instances of
the antecedent and consequent of the rule appear in the
environment. Qualitatively, the expected information gain
from each of the four cards turns out to depend on the base
rates P(p) and P(q) in the following way:
P(q) is small
à p card is informative
P(p) is large
à not-q card is informative
P(p) and P(q) are small à q card is informative
(not-p card is not informative)
How should these base rates, then, be determined? Instead of
attempting to somehow measure them in relevant
environments for different kinds of rules, O&C cite various
intuitively plausible justifications for their rarity assumption:
Relying on the observation that categories in language cut the
world quite finely, and that properties that figure in causal
relations tend to be rare, the assumption states that, generally,
P(p) and P(q) are small in most situations. Under rarity, O&C
conclude, the q card is more informative than the not-q card.
Hence, the model suggests that the highest expected
information gain is achieved by turning over the p and q
cards, exactly as the majority of the participants do. In fact,
with P(p)=0.22, P(q)=0.27, the model shows a very good fit
to experimental data from the Wason task. Hence, by
changing the normative model of rational behavior, O&C
were able to explain away irrationality, and to show that

participants’ behavior in experiments is actually close to
optimal.
The model has received critical attention in the literature
(see Oaksford & Chater 2009), but it serves our current
purposes well. The model specification and the modeling
assumptions are conceptually on a par with those in more
complex Bayesian models: The complexity often pertains to
the number of variables involved, the structure and
generation of the hypothesis space, and in many cases
advanced numerical methods are needed for solving the
model. These mathematical sources of complexity do not,
however, change the fundamental conceptual architecture of
a model. What is common to all RA models is that none of
their main components (hypothesis space, likelihood
function, priors) are interpreted in a psychologically realistic
way as mental representations (Jones & Love 2011). Instead,
they stand directly for properties of the environment.
Furthermore, empirical data about the properties of human
cognition is not fed into the model specification to calibrate
or to constrain the model. Instead, behavioral data enters only
in step 5 of RA (see above) as a means for testing model
predictions. In this sense, the information gain model is an
illuminating example of the theoretical and conceptual
assumptions made in rational analysis modeling.

3. What rational analysis models fail to explain
There is no consensus in philosophy (or in the sciences) about
what scientific explanation is, or what makes a theory
explanatory. However, a shared starting point for many
accounts of scientific explanation has been to distinguish
explanation from other epistemic activities (e.g., description
and prediction) by pointing out that explanations offer
information of a specific kind. Explanations show how or why
something happened or obtains. According to an influential
approach (Woodward 2013), the knowledge that allows one
to answer such questions concerns change-relating
counterfactual dependencies between the relata in the
explanation, the explanans and the explanandum. That is,
explanations show how (the state of) some things depend on
(the state of) other things.
This contrastive-counterfactual account of explanation
suggests that explanatory information has generally the
following form:
{CC} y[y’] because of x [x’] (variable Y takes the value y
instead of y’ because X has the value x instead of x’)
According to the contrastive-counterfactual account, being
able to explain means that one is able to correctly answer
what-if-things-were-different questions, i.e. questions about
how changes in explanantia variables influence the state of
the explanandum variable. In addition to being a sufficiently
general account of explanation, the contrastivecounterfactual account suits the purposes of this article well,
because it does not necessarily tie the notion of explanation

3
Uncertainty 𝐼 𝑀( given n mutually exclusive and exhaustive
hypotheses, is – 1(23 𝑃 𝑀( log 0 𝑃 𝑀( .

2977

to that of causation. That is, although the ‘because’ in {CC}
is typically understood as referring to a causal dependency,
the account does not rule out the possibility of there being
also non-causal explanations (Woodward 2013; Pincock
2015; Rice 2015): If a suitable analysis of invariant
dependency in non-causal contexts (e.g., for mathematical
dependencies) can be found, the contrastive-counterfactual
account can be applied to non-causal explanations as well.
Hence, the account of explanation casts the net wide enough
to give RA models a fair chance of being explanatory.
A further advantage of treating explanations as answers to
questions is that it allows us to sharpen the explananda, i.e.
to make more precise the possible explanatory claims arising
from RA models. I suggest that there are at least three
different kinds of objective dependencies that RA models
could be said to track: (1) constitutive dependencies between
parts and wholes, (2) environment-behavior dependencies,
and (3) environment–optimal-behavior dependencies. In the
rest of this section, I argue that often RA models do not have
genuine explanatory import with respect to the two first kinds
of dependencies. The more promising third option is
discussed in section 4.

3.1 Constitutive what-ifs
The notion of mechanism has acquired a central position in
the philosophical debates on scientific explanation. A clear
expression of the mechanistic viewpoint has recently been
given in the model-to-mechanism mapping (3M) requirement
by Kaplan and Craver (2011). According to the requirement,
dynamical and mathematical models in systems- and
cognitive neuroscience can be explanatory only if there is a
mapping between elements in the model and elements in the
mechanism for the phenomenon. As the example discussed
above suggests, rational analysis models provide no such
mapping. They are agnostic about algorithmic and
implementation level details, and intentionally so. They
clearly do not track constitutive dependencies. Does this
mean they cannot be explanatory?
As Kaplan and Craver themselves admit, their argument
ultimately relies on shared norms about explanatoriness in the
neuroscience community, and their account of explanation as
uncovering multi-level mechanisms reflects these norms. If
such norms do not hold among probabilistic cognitive
modelers, it is not obvious why they, based on this argument
alone, should abide by the 3M requirement.
The contrastive-counterfactual account suggests a more
positive reply to Kaplan and Craver’s argument: RA models
obviously do not provide information about constitutive and
causal dependencies in multi-level mechanisms, but this does
not rule out the possibility of them tracking some other kinds
of objective dependencies, for example, those holding
between relata described in purely computational-level
terms. Furthermore, a proponent of RA need not (and should
not) claim that adding mechanistic detail never improves a
computational explanation. To defend the explanatoriness of
RA models, a far weaker claim suffices, one stating that it is
possible to learn about objective explanatory dependencies

without always relying on information about cognitive
mechanisms.

3.2 Environment–behavior what-ifs
A second kind of explanatory question answered by an RA
model could be: ”How would the behavior of the cognizer
change when the cognitive task changes in some particular
way?” That is, the model could uncover objective
dependencies between properties of the environment and the
behavior of cognizers. For example, O&C’s model can be
used to derive predictions about what the behavior of the
participants in the Wason task would be, were P(p) and P(q)
to take some range of values.
It is here that the optimality assumption of RA becomes
crucial. To predict how human behavior would change in
response to changes in the task, without knowing anything
about the algorithms and processes producing the behavior,
RA relies on the assumption that humans are well-adapted to
their environments: If we assume that human behavior is
close to optimal across a large variety of environments, the
predictions derived from the RA model (step 4 of the RA
procedure) should in fact apply to that behavior. Optimality
forms the link between the normative theory and observed
behavior.
Given that human (ir)rationality has been the topic of a
longstanding debate in philosophy and psychology, it is not
surprising that the optimality assumption has drawn a lot of
criticism (Jones & Love 2011). Although proponents of RA
are correct in arguing that some degree of rationality of target
behavior is required for us to even perceive it as intentional
action, such modest levels of rationality hardly license the
strong optimality assumptions of RA models. Neither do
evolutionary arguments provide support for strong optimality
claims: Natural selection is a source of design and
adaptedness, but not necessarily of globally optimal solutions
– merely a local comparative advantage is sufficient for
evolutionary solutions to survive.
Being aware of these problems, proponents of RA have
avoided evolutionary defenses of the optimality assumption.
Instead, they often justify optimality by relying on analogies
to behavioral ecology and economics, where similar
assumptions are commonly made (Chater et al. 2003).
However, such analogies break down due to a crucial
dissimilarity between these fields. Unlike in cognitive
science, both in biology and economics the rationality claims
typically concern aggregate behavior, not that of individual
agents. Hence, I do not see how appealing to economics or
biology could be a viable way to justify optimality
assumptions in RA modeling.
These problems with the general defenses of the optimality
assumption suggest that perhaps optimality should be
examined more locally. Now, what kind of evidence should
be obtained to justify the optimality claim in the case of a
particular cognitive task? It seems that to support a claim
about there being an objective dependency between
environment and behavior, we should gather data about
human behavior in a task across a range of parameter values

2978

describing various different environmental states. In other
words, if human behavior fits the predictions of the model
across a range of conditions, that would appear to be rather
strong evidence of optimal performance.
However, the existing RA models rarely make use of such
cross-environmental data. First of all, many models do not
rely on any actual measurements of environment parameters.
Instead, they use plausible-sounding assumptions or
analogies. For example, Anderson (1990, ch. 2) relied on data
about library borrowings to model usage of memory
structures, and Griffiths et al. (2007) use Google PageRank
to predict fluency of recall. Models devoid of good quality
empirical data should be considered as toy models (at best),
incapable of uncovering the actual properties of cognitive
environments. Furthermore, Marcus and Davis (2013, table
1) suggest that Bayesian modelers have been selective in
choosing the results that they report from experimental tasks,
only reporting results where human behavior follows the
model predictions and ignoring cases where behavior is not
optimal.4
That said, in the large literature on the information gain
model, predictions from the model have been tested against
human performance under different base rates and different
framings of the task (e.g., descriptive vs. deontic; Oaksford
& Chater 2007, Ch.6). Although the empirical findings
remain inconclusive, such systematic variation of the task
parameters should be used to produce evidence of a robust
explanatory environment-behavior dependency.5

4. Rational analysis and the logic of the
situation
Finally, let us examine the epistemic value of an RA model if
we drop the optimality assumption. Assume that we have a
model with a (i) well-specified task structure, (ii) parameter
values based on measurements of the environment, and (iii)
an empirically informed account of computational costs and
cognitive limitations. What such a model could do is it could
link combinations of parameter values to best possible
behavioral choices in those situations. Is this not a kind of
objective change-relating dependency? However, consider
what the relata of such a dependency are. The model tells
what the optimal behavior would be, given a particular
combination of environmental conditions and computational
limitations. Such counterfactuals do not say anything about
actual human behavior. Instead, they can be seen as
increasing our understanding of the environmental
affordance, or, the logic of the situation (Popper 1963).6
What mathematical models of affordances (of the
opportunities that the environment offers for the agent) can
help us understand is the possible space of action for
cognitive agents. Models of affordances show what a
hypothetical rational agent would do in different situations.
4

See Goodman et al. (2015) for the modelers’ response.
See Griffiths & Tenenbaum (2006) for an empirical study that
attempts to directly test the optimality assumption.
5

For what kind of purposes could such information be useful?
First, were we to design artificial cognitive systems with a
particular cognitive task in mind, these systems should
approximate the optimal behavior specified by the model. For
example, in the selection task, if we are interested in reducing
our uncertainty, O&C’s model tells us something non-trivial,
i.e. which information sources to examine given the base
rates of p and q.
Secondly, as in economics, rational models can obviously
act as normative baselines to which human behavior can be
compared. As Sloman & Fehrbach (2008) argue, often it is
just as interesting to discover that behavior does not conform
to the rational norm as to see that it does. Finding out when
and how complex systems malfunction is often an efficient
way to learn about the underlying processes.
However, in neither one of these cases are RA models used
to directly explain human behavior. Instead, the model
functions as an inferential aid which helps to chart the
possible space of action for agents, when faced with a
particular task. Herein lies perhaps the hardest evidential
problem faced by rational analysis. How do we know what
the mind really does in some situation; where do the
functional hypotheses in step 1 of RA come from? For
example, how would O&C defend their Bayesian construal
of the selection task against an adamant falsificationist? The
currently available empirical evidence can hardly decide the
issue: Where O&C see optimal behavior, the falsificationist
sees well-known inferential blunders. Marcus and Davis
(2013) have argued that similar problems of model selection
plague several other RA models as well.
The difficulty seems to come down to the fact that the
cognitive tasks and the affordances available to an organism
depend on its “life space” – not the physically objective world
in its totality, but reality filtered through the organism’s
needs, drives and perceptual apparatus. Therefore, we should
not think that the researcher’s intuitions are necessarily a
reliable guide to what the tasks faced by different aspects of
the human cognition really are. Ad-hocness in task
specification, in turn, raises serious worries about the
relevance of RA modeling: Constructing detailed
mathematical models of potential affordances is of little
interest unless such affordances can be shown to be ones
actually offering themselves to the human mind.
This worry suggests that the six-step rational analysis
modeling cycle introduced in section 2.1 should not proceed
independently from knowledge originating from mechanistic
research: As both the connectionist rivals of RA and
proponents of multi-level mechanistic explanation have
argued, functional hypotheses (step 1 of RA) in cognitive
science must be formulated in an iterative process between
bottom-up and top-down research strategies (see McClelland
et al. 2010; Bechtel & Richardson 2010). In particular,
knowledge of perceptual capacities and embodiment
6
As an anonymous referee pointed out, also the dynamical
models used in ecological psychology are often understood as
formalizations of affordances. This calls for a systematic
comparison between the two modeling paradigms.

2979

(informing step 2), as well as of the computational constraints
of organisms (step 3) mostly originate from the bottom-up
research on the mind-brain, and this knowledge should be
allowed to constrain RA models. In this sense, Anderson’s
and O&C’s claims about the self-standing explanatory role of
RA are not vindicated by my analysis.
However, neither can bottom-up research strategies stand
on their own, or at least they fail to reach high enough. The
discussions on mechanistic explanation often have a
reductionist bias, and understanding the environments within
which cognitive mechanisms function has not received
sufficient attention. Here RA models can complement
mechanistic theories of cognition by providing precise
mathematical models of the task and the environment. For
example, as Chater et al. (2003) point out, a correctly
formulated rational analysis can show why it is that some
simple heuristic can be successful in solving a
computationally complex task.

5. Conclusions
I have argued that given a sufficiently broad account of
scientific explanation, there are several possible ways in
which probabilistic modeling could increase our
understanding of the mind. However, the strictly
computational-level approach embodied in the six-step
formula of rational analysis has led to theorizing which often
fails to reliably uncover genuine explanatory dependencies.
The shortcomings of RA are evidential in nature: The data,
and the way it is used in model construction, often cannot
support the counterfactual inferences needed explaining
human behavior.
My new proposal about the epistemic role of RA models is
that they can be understood as models of environmental
affordances. Interpreted in this way, the models do not
actually provide information about the mind works, or even
hypotheses about actual cognitive functions (cf. Marr 1982;
Zednik & Jäkel 2014). Instead, they help to chart the possible
cognitive space of action for an organism. The nature of the
explanatory contribution of such information is best worked
out as a part of a non-reductionist mechanistic research
programme.

References
Anderson, J. (1990). The Adaptive Character of Thought.
Hillsdale, JN: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. (2010). Discovering
Complexity. The MIT Press.
Brighton, H., & Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Bayesian brains and
cognitive mechanisms: harmony or dissonance? In Chater
& Oaksford (eds.) The Probabilistic Mind. Oxford
University Press.
Chater, N., et al. (2003). Fast, frugal, and rational: How
rational norms explain behavior. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 63–86.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (eds.) (2007). The Probabilistic
Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Colombo, M., & Hartmann, S. (2017). Bayesian cognitive
science, unification, and explanation. British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 68, 451-484.
Danks, D. (2015). Unifying the Mind. MIT Press.
Frank, M. (2013). Throwing out the Bayesian baby with the
optimal bathwater: Response to Endress (2013).
Cognition, 128, 417–423.
Goodman, N. Frank, M., Griffiths, T., Tenenbaum, J.,
Battaglia, P., & Hamrick, J. (2015). Relevant and robust:
A response to Marcus and Davis. Psychological Science,
26, 539-541.
Griffiths, T., Steyvers, M., & Firl, A. (2007). Google and the
mind. Psychological Science, 1069–1076.
Griffiths, T., & Tenenbaum, J. (2006). Optimal predictions in
everyday cognition. Psychological Science, 767-773.
–– (2009). Theory-based causal induction. Psychological
Review, 661–716.
Jones, M., & Love, B. (2011). Bayesian fundamentalism or
enlightenment? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34, 169231.
Kaplan, D., & Craver, C. (2011). The explanatory force of
dynamical and mathematical models in neuroscience: A
mechanistic perspective. Philosophy of Science, 78, 601627.
Marcus, G., & Davis, E. (2013). How robust are probabilistic
models of higher-level cognition? Psychological Science,
24, 2351–2360.
Marr, D. (1982/2010). Vision. W.H. Freeman/MIT Press.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (1994). A rational analysis of the
selection task as optimal data selection. Psychological
Review, 101, 608-631.
–– (2007). Bayesian Rationality: The probabilistic approach
to human reasoning. Oxford University Press.
–– (2009). Precis of Bayesian Rationality. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 69–120.
Pincock, C. (2015). Abstract explanations in science. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 66, 857-882.
Popper, K. (1963). Models, instruments, and truth.
Manuscript. Karl Popper Collection at the Hoover
Institution Archives at Stanford University.
Rice, C. (2015). Moving beyond causes: Optimality models
and scientific explanation. Noûs 49, 589-615.
Sloman, S., & Fehrbach, P. (2008). The value of rational
analysis: as assessment of causal reasoning and learning.
In The Probabilistic Mind.
Woodward, J. (2013). Mechanistic explanation: Its scope and
limits. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
Supplementary Volume, lxxxvii: 39–65.
Zednik, C., & Jäkel, F. (2014). How does Bayesian reverseengineering work? In P. Bello et al. (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 666-671.

2980

