“I’m Better than You at Labeling!”: Preschoolers Use Past Reliability when
Accepting Unexpected Labels
Xiaoqian Li (xiaoqian_li@mymail.sutd.edu.sg) & W. Quin Yow (quin@sutd.edu.sg)
Singapore University of Technology and Design, 8 Somapah Road, Singapore
Abstract
How do young children decide to trust testimony that
contradicts their initial beliefs? The current study examined
whether children rely on cues to informant credibility (i.e.,
history of accuracy) to determine if they would endorse an
unexpected label from an informant. Three- and 4-year-olds
(N = 60) saw a picture of a hybrid artifact that consisted of
features of two typical familiar artifacts. Children made initial
judgments about the name of the hybrid object and
subsequently received a different name offered by an
informant who had earlier either accurately or inaccurately
named familiar objects. Children were more willing to revise
their own judgment and accept the unexpected label if it was
from a previously accurate informant than if it was from
someone who had made obvious naming errors. This suggests
that preschool-aged children selectively revise their own
knowledge; they are more trusting toward sources proven
accurate than inaccurate.
Keywords: selective trust; accuracy; reliability; unexpected
testimony; preschoolers

Introduction
Children not only learn from their own perceptions and
observations of the world around them but also learn from
information provided by others. Research on young children
has underlined the importance of others’ testimony in
knowledge acquisition in the early stages of development
(see Gelman, 2009; Harris, 2007; Mills, 2013, for reviews).
In particular, extensive studies have demonstrated that
children show selective trust in testimony depending on an
informant’s previously established credibility (e.g., Koenig,
Clément, & Harris, 2004; Sabbagh & Baldwin, 2001; for a
review, see Koenig & Sabbagh, 2013).
Children show sensitivity to the prior accuracy of
informants and make persistent use of such information to
learn new words and new object functions (Birch, Vauthier,
& Bloom, 2008), learn novel rules (Rakoczy, Warneken, &
Tomasello, 2009), and solve problems (Palmquist & Jaswal,
2015). This effect of accuracy has been established in
studies that present children with two unfamiliar informants
who consistently provide accurate or inaccurate information
in the context of familiar objects and examine whether these
children subsequently prefer the accurate over the inaccurate
informant when the two informants offer conflicting novel
information (e.g., two different names for the same novel
object). By applying such a two-informant paradigm,
research has shown that children aged 4 years, and 3 years
under certain conditions, selectively endorse new
information from the accurate informant over the inaccurate
one (e.g., Koenig et al., 2004; Nguyen, Gordon, Chevalier,
& Girgis, 2016).

Although the two-informant paradigm has proven
informative, children’s selective trust toward one of two
informants leaves open questions of how children evaluate
and learn from a single informant—a situation in which
children are typically involved in everyday interactions
(e.g., Lane & Harris, 2015). Furthermore, the mechanisms
underlying children’s assessment of the testimony from a
single source versus two contrasting sources may be
different. For example, 3- and 4-year-olds would endorse
new information from a previously inaccurate informant as
long as there was no other informant who proposed an
alternative (Vanderbilt, Heyman, & Liu, 2014). This
suggests that in general children prefer to endorse testimony
from an accurate versus an inaccurate informant, but yet
they are willing to trust the testimony of a single inaccurate
informant if that is the only testimony available.
The studies presented above are related to children
learning something that they do not have any prior
knowledge of. However, acquiring new knowledge is
plausibly a simpler process than accepting something that
conflicts with one’s own knowledge or violates one’s
expectations (hereafter as unexpected testimony). It remains
unknown to what extent children’s acceptance of
unexpected testimony would be influenced by the
informant’s past accuracy. Specifically, in the absence of
another person’s testimony, would children still trust a
previously inaccurate (or accurate) informant’s testimony
when it is contrary to one that they have previously formed
on their own? A related line of research has shown that 3- to
4-year-olds are indeed credulous and tend to give up their
own beliefs to accept other’s statements that are
counterintuitive or overtly misleading, particularly when the
speaker’s communicative intent is salient (e.g., Heyman,
Sritanyaratana, & Vanderbilt, 2013; Lane & Harris, 2015).
Research examining preschoolers’ advice-taking (Rakoczy,
Enrling, Harris, & Schultze, 2015) also demonstrated that 3to 6-year-olds were more likely to adjust their own social
judgments when receiving advice from an expert rather than
an ignorant advisor, suggesting that children do keep track
of informants’ credibility and use such cues in adjusting
their own inferences. However, no studies have examined
whether an informant’s history of accuracy would affect
children’s willingness to revise their own testimony in face
of testimony different from their own beliefs, and in the
context where there was no other informant offering
alternative testimony.
The current study seeks to use the single-informant
paradigm to explore the extent to which 3- and 4-year-olds
use informants’ past accuracy as a cue to evaluate testimony
that contradicts their own beliefs about object labels. The

2555

task was modeled after Vanderbilt et al. (2014) and Jaswal,
Lima, and Small (2009). Children were presented with
pictures of ambiguous hybrid artifacts each involving
features of two typical and familiar objects (e.g., car-shoe),
and were asked to provide a name for each hybrid artifact.
We examined how children would react to a previously
accurate or inaccurate informant who provided an
unexpected label, which was not misinformation, but one
that always contradicted the children’s own beliefs. This
would test whether children are willing to give up their own
(prior) beliefs to accept the informant’s testimony. Based on
previous findings that preschoolers show robust sensitivity
to informants’ past accuracy, we predicted that children
would be trusting toward the previously accurate informant
and accept this informant’s unexpected labels, and that they
would be skeptical about the previously inaccurate
informant and, therefore, rather not change their initial
judgments about the object labels. Additionally, it has been
found that children with larger vocabulary (Jaswal, 2007)
and those with disadvantaged executive function (Jaswal et
al., 2014) were more credulous toward others’ testimony
than those with smaller vocabulary and advanced executive
function skills, respectively. Hence, children’s vocabulary
and executive function ability were also assessed to control
for potential confounds in this study.

Method

set, features from the pair of typical exemplars were
integrated to form a “hybrid” exemplar. These hybrid
exemplars were designed such that each hybrid object
looked mostly like one of the two typical exemplars of that
set (i.e., dominant exemplar) but also shared some features
of the other exemplar (i.e., non-dominant exemplar) such as
a spoon-like key (see Figure 1).
A total of 14 video clips was made, corresponding to
three familiarization clips with the informant naming each
of the familiar objects correctly (accurate condition), three
familiarization clips with the informant naming each of the
familiar objects incorrectly (inaccurate condition), four
testimony clips featuring the informant naming the hybrid
objects with the labels for the dominant exemplars, and four
testimony clips featuring the informant naming the same
hybrid objects with the labels for the non-dominant
exemplars (see Figure 2).

Design and Procedure
This study employed a between-participants design. The
procedure for both the accurate and inaccurate conditions
was the same, except that the history of the informant was
established differently during the familiarization phase.
Children were tested individually in a quiet room at their
childcare centers. Children were randomly assigned to one
of the two conditions. All children were seated in front of a
laptop computer and a female experimenter (a different

Participants
A total of 60 3- and 4-year-olds (Mage = 49.64 months, SD =
6.69, range = 35–61 months; 26 girls) participated in this
study. Half of them were randomly assigned to the accurate
condition and the other half to the inaccurate condition.
Children were recruited from private childcare centers in a
middle-class neighborhood in Singapore. Only children
whose parents had given their consent were included in the
study. The majority of participants (96%) were Asian and
the rest were Eurasian. All children spoke English and the
experiment was conducted in English. One additional child
did not want to provide answers in the test phase and,
therefore, was excluded from the final sample. Another
eight children participated but were excluded due to
experimenter error (n = 2) or failure to name familiar
objects (see Design and Procedure, n = 6).

spoon-like key

pen-like toothbrush

cup-like hat

Figure 1. Hybrid objects used in the experiment.
SELECTIVE TRUST IN UNEXPECTED TESTIMONY

23

Accurate condition: Look
at this! This is an apple.
Inaccurate condition: Look
at this! This is a dog.

Materials
Video clips of a single informant naming photographs of
objects were prepared and shown to children on a 13-inch
laptop computer. The informant was a college-age female
actor and with neutral facial expressions. In each video clip,
the informant was seated behind a table with a picture
placed on it. Pictures of three familiar objects (i.e., apple,
ball, and book) were used in the familiarization trials to
establish the informant’s accuracy. Eight typical exemplars
of familiar categories were selected and paired to form four
stimulus sets to be used in the test trials (i.e., key-spoon,
car-shoe, toothbrush-pen, and hat-cup). For each stimulus

shoe-like car

Accurate/inaccurate
condition: This is a spoon.
Look at the spoon.

Fig. 1. Screenshots from familiarization video clips in the familiarization phase (top) and

Figure 2. Screenshots from familiarization video clips in the
testimony video clips in the test phase (bottom).
familiarization
phase (top) and testimony video clips in the
test phase (bottom).

2556

person from the informant in the video clips) was seated
beside the child. The whole procedure was videotaped and
children’s responses were coded from the videos. Each child
received three familiarization trials (Familiarization Phase),
followed by four test trials (Test Phase), and two explicit
judgment trials. The experiment was designed and written
using PsychoPy (Peirce, 2007).
Familiarization Phase In the familiarization phase, the
experimenter introduced the children to a single informant,
a still image of whom was shown on the screen. In the
accurate condition, children were then presented with three
familiarization video clips, each showing the informant
accurately naming a familiar object (i.e., labeling an apple, a
ball, and a book correctly). In the inaccurate condition,
children were familiarized with the same informant
providing inaccurate information (i.e., saying that the above
three objects were a dog, a tree, and a chair, respectively).
After each familiarization video clip, children saw a picture
of the same familiar object presented in the previous video
(without the informant) and were asked by the experimenter,
“Can you tell me what this is called?” This question was to
make sure that each child knew the correct labels of the
familiar objects, implying that the child was able to tell
whether the informant had made errors or not. Children did
not receive any feedback about whether they or the
informant was correct. The order of the presentation of the
three familiar objects was the same for all participants.
Test Phase The experimenter proceeded to the test phase
where children had to respond to a testimony that conflicted
with their initial judgments (i.e., an unexpected but possible
label for a hybrid object). Each test trial began with a
picture of a typical object (e.g., a key) appeared on the
computer screen and the experimenter asked the children for
the name of the object. The purpose of the question was to
ensure that the children knew the names of the typical
objects. Six children were excluded because they failed to
name one or more typical objects (two in accurate and four
in inaccurate condition). The experimenter then showed a
picture of the other typical object from the same stimulus set
(e.g., a spoon) on the screen, and children were again asked
what that object was called. Children were then presented
with a picture of the hybrid object that included features of
the two previously shown typical objects (e.g., a keyspoon), and were asked if they knew what that object was
called (pre-testimony test). Children’s answers to this pretestimony test were recorded as their initial judgments about
the name of the hybrid object. The experimenter then told
the children, “Okay. Now, let’s hear what the girl will say
about this.” and played a testimony video clip, where the
informant and the picture of the same hybrid object
appeared in the clip, and the informant always provided a
label that was different from what the children had indicated
earlier. Subsequently, children were shown the picture of
the hybrid object on the computer screen for a second time
(without the informant) and were asked by the experimenter

what the hybrid object was called (post-testimony test).
During the test phase, children received neutral feedback
following a response, regardless of what their answers were
(e.g., “Thank you!”). All children completed four test trials.
The order of the two typical exemplars of each stimulus set
was fixed, such that, for two sets of stimuli (key-spoon and
hat-cup), the dominant exemplars were shown first, and for
the other two sets (car-shoe and toothbrush-pen), the nondominant exemplars were shown first. The order of the four
test sets was randomized for each participant.
Explicit Judgment Trials After children completed all four
test trials, the experimenter asked two questions assessing
children’s evaluation about the informant. With the picture
of the informant presented on the screen, children were
asked, “Was this girl good or not good at telling the names
of the pictures?” Finally, the experimenter showed a picture
of a novel object and asked children whether they would
seek the informant’s help for the name of the object, “If you
wanted to know what this new thing was called, would this
girl be a good person to ask?” This question was included to
replicate Vanderbilt et al.’s (2014) results on children’s
overwhelming judgment of the accurate/inaccurate speaker
as being a good person to ask for the label of a novel object.
In addition to performing the above experiment
investigating selective trust in unexpected testimony, all
children completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(PPVT-4; Dunn & Dunn, 2007), which measures receptive
English vocabulary, and the Dimensional Change Card Sort
task (DCCS-standard version; Zelazo, 2006), which assesses
executive function. Both PPVT and DCCS tasks were
administered and scored following standard procedures. For
the PPVT, each child obtained a standardized score with a
mean of 100. For the DCCS, children were classified as
passing or failing the task based on performance on the
post-switch phase of the DCCS.

Results
The number of times (out of 4 trials) when children adopted
the different labels provided by the informant rather than
persisting with their initial answers about the names of the
hybrid objects on post-testimony test was calculated for
each participant as the dependent variable. Thus, the scores
indicate how children are willing to trust the informant and
accept the informant’s testimony that is contrary to their
own. Preliminary analyses confirmed no effects or
interactions involving children’s age, gender, stimulus set,
or test order; therefore, further analyses collapsed across
these factors. We report 95% confidence intervals and effect
sizes for our statistical tests. In the case of comparisons of
group means these confidence intervals refer to the observed
mean difference.
We first evaluated whether children in the two conditions
had comparable language and executive function abilities.
Vocabulary scores on PPVT-4 were not significantly
different between the conditions (accurate: M = 95.07;
inaccurate: M = 96.17), t(58) = -0.35, p = .73, Cohen’s d = -

2557

0.092, 95% CI of the difference [-7.45, 5.25]. Regarding
performance on the DCCS task, children in the two
conditions were comparable in terms of the proportion of
children who passed the task (accurate: 20/30 passing, 67%;
inaccurate: 20/30, 67%), χ2(1, Ν = 60) = 0.00, p = 1.00,
Cramer’s V = .00. Correlational analyses revealed that
neither the PPVT scores nor the DCCS scores were related
to children’s likelihood of endorsing the informant’s
testimony across the two conditions, rs < .042, ps > .74.
In addition, all children, regardless of the experimental
condition, correctly named the familiar objects and the
typical exemplars during the familiarization and test phase
respectively. Analyses of children’s responses in the pretestimony test trials, where children were to name the hybrid
objects for the first time, indicated that children provided
labels matching the dominant exemplars on 92% of the
trials and labels matching the non-dominant exemplars 8%
of the trials. There were equivalent number of pre-testimony
trials where children chose the non-dominant label in
accurate and inaccurate conditions (7 vs. 13 trials,
respectively). Nevertheless, the informant always provided
the label that was different from the children’s label for the
hybrid object in the testimony video clips (thus unexpected).
Crucially, we were interested in whether 3- and 4-yearolds would respond less credulously to the unexpected
testimony from an informant who demonstrated inaccuracy
at naming familiar objects compared to an informant with a
history of accuracy, that is, whether children would discard
their own labels and accept the unexpected labels from the
informant in the post-testimony test.
As seen in Figure 3A, children were more willing to
revise their answers and accept the unexpected testimony in
the accurate condition (M = 3.60, 95% CI [3.15, 4.06]) than
in the inaccurate condition (M = 1.33, 95% CI [0.88, 1.79]),
U = 123.50, z = -5.12, p < .001, r = -.66. Examining patterns
of individual behavior revealed similar differences between
accurate and inaccurate conditions. We calculated the
number of children in each condition who endorsed the
unexpected testimony on 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4 out of four trials.
Chi-square tests showed that the distribution of children
across various patterns of responses was different between
the accurate and inaccurate conditions, χ2(4, Ν = 60) =
30.64, p < .001, Cramer’s V = .72. There were more
children who accepted the informant’s testimony on 3 or 4
trials in the accurate condition (n = 28) than the inaccurate
condition (n = 7). None of the significance levels were
affected by removing data from test trials where the child
chose the non-dominant label in the pre-testimony test
before the informant providing different testimony.
Lastly, children’s responses to the two explicit judgment
questions were analyzed 1 . In line with the patterns of
information endorsement, significantly more children in the
accurate condition agreed that the informant was good at
1

Three children in the inaccurate condition did not provide
answers to the “good or not good” question and one child in the
accurate condition did not provide answers to the “ask for help”
question.

naming the pictures compared with those in the inaccurate
condition (90.0% vs. 51.9%), χ2(1, Ν = 57) = 10.24, p =
.003, Cramer’s V = .42 (see Figure 3B). However, there was
no significant effect of condition on the question assessing
children’s willingness to seek help from the informant for
the label of a novel object, χ2(1, Ν = 59) = 2.59, p = .18,
Cramer’s V = .21 (see Figure 3C). Children overwhelmingly
judged that the informant, regardless of whether she showed
a history of accuracy or inaccuracy, would be a good person
to ask about the label of a novel object—89.7% of children
did so in the accurate condition, and it was the case for
73.3% of children in the inaccurate condition. These rates
were in a similar range as those reported by Vanderbilt et al.
(2014) where children were asked to judge whether an
accurate or inaccurate source, either alone or paired with
each other, would be a good person to ask for labels of
novel objects (76%–90%).

Discussion
The current study examined the extent to which an
informant’s history of accuracy influenced children’s
endorsement of claims that conflicted with their
independent beliefs about ambiguous hybrid artifacts. Using
a single-informant paradigm, we found that 3- and 4-yearolds’ trust toward unexpected testimony differed depending
on the informant’s past accuracy. Specifically, while
children consistently revised their own initial judgments and
endorsed unexpected testimony from an informant who
appeared to be accurate and knowledgeable about common
objects, they were less likely to do so in response to
someone who made naming errors with these common
objects. This study provided novel findings that children
consider an informant’s previous epistemic history when
determining whether or not to revise their own prior beliefs
in light of unexpected testimony.
The present results challenge the notion that in the
absence of conflicting testimony from another informant,
young children generally trust a single informant who has a
record of inaccuracy. This notion of trust toward a single
inaccurate informant may be true only if children
themselves do not hold any conflicting information at all.
Vanderbilt et al. (2014) found that 3- and 4-year-olds were
willing to trust the testimony of an inaccurate informant
when there was no other informant offering an alternative.
In contrast, children in the current study were less willing to
accept the testimony provided by a single inaccurate
informant in the absence of competing testimony from
another informant. An important difference between this
study and Vanderbilt et al.’s (2014) work, however, is that
children in this study held a different interpretation of an
object than the informant, whereas children in the previous
study did not. Thus, the present results suggest that
children’s own prior knowledge play an important role in
selective trust, and that children would evaluate all
available sources of information, including themselves,
when determining whom to trust. In situations where
children are mostly ignorant, such as labeling unfamiliar

2558

100%

3

2

1

0
accurate inaccurate

B

100%

75%

C

75%

Help seeking

A

Evaluation of informant reliability

Unexpected testimony endorsement

4

50%

25%

50%

25%

0%

0%
accurate inaccurate

accurate inaccurate

Figure 3. Evaluation of the informant by condition: (A) number of trials (out of 4) children adopting unexpected testimony
from the informant, (B) percentage of children agreeing the informant being good at naming pictures, and (C) percentage of
children being willing to seek novel information from the informant. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

Fig. 2. Mean proportion of trials children endorsed the unexpected testimony provided by the

objects, children are likely to perceive an informant who
Even though the present results showed that children
confidently provides
testimony
as more
knowledgeable
thangroup.
demonstrated
a reduced95%
tendency
to accept
the testimony
informant
according
to condition
and age
Error bars represent
confidence
intervals.
them, even if the informant has made errors previously.
against their own judgments in the inaccurate condition, it
Whereas in situations
children
possess
some prior
remains
debatable
Asteriskswhere
indicate
significant
differences
between
conditions
(*** pwhether
< .001). it was because the children
knowledge, albeit loosely formed ones, such as labeling
believed that the inaccurate informant was not trustworthy,
ambiguous hybrid objects in this study, children would
or that they simply had alternative information available
evaluate the relative trustworthiness of the source of
(i.e., their own), or both. Our results showed that children
information against themselves.
gave up their own beliefs and accepted the testimony from
How do children determine the trustworthiness of an
an accurate informant on an average of 90% of trials (nearinformant in relation to themselves? Past accuracy is one
ceiling), yet they were still willing to give up their own
important factor. In the current study, children were more
beliefs and accept the inaccurate informant’s testimony on
willing to discard their own beliefs in favor of an adult
an average of 33% of trials (a 0% would indicate absolute
informant’s testimony when this adult had been proven
rejection). This implies that children may be more ready to
accurate compared to an inaccurate informant. However, it
accept an adult informant’s testimony than to reject it, even
remains an open question that whether the current results
when the adult informant had been inaccurate previously,
were due to a negative bias toward the inaccurate source of
and even when the testimony conflicted with their own, at
information, or due to both a preference for the accurate
least possibly until they are provided with stronger evidence
source and an avoidence of the inaccurate one. Future
of the negative credibility of the adult informant (Ronfard &
studies could further investigate this question by examining
Lane, in press).
children’s responses in a control condition where no history
Children’s degree of selective trust may thus be affected
of accuracy/inaccuracy would be provided. Age is another
by various factors that reflect the extent of an informant’s
factor. Children in the accurate condition might perceive the
credibility. For instance, children were found to be more
accurate adult as a more credible source of information
forgiving with errors in the episodic domain (e.g., locations
about what artifacts are called than them. In fact, 3- and 4of objects) than in the semantic domain (e.g., names of
year-olds were more willing to learn novel labels from an
objects); they used semantic errors but not episodic errors
adult than from a child when both were equally reliable
when evaluating informants’ trustworthiness in labeling
(Jaswal & Neely, 2006). However, children appeared to
objects (Palmquist & Jaswal, 2015). It is unknown whether
weigh accuracy over age in selective trust; they were found
children would remain skeptical toward unexpected
to trust a previously accurate child more than a previously
testimony from an inaccurate informant who made episodic
inaccurate adult when learning new words. This is also true
errors. Furthermore, hybrid artifacts were used in this study
in the inaccurate condition reported here, such that
and the unexpected labels provided by the informant were
children’s distrust toward inaccuracy was so robust that they
always possibly “correct” and not entirely wrong, as the
assumed that an inaccurate adult was less reliable than them
labels did contain some features of the hybrid, although they
(a child). These results suggest that children consider
were contrary to children’s inferences. It is unknown
multiple factors when evaluating the trustworthiness of
whether children would still be willing to accept the
another source of information compared with them, but
accurate informant’s unexpected labels if the labels were not
weigh certain factors more than others (i.e., accuracy over
possibly correct (e.g., calling a spoon-like key a cat).
age).
Further research is needed to investigate how children’s

2559

selective trust may change depending on the types of errors
made by the informants and when the unexpected labels are
not actually possible.
Last but not least, children’s openness to alternative
information may be dependent on the strength of their initial
beliefs. Indeed, Chan and Tardif (2013) found that 6-yearolds were more accepting an alternative when they felt less
certain about their own prior knowledge. In the current
study, children who chose the non-dominant label in the
pre-testimony trials might be less certain about their answer
and more prone to revise. Therefore it was important to
control for children’s initial choice (there were only limited
number of trials with the non-dominant label thus they were
excluded).
To conclude, the current study showed that when
confronted with different testimony from others, young
preschoolers selectively revised their own inferences
depending on the informant’s past accuracy. Young children
are savvy in that they can use such credibility cues to
evaluate another individual who holds different opinions
from them and decide whether to adjust their own beliefs or
not accordingly. The ability to appropriately evaluate the
reliability of various sources of information and update their
own knowledge correspondingly is important, since reliable
sources allow children to learn efficiently while unreliable
sources increase the risk of being misinformed. Our findings
suggest that this ability is emerging in 3- and 4-year-old
children.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the children and parents who participated
and to the teachers and staff of the Creative O Preschoolers’
Bay, Red SchoolHouse, MacPherson Sheng Hong Childcare
Centre, and Safari House Preschool. We thank Eilise
Francesca for serving as the actor in our videos. This
research was supported by Singapore University of
Technology and Design President’s Graduate Fellowship
awarded to the first author.

References
Birch, S. A. J., Vauthier, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2008). Threeand four-year-olds spontaneously use others’ past
performance to guide their learning. Cognition, 107,
1018–1034.
Chan, C. C. Y., & Tardif, R. (2013). Knowing better: The
role of prior knowledge and culture in trust in testimony.
Developmental Psychology, 49, 591–601.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, D. M. (2007). Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test. Bloomington, MN: NCS Pearson Inc.
Gelman, S. A. (2009). Learning from others: Children’s
construction of concepts. Annual Review of Psychology,
60, 115–140.
Harris, P. L. (2007). Trust. Developmental Science, 10(1),
135–138.
Heyman, G. D., Sritanyaratana, L., & Vanderbilt, K. E.
(2013). Young children’s trust in overtly misleading
advice. Cognitive Science, 37, 646–667.

Jaswal, V. K. (2007). The effect of vocabulary size on
toddlers’ receptiveness to unexpected testimony about
category membership. Infancy, 12(2), 169–187.
Jaswal, V. K., Lima, O. K., & Small, J. E. (2009).
Compliance, conversion, and category induction. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 102, 182–195.
Jaswal, V. K., & Neely, L. A. (2006). Adults don’t always
know best: Preschoolers use past reliability over age
when learning new words. Psychological Science, 17(9),
757–758.
Jaswal, V. K., Pérez-Edgar, K., Kondrad, R. L., Palmquist,
C. M., Cole, C. A., & Cole, C. E. (2014). Can’t stop
believing: Inhibitory control and resistance to misleading
testimony. Developmental Science, 17(6), 965–976.
Koenig, M. A., Clément, F., & Harris, P. (2004). Trust in
testimony: Children’s use of true and false statements.
Psychological Science, 15, 694–699.
Koenig, M. A., & Sabbagh, M. A. (2013). Selective social
learning: New perspectives on learning from others.
Developmental Psychology, 49, 399–403.
Lane, J., & Harris, P. (2015). The roles of intuition and
informants’ expertise in children's epistemic trust. Child
Development, 86(3), 919–926.
Mills, C. M. (2013). Knowing when to doubt: Developing a
critical stance when learning from others. Developmental
Psychology, 49, 404–418.
Nguyen, S. P., Gordon, C. L., Chevalier, T., & Girgis, H.
(2016). Trust and doubt: An examinication of children’s
decision to believe what they are told about food. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 144, 66–83.
Pamquist, C. M., & Jaswal, V. K. (2015). Preschoolers’
inferences about pointers and labelers: The modality
matters. Cognitive Development, 35, 178–185.
Peirce, J. W. (2007). PsychoPy - Psychophysics software in
Python. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 162(1-2), 8–
13.
Rakoczy, H., Enrling, C., Harris, P. L., & Schultze, T.
(2015). Young children heed advice selectively. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 138, 71–87.
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2009).
Young children's selective learning of rule games from
reliable and unreliable models. Cognitive Development,
24(1), 61–69.
Ronfard, S., & Lane, J. (in press). Preschoolers continually
adjust their epistemic trust based on an informant’s
ongoing accuracy. Child Development.
Sabbagh, M.A., & Baldwin, D.A. (2001). Learning words
from knowledgeable versus ignorant speakers: links
between preschoolers’ theory of mind and semantic
development. Child Development, 72, 1054–1070.
Vanderbilt, K. E., Heyman, G. D., & Liu, D. (2014). In the
absence of conflicting testimony young children trust
inaccurate informants. Developmental Science, 17(3),
443–451.
Zelazo, P. D. (2006). The Dimensional Change Card Sort
(DCCS): a method of assessing executive function in
children. Nature Protocols, 1, 297–301.

2560

