Influencing Network Graph Perception and Judgment: Effects of Direct
Connections, Base Rates, and Visual Layout Proximity on Social Network Analysis
Rebecca E. Rhodes1 (rebecca.rhodes@jhuapl.edu), Isaiah Harbison1 (james.harbison@jhuapl.edu),
Nathan Bos1 (nathan.bos@jhuapl.edu), Celeste Lyn Paul2 (clpaul@tycho.ncsc.mil),
Clay Fink1 (clay.fink@jhuapl.edu), Anthony Johnson1 (anthony.johnson@jhuapl.edu)
1. Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD
2. U.S. Department of Defense, USA
Abstract
Social network graphs are often used to help inform
judgments in a variety of domains, such as public health, law
enforcement, and political science. Across two studies, we
examined how graph features influenced probabilistic
judgments in graph-based social network analysis and
identified multiple heuristics that participants used to inform
these judgments. Study 1 demonstrated that participants’
judgments were influenced by information about direct
connections, base rates, and layout proximity, and
participants’ self-reported strategies also reflected use of this
information. Study 2 replicated findings from Study 1 and
provided additional insight into the hierarchical ordering of
these strategies and the decision process underlying
judgments from social network graphs.
Keywords: social network analysis; graph comprehension;
data visualization; judgment and decision making

Introduction
Social Network Analysis
Social network analysis is an analytical method for
understanding data that depicts relationships between
entities, such as communications between people or the flow
of information through a community. Social network
analysis (SNA) can be used to inform judgments such as
who the most connected or influential person is in a
community. The applications for SNA are widespread. The
CDC has used social networks to map the spread of
infectious diseases (Cook, 2007), and intelligence
professionals have used SNA to map potential terrorist
suspects. For example, Krebs (2002) was able to map a
network of suspected 9/11 terrorists after the attacks based
on publicly available information in the news and provide
insight into the terrorist organization.
Social networks are typically depicted using node-link
diagrams, in which nodes (depicted with circles) represent
objects, such as people, and edges between the nodes
(depicted with lines) represent a connection, such as a
friendship or a recent communication. Although there are
quantitative measures of graph structures, such as network
centrality, SNA often involves some degree of visual
interpretation. In many applications of SNA, such as tactical
decision making in military organizations, users of network
graphs have limited time to make their decisions and may
not have the background to supplement their visual

interpretation with more objective, quantitative measures.
Thus, clearly communicating the important information in
network graphs is essential. In practice, however, these
network visualizations are often complex with hundreds or
thousands of nodes, and relatively little is known about the
cognitive strategies people use to make probabilistic
judgments from these graphs. In the present study, we
aimed to identify graph features and heuristics that
influenced probabilistic judgments in scenarios that
mirrored real-world SNA tasks.

Graph Perception
Much research has applied perceptual and cognitive
theories to improve graph comprehension and readability.
Purchase, Cohen, and James (1997) first demonstrated that
several aesthetic qualities could improve comprehension,
such as maximizing the symmetry of the graph, minimizing
the number of intersecting edges, and minimizing the
number of bends in a series of segments. Purchase (2000)
found that graph layouts that minimized intersecting edges
significantly improved participants’ abilities to answer
questions about the relationships in the graph. Similarly,
Ware, Purchase, Colpoys, and McGill (2002) found that
cutting unnecessary edges significantly improved cognitive
performance.
Other perceptual features in graphs have been studied as
well. For example, McGrath, Blythe, & Krackhardt (1997)
found that nodes that were positioned closer to the center of
the graph were perceived as more prominent, suggesting a
bias towards layout centrality. Additionally, nodes were
more likely to be considered to be in the same group if they
were positioned closer to each other, and nodes positioned
directly between two nodes (as opposed to at an angle)
made them more likely to be considered a “bridge” between
the two nodes.
Gestalt principles may help explain why some aesthetic
features can influence graph interpretation by exploiting
people’s tendency to identify patterns (Novick & Bassok,
2005). The Gestalt principle of good continuation suggests
that paths are more easily recognized when they contain less
jaggedness, suggesting that the fewer the bends between two
nodes, the more readily the path connecting them will be
observed. The principle of proximity suggests that spatial
proximity between objects implies logical groupings. Other
cognitive heuristics may also influence graph interpretation.

2992

For example, people sometimes ignore base rates when
making probabilistic judgments. The extent to which this
occurs when making judgments from network graphs, which
may depict base rate information in a visual way, is unclear
(but see Micallef, Dragicevic, & Fekete, 2012).

base rate of salient nodes, and 3) proximity of salient nodes
to the POI.

Pilot Study
We conducted a pilot study with 30 participants recruited
from Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) to identify graph
features people attend to when making judgments about the
likelihood that a particular node belonged to a defined
category. We planned to use the results of the pilot study to
inform our decision about graph features to manipulate in
our experiments1. Participants were asked to play the role of
a data analyst at a law enforcement agency and use nodelink graphs to estimate the likelihood that they would
further investigate a person of interest (POI) in a community
that has known drug users (Figure 1). They were also asked
to describe the strategies they used to make their judgments.
The POI was indicated as a black node, known drug users as
blue nodes, and everyone else as yellow nodes. Lines were
drawn between nodes to indicate recent communications.
Two graph features were varied, 1) the number of direct
connections the POI had, and 2) the number of drug users in
the whole graph (base rate). The graph visual was generated
using a force-directed layout, a popular way of visualizing
graph data. Participant responses revealed two common
strategies. The first was based on the number of drug users
within the POI’s direct connections (what we call the “ratio”
strategy, N = 10). The second strategy was based on the
spatial proximity of drug user nodes to the POI node in the
visual layout, regardless of whether they were actually
closely connected to the POI (“proximity” strategy, N = 8).
We expected to see instances of the ratio strategy, but not
necessarily the proximity strategy, since the position of
nodes in a force-directed layout is a function of connections
rather than nodes. In general, layout position in a graph can
be misleading, and two nodes visually close to each other
but not connected may not necessarily have a strong
relationship. Three participants in the pilot study also
mentioned relying on the total number of drug users in the
graph. This strategy was expected to be more frequent
considering that base rates were explicitly manipulated
across graphs. However, participants apparently found base
rates less informative than ratio and proximity features for
the pilot set of graphs.

Overview of Experiments
We conducted two experiments to understand how the
graph features identified in the pilot study influence
probabilistic judgments. In each study, we manipulated the
three features identified during our pilot study: 1) ratio, or
the number of connections the POI has to salient nodes, 2)
1

All procedures in the pilot study and experiments were
approved by the Johns Hopkins University Institutional Review
Board.

Figure 1: Example network graph provided in pilot study.

Study 1
Participants and Procedure
Participants. We recruited 30 participants from AMT.
Participants were required to have a “Masters” qualification,
indicating that they had repeatedly demonstrated good
performance in the AMT marketplace. Most participants
reported having no experience (72.41%) or only slight
experience (17.24%) with SNA. One participant was
excluded from analysis for failing an attention check.
Scenario. Similar to the pilot study, participants were asked
to take on the role of a data analyst at a law enforcement
agency and use graphs to identify potential drug users in a
community. They were provided a set of 36 graphs that
described communications in a small community over the
past month. Participants were told that links between nodes
represented non-family relationships with others, such as
friends and coworkers. No information was provided on
how the graphs were constructed. For each graph,
participants made a judgment of how likely they would be
to investigate the POI and described how they used the
graph to make their judgment.
Materials. The graphs were small real-world graphs
generated from the Polbooks dataset of co-purchased
political
books
(V.
Krebs,
unpublished,
http://www.orgnet.com/). Graphs were rendered with the
default graph plotting parameters in the R iGraph package,
which uses the Fruchterman-Rheingold force-directed
algorithm. Each graph consisted of 104 nodes. As in the
pilot study, the POI was indicated as a black node, known
drug users as blue nodes, and everyone else as yellow
nodes. Direct connections to the POI were highlighted in the
graphs to aid interpretation. Emphasizing direct connections
in this way may have led to more emphasis on the ratio
strategy, but highlighting connections was deemed
important to help participants distinguish between graph
connectedness from layout proximity (i.e. visual closeness).

2993

Results and Discussion

Conditions. Three graph conditions were manipulated
within-subjects: 1) number of drug users in the POI’s N
direct neighbors (0/N, 1/N, Half/N); 2) overall base rate of
known drug users in entire graph (5% or 50% of all nodes);
and 3) proximity placement of known drug user nodes (near
or far from POI). Note that proximity was the physical
location of drug user nodes within the visual graph layout
and not the graph connectedness. Graph connectedness was
controlled by removing edges that connected proximal drug
user nodes to the POI’s direct neighbors (Figure 2).

Ratio: Half/N

Ratio: 1/N

Ratio: 0/N

Base Rate: Low

Proximity: Far

Base Rate: High

Proximity: Near

Figure 2: Graph feature conditions. Note that in the
Proximity: Near graph, the proximal blue nodes are not
connected to the POI or the POI’s direct neighbors.
Likelihood Judgments. For each graph, participants were
asked to rate how likely they would be to investigate the
POI on a scale of 1 to 7 (1 = Extremely Unlikely, 7 =
Extremely Likely).
Strategy Use. After giving their likelihood rating,
participants were also asked to describe any specific graph
information they used in making their rating. Responses
were open-ended text responses and were analyzed using a
structured coding approach, described in Table 1, with three
coders who coded 75% of the responses independently and
25% overlapping. Inter-rater reliability on the 25% co-coded
responses was high (Cohen’s Kappa > .75).
Table 1: Coding scheme for open-ended responses.
Strategy
Ratio
Base Rate
Proximity

Description
Mentions number of users in POI
connections
Mentions number of users in graph
Mentions visual closeness of POI to users

Likelihood Judgments. We modeled likelihood judgments
with a linear multilevel model with base rate, proximity, and
ratio conditions treated as random effects. Graph feature
conditions were nested within participant. Multilevel
models are able to estimate the variance associated with
each random effect; thus, the model can account for the
within-individual variability for different graph feature
conditions. In addition to modeling random effects,
multilevel models can also simultaneously estimate fixed
effects, which in this case represent the average effect for
the whole sample.
We sequentially entered each graph feature into the model
as a fixed effect to examine its effect on likelihood ratings.
Base rate, ratio, and proximity each significantly improved
the fit of the model (χ2(1) = 34.51, p < .001, χ2 (2) = 148.62,
p < .001, and χ2(1) = 45.07, p < .001, respectively).
Specifically, higher base rates increased the likelihood of
investigating the POI (b = 0.97, t(1011) = 7.54, p < .001),
higher ratios increased the likelihood of investigating (b =
1.24, t(1011) = 7.18, p < .001 for 1/N vs. 0/N and b = 3.86,
t(1011) = 22.34, p < .001 for Half/N vs. 1/N), and closer
proximities also increased the likelihood of investigating (b
= 1.02, t(1011) = 9.58, p < .001). These results suggest that
participants considered all three graph features when
making their judgments. The observation that participants’
suspicion levels of the POI increased with proximity to
known drug users was significant, because it suggests that
participants believed proximity to be a meaningful indicator.
We also found a significant interaction between base rate
and proximity (χ2(1) = 146.00, p < .001). When proximity
was far, there was no difference between the base rate
conditions, but when proximity was near, higher base rates
significantly increased the likelihood of investigating (b =
1.70, t(1006) = 13.96, p < .001; Figure 3). In other words,
base rate information only affected judgments to the extent
that it placed more users near the POI.
There were also interactions between the base rate and
ratio conditions (χ2(2) = 112.90, p < .001) as well as
between the ratio and proximity conditions (χ2(2)= 81.89, p
< .001), as depicted in Figure 3. Increasing the base rate had
a stronger effect in the 0/N and 1/N conditions compared to
the Half/N condition (b = 1.70, t(1006) = 11.40, p < .001
and b = 0.94, t(1006) = 6.32, p < .001 for 0/N vs. Half/N
and 1/N vs. Half/N, respectively). Likewise, proximity had a
stronger effect in the 0/N and 1/N conditions as well (b =
1.36, t(1006) = 9.09, p < .001 and b = 0.87, t(1006) = 5.85,
p < .001, respectively). These interactions reveal that, in the
highest ratio condition, base rate and proximity information
had little effect. One interpretation of this result is that when
ratio was high, participants did not feel a need to look at
other information in the graph. In contrast, when the ratio
was 0/N or 1/N, base rate and proximity information both
influenced judgments, such that higher base rates and closer
proximity increased likelihoods of investigating.

2994

Strategy Use. Analysis of participants’ self-reported
strategies validated our findings from the pilot study.
Participants mentioned using the ratio strategy for the
majority of graphs (85.34%). Proximity was the next most
frequently mentioned strategy (22.41%), followed by base
rate a small percentage of the time (12.64%).

likelihood judgments about the POI in each graph.
Conditions. The same three graph conditions from Study 1
were manipulated within-subjects. We also introduced
different scenarios as a between-subjects manipulation for
the source of the graph data. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three data scenarios: drug use, political
opinion, and infectious disease (Table 2).

Likelihood Rating (1−7)

6

Table 2: Description of data scenarios.
Proximity

4

Far

Scenario
Drug

Near
2

0
5%

50%

Base Rate

Opinion
6

Base Rate

4

5%
50%
2

Likelihood Rating (1−7)

Likelihood Rating (1−7)

6

Proximity

4

Far

Disease

Near
2

0

0
0/N

1/N

0/N

Half/N

1/N

Half/N

Ratio

Ratio

Figure 3: Interactions between graph feature conditions.

Study 2
Study 2 sought to replicate the findings of Study 1 with a
broader range of stimuli. We introduced two additional
scenarios, public opinion and disease propagation. Network
graphs can be used to represent relational data from a
variety of domains, and assumptions about the data may
change interpretations of the graph. For example, base rates
may be utilized more when the activities represented in the
graphs are perceived to be more mobile or contagious. We
speculated that a network graph representing the spread of
an infectious disease could lead people to use base rate
strategies more often than a network graph representing the
spread of drug use. Study 2 also sought to better understand
the hierarchical ordering of cognitive strategies identified in
the previous studies by constructing a decision tree that
could predict the conditions under which particular
strategies will be used.

Participants and Procedure
Participants. We recruited 196 participants from AMT.
Participants were limited to U.S. residents and had at least a
90% approval rating for previous HITs. We excluded 11
participants who either failed attention checks or had
participated in a previous study. Most participants said they
had no prior experience (64.86%) or only slight prior
experience (28.65%) with SNA.
Scenario and Materials. Participants were provided the
same set of 36 graphs from Study 1 and were asked to make

Brief Description
In a community in which some percentage of
people are known users, how likely will the
POI become a drug user in the next six
months?
In a community in which some percentage of
people are known proponents of a new
proposal, how likely will the POI become a
proponent in the next six months?
In a community in which some percentage of
people are infected with a new disease
transmitted through social contact, how likely
will the POI become infected in the next six
months?

Strategy Use. In contrast to Study 1, in which participants
described their analysis strategy in an open-text form,
participants in Study 2 rated the strategies from Study 1
(ratio, base rate, and proximity) as well as distractors (e.g.,
central or peripheral location of POI, presence of a cluster of
nodes) as to how important they were to their likelihood
judgment. Ratings were on a scale of 1 (Not at all
important) to 5 (Extremely important). The list order of
strategies was randomized at each presentation.

Results and Discussion
Likelihood Judgments. We used the same model from
Study 1 but added scenario to the model as a fixed effect.
There was a significant main effect of scenario on likelihood
judgments (χ2(2)= 26.40, p < .001); specifically, participants
in the disease condition gave higher likelihood ratings on
average than participants in the drugs or opinion conditions
(b = 0.58, t(182) = 4.65, p < .001 and b = 0.63, t(182) =
4.71, p < .001 for disease vs. drugs and disease vs. opinion,
respectively). As in Study 1, there were also main effects of
base rate (χ2(1)= 288.97, p < .001), proximity (χ2(1)=
291.26, p < .001), and ratio (χ2(2)= 671.77, p < .001). As
depicted in Figure 4, higher base rates led to higher
likelihood ratings (b = 1.21, t(6471) = 24.06, p < .001),
higher ratios led to higher ratings (b = 0.62, t(6471) = 8.92,
p < .001 for 1/N vs. 0/N, and b = 2.16, t(6471) = 31.39, p <
.001 for Half/N vs. 1/N), and closer proximities also led to
higher ratings (b = 0.99, t(6471) = 25.00, p < .001).
We again found two-way interactions between base rate
and proximity (χ2(1)= 645.45, p < .001), base rate and ratio
(χ2(2) = 424.43, p < .001), and proximity and ratio (χ2(2) =

2995

501.50, p < .001). Consistent with Study 1, increasing the
base rate only mattered when proximity was high (b = 1.36,
t(6466) = 28.31, p < .001); increasing the base rate had
stronger effects when ratios were 0/N or 1/N compared to
Half/N (b = 1.28, t(6466) = 21.70, p < .001 for 0/N vs.
Half/N, and b = 0.79, t(6466) = 13.43 for 1/N vs. Half/N);
and closer proximity also had stronger effects when ratios
were 0/N or 1/N (b = 1.30, t(6466) = 22.16, p < .001 for 0/N
vs. Half/N, and b = 0.36, t(6466) = 6.19, p < .001 for 1/N
vs. Half/N). In other words, when the ratio of users in the
POI’s connections was very high (Half/N), other graph
features had less influence on judgments.

6

Base Rate

4

5%
50%
2

Likelihood Rating (1−7)

Likelihood Rating (1−7)

6

Ratio
4

0/N

rated ratio information as more important than proximity
information, b = 0.54, t(368) = 7.89, p < .001.
Decision Tree. Given the multiple interactions between
graph features, we modeled the influence of graph features
on likelihood judgments with a decision tree using the rpart
package in R. Human judgment is often based on ‘fast and
frugal’ heuristics (Gigerenzer, & Goldstein, 1996), which
can be modeled by decision trees. Decision trees identify a
series of binary decisions to maximize prediction accuracy
of an outcome variable.
The model in Figure 5 shows the decision tree for the
Study 2 data. The first decision point splits the data based
on ratio. If the ratio was high (many salient nodes in the
POI’s direct connections), the model estimated that the
likelihood rating was high (5.8), and no other variables were
considered (far right side of Figure 5).
Decision Tree for Scenario Study: Overall

1/N

1

Half/N

4.1
n=6660 100%

2
yes

Ratio = 0/N,1/N no

0

0
disease

drugs

disease

opinion

drugs

2

opinion

3.3
n=4440 67%

Scenario

Scenario

Base_Rate = Low

Likelihood Rating (1−7)

6

Proximity

4

4

5

2.5
n=2220 33%

4
n=2220 33%
Proximity = Far

Ratio = 0/N

Far
Near
10

3.1
n=1110 17%

2

Ratio = 0/N
0
disease

drugs

opinion

Scenario

Figure 4: Main effects of data scenario and graph features.
As depicted in Figure 4, main effects of graph features
were found for each scenario we tested. The main
interaction we were interested in was between scenario and
base rate, since we expected that base rates would be
utilized more when the scenario described more contagious
activities, such as the spread of disease. There was not a
significant interaction between scenario and base rate,
although significant interactions did emerge between
scenario and the proximity and ratio graph features (χ2(2) =
6.31, p = .04 and χ2(4) = 40.21, p < .001, respectively).
However, Figure 4 suggests that differences were small and,
overall, graph features affected judgments in a consistent
way across scenarios.
Strategy Use. Consistent with Study 1, participants’ ratings
of strategy importance reflected a tendency to rely on the
ratio strategy more than other strategies. A multilevel model
with strategy treated as a random effect and nested within
participant revealed that participants rated proximity and
ratio information as more important to their judgment than
base rate information (b = 0.24, t(368) = 3.43, p < .001 and
b = 0.78, t(368) = 11.32, p < .001, respectively). Participants

8

9

20

21

11

3

2.1
n=1110 17%

2.9
n=1110 17%

2.5
n=555 8%

3.6
n=555 8%

5
n=1110 17%

5.7
n=2220 33%

Rattle 2017−May−03 11:00:31 rhodere1
Figure 5: Decision
tree predicting likelihood of
investigating the POI. n represents number of judgments
collected from participants.

The left side of the first decision point indicates that when
there were zero or one salient node(s) in the POI’s direct
connections, the model next split the data based on the base
rate. If the base rate was low (left side of Figure 5), the
model then made another split based on ratio, and proximity
was not used. If the base rate was high, the model then used
proximity. If proximity was far, the model used ratio
information again to make the final classification.

General Discussion
In this research we identified three graph features that
influenced judgments about a specific person of interest
(POI) in a social network graph: 1) number of salient nodes
within the POI’s direct connections, 2) base rate of salient
nodes in the graph, and 3) proximity of salient nodes to the
POI. Across two experiments, we demonstrated the
influence of these features on probabilistic graph-based

2996

judgments by manipulating their presence in a series of
graphs. Additionally, through our analysis of participants’
self-reported strategies and strategy importance ratings, we
demonstrated that participants consciously use these graph
features in their judgments. Participants reported primarily
using the ratio strategy to make their judgments, followed
by the proximity and base rate strategies. No matter which
data scenario was used (e.g., drug use, disease, public
opinion), base rate, proximity, and ratio manipulations
influenced judgments in similar ways, with only slight
differences across scenarios.

many cases, users viewing a graph will not have knowledge
of the algorithm used to construct the graph (as was the case
in this study), leaving the meaningfulness of proximity
unclear. Thus, although use of spatial proximity as a factor
in judgment is not necessarily wrong in itself, overuse of
this heuristic could lead to misinterpretation in some cases.
Understanding how novice audiences interpret proximity
could help inform the design of layouts and the use of
graphs by analysts, particularly for graphs whose layout
algorithms are independent of spatial distance.

Strategy Use

The present studies were carried out with participants who
lacked a background in SNA. Future studies plan to
examine how novices and experts differ in their use of graph
information. We also plan to further assess the validity of
proximity information by testing different graph layouts and
examining correlations between path and spatial distance.

Future Directions

Participants consistently used the ratio strategy to make
likelihood judgments. The three-level manipulation of this
variable (0/N, 1/N, Half/N) was the strongest determinant of
likelihood judgments and the ratio strategy was the most
frequently self-reported strategy. Furthermore, a decision
tree analysis suggests that when the number of connections
was high, participants made ‘fast and frugal’ decisions
without using the other strategies.
In other cases, participants made use of base rate and
layout proximity. The decision tree analysis suggests that
each of these graph features was considered by participants
when making likelihood judgments, and manipulating each
of these variables led to significant main effects on
judgments. However, the relative importance of these two
strategies is less clear. Participants were more likely to
mention using the proximity strategy than the base rate
strategy in Study 1, and in Study 2 participants rated the
proximity strategy as more important than the base rate
strategy. Yet the decision tree analysis revealed that base
rate was a decision point before proximity was considered,
suggesting that base rate may be more important than
proximity to participants’ judgments. These results suggest
that there may be a disconnect between participants’ selfreported strategies and the strategies revealed by their actual
judgments. One interpretation of this finding could be that
participants were mistaken in how much they considered
each graph feature. Future research could further explore the
relative importance of these strategies by testing different
response formats, scenarios, and graphs.

Is Use of Proximity an Error?
An important question about these results is whether the
use of proximity should be considered a reasoning error. It
is true that in force-directed layouts, which was the layout
algorithm used to generate the graphs in these studies,
layout distance does often have a relationship with graph
distance. In other words, the physical distance between two
nodes is somewhat related to the number of edges that
separate those nodes. However, it could be misleading to
rely only on layout proximity to make the kinds of
judgments in these studies for two reasons. First, the extent
to which proximity provides meaningful information about
the relationship between two nodes depends critically on the
layout algorithm used for graph construction. Second, in

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Department of Defense
under Contract No.: H98230-14-D-0037 through the
Computer and Analytic Sciences research group.

References
Cook, V. J., Sun, S. J., Tapia, J., Muth, S. Q., Anguello, D.
F., Lewis, B. L., Rothenberg, R. B., McElroy, P. D., & the
Network Analysis Project Team (2007). Transmission
network analysis in tuberculosis contact investigations.
The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 196, 1517-1527.
Gigerenzer, G. & Goldstein, D.G. (1996). Reasoning the
Fast and Frugal Way: Models of Bounded Rationality.
Psychological Review, 103:4, 650-669.
Krebs, V. E. (2002). Mapping networks of terrorist cells.
Connections, 24(3), 43-52.
McGrath, C., Blythe, J., & Krackhardt, D. (1997). The
effect of spatial arrangement on judgments and errors in
interpreting graphs. Social Networks, 9, 223-242.
Micallef, L., Dragicevic, P., & Fekete, J.D. (2012).
Assessing the effect of visualizations on Bayesian
reasoning through crowdsourcing. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization & Computer Graphics, 18(12), 2536-2545.
Novick, L. R., & Bassok, M. (2005). Problem solving. In K.
J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), Cambridge
Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning, pp. 321-349. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Purchase, H. C., Cohen, R. F., & James, M. I. (1997). An
experimental study of the basis for graph drawing
algorithms. Journal of Experimental Algorithmics, 2(4).
Purchase, H. C. (2000). Effective information visualization:
A study of graph drawing aesthetics and algorithms.
Interacting with Computers, 13, 147-162.
Ware, C., Purchase, H., Colpoys, L., & McGill, M. (2002).
Cognitive measurements of graph aesthetics. Information
Visualization, 1, 103-110.

2997

