Information theoretic factors in marking linguistic focus:
A laboratory-language approach
Gareth Roberts (gareth.roberts@ling.upenn.edu)
University of Pennsylvania, Department of Linguistics, 3401-C Walnut Street,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Jon Scott Stevens (stevens.400@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Department of Linguistics, 118G Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place,
Columbus, OH 43201 USA
Abstract
We present an experimental study investigating the role of
information-theoretic factors in determining patterns of redundancy and focus in language and other communication systems. Pairs of participants played a simple communication
game using a non-linguistic visual medium to send messages
to each other. We manipulated noise, effort, and time pressures and measured message length, redundancy, and accuracy.
Participants behaved as predicted based on an informationtheoretic model, with message length and redundancy varying
according to circumstance, but accuracy remaining constant.
Keywords: communication; focus; information theory; language; redundancy; signaling game

Introduction
Questions invite answers. However, the invitation is not entirely open: There are important constraints on the form that
an answer can take. Most obviously, it must be relevant
(Grice, 1975; Wilson & Sperber, 2004). In response to the
question of who invented the printing press, for instance, “My
sister loves cheesesteak” is not an acceptable answer unless
some double meaning is understood. Perhaps less obviously,
the length and syntactic completeness of an answer are also
constrained. Fragment answers—that is, answers that are not
whole sentences—are permitted and may even be preferred
in some circumstances. At the same time, prosodic and morphosyntactic mechanisms (e.g., pitch fluctuations; cleft constructions such as “it was . . . who”) may be employed to add
redundancy to certain elements in the sentence. Patterns of
message length and redundancy should not be assumed to be
random. In this paper we present a set of communication
game experiments investigating how they vary according to
information-theoretic factors.
As an example of how such patterns vary in English, consider the three answers to the printing press question that are
given in (1). While (1a) is an acceptable answer, (1b) and
(1c) are just as good, and would even be preferable in many
contexts.
(1)

Who invented the printing press?
a. Gutenberg invented the printing press.
b. Gutenberg did.
c. Gutenberg.

As evidenced by the acceptability of (1a), fragment answers are not obligatory. Indeed, whole-sentence answers

may help establish that the respondent heard and understood
the question correctly; in some cases they may also serve to
aid parsing of the what Schmitz (2008) calls the “critical” element (in this case Gutenberg). An answer like “The printing
press was invented by Gutenberg”, for instance, makes very
clear through syntactic and prosodic means when precisely
the listener should expect to get the answer. An utterance
that does contain such unnecessary material is constrained in
important ways; in particular, focus must be marked on the
critical element. This is realized in English and many other
languages by a pitch accent on that element (i.e., the element
is distinguished from other parts of the sentence through variation in pitch, length and intensity; for discussion of this welldocumented phenomenon, see Ladd, 1996; Rooth, 1992).
It is important to note that this focus is constrained by the
grammar of the language and is more or less obligatory—
distinguishing the wrong element, distinguishing the right element by the wrong means, or distinguishing no element at
all, is likely to be perceived as odd. Example (2) illustrates
this pattern, with small caps denoting pitch accent.
(2)

Who invented the printing press?
a. 3 G UTENBERG invented the printing press.
b. 3 G UTENBERG did.
c. 7 Gutenberg invented the PRINTING PRESS
d. 7 G UTENBERG invented the PRINTING PRESS
e. 7 Gutenberg invented the printing press

It should be noted that similar patterns pertain even when no
explicit question has been asked. For example, a restaurant
worker who notices a patron wandering around might say to
them something like “Over there”, “They’re OVER THERE”,
or “The toilets are OVER THERE”, even if the patron does not
actually ask for directions.
Stevens (2016), following Schmitz (2008) and Bergen and
Goodman (2015), argues for a theory of focus based partly in
information theory (Shannon & Weaver, 1949), whereby focus and redundancy are presented as a solution to noise, the
random deletion/alteration of parts of a signal. Given that elements in messages may be lost as a result of mishearings, attention failures, and the like, focus is a means of emphasizing
those elements that the speaker considers most important to
transmit accurately. This can be seen as a process of adding

3004

redundancy to important parts of the linguistic signal, compensating for the effects of noise. At the same time, depending on pressures of time and effort, non-focused elements (the
parts of the signal that are easily inferred from context) can
be reduced or even elided.
Stevens (2016) followed Rooth (1992) and many others in
arguing that the inferrabillity of semantic material from the
discourse context follows from the set of alternatives that
is evoked by that context. For example, “Who invented the
printing press?” evokes a set of possible answers {x invented
the printing press} which contains propositions like “Gutenberg invented the printing press”, “Edison invented the printing press”, etc. These alternatives all share overlapping semantic material, namely “invented the printing press” which
is inferrable and thus less important in terms of information
transmission. The material in need of protection from noise,
in other words, is the material that does not overlap among all
contextually available alternatives. We will therefore refer to
redundancy on this material as non-overlapping redundancy,
and redundancy on inferrable material as overlapping redundancy.

Predictions of an information-theoretic model
If patterns of focus and redundancy in language are indeed
a reflex of general information-theoretic concerns, then we
expect that analogs to it will arise in any communication system that shares the goal of signaling the selection of one object from among a set of alternatives. For such systems we
can thus make the following predictions. First, overall message length should vary according to time and effort costs:
Messages should be longer if effort costs are low and time
is not pressing. This might seem trivial, but the key point is
that messages will not simply be minimally short in all cases.
Because redundancy can be useful, messages will in fact be
longer than they strictly need to be if time and effort constraints allow. Second, longer messages should differ from
shorter messages not only with respect to length, but also
with respect to the proportion of overlapping redundancy;
that is, overlapping redundancy is a greater luxury than nonoverlapping redundancy, and should be dispensed with more
readily. Third, the distribution of effort in a message should
take noise into account. In particular, non-overlapping redundancy should be higher when noise is higher, both in an absolute sense (more redundancy overall) and in a relative sense
(more non-overlapping redundancy than overlapping redundancy). Fourth, unless noise and time pressures become so
great that they simply prevent accurate communication, we
should expect communicative accuracy to remain relatively
constant, regardless of the variation between messages predicted above. This is because that variation is (according to
this account) designed to help maintain accuracy under different conditions.
There is evidence from natural language that speakers are
sensitive to time and effort pressures. Corpus analysis suggests, for instance, that syntactic reduction is used to optimize
information density (Jaeger, 2010), while work in experimen-

tal pragmatics demonstrates that referring expressions get
shorter over time as interlocutors establish common ground
(Krauss & Weinheimer, 1964; Clark, 1996).
In general, however, it is hard to fully test the informationtheoretic basis of focus using natural-language data alone.
There is more than one reason for this. A common difficulty in testing predictions in natural language is that the relevant explanatory factors are hard to manipulate (cf. Roberts,
in press). To a small extent this is true here: While it is
relatively straightforward to introduce noise and time pressures, for example, it is harder to make the act of producing
natural-language utterances more effortful without imposing
awkward physical constraints on participants. However, this
is not the most serious obstacle in this case—in fact there is
a history of research in phonetics in which awkward physical constraints are put on participants (e.g., Lindblom, 1990).
The more serious problem is that, in established natural languages, there are constraints on such phenomena as pitch accent, focus, and utterance length that are encoded in the grammar. This means that while the patterns of interest might have
arisen initially as a result of the information-theoretic factors
discussed, we should expect them to an important extent to
be “fossilized” as part of the language, incorporated into relatively constrained grammatical constructions, and less sensitive to contingent factors. Even if the information-theoretic
account is right, therefore, behavior in established languages
may be somewhat weak evidence for it; better evidence would
be furnished by observing the establishment of a novel communication system. Furthermore, as stated above, we should
expect our claims and predictions to apply across communication systems, linguistic or otherwise. It would therefore
be advantageous for our purposes to test predictions in some
non-linguistic communicative medium. Fortunately, the last
decade or so has seen the development of a line of research in
which participants communicate in the lab using “laboratory
languages”—either artificial languages taught to the participants, or novel communication systems developed collaboratively over the course of the experiment (Galantucci, Garrod, & Roberts, 2012; Roberts, in press). This approach allows researchers to investigate principles of communicative
behavior while abstracting away as far as possible from the
established natural languages that the participants bring with
them into the lab. A common kind of study involves the use
of visual communication systems. For instance, Garrod, Fay,
Lee, Oberlander, and MacLeod (2007) had participants play
a Pictionary-like game, while Galantucci (2005) made participants communicate by drawing on a pad that simulated
continuous vertical motion, preventing the use of most established conventions. This kind of approach is particularly useful for investigating the challenges involved in establishing
reference and constructing a new system from scratch. However, we were interested in the pressures acting on a system
in which reference is in principle relatively straightforward,
as is the case for a native speaker of a natural language, but
where there are no established grammatical conventions as

3005

in language. For this reason we had participants play a very
simple communication game in which they had to fill in cells
in a grid to convey a line that was drawn over the grid (Figure 1). Under ideal conditions, this task is rather trivial. We
made conditions less ideal by manipulating noise, time pressure, and the effort required to produce a signal. We then
measured the redundancy in the signals that were produced
and the success rate in interpreting them.

thought the Sender was trying to communicate. Both players
were then told whether the Receiver chose correctly. Then
a new turn began. There were 48 turns in total, which were
preceded by two practice turns. In half the turns (the Overlap
turns) the two line figures overlapped by five squares (as in
Figures 1 and 2). In the other half (the Filler turns) there was
no such overlap, such that any cell through which a line figure
passed would serve to distinguish it from its competitor.
The only differences between the practice turns and the
other turns were that the players’ success in the practice turns
did not count toward their final score, and that, following the
practice turns, they were told to ask questions if they had
any. If players scored over 80% in the non-practice turns,
they were rewarded with $2 each.

Method
Participants
One hundred and twenty University of Pennsylvania undergraduate students participated in pairs for course credit or $5.

Procedure
In each trial a pair of participants played a simple cooperative signaling game. Each sat in a separate cubicle with a
computer; neither participant could see or hear the other. The
game consisted of a series of turns in each of which one player
was nominated as Sender and the other as Receiver; players
alternated roles, with the Sender in the first turn being selected at random. At the start of a turn the Receiver saw a
white screen with the message “You are waiting on a message transmission from the other player”. The Sender saw a
screen as in Figure 1. On the left were two 7×7 grids, over
each of which a different line figure was drawn. Every line
figure consisted of a continuous line drawn between the center points of eleven contiguous grid cells. One of the two line
figures was selected in green, while the other was white.1
On the right of the screen was an empty 7×7 grid, slightly
larger than the other two. Beneath the two leftmost grids there
was also a button marked Send. The Sender’s task was to
communicate to the Receiver which of the two grids was selected in green by clicking on cells in the rightmost grid. At
the moment of the Sender’s first click a timer would start.
Once the timer stopped (after either 5 or 30 seconds, depending on condition; see Section Experimental conditions) the
grids would disappear and be replaced by the message “You
are waiting on a guess from the other player.” Clicking the
Send button would have the same result. Once the Sender’s
turn had come to an end in one of those two ways, the Receiver’s screen would change to display the two line figures
that had been displayed to the Sender (in a random order, but
each in the same orientation as for the Sender) as well as a
third 7×7 grid in which certain cells might be colored black,
and a button marked OK (Figure 2). The black cells would
always be cells that the Sender had clicked; however, not all
cells that the Sender had clicked would necessarily be sent.
The means of deciding which cells would be sent depended
on the condition (Section Experimental conditions). The Receiver’s task was to select which of the two line figures they
1 Given

that the orientation of the two figures was never varied
and that the two line figures were never identical, it is important to
note that there was always at least one cell that would, on its own,
allow the two line figures to be distinguished.

Figure 1: Sender’s screen.

Figure 2: Receiver’s screen.

Experimental conditions
There were six between-subjects conditions in total (Table 1).
Conditions differed from each other with respect to the time
available to the sender (either 5 seconds or 30 seconds) and
with respect to the means with which the sender could ensure
that a message be sent. In the Effort conditions clicking a cell
a specific number of times would guarantee that it was sent

3006

one cell can be considered to contain redundancy.

Table 1: Experimental conditions
Time limit

Effort

Noise

30 seconds
30 seconds
5 seconds

High effort
Low effort
Low effort (5s)

High noise
Low noise
Low noise (5s)

Click effort. This was calculated by counting the number of
clicks made by the Sender.

to the Receiver. The Sender had to click fifteen times on each
cell in the High effort condition and five times in the Low effort conditions. Once a cell had been clicked the requisite
number of times, it turned black. In the Effort conditions, a
cell that turned black for the Sender was sure of being seen
by the Receiver, but a cell that had not been clicked enough
remained white and was sure not to be sent. The same was
not true in the Noise conditions. In these conditions, each
click on a cell would make it appear darker. Any cell that had
been clicked once had a chance of being sent. Clicking more
on the cell not only made the cell darker, but increased that
chance (and the darkness of the cell increased proportionally
to the probability that the cell would be sent). The probability of a given cell being sent was calculated as 1 − (1 − d)n ,
where d is a decay parameter between 0 and 1, and n equals
the number of times the Sender clicked on the cell in question. Two values were used for the decay parameter. In the
High noise condition, it was set at 0.1. In the Low noise conditions it was set at 0.4. This meant that it would take many
more clicks in the High noise condition than in the Low noise
conditions to feel confident that the cell would be sent. For
instance, 4 clicks in the latter condition would result in an
87% chance of the cell being sent, but a 34% chance in the
former. In all conditions the number of cells clicked on can be
taken to correspond roughly to utterance length, while in the
Noise conditions, cell darkness can be taken to be analogous
to greater effort in marking prominence.
The length of time available for the Sender to click on cells
was varied, being set at either 5 or 30 seconds. For the Low
effort and Low noise conditions, there was both a 5-second
condition and a 30-second condition. For the High effort and
High noise conditions, however, we ran only 30-second conditions; this is because 5 seconds was not enough time for
participants to send more than one cell in the High effort condition, or to have a good chance of doing so in the High noise
condition, meaning that the results would be rather trivial and
most of our measures could not be calculated.

Measures
We measured the following variables.
Message length. This was calculated by counting how
many squares had been clicked on (for Noise conditions) or
turned black (for Effort conditions). Since one cell would
be sufficient to distinguish between any two line figures
(assuming it arrived), any message consisting of more than

Overlapping redundancy. This was calculated by counting
how many cells the Sender clicked on (for Noise conditions)
or turned black (for Effort conditions) that overlapped with
both line figures, and would therefore not differentiate the
target figure from its competitor. (Note that this could be
measured only for the Overlap turns, and not the Filler turns.).
Accuracy. This was calculated by counting the number of
turns in which the Receiver chose the correct line figure.

Results
Data reported in the following sections come from Overlap
turns only, for the sake of consistency between the measures.
Unless otherwise stated, all models reported are mixed effects
linear regression models with random intercepts for both subject and item, using the Satterthwaite approximation of degrees of freedom to obtain a p-value from a t-value.

Variation in message length
We predicted that overall message length should vary according to time and effort costs, with messages being longer than
strictly necessary if time and effort constraints allowed. This
was supported by the data. One cell would have been sufficient in every condition to signal which line figure to choose;
however, messages were longer than this in every condition
(Figures 3 and 4). In all but the High noise and High effort conditions, message length also remained relatively constant throughout a game, though it was lower in the Low
noise (5s) than in the Low noise condition (β = −4.83, SE =
0.75,t = −6.48, p < 0.001) and in the Low effort (5s) condition than in the Low effort condition (β = −7.64, SE =
0.65,t = −11.83, p < 0.001), suggesting that the shorter message lengths in the 5s conditions were due to time constraints.
In both the High noise condition and the High effort condition, message length began high and fell over the course of
the game in a rather linear fashion, converging in the High
effort condition with the Low effort (5s) condition. This suggests that effort came to exercise increasing pressure as time
went on. It is likely also the case that it partly reflects participants’ growing familiarity with the game, although if this
were the main explanation, one would expect a sharper fall by
the middle of the game rather than a linear decline. Message
length in the noise conditions did not quite converge (i.e., the
slope was less steep), likely because less effort was necessary
in this condition.

Message length and overlapping redundancy
We predicted that shorter messages should differ from longer
messages with respect to the proportion of overlapping redundancy. This was confirmed. The proportion of clicks devoted

3007

Condition

8

Low effort

6

Condition

100

High effort

Clicks

Message length

10

Low effort (5s)

High noise
Low noise
50

Low noise (5s)

4
2

0

5

10

15

20

25

0

5

10

Turn

10

Condition
High noise

8

Low noise
Low noise (5s)

6

5

10

15

20

Condition
High noise

0.3

Low noise
Low noise (5s)

0.2
0.1
0

25

5

Distribution of effort
We predicted that the distribution of effort would take noise
into account and that non-overlapping redundancy would be
higher when noise is higher, both in an absolute sense and relative to overlapping redundancy. This was confirmed by results. First, click effort was lowest in the Low noise (5s) condition, but higher in the High noise condition than in the Low
noise condition (β = 58.57, SE = 7.56,t = 7.75, p < 0.001),
in both of which rounds lasted 30 seconds (Figure 6). Sec-

Proportion Overlap

15

20

25

Figure 7: Proportion of clicks on overlapping redundant cells
in Noise conditions.

to overlapping redundancy (as opposed to non-overlapping
redundancy) correlated with click rate ; r = 0.29, p < 0.001),
but the correlation was stronger (r = 0.56) in the High effort and High noise conditions alone, where there was greater
pressure on participants (Figure 5).

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
100

10

Turn

Figure 4: Message length in noise conditions.

50

25

0.4

Turn

0

20

Figure 6: Click effort in noise conditions.

Proportion Overlap

Message length

Figure 3: Message length in effort conditions.

0

15

Turn

150

200

Clicks

ond, for the proportion of overlapping redundancy, there was
a significant interaction of turn and condition for the High
noise and Low noise conditions (β = 0.006, SE = 0.002,t =
3.07, p < 0.01): Although all the noise conditions began at
roughly the same place (Figure 7), the proportion of overlapping redundant cells clicked in the Low noise condition
remained relatively constant, but decreased on the High noise
condition. There is also a main effect of condition if the interaction terms are excluded from the model (β = 0.11, SE =
0.04,t = 2.81, p < 0.01). The proportion of clicks on overlapping redundant cells was significantly lower in the Low
noise (5s) than in the High noise condition (β = −0.10, SE =
0.04,t = −2.44, p < 0.05).

Accuracy rates
We predicted that accuracy would remain similar between
conditions, regardless of differences in message length, click
effort, and redundancy. This was broadly true. Overall mean
accuracy was very high (97%), and did not differ significantly between conditions, with one exception (Figure 8): It
was lower in the Low noise (5s) condition (β = −0.07, SE =
0.02,t = −2.81, p < 0.01). This likely represents an underestimation of noise by participants; this was the only condition
in which senders had little time to send a signal, but could not
be sure before sending it how much the receiver would see.

Discussion
Figure 5: Correlation between click effort and overlapping
redundancy (High effort and High noise conditions only).

We modeled the emergence of a system similar to linguistic focus by having participants play a simple non-linguistic

3008

References

1.00

Accuracy

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
High effort

High noise

Low effort

Low effort (5s)

Low noise

Low noise (5s)

Condition

Figure 8: Accuracy rates by condition. Error bars show 95%
confidence intervals.

communication game, in which we manipulated noise, effort, and time pressures. We made four predictions consistent with an information-theoretic account of focus: that message length should vary according to time and effort costs,
that longer messages should differ primarily with respect to
redundant material that is shared with alternatives, that the
distribution of effort in the message should take noise into
account, and that accuracy should be stable in spite of variation in other measures. These predictions were confirmed.
The patterns we observed also resemble patterns in natural language. While message length varied considerably between conditions, accuracy was maintained, largely due to
distribution of effort being skewed toward protecting nonoverlapping material from noise. On the one hand this is consistent with the natural-language examples given in the introduction to this paper. On the other hand, it is also consistent
with findings from experimental pragmatics studies in which
participants repeatedly refer to a set of unfamiliar shapes; referring expressions are reliably shorter at later stages of such
interactions (Krauss & Weinheimer, 1964; Clark, 1996). This
is typically explained in terms of the establishment of common ground—participants develop a shared perspective on
the objects in question. On the surface, this does not obviously apply so well to our study, but the fundamental mechanism is the same. The point in both cases is that message
length varies as a result of time and effort pressures on the
one hand, and the sender (or speaker)’s confidence that the
message will be understood by the receiver, on the other.
Overall, our results lend support to the view that linguistic focus may have emerged as a response to informationtheoretic pressures. We also consider that the experimental
approach we have taken may prove fruitful for future work.

Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). The strategic use of
noise in pragmatic reasoning. Topics in Cognitive Science,
7(2), 336–350.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the emergence of human communication systems. Cognitive Science, 29(5), 737–67.
Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., & Roberts, G. (2012). Experimental Semiotics. Language and Linguistics Compass, 6(8),
477–493.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & MacLeod,
T. (2007). Foundations of representation: Where might
graphical symbol systems come from? Cognitive Science,
31(6), 961–87.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, vol. 3: Speech
acts (pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61(1), 23–62.
Krauss, R. M., & Weinheimer, S. (1964). Changes in reference phrases as a function of frequency of usage in social
interaction—a preliminary study. Psychonomic Science,
1(5), 113–114.
Ladd, D. R. (1996). Intonational phonology. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaining phonetic variation:
A sketch of the H&H theory. In W. J. Hardcastle &
A. Marchal (Eds.), Speech production and speech modelling (Vol. 55, pp. 403–439). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Roberts, G. (in press). The linguistic Drosophila: Experiments in language change. Linguistics Vanguard.
Rooth, M. (1992). A theory of Focus interpretation. Natural
Language Semantics, 1, 75-116.
Schmitz, H.-C. (2008). Accentuation and interpretation. New
York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical
theory of communication. Champaign, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Stevens, J. (2016). Focus games. Linguistics and Philosophy,
39(5), 395–441.
Wilson, D., & Sperber, D. (2004). Relevance theory. In
L. R. Horn & G. Ward (Eds.), Handbook of pragmatics (pp.
607–632). Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Robin Clark for insightful comments on
the development of this project, to Lisa Raithel for preparing
the software, and to members of the Cultural Evolution of
Language Lab for assistance in running the experiment. This
work was funded in part by the American Council of Learned
Societies (ACLS).

3009

