Inhibitory Control Supports Referential Context Use in Language Production and
Comprehension
Alison M. Trude (atrude2@jhmi.edu)
Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University
1629 Thames St., Suite 350, Baltimore, MD, 21231 USA

Nazbanou Nozari (nozari@jhu.edu)
Department of Neurology, Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University
1629 Thames St., Suite 350, Baltimore, MD, 21231 USA
Abstract
Using referential context in language (e.g., saying “blue pen”
when two different-colored pens are visible) makes
communication efficient. But it is still unclear which general
cognitive processes support the use of context in
conversation. Research on pragmatic use in language
implicates working memory and inhibitory control; however,
no studies have shown evidence of a shared cognitive
mechanism in both production and comprehension within an
individual. The current study asked a) whether referential
context use is supported by the same cognitive mechanisms in
production and comprehension, b) which processes are
implicated, and c) whether the nature of the context itself
affects processing. Participants completed a referential
communication eye-tracking task in which a disambiguating
adjective was either necessary or over-informative, as well as
a cognitive test battery. The results implicated inhibitory
control in both production and comprehension (although the
comprehension results were more variable), suggesting a
shared underlying cognitive mechanism across domains.
Keywords: language production; language comprehension;
discourse; pragmatics; inhibitory control; working memory

Introduction
The ability to take context into account often facilitates
communication in interactive settings. Imagine you are
cooking with a friend. There are two identical spoons on the
table: one next to a big bowl, and one next to a small bowl.
You may know that you would like you friend to hand you
the former; however, if you just say, “hand me the spoon
next to the bowl,” he will likely not understand which one
you mean. Thus, in order to effectively communicate your
intent, you would need to use a disambiguating adjective
(i.e., “hand me the spoon next to the big bowl”). On the
other hand, if only one spoon and one bowl were visible,
saying “hand me the spoon next to the big bowl” would be
confusing, as it implies to your listener that there is more
than one option to choose from. This paper investigates how
speakers and listeners behave in situations when adding or
subtracting an adjective is most appropriate for clear
communication given the referential context.
Related to the idea that listeners and speakers will tailor
their language to the referential context is the Gricean
Maxim of Quantity (Grice, 1975), which specifies that
speakers should make their utterances only as informative as
is required. Thus, enough information should be provided to

distinguish the intended referent from its potential
competitors (e.g., the big bowl when two bowls are visible),
and providing information that is not necessary (e.g., the big
bowl, when no other bowls are in view), should be avoided.
Although, ideally, following this maxim would help to make
communication maximally efficient, in reality, speakers and
listeners and often fail to behave in a completely Gricean
manner (e.g., Deutsch & Pechmann, 1982; Sedivy, 2005).
Speakers’ and listeners’ ability to make their utterances
optimally informative, or to appropriately interpret the
utterance they are hearing, within the current referential
context may depend upon the cognitive demands that this
process places upon them. Referential context adaptation
(RCA) is a complex process, involving not only language
production or comprehension, but also selectively attending
to certain objects in one’s surroundings, remembering what
information has already been introduced into the discourse,
or refraining from mentioning irrelevant or confusing
information, to name a few. Therefore, general cognitive
functions, such as working memory (WM) and inhibitory
control (IC), could play an important role in RCA.
The current work investigates whether the ability to take
referential context into account is supported by the same
cognitive processes in language production and
comprehension, and under different linguistic demands. If
so, we would expect (a) individuals with better RCA to
demonstrate this ability in both production and
comprehension, and (b) the same general cognitive
operations to drive referential context consideration in
comprehension and production, and perhaps in situations
with different linguistic demands.

Pragmatic Language Use and Cognitive Abilities
The fact that speakers often fail to observe the Gricean
Maxim of Quantity provides evidence that taking referential
context into account may be a cognitively demanding
process. While research in this field has not previously
addressed the relationship between RCA and general
cognitive abilities, some work on a related linguistic
process, perspective-taking, has attempted to identify the
cognitive processes underlying pragmatic language use.
Perspective-taking and RCA are similar in that both involve
the on-line incorporation of referential context in interactive
conversation. Thus, it is possible that a similar set of

1218

cognitive mechanisms supports both processes.
In one study of perspective-taking, speakers were tested
on their ability to refrain from producing descriptions that
were over-informative from the perspective of their listener
(e.g., “the big star” when two stars are visible to the speaker,
but only one is visible to the listener; Wardlow, 2013). The
results showed that this ability was correlated with both
WM and IC. In comprehension, Brown-Schmidt (2009)
found that participants with greater IC were more likely to
take the experimenter’s perspective when interpreting their
questions about a display containing some pictures that were
visible to only the listener. Lin, Keysar, and Epley (2010)
found that comprehenders with higher WM capacity
performed better on a similar task.
While these studies all point to a role for general
cognitive resources in perspective-taking, an important
question remains: Do the same abilities underlie
perspective-taking in production and comprehension? The
two studies that have investigated perspective-taking in both
domains within the same individuals found contradicting
results: Ryskin, Benjamin, Tullis, & Brown-Schmidt (2015)
found WM to be correlated with perspective-taking in
production, but none of their executive control measures
were correlated with comprehension. On the other hand,
Nilsen and Graham (2009) found that IC negatively
correlated with egocentric behaviors in a comprehension
task in 3-5 year olds; however, none of their executive
control measures correlated with production. The question,
thus, remains: is the ability to take into account the
referential context the same in both domains?

using an adjective in Figure 1b.) (Munakata et al., 2011).
Due to the rich set of independent and dependent variables
in the current design, we adopted a statistical approach that
is well-suited to handling this type of data structure: partial
least squares path modeling (PLS-PM). This method allows
us to look at multiple dependent variables simultaneously.
In addition, this method allows us to similarly group WM
and IC tasks into latent constructs in order to minimize taskspecific effects and avoid the issue of collinearity.

Figure 1: Example Adj+ (a) and Adj− (b) displays used in
the referential communication task.

Methods
Participants
Twenty-eight native English speakers, ages 18-30,
participated for $40.

Materials
The Current Study
The current study investigates how speakers and listeners
adapt their language processing to referential context when
observing the same visual display. Specifically, we asked: is
the ability to take referential context into account related in
production and comprehension, and under different
linguistic and contextual demands? To this end, each
participant took turns as both speaker and listener in a
referential communication task with a visual world design,
and their eye fixations, as well as their utterances (when
acting as speakers) were recorded. Two conditions with
different contextual demands were created: in the Adj+
condition, the most felicitous utterance required the
inclusion of an adjective (e.g., “Click on the heart under the
green gorilla,” Figure 1a). In the Adj− condition, the most
felicitous utterance was one without an adjective (e.g.,
“Click on the heart under the gorilla,” Figure 1b). To test
which cognitive processes underlie RCA in production and
comprehension, each participant also completed a battery of
tasks that included three WM and three IC measures. The
WM measures were selected so as to include a mixture of
both linguistic and non-linguistic tasks. The IC measures
were selected to probe both competitive inhibition (the
ability to inhibit a strongly competing response, e.g., not
saying red gorilla in Figure 1a.) and global inhibition (the
ability to inhibit a prepotent response, e.g., refraining from

Referential Communication Task Each display consisted
of four black card suit shapes (club, diamond, heart, or
spade). Above each shape was a drawing of an animal. The
animal stimuli were chosen to be cohort competitors with
either a size or color adjective (e.g., big buffalo, green
gorilla). On each trial, the target and competitor shapes were
the same (e.g., both spades), ensuring that the target shape
always needed to be disambiguated from the competitor by
describing the animal above the target. Trials were
presented in one of four fixed random orders.
There were two critical trial types. On Adj+ trials (n=96),
the same cue animal appeared above the target and
competitor shapes in two different colors or sizes. Critically,
the animal above the target shape was rendered in its cohortcompetitor adjective (e.g., green gorilla). These trials were
designed such that, if participants used RCA, in production,
they would include the adjective necessary to disambiguate
the target cue from the competitor cue, and in
comprehension, upon hearing the initial phoneme of the
adjective (e.g., the /g/ in green), they would interpret this
sound as the beginning of an adjective, and not a noun, and
as a result fixate more on the cue above the target (green
gorilla) than the cue above the competitor (red gorilla)
(Table 1).
On Adj− trials (n=96), different cue animals appeared

1219

above the target and competitor shapes. The cue animal
above the target shape was always a cohort competitor with
the adjective corresponding to the cue above the competitor
shape (e.g., red gorilla vs. green raccoon). These trials were
designed such that, if participants used RCA, no adjective
would be produced in production, as it would be overinformative, and in comprehension, upon hearing the initial
phoneme of the target noun (e.g., the /g/ in gorilla), the
participant would interpret this phoneme as the onset of a
noun (gorilla), and not of the adjective preceding the
competitor cue (green raccoon) (Table 1).
Table 1: Felicitous utterances on Adj+ and Adj− trials.

Production

Comprehension

Adj+

Adj−

Say “the heart under
the green gorilla.”

Say “the heart under
the gorilla.”

Upon hearing “heart
under g…” look for
“green,” not “gorilla”

Upon hearing “heart
under g…” look for
“gorilla,” not “green”

[target shape] under the [adjective, if needed] [target cue].”
They were told that the goal of the task was to provide
instructions as quickly as possible, and to avoid unnecessary
words to meet the temporal deadline, thus motivating them
to drop the adjective when not necessary.
Referential Communication Task, Session 2. Participants
followed instructions like the ones they had given during
Session 1. Each trial began with a 500 ms fixation point.
The stimuli then appeared onscreen, and after a 1000 ms
preview period, a pre-recorded instruction played,
instructing the participant to click on one of the shapes.
Instructions were always pragmatically appropriate (i.e., an
adjective was always provided on Adj+ trials, and no
adjective was provided on Adj− trials).

Analyses
Behavioral

Cognitive Battery
A spatial WM task (Corsi Block, Kessels et al., 2000) and
two linguistic WM tasks (Category and Rhyme Probe,
Freedman & Martin, 2001), measuring semantic and
phonological WM respectively, were administered. Three
IC measures were also employed: Fish Flanker along with
embedded NoGo (Nozari, Trueswell, & Thompson-Schill,
2016), as well as semantic blocking elicited through cyclic
naming (e.g., Schnur et al., 2006), in which participants
named twelve sets of six images, either in semanticallyhomogenous or heterogeneous blocks. Semantic blocking
was determined as the difference in response latencies
between the two block types.

Procedure
Participants completed two sessions 3-7 days apart. Each
session began with the eye-tracking task, followed by half
of the cognitive measures. Stimuli were displayed using
MATLAB and Psychophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997),
and the participant’s eye movements during the referential
communication tasks were recorded using an Eyelink 1000
Plus desktop-mounted eye-tracker (SR Research).
Referential Communication Task, Session 1. On each
trial, a fixation cross was presented for 500 ms before the
stimuli appeared. After a 1500 ms preview period, a tone
sounded and the target shape began to flash, cuing the
participant to begin speaking. After 2.5 seconds, a lower
tone sounded, indicating the end of the trial. The participant
and experimenter viewed separate monitors containing the
same stimuli. The participant instructed the experimenter to
click on the target shape that was cued on the participant’s
screen, using sentences with this structure: “Click on the

Participants made a total of 345 infelicitous utterances out
of 5376 critical trials (6.4% error rate, M = 12.3 errors, SD =
8.5). Of these infelicitous utterances, 187 were made on
Adj+ trials (i.e., adjective underuse), while 157 were made
on Adj− trials (i.e., adjective overuse). Participants were
expected to perform near ceiling on the comprehension task,
so no accuracy measures were collected.

Eye-Tracking
In production, eye-tracking analyses combined each card
suit and its animal cue into a single region. Data was
analyzed from 400-1350 ms post-target cuing, comprising
the time period between the minimum and maximum
proportion of fixations to the competitor after attention was
initially drawn to the flashing target (see Figure 2a).
Competitor fixations were considered critical because, in
order to establish the referential context of the display,
participants needed to divert their attention from the
extrinsically-cued target to its competitor. Thus, our
dependent measure of analysis was a competitor advantage
score, or the proportion of fixations to the competitor minus
the proportion of fixations to the target.
In comprehension, eye-tracking analyses were completed
on the target advantage score (proportion of fixations to the
target and its cue minus the proportion of fixations to the
competitor and its cue) over a time window beginning 300
ms before the onset of the critical word (cue noun in the
Adj- and cue adjective in the Adj+ condition) and ending
200 ms after the onset of the critical word (see Figure 2b).
The time window was chosen in order to encompass
coarticulatory cues from the word preceding the critical
word, as well as processing of the initial cohort phoneme of
the critical word. This target preference measure should
indicate how well participants took referential context into
account (i.e., disregarded the competitor). By using target
advantage as a DV in comprehension and competitor
advantage in production, we ensured that in both cases, a
more positive eye-tracking score would index better RCA.

1220

a.
a.

b.
Figure 3: Structure of initial path model (a) and revised
model for production data only (b).
b.
Figure 2: Time course of eye-tracking data for all critical
trials in Production (a) and Comprehension (b). Highlighted
regions indicate windows of analysis.

Partial Least Squares Path Modeling (PLS-PM)
Analyses were conducted using partial least squares path
modeling, implemented in the plspm package in R
(Sanchez, 2013). PLS-PM is a partial least square approach
to Structural Equation Modeling suitable for analyzing the
relationship between latent variables (psychological
constructs such as WM) and manifest variables (observed
data from tasks assumed to index these variables) as a
network of multiple interconnected linear regressions.
Figure 3a shows our initial theoretical model. The model
has three latent variables: RCA, Working Memory (WM),
and Inhibitory Control (IC), each measured through a
number of manifest variables. The direction of the arrows
indicates the direction of causal influence.
Model quality assessment takes three general steps. The
first is to verify the relationship between manifest variables
and the latent variables hypothesized to underlie them. This
is done by first assessing unidimensionality, or the extent to
which a change in the latent variable affects all manifest
variables in the same direction. Unidimensionality is
indexed by Dillon-Goldstein’s rho (DG rho). A DG rho
above 0.7 is favorable. Second, the relative contribution of
the latent variable (vs. noise/task-specific factors) to each
manifest variable is calculated. Indicators with a loading of

less than 0.6 are not good indices of the latent construct.
Third, the cross-loadings of the manifest variables are
checked to ensure that the loading of a manifest variable is
indeed highest on the latent variable it is assumed to
represent, and not on another latent variable in the model.
The first three steps are used to revise the model by
dropping manifest variables or re-partitioning the latent
variable constructs. The revised model is then re-checked.
Once a viable model is obtained, the overall fit is
assessed, which also includes the relationship between the
latent variables. R2 is reported for the latent variable of
interest, and similar to simple regression models, indicates
the amount of variance explained by the independent latent
variables (WM and IC).
The part of the model that answers questions about the
contribution of general cognitive functions on RCA is the
inner model, or the links between latent variables. Its output
is similar to that of any generalized linear model.
Significance levels of path coefficients are estimated via
bootstrapping with 1000 iterations.

Results
Model 1: General Model
Model 1 is based on the following theoretical assumptions:
(a) the three WM tests measure a unified WM construct, (b)
the three IC tests measure a unified inhibition construct, and
(c) all the RCA scores measure a unified RCA construct.
Examination of this general model resulted in three main
revisions: (a) Rhyme Probe was dropped because it did not
contribute substantially to the latent WM construct (loading

1221

= 0.12) (b) The loadings and cross-loadings of the latent
variables revealed that the IC variable had low
unidimensionality (DG rho = .11). NoGo errors had a large
negative loading on the IC latent variable (-0.93), while the
other two IC manifest variables had positive loadings,
indicating that the NoGo errors were measuring a
fundamentally different construct. Thus, the IC latent
variable was broken down into two variables: indirect
competitive (CI; Semantic Blocking and Flanker) and global
(GI; NoGo) to reflect two types of IC that have been shown
to have different cognitive and neural underpinnings
(Munakata et al., 2011). (c) While all measures of RCA in
production had factor loadings above 0.6 on the RCA latent
variable, RCA measures in comprehension had low factor
loadings and low unidimensionality across Adj+ and Adjconditions. This finding points to dissociation of the RCA
construct in production and comprehension and calls for
separate examination of the two tasks.

Model 2: Production
This model is shown in Figure 3b, and includes only
manifest variables indexing RCA in production. RCA had a
DG rho of 0.86, and high factor loadings for all four
manifest variables. This finding supports defining RCA in
language production as a unified construct, regardless of
linguistic demands. DG rho’s for WM and CI were 0.7 and
0.63 respectively, with R2 of 0.51.
Table 2 shows the results of the bootstrapping on Model
2. The only latent variable that significantly predicted RCA
in production was GI. Post-hoc modeling of Adj+ and Adjmanifest variables separately also revealed a reliable
contribution of this variable to RCA in both trial types.
Table 2: Results of Bootstrapping for Model 2. CI =
Competitive Inhibition; GI = Global Inhibition; WM =
Working Memory.
Latent
IV

Path
Coeff.

Bootstrapping
Means

SE

WM
CI
GI

0.18
0.26
-0.56

0.20
0.18
-0.54

0.20
0.28
0.18

Lower
95%
CI
-0.24
-0.42
-0.80

Upper
95%
CI
0.54
0.57
-0.21

we first examined the correlation between participants’
target advantage scores in the Adj+ and Adj− conditions.
The two measures showed a significant negative correlation
(r = -.47, p = .01), in contrast to the production results.
Nearly half of the participants (13 of 28) showed a negative
target advantage score in one condition and a positive score
in the other, indicating that in one condition, participants
systematically interpreted the critical cohort phoneme as the
onset of the competitor, instead of the target. Recall that in
the Adj+ condition, the target word was always an adjective
and its cohort competitor was always a noun, while in the
Adj− condition, the opposite was true. Thus, it appears that
these participants adopted a strategy of always interpreting
the cohort phoneme as being from the same part of speech.
Because our main question of interest was whether RCA
in production and comprehension rely upon the same
cognitive processes within an individual, we directly
compared performance in these two domains within the
subset of participants who were clearly engaging in RCA
during comprehension (Adapters; n = 11). While no
relationship was found between production and
comprehension on Adj+ trials, on Adj− trials, these
participants’ eye-tracking performance in comprehension
was significantly positively correlated with their production
accuracy (r = .63, p < .05) and marginally positively
correlated with their eye-tracking performance in production
(r = .49, p = .12).
We also tested whether the same cognitive abilities were
responsible for performance across conditions in Adapters.
Due to the univariate nature of the dependent measures in
these analyses, we ran multilevel models separately on Adj+
and Adj− eye-tracking data, with all six cognitive tests
included as predictor variables. While none of the cognitive
measures predicted performance on Adj+ trials, RCA on
Adj− trials was significantly predicted by the Flanker (t =
6.2, p < .01) and NoGo tasks (t = 5.1, p < .05).
In summary, comprehension results differentiated two
groups of individuals: those who flexibly adapted their
processing to referential context and those who did not. In
those who did, RCA abilities were correlated in production
and comprehension, at least on Adj− trials, and in both cases
they were well predicted by a measure of IC.

Discussion

Analysis of eye-tracking data in production showed that
participants’ average competitor advantage scores were
positively correlated with RCA accuracy in both the Adj+
and Adj- condition (r = .45 and .58, respectively; p’s < .05),
and that eye-tracking performance itself was highly
correlated across the two conditions (r = .96, p < .001).

Analysis of Comprehension Data
In the path model, the two measures of RCA in
comprehension had opposite loadings on the RCA latent
variable, thus forcing us to examine them separately. To
understand
why the
eye-tracking
measures
in
comprehension had opposite effects on the RCA variable,

This experiment tested three central questions: 1) Which
cognitive processes underlie RCA? 2) Are these processes
consistent across production and comprehension? 3) Do
situations in which better RCA is marked by addition of an
adjective differ from those in which it is marked by
omission of an adjective? In answer to question 1, we
observed a clear effect of IC across the domains of
production and comprehension. In production, NoGo scores
were predictive of better RCA for both Adj+ and Adj- trials.
In comprehension, amongst Adapters, scores on both NoGo
and Flanker tasks predicted performance on Adj− trials.
These findings suggest a definite role for IC in RCA. Since
common to both production and comprehension, this finding

1222

most likely points to the role of IC in capturing the critical
contrast by preventing fixed attention to the target (hence
ignoring the critical competitor).
Two lines of evidence can be used to answer question 2.
First, the fact that IC played a role in RCA for both
production and comprehension is evidence that the RCA
abilities are related in the two domains. Second,
performance on Adj− trials was correlated between
production and comprehension amongst Adapters. Together,
these findings provide the first piece of evidence for a
common basis of RCA in production and comprehension.
In answer to question 3, production analyses strongly
suggested RCA ability was independent of trial type: Eyetracking measures across Adj+ and Adj- trials were highly
correlated, PLS-PM revealed the RCA latent variable in
production to be a highly coherent construct, and the same
underlying cognitive mechanism, global inhibition, was
implicated in both Adj+ and Adj− trials. In comprehension,
more variability across conditions and participants was
observed. PLS-PM showed a lack of unidimensionality
across comprehension conditions, and further inspection of
the data revealed that nearly half of the participants did not
use referential context. Even within Adapters, only RCA on
Adj− trials correlated with production and was predicted by
measures of IC. This is in part due to low internal reliability
of RCA in comprehension (ρ* = .34 for Adj− and ρ* = -.16
for Adj+)1, as also reported by Ryskin et al. (2015), which
stands in sharp contrast to the high split-half reliability of
RCA in production (ρ* = .97 in both conditions). However,
our results suggested that apart from consistency issues,
listeners did often default to a fixed strategy, as opposed to
flexibly adapting to context, as they did in production.
In summary, these results represent the first evidence for
shared underlying cognitive mechanisms of pragmatic
processing in production and comprehension. In production,
this mechanism, global inhibition, was recruited regardless
of the particulars of the referential context, while in
comprehension, results were less uniform across conditions,
pointing to specific strategies adopted by listeners in
locating the referent. These findings provide insights into
the cognitive processes that drive pragmatic use during
spoken language comprehension and production, and help to
situate pragmatic processing within a larger and more
general cognitive framework.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a Ruth L. Kirschstein
NRSA Postdoctoral Fellowship (F32DC015390) to AMT &
the Therapeutic Cognitive Neuroscience Fund.

References
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.
Brown-Schmidt, S. (2009). The role of executive function in
1 ρ* = Spearman-Brown adjusted correlation, a measure of splithalf reliability

perspective
taking
in
online
language
comprehension. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16, 893900.
Deutsch, W., & Pechmann, T. (1982). Social interaction and
the development of definite descriptions. Cognition, 11,
159-184.
Freedman, M. L., & Martin, R. C. (2001). Dissociable
components of short-term memory and their relation to
long-term learning. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 18, 193226.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
J. Morgan (eds.) Syntax and Semantics Volume 3: Speech
Acts. New York: Academic Press.
Kessels, R. P., Van Zandvoort, M. J., Postma, A., Kappelle,
L. J., & De Haan, E. H. (2000). The Corsi block-tapping
task: standardization and normative data. Applied
Neuropsychology, 7, 252-258.
Lin, S., Keysar, B., & Epley, N. (2010). Reflexively
mindblind: Using theory of mind to interpret behavior
requires effortful attention. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 46, 551-556.
Munakata, Y., Herd, S. A., Chatham, C. H., Depue, B. E.,
Banich, M. T., & O’Reilly, R. C. (2011). A unified
framework for inhibitory control. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 15, 453-459.
Nilsen, E. S., & Graham, S. A. (2009). The relations
between children’s communicative perspective-taking and
executive functioning. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 220249.
Nozari, N., Trueswell, J. C., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (in
press). The interplay of local attraction, context and
domain-general cognitive control in activation and
suppression of semantic distractors during sentence
comprehension. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Ryskin, R. A., Benjamin, A. S., Tullis, J., & BrownSchmidt, S. (2015). Perspective-taking in comprehension,
production, and memory: An individual differences
approach.
Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 144, 898-915.
Sanchez, G., Trinchera, L., & Russolillo, G. (2013). plspm:
tools for partial least squares path modeling (PLS-PM). R
package version 0.4, 1.
Schnur, T. T., Schwartz, M. F., Brecher, A., & Hodgson, C.
(2006). Semantic interference during blocked-cyclic
naming: Evidence from aphasia. Journal of Memory and
Language, 54, 199-227.
Sedivy, J. C. (2005). Evaluating Explanations for
Referential Context Effects: Evidence for Cricean
Mechanisms in Online Language Interpretation. In
Trueswell, J. C., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (eds). Approaches
to studying world-situated language use: Bridging the
language-as-product and language-as-action traditions.
MIT Press.
Wardlow, L. (2013). Individual differences in speakers’
perspective taking: The roles of executive control and
working memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 20,
766-772.

1223

