Insomniacs Misidentify Angry Faces as Fearful Faces Because of Missing the Eyes:
An Eye-Tracking Study
Jinxiao Zhang (tepzhang@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong

Antoni B. Chan (abchan@cityu.edu.hk)
Department of Computer Science, The City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

Esther Y.Y. Lau (laueyy@eduhk.hk)
Department of Psychology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Tai Po, Hong Kong

Janet H. Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong
Abstract
Insomniacs were found to have compromised perception of
facial expressions. Through eye movement examinations,
here we test the hypothesis that this effect is due to impaired
visual attention functions for retrieving diagnostic features in
facial expression judgments. 23 individuals with insomnia
symptoms and 23 non-insomniac controls completed a task to
categorize happy, sad, fearful, and angry faces. The
insomniacs were less accurate to recognize angry faces and
made more “fearful” mistakes than controls. A hidden
Markov modeling approach for eye movement data analysis
revealed that when recognizing angry faces, more insomniacs
adopted an eye movement pattern focusing on the mouth
while more controls adopted a pattern attending to both the
eyes and the mouth. This result is consistent with previous
findings that the primary diagnostic feature for recognizing
angry faces is the eyes suggesting that impaired information
selection through visual attention control may account for the
compromised emotion perception in insomniac individuals.
Keywords: insomnia; eye-tracking; hidden Markov model;
facial expression

Introduction
Insomnia is closely related to emotional disorders such as
anxiety and depression (see Baglioni et al., 2010 for a
review). In particular, compromised perception of emotional
facial expressions, which has an important role in one’s
socioemotional functioning, has been frequently found
among sleep-deprived individuals or those with insomnia
symptoms. For example, individuals with physiological
insomnia were found to perceive fearful and sad faces as
less emotional compared with good sleepers (Kyle et al.,
2014). Another study found that 31.5-hour sleep deprivation
led to less accurate recognition of sad faces (Cote et al.,
2014). In addition, an fMRI study found that sleep
deprivation made participants more likely to classify facial
expressions as angry, and this effect was coupled with their
diminished neural discrimination between threatening and
non-threatening stimuli (in the anterior cingulate and
anterior insula; Goldstein-Piekarski et al., 2015).
Nevertheless, the underlying mechanism for the disturbed
perception of emotional facial expressions among
insomniacs remains unclear (Kyle et al., 2014).
In addition to emotional functioning, insomniacs and
sleep-deprived individuals are commonly found to have
impaired performance in visuospatial attention tasks

(Marchetti et al., 2006), and this behavioral impairment is
associated with attenuated activation in the attention neural
network comprising the prefrontal, parietal, and cingulate
cortex (Tomasi et al., 2009; Mander et al., 2008). The
impairment in the attention network may have a profound
impact on cognitive performance in general, as it can
significantly influence how task relevant information is
selected. Indeed, attenuated activations in the attention
network were reported to be associated with less explorative
eye movement patterns and worse performance in face
recognition (Chan et al., 2016). It is thus possible that
insomniac individuals adopt different eye movement
patterns from good sleepers in emotional facial expression
judgments as a result of their impaired visual attention
control, leading to compromised recognition performance.
Here we aim to investigate the role of visual attention
functions in accounting for insomniacs’ compromised
identification of emotional facial expressions through eye
tracking. Individuals with insomnia symptoms and noninsomniac controls completed an emotional facial
expression judgement task in which they were required to
recognize emotional facial expressions and rate the
emotional intensity with eye tracking. Recent studies have
suggested four basic facial expressions that are recognized
across cultures: ‘happy’, ‘sad’, ‘fear’ and ‘anger’ (Jack et al.,
2016). Accordingly, here we examine participants’
perception of these four facial expressions. Previous
research did not consistently find disturbed perception of a
particular facial expression in sleep-deprived or insomniac
individuals. However, most of the expressions reported to
be affected were negative expressions (e.g., sadness in Cote
et al., 2014; anger in Goldstein-Piekarski et al., 2015;
sadness and fear in Kyle et al., 2014). Thus, here we
hypothesize that insomniac individuals may be less accurate
in recognizing the negative facial expressions than noninsomniac controls, and that this behavioral difference may
be associated with differences in eye movement patterns
adopted by the two groups.
While eye movements are important measures for visual
attention functions, recent studies have reported substantial
individual differences in eye movements in visual tasks (e.g.
Kanan et al., 2015), which were not adequately reflected in
most of the current analysis methods. In view of this, Chuk,
Chan, and Hsiao (2014) have recently proposed a Hidden

1430

Markov Model (HMM, a type of time-series probabilistic
model in machine learning) based approach for analyzing
eye movement data. This approach assumes that the current
eye fixation during a task is conditioned on previous
fixations. Thus, eye movements in the task can be
considered a Markov process, which can be better
understood using HMM. In this approach, each individual’s
eye movements are modeled with an HMM, including both
person-specific regions of interests (ROIs) and transitions
among the ROIs. Thus, it reflects individual differences in
both spatial and temporal dimensions of eye movements.
Individual HMMs can be clustered to discover common
patterns among individuals (Coviello, Chan, & Lanckriet,
2014), and similarities between individual eye movement
patterns can be quantitatively assessed by calculating the
likelihoods of the patterns being generated by a given
HMM. Thus, this approach is especially suitable for
examining the relationship between eye movement patterns
and other outcome measures such as task performance (e.g.,
Chuk, Chan, & Hsiao, in press). Here we aim to apply this
method to examine the relationship among insomnia, eye
movements, and performance in facial expression
categorization. We hypothesize that there may be more
insomniac individuals adopting an eye movement pattern
that overlooks diagnostic features for the negative facial
expressions than non-insomniac controls, and participants’
likelihoods of adopting this pattern may be associated with
their performance in recognizing the negative expressions.

Methods

Design & Procedures
Participants completed an emotional facial expression
judgment task adapted from Kyle et al. (2014), which
required participants to categorize and rate emotional
intensity of 4 facial expressions (i.e. happiness, sadness,
fear, and anger; Figure 1A). The task consisted of 2 blocks
with 40 trials in each block (10 trials for each expression).
In each trial, a solid dot first appeared at the screen center
for drift correction, and it was replaced by a fixation cross
for 500 ms. Once a fixation was detected at the cross at the
end of the 500 ms, a color picture of an Asian individual’s
face with an emotional facial expression (Figure 1B; 450 x
600 pixels) was presented either above or below the center
of the screen until the participants categorized it as a happy,
sad, fearful, or angry face by pressing corresponding
buttons. Participants were asked to respond as quickly as
possible. After a 250-ms pause, they were asked to rate the
emotional intensity of the facial expression on a 6-point
scale, ranging from “1-not very intense” to “6-extremely
intense”. Half of the face images were male faces; the faces
spanned around 8°of visual angle at the viewing distance
of 60 cm (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2008). The participants had a
practice of 24 trials at the beginning of the task.
Participants’ eye movements were recorded by an
EyeLink 1000 eye tracker. The standard 9-point calibration
procedure was used at the beginning of each block and was
repeated whenever the drift-correction error was larger than
1° of visual angle. The tracking mode was pupil and corneal
reflection and the sampling rate was 2000 Hz. A chinrest
was used during the task to reduce head movements.

Participants
23 individuals with insomnia symptoms and 23 noninsomniac controls classified by the Sleep Condition
Indicator (SCI, Espie et al., 2014) were recruited (Table 1).
The SCI consists of 8 items concerning an individual’s sleep
condition during the recent month in a 0-4 Likert-style
scale. The Chinese SCI has been validated and
recommended as a screening tool for clinical insomnia with
an original cut-off at 21/22 (Wong et al., 2017). To increase
the contrast between the two groups, individuals with SCI
scores < 19 were classified as individuals with insomnia
symptoms, and those with SCI scores > 24 were classified
as non-insomnia controls. Participants in the two groups
were individually matched in gender and age. They were
ethnically Chinese from Hong Kong and right-handed
(Edinburgh Handedness Inventory, EHI; Oldfield, 1971).
They had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no
history of head trauma or psychiatric conditions.
Table 1. Participants’ demographics and sleep conditions
Controls
INS
Comparison test
(n=23)
(n=23)
Age (M+SD) 18.91+0.90 18.74+0.81
t(44) = .689
Gender
30.43%
30.43%
χ2(1) = 0
(%male)
SCI (M+SD) 27.61+1.80 15.70+2.94 t(44) = 16.54**
SCI: Sleep Condition Indicator; INS: insomnia group.
* p < .05; ** p < .01

Figure 1. (A) A demonstration of a trial with an angry face. (B)
The average pictures of the 20 stimuli used in each emotional
expression. From left to right: happiness, sadness, fear, anger.

The eye movement data were analyzed using the
EMHMM (Eye Movement analysis with Hidden Markov
Models, http://visal.cs.cityu.edu.hk/research/emhmm/; Chuk
et al., 2014) approach. Each participant’s eye movements
while viewing one type of facial expressions was
summarized with an HMM. The optimal number of ROIs
for each model was determined automatically through a
variational Bayesian approach, by selecting the model with
the highest marginal likelihood. For each facial expression,
we clustered all individual HMMs into 2 groups to reveal
common patterns. We then examined the distributions of the
insomniacs and the controls in the 2 common patterns, and

1431

the correlations between their likelihoods of adopting each
pattern and behavioural performances.

emotional intensity rating showed a main effect of emotion
(adjusted post-hoc comparisons: fearful > happy, angry >
sad; Figure 2D), F(3, 132) = 23.24, p < .001, η2 = .35.
However, this effect did not interact with group.

Results
Behavioral results

Eye movement data

A 2 (group: insomnia vs. control) by 4 (emotion: happy, sad,
fearful and angry) repeated measures ANOVA revealed a
significant interaction between group and emotion on the
accuracy of the facial expression judgment task, F(3, 132) =
2.68, p = .049, η2 = .057. Independent t-tests between the
insomnia and the control group in each emotion condition
indicated that there was 8.4% higher accuracy on average to
recognize angry faces in the control group than the insomnia
group, t(44) = 2.12, p = .039, d = .63 (Figure 2A). This
group difference was not found in other emotion conditions,
ps > .05. When we examined the responses participants
made towards angry faces (Figure 2B), the 2 by 4 repeated
measures ANOVA indicated a significant interaction
between group and emotion, F(3, 132) = 3.57, p = .016, η2 =
.075. Post-hoc between-group t-tests showed a significantly
higher percentage of “fearful” responses in the insomnia
group than the control group, t(44) = 2.07, p = .045, d = .62.

We modeled each participant’s eye movements for viewing
each type of facial expressions with an HMM. For each
expression type, we clustered all participants’ HMMs into 2
representative patterns and examined the distributions of the
insomniacs and controls adopting the 2 patterns. We
observed that the insomnia and control groups differed
significantly in their frequencies of adopting the 2
representative patterns when viewing angry faces.
Consistent with our behavioral data, this difference was not
observed in viewing other expressions1. Figure 3A and 3B
show the 2 representative patterns. The 3 ROIs were in red,
green, and blue respectively and the table showed the priors
(the probability of the first fixation being located at an ROI)
of the ROIs and the transition probabilities among them. In
the eye-mouth pattern (Pattern 1; n = 21), the first fixation
was most likely to be in eye region (red ROI, 47%) or the
mouth region (blue ROI, 42%). The next fixation from the
eye ROI had a high probability to stay in the same (eye)
ROI, whereas the next fixation from the mouth ROI had a
26% probability to move to the eye region. Thus,
participants adopting this pattern focused the most on the
eye region, followed by the mouth region, while viewing
angry faces. In the nose-mouth pattern (Pattern 2; n = 25),
the first fixation was most likely to be at the nose/face
center (red ROI, 46%) or the mouth and chin region (green
ROI, 42%). The next fixation following the first was most
likely to stay in the same ROI as the first fixation (> 99%),
suggesting few transitions among the ROIs. Thus,
participants adopting this pattern tended to focus on the
lower part of the face (nose, mouth and chin) but neglect the
eye region. Figure 3C shows the difference heat map
between the two patterns: the eye-mouth pattern had more
fixations on the right eye region (warm colors) while the
nose-mouth pattern had more fixations on the mouth and
chin regions (cold colors). This clear separation of the eye
movement patterns demonstrated well the power of machine
learning methods.
Importantly, significantly more insomniacs adopted the
nose-mouth eye movement pattern, and more controls
adopted the eye-mouth pattern (Figure 3D), χ2(1) = 4.29, p =
.038. In addition, insomniacs’ eye movement patterns had
higher similarities to the nose-mouth pattern than those from
controls, t(44) = -2.37, p = .022, d =.713, as measured in the
log-likelihoods of their eye movement patterns being
generated by the HMM of the nose-moth pattern. In
contrast, there was no significant difference in the similarity
of eye movement patterns to the eye-mouth pattern between
insomniacs and controls, p > .05.

Figure 2. (A) The accuracy to categorize happy, sad, fearful, and
angry facial emotions in the control and the insomnia group. (B)
Reponses made while angry faces were presented. (C) Response
time to accurately categorize emotional facial expressions. (D)
Emotional intensity rating of the 4 facial emotions in the two
groups. (* p < .05;  .05 < p < .10; error bars: 1 s.e.m.)

In the correct response time (RT) data (Figure 2C), a 2
(group) by 4 (emotion) repeated measures ANOVA
indicated a main effect of emotion (adjusted post-hoc
comparisons: happy < sad, fear, and anger), F(3, 132) =
40.72, p < .001, η2 = .48. This effect did not interact with
group. When we examined the difference between the two
groups in categorizing different expressions separately, the
insomnia group responded marginally slower in identifying
angry faces than the control group, t(44) = 1.768, p = .084, d
= .53. The group by emotion repeated measures ANOVA on

1

1432

Due to space limit, these results were not reported here.

responses (Figure 5A), r = .423, p = .0032: the more similar
the pattern to the nose-mouth pattern when viewing angry
faces, the more “fearful” mistakes made. In addition, in the
control group, the log-likelihood of being classified as the
eye-mouth pattern was negatively correlated with the correct
RT of identifying angry faces (Figure 5B), r = -.451, p
= .031: the more similar the pattern to the eye-mouth pattern,
the faster the correct RT. This correlation was not
significant in the insomnia group, p > .05.

Figure 4. Fixation heat maps of the control and insomnia group
and the difference map between the two groups. The areas
surrounded by white contours showed significant differences.
Warm colors: control > insomnia; cold colors: insomnia > control.

Discussion

Figure 3. (A and B) The eye-mouth and nose-mouth representative
eye movement patterns for viewing angry faces as the result of
clustering. Images from left to right: 3 ROIs, actual assignments of
the fixations to the ROIs, and heat map of eye fixations. The tables
contain the priors and transition probabilities of the ROIs. (C)
Difference map of actual fixations between the two patterns. (D)
Distribution of the eye-mouth (Pattern 1) and nose-mouth (Pattern
2) patterns in the insomnia group and the control group.

To demonstrate the advantage of using the EMHMM
approach to reveal these differences, we plotted the heat
maps of the fixations of the insomnia and control groups
and the difference map between them (Caldara & Miellet,
2011). As can be seen in Figure 4 difference map, the
significantly different areas (circled in white) were scattered
and not easily interpretable. This phenomenon was due to
significant individual differences in eye movement patterns
within each group. The EMHMM approach allows us to
identify the eye-mouth and nose-mouth patterns in a data
driven fashion and clearly reveal the difference between the
two participant groups while accounting for individual
differences in eye movement patterns.
When we examined the relationship between eye
movement patterns and performances in the facial
expression judgment task, we found that the log-likelihood
of participants’ patterns being classified as the nose-mouth
pattern was positively correlated the percentage of “fearful”

In the current study, we aim to test the hypothesis that the
compromised perception of emotional facial expressions in
insomniacs is related to impaired visual attention functions
for selecting diagnostic features as revealed in their eye
movements. Our results showed that individuals with
insomnia symptoms were less accurate and marginally
slower to identify angry faces than non-insomniac controls.
Furthermore, insomniacs tended to misidentify angry faces
as fearful faces more often than controls. Through the
EMHMM approach (Chuk et al., 2014), we discovered two
common eye movement patterns among the participants
when viewing angry faces: an eye-mouth pattern that looked
at the eyes and mouth primarily, and a nose-mouth pattern
that fixated at either the nose or the mouth/chin region.
Significantly more controls adopted the eye-mouth pattern
and more insomniacs adopted the nose-mouth pattern.
Indeed, the eye-mouth pattern was associated with faster
identification of angry faces in the control group, whereas
the nose-mouth pattern was associated with more
misidentification of angry faces as fearful faces. These
results suggest that insomniacs misidentified angry faces as
fearful faces because of missing the eyes. The EMHMM
approach is a data-driven method that reflects individual
differences in both spatial and temporal dimensions of eye
movements and provides quantitative assessments of
2 The log-likelihood of participants’ eye movement patterns
being classified as the eye-mouth pattern was also correlated with
the percentages of “fearful” responses, but with a smaller
Pearson’s r, r = .394, p = .007. This effect may be due to the
similarities between the two representative patterns. Note that the
two patterns were significantly different: eye movements classified
as the eye-mouth pattern had higher likelihoods of being generated
by the eye-mouth model, and vice versa (Chuk et al., 2014).

1433

similarities among individual eye movement patterns,
making it possible to reveal these effects. These findings
were not possible with traditional approaches to eye
movement data analysis such as using predefined regions of
interest (ROIs; Henderson et al., 2005) or fixation heat maps
(iMap, Caldara & Miellet, 2011) between the insomniacs
and the controls (Figure 3 vs. Figure 4).

Figure 5. (A) A positive correlation between the log-likelihood of
being the nose-mouth pattern and the “fearful” response rate
among all participants. (B) A negative correlation between the loglikelihood of being the eye-mouth pattern and the RT to identify
angry faces in the control group.

Our finding is consistent with previous studies suggesting
that insomnia and sleep loss are associated with
compromised recognition of emotional facial expressions
(e.g. Kyle et al., 2014; Cote et al., 2014). In particular, in an
fMRI study, Goldstein-Piekarski and colleagues (2015)
found that experimental sleep deprivation impaired
behavioral and neural discrimination of angry faces from
neutral faces. Angry facial emotions signal social threats,
and thus misidentification or slower identification of angry
faces may elevate interpersonal conflicts of insomniac
individuals. Interestingly, insomniacs were more likely to
misidentify angry faces as fearful faces than controls,
suggesting that they may misidentify social threats senders
as social threats receivers.
The misidentification of facial anger as facial fear in
insomniacs corresponds to their eye movement patterns.
Most of the insomniacs adopted a pattern that focused on
either the nose or the mouth while missing the eye region. In
contrast, most controls adopted a pattern that looked at
mainly the eye region or both the eye and the mouth region.

The finding that insomniacs missed the eye region may be
related to their impaired perception of angry faces. Indeed,
through the ‘Bubbles’ reverse-correlation technique, Smith,
Cottrell, Gosselin, and Schyns (2005) showed that eyes are
the most diagnostic feature for recognizing angry
expressions, whereas the most diagnostic features for
recognizing the other three expressions (i.e. ‘happy’, ‘sad’,
and ‘fearful’) were either mainly on the mouth region or
comprised both the mouth and the eyes (see also Schyns,
Petro, & Smith, 2009). Consistent with this finding,
Eisenbarth and Alpers (2011) showed that participants
looked at the eyes longer than the mouth in recognizing
anger and sad expressions, the mouth longer than the eyes
for happy expressions, and the mouth and the eyes equally
for fear and neural expressions. The exclusive importance of
the eye region for recognizing angry faces may explain why
we only observed behavioral differences between
insomniacs and controls in identifying angry faces, since
identifying other expressions do not require specific
attention to the eye region as much as identifying angry
expressions.
In the literature, biased interpretation of emotional
information after sleep loss has typically been attributed to
impaired functioning of limbic structures such as amygdala
and anterior cingulate cortex and the functional connectivity
between the prefrontal cortex and these limbic structures
towards emotional stimuli (e.g., Yoo et al., 2007; GoldsteinPiekarski et al., 2015). In addition to this emotional brain
network, the current study suggests that impaired attentional
functioning may also play an important role in accounting
for the misinterpretation of emotional information after
sleep loss. Indeed, sleep loss is shown to affect visual
attention control and activation in the attention brain
network (Tomasi et al., 2009; Mander et al., 2008).
Decreased activations in the attention brain network (e.g.,
the frontal eye field and intraparietal sulcus) are associated
with maladaptive eye movement patterns and impaired
recognition performance during face viewing (Chan et al.,
2016). Impaired visual attention functions may cause failure
of selecting diagnostic information for emotional face
perception, leading to biased interpretation of emotional
information. Our finding is consistent with Cote et al.’s
(2014) study, which showed that impaired facial expression
identification in sleep-deprived individuals was reflected in
early visual ERP components including P1 and N170.
While the current study showed impaired recognition of
angry expressions but not other expressions in insomniacs,
some previous studies have reported disturbed perception of
sad and fearful faces in addition to angry faces (e.g., Kyle et
al., 2014). Cote et al. (2014) showed that altered early visual
ERP responses due to sleep deprivation were observed for
all expressions, whereas difference in identification
accuracy between sleep deprived individuals and controls
was only observed in sad faces. This effect suggests that
while the modulation of sleep loss in attentional functioning
may apply to all expressions in general, whether it results in
decreased identification accuracy may depend on how it
affects selection of diagnostic features, since different facial
expressions differ in their diagnostic features (Schyns et al.,

1434

2009). There may be individual differences in how features
are selected and used for identification; individual
differences in emotional functioning may also play a role.
Future work will examine these possibilities.
In conclusion, here we showed that insomniacs
misrecognized angry expressions because of missing
diagnostic features in the eye region. This effect suggests
that the impaired perception of facial expressions after sleep
loss may be due to diminished visual attention control in
addition to impaired emotional functioning. To our
knowledge, this is the first to report the role of eye
movement in the biased perception of emotional information
due to sleep loss. Future studies will examine eye
movements in clinical insomnia samples and sleep-deprived
individuals to further examine the role of visual attention
control in emotional perception after sleep loss.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (#17402814 to Hsiao and CityU110513 to Chan). We
thank Dr. Tim Chuk for his support in data analysis and Ms.
Li-Cih Hsu for her assistance in data collection.

References
Baglioni, C., Spiegelhalder, K., Lombardo, C., & Riemann,
D. (2010). Sleep and emotions: a focus on
insomnia. Sleep medicine reviews, 14(4), 227-238.
Caldara, R. & Miellet, S. (2011). iMap: a novel method for
statistical fixation mapping of eye movement data.
Behavior Research Methods, 43(3), 864-878.
Chan, C. Y. H., Wong, J. J., Chan, A. B., Lee, T. M. C., &
Hsiao, J. H. W. (2016). Analytic eye movement patterns
in face recognition are associated with better performance
and more top-down control of visual attention: an fMRI
study. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, 854-859.
Chuk, T., Chan, A. B., & Hsiao, J. H. (2014). Understanding
eye movements in face recognition using hidden Markov
models. Journal of vision, 14(11), 8-8.
Chuk, T., Chan, A. B., & Hsiao, J. H. (in press). Is having
similar eye movement patterns during face learning and
recognition beneficial for recognition performance?
Evidence from hidden Markov modeling. Vision Research.
Cote, K. A., Mondloch, C. J., Sergeeva, V., Taylor, M., &
Semplonius, T. (2014). Impact of total sleep deprivation
on behavioural neural processing of emotionally
expressive faces. Experimental brain research, 232(5),
1429-1442.
Coviello, E., Chan, A. B., & Lanckriet, G. R. G. (2014).
Clustering hidden Markov models with variational HEM.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1), 697-747.
Eisenbarth, H., & Alpers, G. W. (2011). Happy mouth and
sad eyes: scanning emotional facial expressions.
Emotion, 11(4), 860.
Goldstein-Piekarski, A. N., Greer, S. M., Saletin, J. M., &
Walker, M. P. (2015). Sleep deprivation impairs the
human central and peripheral nervous system

discrimination of social threat. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 35(28), 10135-10145.
Hsiao, J. H., & Cottrell, G. W. (2008). Two fixations suffice
in face recognition. Psychol. Sci., 9(10), 998-1006.
Henderson, J. M., Williams, C. C., & Falk, R. J. (2005).
Eye movements are functional during face learning.
Memory & Cognition, 33(1), 98-106.
Kanan, C., Bseiso, D. N., Ray, N. A., Hsiao, J. H., &
Cottrell, G. W. (2015). Humans have idiosyncratic and
task-specific scanpaths for judging faces. Vision
Research, 108, 67-76.
Kyle, S. D., Beattie, L., Spiegelhalder, K., Rogers, Z., &
Espie, C. A. (2014). Altered emotion perception in
insomnia disorder. Sleep, 37(4), 775-783.
Mander, B. A., Reid, K. J., Davuluri, V. K., Small, D. M.,
Parrish, T. B., Mesulam, M. M., Zee, P.C., & Gitelman, D.
R. (2008). Sleep deprivation alters functioning within the
neural network underlying the covert orienting of
attention. Brain research, 1217, 148-156.
Marchetti, L. M., Biello, S. M., Broomfield, N. M.,
Macmahon, K., & Espie, C. A. (2006). Who is pre‐
occupied with sleep? A comparison of attention bias in
people with psychophysiological insomnia, delayed sleep
phase syndrome and good sleepers using the induced
change blindness paradigm. Journal of Sleep
Research, 15(2), 212-221.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of
handedness:
The
Edinburgh
Inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1), 97–113.
Schyns, P. G., Petro, L. S., & Smith, M.
L. (2009). Transmission of facial expressions of emotion
co-evolved with their efficient decoding in the brain:
behavioral and brain evidence. PLoS ONE, 4(5), e5625.
Smith, M. L., Cottrell, G. W., Gosselin, F., & Schyns, P.
G. (2005). Transmitting
and
decoding
facial
expressions. Psychological Science, 16(3), pp. 184-189.
Tomasi, D., Wang, R. L., Telang, F., Boronikolas, V., Jayne,
M. C., Wang, G. J., Fowler, J.S., & Volkow, N. D. (2009).
Impairment of attentional networks after 1 night of sleep
deprivation. Cerebral cortex, 19(1), 233-240.
Wong, M. L., Lau, K. N. T., Espie, C. A., Luik, A. I., Kyle,
S. D., & Lau, E. Y. Y. (2017). Psychometric properties of
the Sleep Condition Indicator and Insomnia Severity
Index in the evaluation of insomnia disorder. Sleep
Medicine, 33, 76-81.
Yoo, S. S., Gujar, N., Hu, P., Jolesz, F. A., & Walker, M. P.
(2007). The human emotional brain without sleep—a
prefrontal amygdala disconnect. Current Biology, 17(20),
877-878.

1435

