Instrumental Representations of Sensorimotor Control: Representations at
Intermediate Level
Hsi-wen Daniel Liu (hwliu@pu.edu.tw)
Center for General Education, Providence University
Taichung, Taiwan

Abstract
In cognitive science, computation is largely accompanied
with representational theory of mind. Yet, it remains unclear
whether this companionship also appears in the realm of
sensorimotor control. Grush’s (2004) and Pezzulo’s (2008,
2011) account of anticipatory representations provide a
limited answer, as they are only suitable for forward models,
but not the entire sensorimotor control. Rescorla’s (2016)
representational explanation for sensorimotor psychology
addresses several intentional states considered in Bayesian
inference and optimal modeling. However, the above
accounts does not explain how motor commands are produced
and chosen in the course of sensorimotor control for
maintaining accuracy of goal-achievement. The present paper
aims to explain it with a representational account by
considering instrumental representations of sensorimotor
control, which appear at the intermediate level and are
exemplified by motor commands and costs.
Such
representations do not presume decouplability, as they need to
run on-line in the maintenance of accuracy.
Keywords: Sensorimotor control; representation; optimal
feedback control; Bayesian decision theory.

Introduction
Within cognitive science there is a long-standing dispute
between different paradigms concerning the role of
representation in computation. Classical cognitive science
understands cognition in terms of computation over mental
representations, and considers the role of cognition to be
deriving world-models that provide a database for thinking,
planning and problem-solving. Decouplability between
representations and their immediate environment is taken as
intrinsic to representation. By contrast, a ‘pragmatic turn’
raises the ‘action-oriented paradigm’ that considers
cognition to be providing skillful know-how in situated and
embodied actions (Engel et. el., 2013). Clark (1997) raises
the notion of action-oriented representations, which do not
presume
decouplability,
in
his
‘minimal
representationalism’. Action-oriented representations, yet,
are mostly applied to reactive motor activities, regardless of
various models of motor control.
The computational theory of mind is largely accompanied
with a representational theory for explaining a variety of
faculties, including perception, language, thinking, and
problem-solving. However, the role of representation is
highly debated for the faculty of motor action. Within
models of motor control, the forward model is firmly
associated with a role of representation, in the notions of
emulating representation or anticipatory representations
(Grush, 2004; Pezzulo, 2008, 2011).
For those

representations, decouplability is claimed to be an intrinsic
property. In addition, Bayesian models of motor control are
seen as highly associated with a robust notion of mental
representation (Rescorla, 2016). Decouplability is also seen
as intrinsic to that notion of representation (Haselager et al.,
2003). As to other models of motor control, however, the
role of representation is unclear. The computational theory
of sensorimotor control has been established (Wolpert and
Ghahramani, 2000; Franklin and Wolpert, 2011; Orbán and
Wolpert, 2011). It is suggested that motor control is
conformed to the notion of pragmatic representation, as
different from that of semantic representation (Jeannerod,
2006). Yet, questions remain as to what the pragmatic
representation is and how it is related to computational
models of motor control.
Given that computation of cognition is an explanatory
account of cognition (Marr, 1982), an explanation can be
found in the computational theory of sensorimotor control,
as shown above. The sensorimotor control, as seen in the
determination of an appropriate motor command, is
considered to be fundamentally a decision process (Körding
and Wolpert, 2006). The decision is to choose an
appropriate motor command in order to achieve a given goal.
The present paper contends that the explanation of the
sensorimotor control is to explain why and how the decision
could determine an appropriate motor command that turns
out to achieve the goal. The explanandum is the way in
which the goal is achieved by choosing an appropriate of
motor command. The present paper characterizes this way
of goal-achievement in terms of the end-means relation.
The goal of a motor task is the end, and a chosen motor
command is its means. Humans can rationally consider the
appropriate means for an end; similarly, the sensorimotor
system can choose an appropriate motor command for a
given goal. This similarity, yet, is subject to two caveats.
Firstly, while in economic decision-making or daily affairs
in general, the rationality proceeds at the personal-level, the
sensorimotor processes largely operate at subpersonal-level.
Secondly, while characterization of human rationality need
not be put in terms of probability, the actual performance of
sensorimotor control is found to be very close to
descriptions made with Bayesian decision theory (Körding
and Wolpert, 2006), a theory with probabilistic measures.
Explanation of sensorimotor control can be pursued in
anti-representationalist accounts, which hold certain
explanatory perspectives (Turvey and Fonseca, 2009).
Motor control, as contended in such accounts, is determined
by interactions between the neural system, body, and the
environment. Different from such accounts, the present

2622

paper preserves an explanatory role for representation in
terms of a novel notion of representation—instrumental
representation—and regards the above interactions as
complementary to computation and representation.
Arrangement of that complementarity is for two reasons.
One is the overall success of the computational approach to
sensorimotor control (Franklin and Wolpert, 2011; Orbán
and Wolpert, 2011; Todorov, 2004; Wolpert and
Ghahramani, 2000). The other reason is that problems of
sensorimotor control, to put it in Clark’s (1997) terms, are
not ‘representational-hungry’.
The neural system of
sensorimotor control has tight interactions with body, and
the environment. The notion of instrumental representation
differs from the mainstream conceptions of representation in
that it does not presume decouplability from the
environment. Putting above two reasons together has an
implication in the level of instrumental representations.
Like that the present account of representation stands
between the classic account of representation and those antirepresentationalist accounts, instrumental representations
can be conceived of as standing at the intermediate level of
the mind.
The present paper aims to raise a representational account
of the sensorimotor control. This aim is to be achieved by
explaining computation of sensorimotor control in terms of
representation, on grounds that computation is a way to
explain the mind, in the first place. Section two discusses
computational explanations of sensorimotor control in terms
of end-means relations. Section three specifies the notion of
instrumental representations for explaining the sensorimotor
control, on grounds of computational explanations of
sensorimotor control.

Computation in the Sensorimotor Control
The Bayesian decision theory in sensorimotor control holds
a computational perspective with two components-estimation of environmental and bodily conditions, on the
one hand, and decision made upon motor commands for the
most desirable performance, on the other. To put it in an
epistemological dichotomy, the former component is to
measure environmental and bodily facts, while the latter one
is to evaluate motor actions. To put it otherwise, the former
is close to perception, while the latter to decision-making.

Uncertainty
Measurement of states in the sensorimotor system is
affected with various factors of uncertainty, and
consequently it cannot be accurate like that we manage to
measure the length of an object left on the table with a ruler.
Sensory signals of the environment have inherent delays,
which affect signals at all stages of sensorimotor system
from the afferent (coming-in-from-the-outside) sensory
information, to conduction along the neural fibers, together
with the complexity of processing (face recognition being
longer than motion perception) and ‘slower’ modality
(vision being longer than proprioception). It can be said that
we ‘live in the past’ by accessing the ‘out-of-date

information’ about the common world and our own bodies
(Franklin and Wolpert, 2011, pp. 425-6). In addition, the
nervous system is corrupted by noise, which also affects
sensorimotor control at all stages, from the reception of
sensory information, to planning, resulting in variability in
movement endpoints. Noise, hence, contaminates our
observation of the sensorimotor system internally and
externally, by affecting estimation of body states and world
conditions (ibid., p. 425). Noise in motor commands, in
particular, increases propositionally to the size of their
signal (the so-called ‘signal-dependent noise’). Different
motor commands would incur different degree of variability
in the resulting endpoints. To put it more specifically, the
motor performance is subject to speed–accuracy trade-off
described by Fitt’s law (Harris and Wolpert, 1998). Noise
in the sensorimotor system corrupts not only estimation of
internal and external states, on the one hand, but also
performance of motor actions, on the other.
Apart from delay and noise, there are more factors of
uncertainty residing in the sensorimotor system.
Environmental conditions are constantly subject to change,
for example, forces imposed upon the arm in the reaching
movement (Shadmehr and Mussa-Ivaldi, 1994). It is also
uncertain as to which actions or tasks would be beneficial in
the real world outside the laboratory (Franklin and Wolpert,
2011). Furthermore, our motor system is non-stationary, for
example, the length and weight of our limbs are changing
when we grow up, and our muscles are getting stronger with
larger forces (ibid.).
Those uncertain factors would
constantly contaminate information of the sensorimotor
system, information which consequently needs to be
optimized in order to achieve the given goal.
Given the aforementioned factors of uncertainty, the
computation of sensorimotor system needs to optimize its
information, in order to find the best resolution in view of
goal-achievement.
The sensorimotor system should
maintain optimal estimation of world and body states, and
should conduct optimal choice of motor commands. This
need of optimality, in both state estimation and action
choice, introduces a version of instrumental rationality that
is immanent in the sensorimotor system at the subpersonallevel.

Decision on Grounds of Utility
By contrast, another version of instrumental rationality turns
up in the sensorimotor system’s course of decision-making
for optimal choice of a particular motor command, given a
particular goal. Various particular goals can be given to a
sensorimotor system, which are ends for the system to seek
appropriate means for their fulfillment. Whenever a means
is determined, a decision is made for attaining the end. The
degree of fulfillment can be evaluated in positive terms,
such as benefit, reward, utility or prospect; or alternatively
in negative terms, such as loss or cost (Körding and Wolpert,
2006). The degree of fulfillment is a foundational notion,
the present paper proposes, for explaining the sensorimotor
control. In the realm of sensorimotor control, the utility of a

2623

motor movement is the decision theory’s way of evaluating
the fulfillment of the goal. The fulfillment to a higher
degree would receive the evaluation of a higher utility.
According to the decision theory, the expected utility of
an action is defined quantitatively in terms of probability, as
follows:

The Basics of Motor Commands

where p(outcome | action) is the probability of an
outcome given an action, and U(outcome) is the utility
assigned to that outcome. An action is chosen for
maximizing the expected value, which is put in terms of
utility. A decision made in this way is defined to be a
rational choice (Körding and Wolpert, 2006). This is a
normative theory that defines the way in which people
should behave; that way is put in terms of rationality. In
other words, the rationality of action urges that people in
their actions should pursue a higher degree of utility. When
it is put in the context of sensorimotor control, a utility
function evaluates how well a movement is performed. This
way of evaluation quantifies, in terms of utility, the total
desirability of a chosen movement. In addition, the decision
theory is also considered to be a descriptive theory by
assuming that people act rationally.
The rationality
assumed in this theory explains why people behave in the
way they do. In fact, empirical findings indicate that the
Bayesian decision theory shows successfully how people
actually perform their sensorimotor control (ibid.).
The decision theory measures a motor movement, in
terms of utility (measuring positively) or cost (measuring
negatively), by evaluating its degree of fulfillment, that is,
how well it achieves the goal. The end-means relation is
assumed in the notion of fulfillment. The utility, in a
descriptive term, defines how well a means attains the end.
The measurement of a cost depends on the immediate
conditions of all relevant factors in the sensorimotor
processing. Specifically, it depends on current states of the
sensory system and properties of the to-be-chosen motor
commands. The considered states include body states and
the environmental conditions, for example, joint angles and
velocities, and positions of relevant objects. Properties of
motor commands can be measured with different emphases,
for example, the jerk, torque change, energy, time, variance,
of the to-be-chosen motor commands. The measurement,
whatever the emphasis, takes the form of ‘minimize X’
(Todorov, 2004). It is to minimize the size of relating
factors, for example, the energy-to-be-consumed of the
motor commands. In other words, the measurement of cost
is sensitive to the size of the system’s immediate response to
its (bodily and environmental) conditions, which are
embodied properties (i.e. jerk, torque change, energy, time,
variance, etc.) of the sensorimotor system. To be noted,
measuring the cost is not purely an internal matter, but is to
be put in real situations, which consist of bodily and
environmental conditions.

Choice of motor commands, as above considered, is to be
managed after a series of motor commands is organized.
The computation of sensorimotor control is required to
explain how to transform a higher-level goal into a series of
motor commands, which are strictly constrained in the
embodied sensorimotor system. This explanation consists
of two parts: coordinate transformation and modular
structure, both of which assume the end-means relationship.
The former, coordinate transformation, is to convert sensory
signals of the goal into motor commands. Sensory signals
consist of visual information of the object in the goal-state
together with the signals relating to the posture of bodily
parts (hands, arms, shoulders, head, and eyes). Those
signals need to be transformed into a set of motor
commands that would bring about the goal-state when they
are performed. This task is named to be sensorimotor
transformations, which are accomplished with the mapping
of a three-layered neural network: from the input layer of
posture signals, to the intermediate layer that consists of
population codes, to the output layer of the motor command
that consists of the change in joint angles needed for the task
(Pouget and Snyder, 2000). This is a way of reverse
engineering, which is called the inverse model, as its
direction of transformation is opposite to the forward model
of motor control (Wolpert and Ghahramani, 2000). The
sensorimotor transformations and their products can be
regarded as means for the end of achieving the given goal.
As for the construction of movements, it remains
controversial as to how much of movement might be
controlled by modular processes (Zelik et. el., 2014).
Insofar as modular organization is applicable, various
complex motor movements are constructed through flexible
combinations of a limited number of modules, in order to
simplify computation by reducing degrees of freedom (Jing
et. el., 2004). In other words, a complex motor command is
organized with a combination of motor primitives. A motor
command consists of a series of muscle activations for the
needed changes of joint angles. With a study in the
vertebrate spinal cord, it is shown that a complex motor
command is produced by combining a few motor primitives,
which are ‘unit burst generators’ organized in the spinal
cord. Each burst generator is to control the activation of a
small group of synergistic muscles, or motor synergies
(Tresch et. el., 1999). Such a combination is a modular
representation (Mussa-Ivaldi, 1999). A motor task is to
produce a motor command with an appropriate modular
structure. The motor commands produced in the above way
are basic elements for the choice of cost function (Wolpert
and Ghahramani, 2000). Given that a single motor
command has the above modular representation, it would
naturally be questioned as to how the series of motor
commands leading to the achievement of a goal are
organized.
The notion of modular structure appearing in
sensorimotor control does not strictly follow Fodor’s (1983)
sense of modularity. Firstly, Fodor (1975) argues that

2624

mental modules are combined with a language of thought
(LOT, Mentalese). The modular structure of movement
generation, however, does not seem to follow the structure
of LOT, in the following two aspects. The weighted and
graded combination of modules (Jing and Weiss, 2005) does
not show the structure of LOT. Furthermore, generation of
movements out of modular organization has practical
limitations, as is found in generation of movements for
diverse locomotor behaviors; sufficient flexibility needs a
further basis of coordination (Zelik, 2014). There may be
no clear distinction between planning and execution,
because coordinated motor movements may emerge out of
real-time optimal feedback control (Todorov and Jordan,
2002), as discussed below. Emergence of coordinated
movements out of interaction with the environment makes
generation of a movement deviant from the modular
organization. To summarize, the modular organization is
only loosely applicable in sensorimotor control.

Coordination During Execution
The sensorimotor control on the basis of decision, cost and
optimality, as aforementioned, can be managed, to a certain
degree, in abstraction from the real situations. A version of
optimality can be so pursued, by way of open-loop
optimization, with detailed planning in advance of execution.
The accuracy can be maintained to a certain degree, yet with
serious limitations. The application of optimal principles
seeks average optimality over previous performance. As it
is detached from the real situations, the sensorimotor control
is like playing “a prerecorded movement tap” and
consequently the given goal is treated like a laboratory task.
It would be unable to encounter the trial-to-trial variability
in the real situations (Todorov, 2004, p. 2).
Such an abstract way of sensorimotor control is rather like
the maintenance of thought, as it can run in abstraction from
the real environment. It has the merit of a Popperian
creature, that is, planning internally for a best solution of the
considered problem before its execution. Decision can be
made for a relatively optimal performance. Yet, an
important way of sensorimotor control would be completely
missing—coordination during execution. Understanding
how this is done is a central problem in motor control for
nearly 70 years (Todorov and Jordan, 2002).
The coordination during execution presumes optimal
feedback control—the optimal control with on-line sensory
feedbacks. It does not plan a desired trajectory before
execution, but maintain the coordination on-line in response
to all the task-specific contingencies in the real situations.
Coordination in the sensory system is highly important as
such a system is highly redundant, with a high number of
ways over the combination of motor activations, and full of
a variety of uncertain factors such as noise and delay, as
aforementioned. The optimal feedback control produce
“continuous trajectory of movement in response to
contiguous stream of sensory input (Körding and Wolpert,
2006)”. Costs are continuously generated with on-line control of

to-go’—the continuous and integral summation of costs (Todorov,
2004). The optimal feedback control responds to real

situations of the body and the environment, and fully
manifests the continuous way of motor decision in fastchanging conditions. This cannot be done in a detached
model.
When the optimal feedback control operates as a way of
coordination, motor synergies and the achievement of the
given goal emerges. It only asserts what to achieve, without
dealing with the how question in detailed. After the goal is
given, the optimal feedback control can keep on seeking an
appropriate resolution because of its coupling with the plant,
in a way like the operation in the dynamic systems view.
The stages of planning and execution are not separate
(Todorov and Jordan, 2002).
The success of the coordination, in the optimal feedback
control, relies on a normative property of the end-means
relation, which is immanent in the sensorimotor system.
That is, the sensorimotor system as a system with the endmeans relation would seek appropriate means for its given
end. This property of the optimal feedback control can be
seen as endowed in evolution. It is a process that makes
possible the emergence of coordination in the sensorimotor
system. After it encounters its contingencies, including the
fast-changing environment (with body) with various
uncertain factors, the sensorimotor system operates like the
way present in the dynamic systems view. In that dynamic
relations, motor synergies will eventually emerge.

Instrumental Representations
Representations in the sensorimotor system are generally
divided into three types: end, means, and cost. The goals in
the sensorimotor system are regarded as ends, and motor
commands are means for attaining those ends. An end
represents a world state that is to be attained. A common
element in the latter two types is the end-means relation: a
means can attain its end, but therein lies a certain cost; in
this sense, the means and the cost are called ‘instrumental
representations’. The means are first-order representations,
which represent ways to attain their relating ends. Costs, by
contrast, are second-order representations that represent
prospects of the relating means in the processes of attaining
their ends. Furthermore, those three types of representations
hold different foundations of representation qua
representation. An end represents a to-be-attained future
state, in which the end refers to the to-be-attained future
state on grounds of similarity. By contrast, the means
represents the to-be-attained end in the way that the end is to
be attained through the means. The cost, in addition,
evaluates the prospect of a means in the way to attain its end.
Finally, whether a means represents an end successfully, is
measured in terms of accuracy (as opposed to truth), that is,
accuracy with which the means attains the end. As accuracy
can be measured with various degree, misrepresentation is
subject to different degree.

sensory feedbacks. The evaluation of cost is put in terms of ‘cost-

2625

Representations as Stand-Ins
Representation, generally speaking, is something R that
stands in a system S for something else E. That is, R is a
surrogate in the system S for E. Representation sometimes
serves as a Poppian creature: something that can run
internally in a system before it is actually carried out.
Representation in this sense simulates what will actually
happen. It (R) is a surrogate of E’s actual performance.
Based on Cummins (1996), a surrogate in this sense refers
to its target with the informatiom of its content. A city map
refers to the city streets according to structures of the map.
A map user can simulate a feasible route in the map without
actually walking in the street. Further, in order to account
for the wits in the sensorimotor control, the notion of
representation can be extended from the predicative relation
to the end-means relations, insofar as they bring about a
certain target (the end) with recourse to a certain content
(the means). That is, the predicative representation Rb in a
descriptive relation describes E. Rb refers to the target of E,
and the content of Rb describes E. By contrast, the
instrumental representation Rm in an instrumental (that is,
end-means) relation brings about E, and the content of Rm
guides the system S to reach the goal-state E. Furthermore,
a different surrogate Ri in the system S would be likely to
bring about a different state, as opposed to E. Rm and Ri,
hence, are alternative means generated in the system S,
alternatives which can be compared for a higher degree of
prospect P to bring about the end-state E. The prospect P is
a second-order instrumental representation, as it evaluates
the degree in which certain means would bring about the
end. Rm and Ri are exemplified in the instrumental system
by motor commands, and the prospect P is exemplified by
costs. Thus, instrumental representations are genuine
representations because they stand in a system (S) for
something else (E) that they bring about. The instrumental
representations stand in the sensorimotor system, rather than
merely serving as physical components of a mechanism,
because they always have alternatives to be chosen in their
way to bring about an end. The above profile will be
discussed more specifically below.
The decouplability between representations and their
environments is but a particular case for a system capable of
generating alternatives. The system produces something
else apart from a fixed representation. In a dark night, as I
encounter a distal horse (a target) I may consider it to be a
cow; in a darker night, I may even feel that it is like a
unicorn.
For achieving a given goal, sensorimotor
representations produce various motor commands that are
all likely to achieve the goal. The inverse model of a
sensorimotor system transforms a single goal-state G into
various motor commands, which would all be likely, to a
certain degree, to achieve the same goal G.
The
sensorimotor system always has alternatives to be chosen, in
a decision for an optimal motor command, as indicated by
the redundancy present in the musculoskeletal system. This
is unlike a physical causal relation, such as knocking a
group of billiard balls with a single ball, where a move in a

particular circumstance will determine a single result.
Alternatives, as aforementioned, are made by the system S
in a non-physical connection, when the system S encounters
a fixed condition (e.g. encountering a horse, or given a
particular goal-state). In the sensorimotor system, the
inverse model generates various motor commands in a nonphysical connection, which is non-physical insofar as it is
computational. The mechanism on the basis of Bayesian
decision theory, in addition, makes a choice among
redundant motor commands for optimality with a lowest
cost. The choice from alternatives justifies that the
sensorimotor control is not a ‘merely physical’ device.
Decoding of sensorimotor representations in the
sensorimotor control is grounded on the use of those
representations in the way to achieving the goal. Therein,
the pragmatic dimension of sensorimotor control is
considered in terms of end-means relations. The use
consists of estimation over environmental conditions for
applying them and choice between them, as manifest in the
application of Bayesian decision theory in sensorimotor
control (Körding and Wolpert, 2006). The generated motor
commands in the inverse model, in addition, are made with
alternatives, which are available for choice in their use
dedicated to the achievement of the goal.
The motor commands are genuine representations because
their way of bringing about goal-achievement is internally
rich. Based on Cummins’ (1996) notion of representation,
the goal-state is the target while the content in use is the
information employed, serving as guidance of the
instrumental control, for achieving the goal. Specifically,
the estimation of environmental conditions in the Bayesian
model of sensorimotor control presumes the need of
achieving the goal, and so is the model of optimality. Thus,
the sensorimotor representations are internally rich, even
compared to the classic representations, which are dubbed
as representation-hungry.
For example, the Bayesian
inference, in order to estimate external conditions out of
noise, needs to take account of priors, that is, previous
experiential outcomes. This makes the Bayesian model of
the sensorimotor control even no less emphasized on
internal wits than the computation related to the classic
theory of representation. In addition, the decision made in
relation to cost, as discussed previously, making a choice
from various alternative motor commands. Furthermore,
the on-line measurement of cost adds more wits on the top
of the computation with open-loop optimization. The
instrumental representation based on alternatives of action
command, together with their accompanying estimation and
choice, provides computation with internal alternatives,
evaluation and inference. Such a way of representation is
internally rich.
Representations can serve as stand-ins of a system
without being predicative. Representations are stand-ins for
the existence of certain states, or for those states’ activities.
The former relates to representational production and the
latter representational consumption. As considered above,
the stand-ins can be instrumental, and consequently need

2626

not be built with the function of imagination, on grounds of
which counterfactual representations are possible.
Imagination is surely a characteristic of human cognition.
Cognition, however, can have other characteristics, for
example, instrumental allocation, that is, arrangement of
end-means relations. The end-means relation, for a given
end, need not consist of a single string of causal chain, as it
can produce alternative means for the same end. Those
alternatives can be evaluated with different degree of
prospects for attainment of the end. The choice from
alternatives justifies the cognitive bearing of the
instrumental representations.
Before concluding, it should be noted that instrumental
representations can have a combinatorial structure only in a
loose sense. Instrumental representations of sensorimotor
control do not follow the LOT, basically because its
modular organization is only loosely applicable, as
discussed in a previous section. As a consequence, the
combinatorial structure—with which mental representations
can be generated recursively and systematically from
primitive states—would not be generally salient in the realm
of sensorimotor control. In particular, the costs of motor
commands are continuously generated in on-line feedback
control, as manifest in ‘cost-to-go’—the continuous and
integral summation of costs, as aforementioned. With this
way of computing costs, the consequently chosen motor
commands can only have modular structures (if there are) in
a loose sense.

Conclusions
Computation of sensorimotor control employs instrumental
representations—representations
with
end-means
relations—as exemplified by motor commands and costs.
Motor commands represent ways to achieve the goal, and
costs represent prospects of goal-achievement. They are
intermediate-level representations, because the computation
of motor commands does not rely on reactive machinery,
and because they appear at the sub-personal level. Although
they have modular structures, sensorimotor representations
are initiated continuously and connected integrally. In order
to maintain accuracy of goal-achievement, the sensorimotor
system needs on-line incorporation of sensory feedbacks,
and consequently sensorimotor representations cannot be
detached from the body and the environment.

References
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body and
World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cummins, R. (1996). Representations, Targets, and
Attitudes, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Engel, A. K., Maye, A., Kurthen, M., and König, P. (2013).
Where’s the action? The pragmatic turn in cognitive
science, Trends in Cognitive Sciences, v.17(5):202209.
Fodor, J.A. (1983), The Modularity of Mind,: MIT Press.
Fodor, J.A. (1975), The Language of Thought, Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Franklin, D. W. and Wolpert, D. M. (2011). Computational
mechanisms of sensorimotor control, Neuron, v. 72(3):
425-442.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation:
motor control, imagery, and perception. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 27: 377-442.
Harris, C. & Wolpert, D. M. (1998). Signal-dependent noise
determines motor planning, Nature, v.394: 780-784.
Haselager, P., de Groot, A, and van Rappard (2003).
Representationalism vs. anti-representationalism: a
debate for the sake of appearance, Philosophical
Psychology, v. 16 (1): 5-23.
Jeannerod, M. (2006). Motor cognition, Oxford Univ. Press.
Jing, J. and Weiss, K. R., (2005). Generation of variants of a
motor act in a modular and hierarchical motor
network, Current Biology, v. 15, 1712–1721.
Jing, J., Cropper, E. C., Hurwitz, I., and Weiss, K. R. (2004).
The construction of movement with behavior-specific
and behavior-independent modules, The Journal of
Neuroscience, 24(28): 6315-6325.
Körding and Wolpert (2006) Bayesian decision theory in
sensorimotor control, Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
v.10(7), pp. 319-326.
Marr, D., (1982). Vision, San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Mussa-Ivaldi, F. A. (1999). Modular features of motor
control and learning. Current
Opinion in
Neurobiology, v.9, pp: 713–717.
Orbán, G. and Wolpert, D. M. (2011). Representations of
uncertainty in sensorimotor control, Current Opinion
in Neurobioloby, v.21, pp.629-635.
Pezzulo, G. (2008). Coordinating with the Future: the
Anticipatory Nature of Representation. Minds and
Machines, 18, 179-225.
Rescorla, M. (2016). Mind & Language, v.3(1), pp. 3-36.
Rescorla, M. (2015). The Computational theory of mind,
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
Shadmehr, R., and Mussa-Ivaldi, F.A. (1994). Adaptive
representation of dynamics during learning of a motor
task. Journal of Neuroscience, 14, 3208–3224.
Todorov, E. (2004). Optimality principles in sensorimotor
control, Nature Neuroscience, 7(9), pp. 907-915.
Todorov, E. and Jordan, M. (2002). Optimal feedback
control as a theory of motor coordination, Nature
Neuroscience, v. 5(11), pp. 1226-1235.
Tresch, M. C., Saltiel, P. & Bizzi, E. (1999). The
construction of movement by the spinal cord. Nat.
Neurosci. 2, 162–167.
Turvey, M. T., and Fonseca, S. (2009). Nature of Motor
Control: Perspectives and Issues, Progress in motor
control, Springer, pp. 93–123.
Wolpert, D. M. and Ghahramani, Z. (2000). Computational
principles of movement neuroscience, Nature
neuroscience supplement, v.3, pp. 1212-1217.
Zelik, K. E., La Scaleia, V., Ivanenko, Y. P., and Lacquaniti,
F. (2014). Can modular strategies simplify neural
control of multidirectional human locomotion?
Journal of Neurophysiology, 111: 1686–1702.

2627

