Instruction type and believability influence on metareasoning in a base rate task
Pavle Valerjev (valerjev@unizd.hr)
Department of Psychology, University of Zadar, Obala kralja Petra Krešimira IV 2
Zadar, 23000 Croatia

Marin Dujmović (marin.dujmovic@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Zadar, Obala kralja Petra Krešimira IV 2
Zadar, 23000 Croatia
Abstract
Person X is popular.
Person X is chosen at random from a group consisting of
875 postmen and 125 actors.

Task dependent conflict has been shown to reduce
metacognitive judgements of confidence and prolong
response times in various reasoning tasks. For this study a
modified version of the base rate task was used to induce
conflict while measuring response times and judgements of
confidence. The aim of this experiment was to determine the
influence of different instruction conditions (reasoning
according to belief or according to mathematical probability)
on fluency and metacognitive judgements. As expected,
participants experienced higher levels of conflict when
reasoning according to mathematical probability even though
conflict effects were present in both conditions. Additionally,
higher believability items mitigated conflict influence while
reasoning in accordance with belief and increased it when
reasoning in accordance with mathematical probability. These
results enrich the growing field of metareasoning research and
are discussed as such.

The question: Which is more probable?
1. Person X is a postman
2. Person X is an actor

Keywords: metacognition; metareasoning; base rate neglect;
conflict monitoring; judgement of confidence

Introduction
The dual process approach in the field of reasoning is
based on the hypothesis of two distinct types of processing.
Type 1 processing is heuristic based, fast and comes at a
low cognitive resource cost, while Type 2 processing is
analytic based, slower, less intuitive, and comes at a high
resource cost (Evans, 2007). However, this is just a
simplified representation of what is a large set of theories.
Since this approach encompasses a large number of theories
and models we recommend an excellent review by Evans
(2012) for a better understanding of all the complexities in
this field. Within this framework a cognitive bias can be
defined as a dominant Type 1 response when it is not
appropriate and results in a normatively incorrect answer.
One of the most commonly studied biases is the belief bias
in which a believable response is dominant and more
acceptable regardless of correctness (Evans, Barston, &
Pollard, 1983). Tasks which elicit the belief bias have
mostly been used in studies of formal types of reasoning
such as syllogistic logical reasoning. However, there are
other tasks in which participants are led to reason according
to their belief. One such task is a modified version of
Kahneman and Tversky's (1973) classic base rate task.
The modified base rate task is interesting to researchers
because it is suitable for introducing conflict between
processes that give rise to different responses. To better
understand this task, examine a simple example.

In the example above there are two sources of information
on which a person can base his or her response. The
mathematical ratio (the base rate) of postmen to actors
would indicate that the first answer is more probable.
However, common belief based on personal, everyday
experience would indicate actors are more likely to be
popular than postmen. This strong association between the
trait of popularity and the group of actors leads most
participants to choose answer number two (e.g. Obrecht &
Chesney, 2016; Pennycook, Fugelsang & Koehler, 2015).
By changing the base rate, congruent versions of this task
can be constructed and studied in comparison to conflict
ones.
Our research is based on the model proposed by
Pennycook and his colleagues (2015). They propose that
multiple processes generate initial responses to a particular
task or problem (Type 1 processes). The initial responses
may be congruent or in conflict. Conflict monitoring then
detects (or fails to detect) incongruent results of these
processes which leads to Type 2 processing (or simple Type
1 processing if no conflict is detected). Type 2 processing
then includes both rationalization of the dominant initial
response, and what is usually considered pure Type 2
processing – cognitive decoupling (choosing an alternative
response). It is important to note that rationalization and
decoupling are not necessarily processed on a conscious
level. The dominant response is the one with the highest
weight, which would explain the difference in influence and
persistence of those responses even when instructed to
reason by different criteria. In the example given above the
belief-based response would represent the dominant initial
response, while the mathematical probability response
would be the second initial response. This model provides
clear hypotheses on the influence of conflict on response
times, levels of confidence, required cognitive load and
others.
As indicated, conflict monitoring and detection are key
processes which link Type 1 and Type 2 processes

3429

according to the proposed model. For the purposes of this
study inducing conflict was of the greatest importance.
Conflict monitoring and detection have been identified as
important processes in a variety of reasoning tasks (De
Neys, 2014; De Neys & Glumicic, 2008). Conflict in base
rate tasks is detected even when participants choose the
stereotypical answer because it can be observed in
prolonged response times (Pennycook et al., 2015). Since
conflict detection in these tasks is present regardless of
participant response it is interesting how this process effects
other psychological constructs and processes.
Metacognition is broadly concerned with knowledge
about, the monitoring and evaluation of other mental
processes (Nelson & Narens, 1990). Recent research in the
field has been focused on possible sources of metacognitive
judgements in various reasoning tasks (Markovits,
Thompson, & Brisson, 2015; Thompson, Evans, &
Campbell, 2013; Thompson & Johnson, 2014; Thompson et
al., 2013). Building on older research concerning
metamemory Ackerman and Thompson (2015) lay out a
framework of metareasoning. They outline a number of
different metareasoning judgements. For example, the
judgement of solvability refers to the probability a particular
task is solvable based on type of task, prior knowledge and
experience of the participant. Of the basic metareasoning
judgments we focus on the final judgements of confidence.
These judgements represent retrospective confidence that a
final solution to a problem or task is correct. Typically,
metareasoning studies make use of a variety of tasks which
include the possibility of both heuristic and analytical
responses. The interpretation of results in these studies then
naturally takes into account the dual-process approach to
reasoning. Participants usually express more confidence for
heuristic-based responses (Thompson, Evans, & Campbell,
2013). It has also been established that in these types of
tasks participants tend to be overconfident and their
judgements are not dependent on accuracy (Thompson et
al., 2013). Therefore, metacognitive judgements in these
tasks are formed based on other cues such as fluency (the
speed and ease of generating responses) and the presence of
conflicting answers (Thompson et al., 2013). Conflict in
base rate tasks has been shown to decrease final judgements
of confidence (Pennycook Trippas, Handley, & Thompson
2014) and prolong response times (Pennycook et al., 2015).
Manipulating the content of tasks is only one way to
influence reasoning processes. One of the more interesting
manipulations is varying instruction types, giving more
weight to a particular type of reasoning or to specific
content. Explicit instruction to reason according to logic
increases accuracy (Evans, Handley, Neilens, & Over, 2010)
as well as confidence ratings (Trippas, Thompson, &
Handley, 2016), depending on task difficulty. Within the
described model of dual processing, instruction type
modifies the weight of initially generated responses
therefore influencing the level of experienced conflict.
The focus of our study was to determine how simple
effects (congruence, instruction type, believability) interact

and effect response times and confidence levels. We
predicted participants would experience a greater level of
conflict when base rates and stereotypes do not point toward
the same answer. This effect should be stronger when
instructed to reason based on mathematical probability
compared to reasoning based on belief. The level of
experienced conflict is expected to increase the likelihood of
Type 2 reasoning and manifest as prolonged response times
and lowered judgements of confidence. We predicted the
addition of different believability levels of stereotypes
would influence judgements and response times differently
depending on the type of instruction. When reasoning
according to belief high believability should mitigate the
influence of conflict while increasing it when reasoning
according to mathematical probability.

Method
Participants and design
The sample (N=38) was recruited among undergraduate
psychology students. The experiment was a 2(instruction
type) x 2(congruence) x 2(believability) repeated measures
design.
There were two different instructions. For half of the
items participants were instructed to answer according to
their belief. The exact instruction was “For the following
items respond as fast as you can according to what you
know to be probable from everyday experience”. For the
other half of the items they were instructed to respond in
accordance with mathematical probability. The exact
instruction was “For the following items respond as fast as
you can according to mathematical probability”.
The second independent variable varied the level of
congruence. For half of the items there was no conflict
between belief and mathematics based probability while for
the other half there was.
Finally we varied the level of believability of the content
by creating two types of items as displayed in the materials
section.
In order to control order effects half of the participants
first completed the block based on belief instructions and
then the one based on mathematical probability, while the
other half had the reversed order. Items within each block
were randomized for each participant.

Materials
Previous research with base rate tasks regularly used
extreme base rate ratios to achieve the conflict effect, 995/5
and higher (De Neys & Glumicic, 2008; De Neys,
Vartanian, & Goel., 2008; Obrecht & Chesney, 2016;
Pennycook et al, 2014). We chose to use less extreme and
random ratios in order to control for a possible effect of
repetitiveness on participant decisions. We implemented
clear rules for ratio selection. The highest allowed ratio was
900/100, while the lowest was set at 850/150. Within this
spread ratios were generated randomly by a computer
algorithm.

3430

To vary believability we followed two different
approaches. For half of the items, attributes associated with
the person were characteristic of one group, but not
exclusive to it. E.g. Person A is physically attractive.
Person A is chosen from a group of supermodels or a group
of secretaries. Obviously, secretaries can be attractive, but
the attribute is an integral part of the concept supermodel.
For the other half, we increased the difference in the
believability of the attribute for the two groups. For one
group the attribute was still integral, but for the other it was
highly uncharacteristic, the opposite of what people would
expect. E.g. Person B is courageous. Person B is chosen
from a group of firefighters or a group of deserters.
Courage is an integral part of what people think of
firefighting, while cowardice is strongly associated with
deserting.
Conflict is achieved when base rate ratios and belief
based probability do not point towards the same choice. By
adhering to the before mentioned guidelines, forty main and
four practice items were selected from a larger pool of
constructed items based on researcher scores. Base rate
ratios were assigned randomly to the items which were then
randomly assigned to experimental conditions. Examples
for the four possible combinations of believability and
congruence can be seen in Table 1. When combined with
the two different instruction types this forms a total of eight
experimental conditions (five items per condition).
Table 1: Examples of item types.
Attribute

Subgroups

Lower
believability/Congruent

Elegant

854 ice skaters,
146 teachers

Lower
believability/Conflict

Creative

866 waiters,
134 painters

Higher
believability/Congruent

Comical

880 comedians,
120 morticians

Higher
believability/Conflict

Honest

842 smugglers,
158 judges

The order in which subgroups appeared was randomized
among items to avoid habitual responses from our
participants.

Procedure
The experiment was designed in E-Prime v2.0.10.356 and
conducted in the Laboratory for Experimental Psychology.
Before the main experiment participants underwent practice
to associate themselves with the way in which they were
required to react. For the main experiment participants were
told an attribute describing a person would be presented for
a few seconds after which they would receive information
about the groups from which the person was randomly
selected. Finally, they were presented with a choice and
were required to answer from which group they thought the

person was probably chosen based on one of the instruction
criteria (belief in one block, and mathematical probability in
the other). Confidence judgements were made on a six point
scale, with each point representing a percentage of
confidence. Scale value 1 represented 50% confidence
(guessing) with each successive value representing an
increase of 10% with the scale value 6 representing 100%
confidence (complete confidence). An example of the single
trial procedure can be seen in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Example of a single trial.

Results
Prior to analysis response time data was processed to
eliminate outliers by removing responses outside of the +/3 standard deviation range. Outliers made up of 2.2% of all
responses. Response times were averaged for items within
each experimental condition (5 items per condition) for final
analysis. Confidence ratings were also averaged to get the
final confidence judgements for each condition. Before the
main analysis two 2x2x2x2 mixed analyses of variance were
conducted with an additional variable of block order
(instruction order) to determine whether the order in which
participants completed the experiment influenced response
times and confidence judgements. In both analyses the main
effect of block order and interactions which include the
effect were not significant. The results of these analyses
show that the order in which participants completed the task
had no influence on response times and confidence
judgements.
A 2 (instruction condition) x 2 (congruence) x 2
(believability) repeated measures analysis of variance was
conducted on response time data. Results of the analysis can
be seen in Table 2. A strong main effect of congruence
showed response times were significantly shorter for
congruent compared to conflict trials. Higher believability
in general led to slower responses, but this was due to a
strong effect in conflict situations when participants were
instructed to reason according to probability (see the threeway interaction interpretation). The main finding of this
study is reflected in the significant two-way interaction
between instruction type and congruence which is shown in

3431

Figure 2 (for all figures error bars represent 95% confidence
interval for the mean).

congruent and conflict responses Mdiff = 5.24%) more than
for reasoning based on belief (Mdiff = 2.38%).

Table 2: ANOVA results for response times.

Table 3: ANOVA results for confidence judgements.

Effect
Instruction
Congruence
Believability
Instruction by Congruence
Instruction by Believability
Congruence by Believability
Three-way interaction

F (1, 37)
.05
11.68**
7.07*
7.70**
2.32
2.69
11.34**

ηp2
.00
.24
.16
.17
.06
.07
.23

Effect
Instruction
Congruence
Believability
Instruction by Congruence
Instruction by Believability
Congruence by Believability
Three-way interaction

*p<.05; **p<.01

F (1, 37)
.21
20.49**
6.54*
5.63*
.36
2.30
4.77*

ηp2
.00
.36
.15
.13
.00
.06
.11

*p<.05; **p<.01

Figure 2: Response times as a function of conflict and
instruction type.

Figure 3: Confidence judgements as a function of conflict
and instruction type.

The influence of conflict on response times was
significantly lower when participants responded in
accordance with belief (mean difference between congruent
and conflict responses Mdiff = 76 ms) than when they
responded in accordance with mathematical probability
(Mdiff = 230.36 ms). The three-way interaction effect reflects
the different influence of believability depending on the
instruction. Higher believability mitigated the influence of
conflict when participants responded according to belief,
and increased it when they responded in accordance with
mathematical probability.
The same analysis was conducted for confidence
judgements for which results can be seen in Table 3. The
analysis showed a similar pattern of results. Participants
expressed lower levels of confidence for conflict compared
to congruent items, which is reflected in a large main effect
of congruence. Believability, in general, slightly increased
confidence ratings but was present in more complex
interaction effects. Again, the main finding of this study is
best observed by considering the significant two-way
interaction between instruction type and congruence in
Figure 3. Conflict lowered confidence judgements for
mathematics based reasoning (mean difference between

In the three-way interaction believability increased
confidence ratings and mitigated conflict influence when
participants responded in accordance with belief, and
lowered confidence ratings for conflict items when they
responded in accordance with mathematical probability.
Next, we analyzed accuracy depending on instruction
type. For the belief based instruction the stereotypical
response could be considered as correct, and for the
probability instruction the opposite. Accuracy was high for
the two belief conditions and the congruent probability
condition (above 86%), but low for conflict trials in the
probability condition (46.84%). Since this data was not
distributed normally, we tested differences using the Wilcox
matched pairs test. Instruction to reason according to
mathematical probability significantly lowered stereotypical
responses in conflict trials (Z = 4.94, p<.01), the same was
true for the belief instruction condition (Z = 2.65, p<.01). To
evaluate confidence judgements we calculated differences
between confidence levels and accuracy for each participant
(for this and similar procedures see Koriat, Lichtenstein, &
Fischoff, 1980). An instruction by congruence ANOVA
showed a significant interaction effect (F(1, 34) = 34.81,
p<.01, ηp2 = .51). Results showed the difference between

3432

confidence and accuracy was largest for conflict trials in the
probability instruction condition (Figure 4).

Figure 4: Differences between confidence and accuracy as a
function of instruction type and congruence
Additionally, analyses of variance were conducted only
for responses that were correct depending on the instruction.
A total of 25 participants made up this dataset while the rest
did not have correct responses for all of the experimental
conditions. For both response times and judgements of
confidence, results followed a very similar pattern to the
analysis of the full dataset. Once again participants were
considerably slower for conflict items (F(1, 23) = 12.71,
p<.01, ηp2 = .36), and slightly slower for more believable
items (F(1, 23) = 9.63, p<.01, ηp2 = .29). The instruction
type by congruence interaction (F(1, 23) = 9.54, p<.01, ηp2
= .29) was again the most interesting result. Conflict had a
greater influence on response times when reasoning
according to probability than when reasoning according to
belief. The three-way interaction was no longer significant
but showed the same pattern of results. For judgements of
confidence the analysis showed significantly lower levels of
confidence in conflict compared to congruent conditions
(F(1, 23) = 19.60, p<.01, ηp2 = .46). The instruction by
congruence interaction remained significant (F(1, 23) =
5.62, p<.05, ηp2 = .20) and showed conflict lowered
confidence judgements to a larger extent than when
reasoning according to probability. Additionally, instruction
by congruence (F(1, 23) = 12.37, p<.01, ηp2 = .35) and
congruence by believability (F(1, 23) = 4.92, p<.05, ηp2 =
.18) interactions showed participants were less confident for
high believability items when reasoning according to
probability and that conflict had a larger influence on
confidence for higher believability items. The three-way
interaction was no longer significant, but showed the same
pattern of results as the analysis of the total response data.
Finally, we calculated an item-level correlation between
response times and confidence ratings. Results (r(38) = -.56,
p<.01) showed that participants gave higher judgements of
confidence for items they responded to faster.

Discussion and conclusions
According to the proposed dual-process model by
Pennycook et al. (2015), initial responses are generated by

Type 1 processes in reasoning tasks. If there is a conflict
between the initially generated responses, and it is
successfully detected, Type 2 processing resolves the
conflict in two possible ways. One outcome is the
acceptance of a dominant initial response (rationalization),
and the other is choosing an alternative response (cognitive
decoupling). Because of the expected dominance of belief
based responses, we predicted that induced conflict would
have a greater influence when instructed to reason based on
mathematical probability compared to reasoning based on
everyday belief. According to the prediction, this greater
influence would initiate Type 2 processes to a larger extent,
which would manifest in prolonged response times and
lower confidence judgements in the mathematical
instruction condition. Both three-way ANOVAs (Tables 2
and 3) prove this prediction to be correct. The expected
strong main effect of congruence was significant, which is
the usual result in this type of research (Pennycook et al.,
2015; Pennycook et al., 2014; Thompson & Johnson, 2014;
Thompson et al., 2013). The main findings show that
participants responded slower in conflict trials when
reasoning according to mathematical probability. Conflict
influence was less prominent when reasoning in accordance
with everyday belief. This pattern of results is evident for
both response times and confidence judgements (Figures 2
and 3). We hypothesize that stereotypical responses have a
greater weight during initial response generation (Type 1
processing), which leads to stronger interference of belief on
probability based reasoning than vice versa.
Our additional experimental manipulation of stereotype
believability resulted in significant three-way interaction
effects (Tables 2 and 3). When reasoning according to
belief, higher believability mitigates the impact of conflict
on response times and confidence levels. On the other hand,
higher levels of believability increase the influence of
conflict when reasoning based on mathematical probability.
This result may represent further proof for the existence of
differently weighted initial responses among which belief
based responses are very prominent.
Participants expressed a higher level of confidence for
items which had shorter response times indicating response
fluency is a strong cue in the formation of metacognitive
judgements. This finding was obtained in recent studies
using different thinking and reasoning tasks (see Thompson
et al., 2013).
Furthermore, when instructed to reason according to
belief, conflict decreased stereotypical responses, but to a
far lesser degree than when instructed to reason according to
mathematical probability. It is important to note that even
when instructed to reason according to probability
participants chose belief based responses in over 50% of
conflict trials. This further strengthens the conclusion that
everyday belief dominates reasoning in this specific task.
Within the framework proposed by Pennnycook et al.
(2015), this would indicate instruction to reason according
to probability influenced the relative importance of belief
and probability information, but did not fully override the

3433

initial dominance of belief based responses. Participants
were overconfident only for conflict trials in the probability
instruction condition (Figure 4). This was probably due to
the fact that in the other three conditions the dominant belief
based answers were correct, while in this one that was not
the case.
When we analyzed only correct responses the same
pattern emerged. As the model predicts, participants were
slower and less confident in conflict trials and the conflict
had a larger effect when reasoning according to probability.
Based on these results, we can conclude that emphasizing a
particular way of reasoning can have an effect on the
relationship between conflict, response fluency and
metareasoning judgements.
When these results are considered together we can
conclude everyday belief has a stronger interference on
mathematics based reasoning in this type of task than vice
versa. Since a main effect of instruction (reasoning type)
was not observed, we can speculate the two processes run in
parallel, but that the result of the belief based process has a
higher weight.
The results may have practical implications, particularly
in educational settings. Many tasks require students to
ignore intuitive modes of reasoning in favor of analytical
thinking, and it is in those types of tasks where results such
as found by this study could be applied to increase
efficiency.
To conclude, the results of this study confirm the strong
influence of conflict on response times and confidence
levels in reasoning tasks. The study expands on previous
research by introducing further complexity into established
relationships between processes. Explicit instructions in
combination with different levels of believability moderate
the influence of conflict on fluency and confidence
judgements. Results may indicate parallel processing of
multiple, differently weighted processes, but more
sophisticated research is required to explore the findings
further.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Grant 4139 from the
Croatian Science Foundation, and the University of Rijeka
Research grant 13.04.1.3.11.

References
Ackerman, R., & Thompson, V.A. (2015). Meta-reasoning:
What can we learn from meta-memory? In A. Feeney &
V.A. Thompson (Eds.), Reasoning as Memory (pp. 164182), New York: Psychology Press.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2007). On the resolution of conflict in dual
process theories of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning,
13(4), 321-339.
Evans, J.St.B.T. (2012). Questions and challenges for the
new psychology of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning,
18(1), 5-31.

Evans, J. S. B. T., Barston, J. L., & Pollard, P. (1983). On
the conflict between logic and belief in syllogistic
reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 11, 295–306.
Evans, J.St.B.T., Handley, S.J., Neilsen, H., & Over, D.
(2010). The influence of cognitive ability and
instructional set on causal conditional inference. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63(5),
892-909.
De Neys, W. (2014). Conflict detection, dual processes, and
logical intuitions: Some clarifications. Thinking &
Reasoning, 20(2), 169-187.
De Neys, W., & Glumicic, T. (2008). Conflict monitoring in
dual process theories of thinking. Cognition, 106, 12481299.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008). Smarter
than we think: When our brains detect that we are biased.
Psychological Science, 19(5), 483-489.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80(4), 237-251.
Koriat, A., Lichtenstein, S., & Fischoff, B. (1980). Reasons
for confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6(2), 107-118.
Markovits, H., Thompson, V.A., & Brisson, J. (2015).
Metacognition and abstract reasoning. Memory &
Cognition, 43, 681-693.
Nelson, T.O., & Narens, L. (1990). Metamemory: A
theoretical framework and new findings. In G. Brower.
(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation:
Advances in Research and Theory (Vol. 26, pp. 125-173).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Obrecht, N.A., & Chesney, D.L. (2016). Prompting
deliberation increases base-rate use. Judgment and
Decision Making, 11(1), 1-6.
Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J.A. & Koehler, D.J. (2015).
What makes us think? A three-stage dual-process model
of analytic engagement. Cognitive Psychology, 80, 34-72.
Pennycook, G., Trippas, D., Handley, S.J., & Thompson,
V.A. (2014). Base rates: Both neglected and intuitive.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 40(2), 544-554.
Thompson, V.A., Evans, J.St.B.T., & Campbell, J.I.D.
(2013). Matching bias on the selection task: It's fast and
feels good. Thinking & Reasoning, 19(3), 431-452.
Thompson, V.A., & Johnson, S.C. (2014). Conflict,
metacognition, and analytic thinking. Thinking &
Reasoning, 20(2), 215-244.
Thompson, V.A., Turner, J.A.P., Pennycook, G., Ball, L.J.,
Brack, H., Ophir, Y., & Ackerman, R. (2013). The role of
answer fluency and perceptual fluency as metacognitive
cues for initiating analytic thinking. Cognition, 128, 237251.
Trippas, D., Thompson, V.A., & Handley, S.J. (2016).
When fast logic meets slow belief: Evidence for a
parallel-processing model of belief bias. Memory &
Cognition.
Advance
online
publication.
DOI:
10.3758/s13421-016-0680-1.

3434

