Interpreting Asymmetries in Speech Perception with Bayesian Inference
Jie Ren (Jie_Ren@Brown.Edu)
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University, 1011 Veteran Memorial Pkwy,
Riverside, RI 02915 USA

Joseph L. Austerweil (austerweil@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin – Madison, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA
Abstract
This paper proposes a Bayesian account of asymmetries
found in speech perception: In many languages, listeners
show greater sensitivity if a non-coronal sound (/b/, /p/, /g/,
/k/) is changed to coronal sounds (/d/, /t/) than vice versa. The
currently predominant explanation for these asymmetries is
that they reflect innate constraints from Universal Grammar.
Alternatively, we propose that the asymmetries could simply
arise from optimal inference given the statistical properties of
different speech categories of the listener’s native language.
In the framework of Bayesian inference, we examined two
statistical parameters of coronal and non-coronal sounds:
frequencies of occurrence and variance in articulation. In the
languages in which perceptual asymmetries have been found,
coronal sounds are either more frequent or more variable than
non-coronal sounds. Given such differences, an ideal observer
is more likely to perceive a non-coronal speech signal as a
coronal segment than vice versa. Thus, the perceptual
asymmetries can be explained as a natural consequence of
probabilistic inference. The coronal/non-coronal asymmetry
is similar to asymmetries observed in many other cognitive
domains. Thus, we argue that it is more parsimonious to
explain this asymmetry as one of many similar asymmetries
found in cognitive processing, rather than a linguisticspecific, innate constraint.
Keywords: speech perceptual asymmetry; Bayesian
inference; natural statistics; category variability; nature vs.
nurture; domain-general vs. domain-specific

Introduction
Listeners from a variety of language backgrounds have
shown asymmetric sensitivity to different directions of
sound changes in speech perception. We focus on one
particular asymmetry: consonants with a coronal place of
articulation (/d/, /t/, /n/, /l/) are more tolerant to changes or
mispronunciations than consonants with non-coronal places
of articulation (/g/, /k/, /b/, /p/). For example, the German
word for “railway”, bahn primed the word for “train” when
mispronounced as bahm. However, the word for “tree”,
baum, did not prime the word for “bush” when
mispronounced as baun (Lahiri & van Coillie, 1999). This
indicates that listeners can accept a labial sound as the
correct form of a coronal sound but not vice versa. ERP
findings corroborate this phenomenon: At temporally early
stages of speech perception, German-speaking adults
displayed asymmetric discrimination for mispronunciations
of familiar words with coronal vs. non-coronal onsets
(Friedrich, Lahiri, & Eulitz, 2008) and internal consonants

(Friedrich, Eulitz, & Lahiri, 2006; Cornell, Lahiri & Eulitz,
2013). Similar effects have also been observed with
English-speaking (Roberts, Wetterlin & Lahiri, 2013) and
Bengali-speaking adults (Lahiri & Marslen-Wilson, 1991).
To explain this asymmetric bias in speech perception, the
predominant hypotheses have been derived from
phonological theories (Kiparsky, 1982) in the framework of
Universal Grammar (UG). In particular, the Featurally
Underspecified Lexicon (FUL) model (Lahiri & MarslenWilson, 1991; Lahiri & Reetz, 2002) suggested that the
place of articulation for coronal consonants (/d/ in duck) is
not stored (underspecified) in phonological representations.
Consequently, mispronunciations in the onset of duck, such
as guck, are still compatible with the representation of duck,
and such mispronunciations should have minimal effects on
the lexical activation of the word duck. By contrast, the
place of articulation for a non-coronal consonant is fully
stored (specified) in the phonological representation (the
place of articulation of /ɡ/ in goose is stored as [+velar]), so
mispronunciations of the onset of goose, such as doose, will
be incompatible with the representation of goose and thus
will disrupt lexical activation of the word goose.
Studies with infants and toddlers also support predictions
of the FUL model. 6-month-old Dutch-learning infants were
habituated to repeated taan or paan tokens and then tested
on their ability to discriminate trials in which the stimulus
repeated versus trials in which the two stimuli alternated.
Whereas infants habituated to paan discriminated the two
types of trials, infants habituated to taan did not (Dijkstra &
Fikkert, 2011). The findings were interpreted as support for
the FUL model: When the standard of comparison was taan,
the place of articulation of the onset /t/ was not specified, so
both taan and paan were compatible with the standard. But
when the standard of comparison was paan, place of
articulation of the onset /p/ was specified, so only paan was
compatible with the standard, and paan and taan were
discriminable. 4- and 6-month-old Dutch- and Japaneselearning infants were also tested using the same procedure
on their discrimination of labial (omba) and coronal (onta)
sounds (Tsuji, Mazuka, Christia, & Fikkert, 2015). Infants
habituated to the labial sound omba discriminated the two
types of trials, but infants habituated to the coronal sound
onta did not, regardless of their language background.
Linguistic hypotheses, such as underspecification, provide
one source of explanations for the observed asymmetry in
speech perception. Consistent with the FUL model, Fennel

1010

(2007) showed that infants detected a labial-to-coronal
switch but failed to detect a coronal-to-labial switch.
However, inconsistent with this hypothesis, a follow-up
study (Fennell, van der Feest, & Spring, 2010) showed that
14-month-olds were better able to detect a coronal-to-velar
switch than a velar-to-coronal switch. To explain such
discrepancy, they analyzed the onset formant frequencies of
all the /b/, /d/ and /g/ tokens in their experimental stimuli,
and discovered that /b/</d/</g/ in acoustic variability. Thus,
the authors concluded that the asymmetries they observed
might be better explained by acoustic variability than
phonological specification.
We examine the same asymmetries in speech perception
in the framework of Bayesian inference: Asymmetric
perception of coronal and non-coronal places of articulation
may arise from differences in the statistical properties of the
coronal category and the non-coronal category in
competition (e.g. within word minimal pairs). As presented
later, coronal consonants as a category are more frequent
and/or variable than non-coronal consonants in languages
where asymmetric perceptions have been found. These
statistical properties yield an asymmetric posterior
distribution: Given a speech signal equidistant from a
prototypical coronal and noncoronal articulation, the signal
is more likely to be a coronal consonant.

The Model
Theoretical Overview
Following the tradition of categorical perception of speech
sounds by Liberman et. al. (1957), Clayard et. al. (2008) and
Feldman, Griffiths, and Morgan (2009), we interpret the
asymmetry as the result of statistical inference of speech
categories from a noisy speech signal. Listeners utilize
available information from a variety of sources to achieve
such a goal, including their prior knowledge of native
speech categories and the acoustic properties of the speech
signal.
A speech category is defined in the model as a
distribution over acoustic dimensions. According to the
model, when speakers articulate a sound, they first choose a
speech category and then articulate a sound exemplar from
that category. Each sound exemplar of the speech category
varies from one another due to many factors, such as coarticulation, affect, focus and grammatical intonation.
Although speaker’s articulation over acoustic dimensions is
multidimensional, for mathematical simplicity we assume
articulations of a speech category can be reduced to a
Gaussian distribution over a single acoustic dimension.
Thus, the inventory of native speech categories is
represented as a set of Gaussian distributions in the model.
Different speech categories differ in the location of their
means and in how much their articulation varies over the
acoustic dimension (variance). In addition, categories may
differ in frequency of occurrence with some categories used
more frequently than others. The frequency of occurrence of
each category is represented by its prior probability.

Listeners assume that the perceived signal was generated
by a speech category that is masked by noise, including
environmental noise and perceptual errors. The listeners’
task is to recover the speech category that is most likely to
have produced the speech signal. If there are two categories
that could have generated the speech signal, listeners should
take into account of both categories by weighing the
statistical properties of each category. Suppose that in a
hypothetical language, coronal and non-coronal categories
have equal variance and equal frequency of occurrence.
Then each of the two categories has an equal posterior
probability to have generated a speech signal equidistant
from the mean of the coronal and non-coronal distributions.
However, in real languages, the coronal category is often
higher in variances and/or frequencies of occurrence (the tip
and blade of the tongue are more flexible and more
variable). An ideal observer should take these factors into
account, which may result in the posterior probability of the
equidistant speech signal to be larger for the coronal than
the non-coronal category.

Mathematical Formulation
Here we formulate a Bayesian model of speech perception.
Although we apply the model to the asymmetric perception
of coronal and non-coronal consonants, the model may
apply to any domain where a person observes a noisy signal
from categories, with each category’s exemplars being
approximately Gaussian distributed1.
We consider speech perception as probabilistic
inference. Listeners infer the category membership Ci of a
noisy signal S, as denoted by the conditional probability p(S
|Ci). We denote i = 1 for coronal membership and i = 2 for
non-coronal membership. The posterior probability 𝑝 𝐶! 𝑆
that an observed noisy signal S is a coronal sound can be
obtained by Bayes’ Rule:
𝑃 𝐶! 𝑆 =

𝑝 𝑆 𝐶! 𝑃(𝐶! )
𝑝 𝑆 𝐶! 𝑃 𝐶! + 𝑝 𝑆 𝐶! 𝑃 𝐶!

(1)

P(C1) in Equation 1 is the prior probability of the coronal
category and p(S |C1) is the likelihood of observing stimulus
S given it was generated by a coronal category.
Now we derive a closed form solution to the posterior
probability that a signal S is coronal, P(C1 | S). Suppose that
the speaker articulates an exemplar E of the coronal
category C1 and E is Gaussian distributed with mean 𝜇!! ,
the prototype of the coronal category C1. Exemplars within
a category vary with variance σc12. Therefore,
E | C = C1 ~ N(𝜇!! ,σc12)
The speaker’s articulation, the speech signal passing
through the environment, and the perceptual system of the
listener all add noise to the exemplar. These sources of noise

1

The model may also account for other asymmetries in speech
production. We plan to pursue this in future work.

1011

combined into σS2. Therefore, the conditional distribution of
S | E is
S | E ~ N(E, σS2)
where σS2 represents the random noise that is not due to
within-category variability σc12. Due to conjugacy, E can be
marginalized out to form the likelihood p(S | C1), which is
Gaussian distributed:
S | C1 ~ N(𝜇!! , σc12 + σS2)

from the category prototypes has an equal probability of
being perceived as a coronal or a non-coronal. We now
examine how heterogeneity of category variances (i.e. if σc12
≠ σc22) and unequal frequency (i.e., if P(C1) ≠ P(C2)) affect
the posterior probability of the coronal category P(C1 | S).

(2)

The likelihood’s variance is the sum of two components: the
category variance σc12, and random, environmental, and
perceptual noise σs2. Plugging in the parameter values into a
Normal distribution, Equation 2 can be written as:
1

𝑆 − 𝜇!! !
!
2 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

(3)

Figure 1: Posterior Probability (category boundary) of the
coronal category given equal variance and equal frequency

Following the same logic, the likelihood of the non-coronal
category p(S | C2) is

Effect of Category Variance In many languages where
perceptual asymmetries are found, exemplars of the coronal
category are more variable than exemplars of the noncoronal category. For example, using a modified
Levenshtein distance metric, Cohen-Priva (2012) aligned
the underlying (dictionary) forms and phonetic realizations
in the Buckeye Natural Speech Corpus (Pitt, Johnson,
Raymond, Hume & Fosler-Lussier, 2007). He created an
articulatory confusion matrix for English segments in the
corpus. Of the 43,915 coronal stop tokens, 21,576 (49%)
were pronounced either as allophonic variants or as some
other phonemes, whereas of the 64,288 noncoronal stop
tokens, only 2,997 (5%) were pronounced as allophonic
variants or as an alternative phoneme. Such analyses
indicate that coronal stops are about 10 times more variable
than noncoronal stops. Moreover, coronals (9% of all
coronal segments; 20% of coronal stops were deleted) were
also more likely to be deleted than noncoronals (5% of all
noncoronal segments, 4% of noncoronal stops were
deleted).
The differences in natural language statistics of the
within-category variances between coronal and non-coronal
categories in the Buckeye corpus provide the following
constraint: σc12 > σc22. Suppose that σc12 = 5σc22
(approximately the difference in the segment deletion rates
for the English data in the Buckeye corpus), the posterior
probability for a noisy speech signal to be perceived as a
coronal sound is displayed in Figure 2 (with the case where
the within-category variances are equal for reference).
As the red dashed curve shows in Figure 2, the category
boundary has shifted towards the non-coronal category,
leaving a larger posterior probability for a noisy signal
equidistant between the categories to be perceived as a
coronal sound. Suppose that the posterior probability for the
speech signal [g] to be perceived as a coronal sound /d/ is
0.1 given equal variance (blue curve). The shift of category
boundary (dashed red line) leads to an increase in the
posterior probability for [g] to be perceived as /d/ (to a value
around 0.2). Thus, due to the higher variance of the coronal

𝑝 𝑆 𝐶! =

𝑝 𝑆 𝐶! =

!
2𝜋 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

1
!
2𝜋 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

𝑒𝑥𝑝 −

𝑒𝑥𝑝 −

𝑆 − 𝜇!! !
!
2 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

(4)

Plugging Equations 3 and 4 into Bayes Rule (Equation 1),
we can rewrite the posterior probability of the coronal
category given the perceived speech signal S as
𝑃 𝐶! 𝑆 =

!
!!!! !"# !! ! ! ! !! !!! ∗

where
𝛽! =
𝛽! =

!
𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!
!
𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

,

𝛽! =

! !!
! !!

(5)

!
!
𝜎!!
− 𝜎!!
!
!
2 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!! ∗ 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

!
!
−2 𝜇!! 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!! − 𝜇!! 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!
!
!
2 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!! ∗ 𝜎!!
+ 𝜎!!

The closed form solution for the posterior is given by
Equation 5. We explore how the relative differences in
variability and frequency between coronals and noncoronals affect the posterior probability of coronals
𝑃 𝐶! 𝑆 . Then, we analyze the natural statistics of coronals
and non-coronals to determine whether perceptual
asymmetries would arise from them in an ideal observer.

Quantitative Evaluation
Suppose that in a hypothetical language, the coronal
category and the non-coronal category are equally frequent
– have equal priors, P(C1) = P(C2). Also suppose that the
categories are equally variable, as encoded by σc12 = σc22. In
these circumstances, Figure 1 depicts the posterior
probability for a noisy speech signal to be perceived as a
coronal sound, P(C1 | S).
Given equal variance and equal frequency of occurrence,
the category boundary divides the perceptual space into two
equal parts. This indicates that a noisy signal equidistant

1012

category, an ideal listener is more likely to perceive /g/ as an
exemplar of the /d/ category. Now we examine the reversed
direction, i.e. a coronal ([d]) signal is changed to a noncoronal sound (/g/) given unequal variance.

Coronal segments in these languages are at least twice as
frequent as either labial or velar segments (Japanese velar
stops are exceptional and we will discuss this case later).
Frequency is represented by prior probabilities in the
model. P(C1) and P(C2) are the prior probabilities of the
coronal category and the non-coronal category, respectively.
Suppose that P(C1) = 2P(C2) (approximately the relative
frequency in Table 1).
Table 1: Frequencies of segments in CALLHOME
transcripts by place of articulation
Consonant
Labial
Coronal
Velar
Language
Segments
Arabic
All
91,409
222,774
94,624
Stops
25,592
54,279
38,544
Japanese
All
57,513
236,813
99,760
Stops
15,854
62,241
79,117
Spanish
All
101,717 320,167
53,483
Stops
44,366
62,961
43,005

Figure 2: Posterior probability (category boundary) of the
coronal category as a result of unequal variance.

Figure 3: Posterior probability (category boundary) of the
non-coronal category as a result of unequal variance.
Figure 3 shows the posterior probability for a speech
signal to be perceived as non-coronal. The blue curve in
Figure 3 depicts the posterior probability given equal
within-category variances. The red dashed curve shows the
posterior probability given that the coronal category has
larger variance. As the red dashed curve in Figure 3 shows,
the category boundary has shifted towards the non-coronal
category, producing a smaller posterior probability for a
noisy signal to be perceived as a non-coronal sound.
Suppose that the posterior probability for the speech signal
[d] to be perceived as a non-coronal sound /g/ is 0.1 given
equal within-category variances (blue curve). The shift of
category boundary (red dashed curve) leads to a decrease in
the posterior probability for [d] to be perceived as /g/ (to a
value of approximately 0).
To summarize Figures 2 and 3, increasing the variance of
the coronal category causes an ideal listener to be more
likely to perceive a non-coronal signal ([g]) as an exemplar
of the coronal category (/d/), and less likely to perceive a
coronal signal ([d]) as an exemplar of the non-coronal
category (/g/). [g] can be a /d/ but [d] cannot be a /g/.

Figures 4 and 5 show the posterior probability of the
coronal category P(C1|S) and the non-coronal category
P(C2|S), respectively. The category boundary (green dashed
curve) has shifted towards the non-coronal category due to
the larger prior probability of the coronal category. For
comparison, the posterior probability given equal prior
probabilities of coronals and non-coronals is plotted as the
blue curve. This results in a larger posterior probability for a
noisy non-coronal signal ([g]) to be perceived as a coronal
sound (/d/) (Figure 4) and a smaller posterior probability for
a noisy coronal signal ([d]) to be perceived as a non-coronal
sound (/g/) (Figure 5).

Effect of Frequency of Occurrence Coronals also occur
more often in natural speech than non-coronals. Table 1
(adapted from Ren, Cohen-Priva & Morgan, under review)
shows the frequencies of occurrence of the coronal category
in three languages from typologically distinctive families.

1013

Figure 4: Posterior probability (category boundary) of the
coronal category as a result of unequal frequency

Figure 5: Posterior probability (category boundary) of the
non-coronal category as a result of unequal frequency

Thus, similar to the effect of variance, larger frequency of
occurrence of the coronal category also causes an ideal
listener to be more likely to accept that the noisy signal [g]
is an exemplar of the /d/ category but not vice versa,
predicting the same pattern of asymmetry.
Japanese velar sounds provides an interesting test for an
ideal listener model. As Table 1 shows, velar stops (/k/ and
/ky/) occur more often than coronal stops (/t/) in Japanese.
Our model predicts that assuming equal variance, the pattern
of asymmetries should be reversed for Japanese listeners–
they should be less sensitive to sound changes from noncoronal to coronal than vice versa. Japanese studies (see
Tsuji et. al, 2015) so far have only tested infant listeners
with labial (omba) and coronal (onta) but not velar (/k/ and
/ky/) phonemes. Future experimental studies should examine
this prediction with these velar and coronal phonemes.
Effect of Variance and Frequency In many languages both
the prior distribution and the variance of the coronal
category are larger than those of the non-coronal category.
Here we examine how prior and variance interact.

Figure 6: Posterior probabilities of the coronal category as
a result of unequal frequency and/or unequal variance

Figure 7: Posterior probabilities of the non-coronal category
as a result of unequal frequency and/or unequal variance
Figure 6 shows the posterior probabilities of acoustic
signals to be perceived as a coronal sound and Figure 7
shows the posterior probabilities of acoustic signals to be
perceived as a non-coronal sound with differing
assumptions regarding the relative frequency and variance
of coronal and non-coronal sounds. The grey line shows
category boundary shift as the result of both the larger prior
and variance of the coronal category. As shown in both
figures, the pattern of asymmetry remains the same, but
there is an even larger posterior probability for a noncoronal signal to be perceived as a coronal (Figure 6), and

an even smaller posterior probability obtained for a noncoronal signal to be perceived as a coronal sound (Figure 7).
Thus, with larger variance and larger frequency of
occurrence, an ideal listener is even more likely to perceive
a non-coronal signal ([g]) as a coronal sound (/d/), but even
less likely to perceive a coronal signal ([d]) as a non-coronal
sound (/g/).

General Discussion
We presented an alternative account for the asymmetry in
perceiving coronal and non-coronal consonants in speech
processing: They arise due to Bayesian inference given the
natural statistics of coronals and non-coronals. Listeners
make use of their represented category frequency and
variance to make inference about the category membership
of a perceived signal. Asymmetry occurs when the two
speech categories in competition (e.g. within a word
minimal pair) are not equal in variance and/or frequency of
occurrence.
Our approach diverges from the currently predominant
approach in linguistics, which explains the asymmetric
perception as due to underspecification of the coronal place
of articulation. This theory relies on the special
phonological status of coronal sounds only. Conversely, our
approach accounts for the asymmetry as due to the relative
statistical properties of different speech categories. The
underspecification hypothesis is a language-specific, innate
constraint, whereas our account is experience- (learning-)
based and domain-general. For example, Quinn, Eimas &
Rosencrantz (1993) found that 4-month-olds habituated to
pictures of cat faces could easily detect a change to a picture
of a dog face. However, infants habituated to dog faces
failed to detect a change to a cat face. A series of follow-up
studies investigating this asymmetry confirmed that dog
stimuli are more variable in appearance and that when
variability was equated across categories the asymmetry
disappeared (Eimas, Quinn & Cowan, 1994; Mareschal,
French & Quinn, 2000). In music perception, Delbé, Bigand
& French (2006) examined effects of variability by training
non-musician adults with two distributions of pitch
sequences differing in variability and then testing them on
sensitivities to the two directions of changes. Results
indicated that changes from the less variable category to the
more variable category are more detectable than vice versa.
Our account derives predictions to test in future work.
First, category frequencies and within-category variances
are learned from early language exposure. In languages
where non-coronals are more frequent and/or vary more
within-category, the model predicts that the asymmetry
should be reversed. Second, at any developmental stage
when listeners have stable representations of the
corresponding frequency of occurrence and variance of two
competing categories, perceptual asymmetries may occur in
speech processing. Third, frequency and variance should
have independent effects on speech processing. Further, for
mathematical simplicity we assumed that a speech category
is a Gaussian distribution over a single acoustic dimension.

1014

Thus, the model does not differentiate between different
sources/dimensions of variability (e.g., contextual effect,
Ganong, 1980). Assuming we can control these factors
experimentally and test the posterior probability of coronal
and non-coronals in a fine-grained manner, the model makes
quantitative predictions as to the precise form of the
asymmetry. None of these predictions arises from UG but
from the statistics of speech input exposure.
It is also worth noting that not all asymmetries in speech
or other cognitive domains are caused by category natural
statistics. Findings on vowel (Polka & Bohn, 2003) and face
(Corneille, Goldstone, Queller & Potter, 2006) perception,
for example, have suggested that similar asymmetric
patterns could also be due to stimulus saliency and
experimental training. Future studies may examine how
these factors interact with frequency of occurrence and
variances in category perception.
In conclusion, we have provided a novel explanation for
the asymmetry between coronal and non-coronal sounds in
speech perception. Whereas phonological specification as a
hypothesis could be useful for linguistic purposes, it is not
necessary to account for asymmetries in speech perception.

References
Clayards, M., Tanenhaus, M. K., Aslin, R. N., & Jacobs, R.
A. (2008). Perception of speech reflects optimal use of
probabilistic speech cues. Cognition, 108, 804-809.
Corneille, O., Goldstone, R. L., Queller, S., & Potter, T.
(2006). Asymmetries in categorization, cerceptual
discrimination, and visual search for reference and
nonreference exemplars. Memory & Cognition, 34,
556-567.
Cornell, S. A., Lahiri, A., & Eulitz, C. (2011). “What you
encode is not necessarily what you store”: Evidence
for sparse feature representations from mismatch
negativity. Brain Research, 1394, 79-89.
Delbé, C., Bigand, E., French, R. M. (2006). Asymmetric
categorization in the sequential auditory domain.
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Cognitive Science
Society Conference.
Dijkstra N. & Fikkert P. (2011). Universal constraints on
the discrimination of place of articulation?
Asymmetries in the discrimination of paan and taan by
6-month-old Dutch infants. In N. Danis, K. Mesh, &
H. Sung (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development (pp.
172-180). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Eimas, P., Quinn, P., & Cowan, P. (1994). Development of
exclusivity in perceptually-based categories of young
infants. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 58,
418-431.
Feldman, N. H., Griffiths, T. L., & Morgan, J. L. (2009).
The influence of categories on perception: explaining
the perceptual magnet effect as optimal statistical
inference. Psychological Review, 116, 752–82.
Fennell C. T. (2007). Asymmetries in infants’ ability to
notice mispronunciations. Poster presented at The

1015

Conference of the Canadian Society for Brain,
Behaviour, and Cognitive Science. June 2007,
Victoria, Canada.
Fennell C. T., van der Feest S. V. H. & Spring M. (2010).
Perceptual asymmetries of consonants at 14-months:
Implications for phonological acquisition. Presented at
International Conference on Infant Studies, Baltimore,
Maryland, March, 2010.
Friedrich C. K., Eulitz C., & Lahiri A. (2006). Not every
pseudo word disrupts word recognition: An ERP
study. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 2, 36-45.
Friedrich C. K., Lahiri A., & Eulitz C. (2008).
Neurophysiological evidence for underspecified
lexical representations: asymmetries with word initial
variations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 34, 1545-1559.
Ganong, W. F. (1980). Phonetic categorization in auditory
word perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 6, 110-125.
Kiparsky, P. (1982). From cyclic phonology to lexical
phonology.
The
structure
of
phonological
representations, 1, 131-175.
Lahiri, A., & Marslen-Wilson, W. D. (1991). The mental
representation of lexical form: A phonological
approach to the recognition lexicon. Cognition, 38,
245–294.
Lahiri, A., & Reetz, H. (2002). Underspecified recognition.
In C. Gussenhoven & N. Warner (Eds.), Laboratory
phonology 7 (pp. 637–676). Berlin: Mouton.
Lahiri, A., van Coillie, S. (1999). Non-mismatching
features in language comprehension. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Konstanz.
Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S., & Griffith,
B. C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds
within and across phoneme boundaries. Journal
ofexperimental psychology, 54(5), 358-368.
Mareschal, D. French, R. M., & Quinn, P. C. (2000). A
connectionist account of asymmetric category learning
in early infancy. Developmental Psychology, 36, 635645.
Polka, L., & Bohn, O. S. (2003). Asymmetries in vowel
perception. Speech Communication, 41, 221-231.
Quinn, P., Eimas, P., & Rosenkrantz, S. (1993). Evidence
for representations of perceptually similar natural
categories by 3- and 4-month-old infants. Perception,
22, 463-475.
Ren, J., Cohen-Priva, U. & Morgan, J. L. (under editorial
review). Underspecification in Toddler’s and Adult’s
lexical representations.
Roberts, A. C., Wetterlin, A., & Lahiri, A. (2013). Aligning
mispronounced words to meaning: Evidence from ERP
and reaction time studies. The Mental Lexicon, 8, 140–
163.
Tsuji, Sho, Reiko Mazuka, Alejandrina Cristia, and Paula
Fikkert (2015). "Even at 4 months, a labial is a good
enough coronal, but not vice versa." Cognition 134:
252-256.

