Interactive Communicative Inference
Larry Muhlstein (lmuhlstein@ucsd.edu)
University of California San Diego
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Drive
San Diego, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
In the search for an understanding of human communication,
researchers often try to isolate listener and speaker roles and
study them separately. Others claim that it is the intertwinedness of these roles that makes human communication special.
This close relationship between listener and speaker has been
characterized by concepts such as common ground, backchanneling, and alignment, but they are only part of the picture. Underlying these processes, there must be a mechanism for making inferences about our interlocutors’ understanding of words
and gestures that allows us to communicate robustly and efficiently without assuming that we take the same words to have
the same meaning. In this paper, I explore this relationship between language and concepts and propose an interactive mechanism that can facilitate these latent conceptual inferences. Finally, I show how this proposal paves the way for a more precise account of the role of interaction in communication.
Keywords: Communication; Coordination; Interaction; Pragmatics; Bayes; Cognitive Linguistics; Inference; Discourse

Introduction
FRIEDA :

“I study cognitive science”
“Cool! The brain is so interesting!”
FRIEDA : “Uh, cognitive science 6= neuroscience...”

FRED :

Human communication is fraught with misunderstanding,
incorrect assumptions, and uncertainty, yet we still manage
to make it work. To handle these impediments, we make ample use of processes such as grounding (H. H. Clark & Brennan, 1991), alignment (Pickering & Garrod, 2004), repair,
and backchanneling (Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks, 1977),
all of which are well described in the scientific literature. Because these processes are thought to be somewhat modular,
many linguists–especially computationalists–find it useful to
remove these processes from their models and experiments
and reasonably assume that they can be added back in later
when a more complex and complete theory is desired. While
it is reasonable to excise details tangential to the core phenomenon of study, to remove these interactive processes underestimates the degree to which they are embedded in human communication and fails to appreciate how indispensable they are to communicative success.
The misunderstanding at hand emerges from the fact that
these processes are not fully understood. On one hand,
grounding, alignment, repair, and backchanneling allow us
to repair inferential errors and to establish tighter conventions, but each of these processes also presupposes the ability
to detect misalignments and miscommunications in the first
place. While this might not immediately appear to be much
of a problem, there is a complete dearth of empirical literature on such inferences and of any theoretical analysis about

their mechanics. The purpose of this paper is to provide a preliminary analysis of the necessary and sufficient properties of
these interactive communicative processes and to argue that
any reasonably sophisticated understanding of human communication must build upon an epistemologically-sensitive
theory of how we detect and repair misalignments and misinferences in order to communicate robustly and veridically.

Dead reckoning behavior in models of
communication
Contemporary models of human communication tend to operate with strong assumptions about what I will call conceptual alignment–the extent to which interlocutors’ mappings
from surface structure (words, phrases, and actions) to hidden structure (meanings and concepts) align with one another.
Conceptual alignment captures how the correspondence1 between a speaker’s beliefs about the listener’s understanding
of a situation and the listener’s actual understanding affects
their ability to communicate2 . Typically, these models assume that both interlocutors have complete probabilistic conceptual alignment, and therefore that the listener’s belief distribution about the meanings the speaker intends to communicate with her utterances is equivalent to the speaker’s probability of producing those utterances given her communicative intentions. With this assumption in place, a rich subset
of pragmatic behavior including all sorts of implicatures can
be fruitfully investigated, and have been with the advent of
Bayesian models of pragmatics such as RSA and its many
variants (Degen, Tessler, & Goodman, 2015; Frank & Goodman, 2012; Goodman & Lassiter, 2014; Kao, Wu, Bergen, &
Goodman, 2014).
However, if we were to drop this assumption from these
models in favor of a more realistic amount of uncertainty,
we would notice some problems. For example, if we allow
there to be misalignment between the interlocutors’ concepts,
we would find that any attempt at communication results in
a systematic pattern of errors that are not correctable within
the scope of the model. A plausible case of this might be
if I said the word “justice” intending it to mean something
akin to Rawlsian fairness, where all decisions are made from
a position of agnosticism about where one falls in society, but
my interlocutor thought I was talking about retributive justice, then everything that I said would be misinterpreted, and
this would continue indefinitely in the aformentioned mod1 In

a roughly Bayesian sense
the construction of a privileged and precise version of
this concept is of considerable value, it is regrettably beyond the
scope of the present article.
2 Though

2772

els because they don’t contain any mechanism for detecting
conceptual misalignment (instead they assume alignment and
proceed from there). An even simpler case could involve a
sense/reference mismatch where I use the word “speaker” to
refer to a lecturer, but my interlocutor instead interprets it to
refer to a sound production device. While it is likely that the
vast difference in meaning would cause me or my interlocutor
to notice the misinterpretation, a large class of current formal
models of conversation would proceed as if I was being properly interpreted at all times.
It is useful to refer to this type of behavior as dead reckoning communication, as it offers the same perils as nautical
navigation without taking periodic measurements of location.
A ship without instruments, sailing perpetually into the fog,
is inevitably bound to stray far from its destination no matter
how precisely it was pointed at the beginning of its journey.
This happens because of the pervasive uncertainty about the
ship’s motion, the effects of navigational actions (trimming
the sails, hoisting the spinnaker, turning the rudder, etc.), and
the environment–which is always changing. Even if a ship’s
captain plans out a series of actions in advance in order to
get the ship to its intended destination and executes these actions flawlessly (without taking interim measurements about
the position, speed, and heading of the ship), there is but a
tiny chance that the ship will end up in its intended port. So it
goes with communication sans feedback. If a speaker wants
to convey some concept or scenario to a reader and she develops a series of communicative actions (a communication
plan) and executes it without observing the listener’s interpretations, then she risks the listener’s gross misinterpretation
unless she is willing to put in substantially more detail and
effort than is typically prudent or even possible in a conversation. Even for the most closely aligned concepts, communication is bound to stray off course if the participants don’t
continuously probe the state of the discourse and correct its
course when necessary. As H. H. Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs
(1986) argued, the constraints of conversation restrict us to
brief, ad hoc, ephemeral communicative actions, which limits interlocutors’ ability to provide the kinds of lengthy descriptions that might be present (and necessary) in a book.
However, conversation also affords interaction. As we will
see, this offers additional opportunities for coordinated communication between interlocutors by allowing them to make
inferences about each others’ interpretations. Just like a navigator’s instruments allow her to detect the ship’s position
and velocity and make informed corrections to its course, a
speaker’s inferences allow her to probe the state of her partner’s understanding and choose her successive communicative actions accordingly.

Response-based inference
To combat this undesirable dead reckoning behavior, we can
look both at the necessary properties for any mechanism to
handle pervasive uncertainty and misalignment (given the
right abstraction of the problem) and at empirical investiga-

(a) Dead reckoning navigation

(b) Navigation with instruments

Figure 1: Dead reckoning vs. instrument-based navigation
on a ship. (a) Dead reckoning cannot handle uncertainty and
so the ship ends up far from its intended destination. The
gray line represents the planned trajectory, while the black
line shows the actual trajectory under dead reckoning. (b)
Instrument-based navigation allows the captain to correct the
ship’s course as it goes leading the ship exactly to its intended
destination.

tions about how humans specifically seem to handle it in the
case of communication.

Challenge-response authentication
A particularly good formal analogy for the solution I will
soon propose is the cryptographic concept of challengeresponse authentication. Challenge-response authentication
was developed as a solution to a problem much like the issue of dead reckoning in communication. Imagine that there
are two interlocutors, Alice and Bob, each sitting at one end
of a digital communication channel (imagine them sitting at
desks in separate buildings connected via the internet.) Bob
wants to send Alice a secure message, but first Bob needs to
know for sure that he is communicating with Alice and not
with a malevolent interloper such as their friend Charlie. To
verify Alice’s identity, Bob needs Alice to say something that
only she would know, such as the secret phrase they agreed
upon earlier. Bob receives this phrase from the communication channel and concludes that it must have come from Alice.
But Charlie, the conniving and generally clever chap that he
is, has tapped the communication channel and observes Alice
and Bob’s secret phrase. The next day, when Bob wants to
communicate with Alice, he hears this same phrase, and again
believes that it came from Alice. Unbeknownst to him, Alice
was sick and wasn’t at the computer terminal she normally
uses to communicate with Bob. Instead, the secret phrase
came from Charlie, who now proceeds to communicate with
Bob as if he was Alice.
A natural question then follows: how can Bob and Alice
communicate securely without risk of Charlie impersonating
Alice? The answer lies in challenge-response authentication.
Bob, having discovered the fatal flaw in his authentication
system, comes up with a clever alternative. Instead of agree-

2773

ing with Alice upon a secret phrase, they instead come up
with a secret relationship between phrases–i.e. a secret function. The next day, when Alice and Bob try to communicate,
Bob sends Alice a message called a challenge. When Alice
receives this challenge, she feeds it into the secret function
and gets an output that she then sends back to Bob as a response. When Bob receives this response, he feeds his challenge into his own copy of the secret function and compares
the result with Alice’s response. If they match, then Bob can
be sure that he is communicating with Alice and not Charlie.
To understand why this works, we can look at Charlie’s behavior in this scenario. Like before, Charlie has tapped the
communication line and receives both Bob’s challenge and
Alice’s response. The next day, when Charlie tries to pretend that he is Alice, he receives a challenge from Bob. This
challenge however, is not the same as the one he saw the day
before. This means that the correct response is different as
well! Because the secret knowledge is a full function, the observation of a few challenge-response pairs is not sufficient to
induce the full function or the correct response to additional
challenges. If the secret functions are properly designed, then
virtually no amount of observations of the challenge-response
pairs will be sufficient for Charlie to induce the secret function. Upon realizing this information, the sullen Charlie decides to leave Alice and Bob alone to search for others with
weaker verification algorithms to deceive.

Utterance-response contingencies
How does this cryptographic mechanism relate to human
communication and how does it help us avoid dead reckoning behavior? The problem in human communication is not
in establishing the identity of the interlocutor, but rather in
verifying the interlocutor’s comprehension. If we replace the
secret functions from challenge-response authentication with
out latent conceptual understandings, we can use the same
sort of strategy to verify the similarity or alignment between
our communicative intentions and the interlocutor’s interpretations. If Alice produces utterance x for Bob, and Bob responds with utterance y, then Alice can check Bob’s comprehension of x by modeling the plausibility that Bob would have
generated response y given various interpretations of x. In the
simple case, if Bob interprets x exactly as Alice intends, then
his response y will be identical to Alice’s prediction about his
response given her intended interpretation. In the case where
there are multiple plausible interpretations, Bob’s response y
provides Alice with information about how likely Bob is to
have made each of the possible interpretations of x. We will
call this minimal pair of utterance and response an utteranceresponse contingency. Utterance-response contingencies are
the basic building blocks of interactive communicative inference, a term I propose to denote the general process of inferring interlocutor beliefs through interaction. This also involves more complex cases where each interlocutor’s beliefs
about the others’ understanding are updated through extended
dialogical interaction, which can result in robust alignment
processes that make effective discourse possible.

In real discourse, utterance-response contingencies look
like this:
GEORGE ( UTTERANCE ):

“Wasn’t that a great speech yesterday?”
GEORGIA ( RESPONSE ): “I mean, it wasn’t as horrible as I
expected, but I definitely can’t say it was good...”
GEORGE ( REPAIR ): “Oh, did you think I meant Donald’s
speech? I was talking about the address from the director
of the ACLU.”
These utterance-response contingencies can come in various forms. They can resolve referential misinterpretations
like in the example above, or they can surface more subtle conceptual misalignments where the interlocutors’ wordconcept mappings are misaligned, or even when the internal
structures of their respective concepts are inconsistent with
each other3 .
The case of misaligned word-concept mappings is illustrated in the opening dialogue between Frieda and Fred.
FRIEDA :

“I study cognitive science”

FRED : “Cool! The brain is so interesting!”
FRIEDA : “Uh, cognitive science 6= neuroscience...”

Here we see that Frieda’s concept of “cognitive science”
is reflective of her being an insider to the field and therefore likely includes associations with each of the “six corners
of the hexagon”: psychology, computer science, philosophy,
linguistics, anthropology, and neuroscience. Fred’s concept,
however, is closer to how many outsiders think of cognitive
science4 –as alternative word for neuroscience. Using interactive communicative inference and utterance-response contingencies, Frieda is able to notice this conceptual misalignment
and repair it, thus improving the alignment between interlocutors.

A more systematic formulation
To make this idea a bit more concrete, we can situate it in
the context of a more precise way of looking at human communication. Fundamentally, communication is comprised of
two kinds of processes: inferences, and actions that facilitate inferences. The idea of an inference is mostly self explanatory. It refers to any kind of inference about the beliefs, communicative intentions, or mental state of your interlocutor. Such beliefs can be about things in the world
or more abstract concepts, and so the contents of these inferences are almost unlimited in scope. Inference facilitation, on the other hand, refers to actions that are taken by
one participant in the discourse (whom we call the speaker,
even though their actions may not be vocally produced) and
observed by another participant in the discourse. As these
actions are caused (at least in part) by the speaker, they provide the observer of the actions (the listener) with information
3 Such as in the earlier example involving misaligned concepts of
justice.
4 At least in this author’s experience

2774

about the speaker and consequently their beliefs, mental state,
and communicative intentions. Since the roles of speaker and
listener shift dynamically throughout a discourse, we do not
associate these terms with particular conversational agents,
but with the roles themselves. The listener–in responding to
the speaker–therefore temporarily instantiates the role of the
speaker, and even the most subtle facial expressions, when
produced in a discourse, count as inference-facilitating actions. Besides these two components, there is also the idea
of context, which is broadly defined to capture any effect of
the discourse topic, the surroundings, or any other processes
on the particular instance of communication5 . The definitions
of these communicative concepts are not constrained further
than this because to do so would limit their generality as the
basic constituents of human communication.
I choose this framework instead of other possibilities such
as the pragmatic alternatives framework, classical communication theory, and informal schools of thought such as relevance theory and cognitive linguistics because it affords both
precision and generality and it allows us to highlight the basic
epistemics of human communication. In this formulation, all
communicative actions have the same status. This is because,
at the epistemic level, an utterance, a gesture, and an unintentional twist of the lips are all actions taken by a communicator
that allow an interlocutor to make various inferences about
her communicative intentions and her state of mind. While
the contents and causal pathways associated with these actions may differ drastically, these details do not have bearing
on the development of a basic framework for communicative
analysis, only on specific theories subsequently derived from
that framework.
To move towards a formal theory, we can choose a minimal
Bayesian framework that captures only the epistemic relationships between the speaker’s utterance, the listener’s interpretation, the listener’s response, and the context. Since all of
these, except for the listener’s interpretation, are observable to
both parties6 , we can capture their relationships in a causallyderived probabilistic graphical model where each of the nodes
is observed except for the node representing the listener’s interpretation, as seen in figure 2 (Pearl, 1988). This model
captures the fundamental structure of the speaker’s inference
about the listener’s interpretation via utterance-response contingencies, where the details of particular inferences depend
on the particular distributions that comprise an instantiation
of the model. While the broad epistemic structure of these
inferences is simple, the corresponding real-world processes
are anything but so. Filling in the details of this model will not
be an easy process and will require a large amount of directed
scientific experimentation and theoretical analysis. Therefore
the goal here is not to develop a full theory of these communicative processes in real humans, but to provide a structured
5 Context is an incredibly complex topic, but for the purposes of
this article, we will leave its nuances aside.
6 Except possibly some component of the context, but the variance in context between participants in an interaction is beyond the
scope of this article.

“Context”

Speaker’s
utterance

Listener’s
interpretation

Listener’s
response

Figure 2: Bayesian network representation of interactive
communicative inference. Bolded nodes are directly observable.
framework through which we can understand and investigate
them. Bayesian probability is sufficiently abstract to allow us
to represent these general inferential structures while allowing the rich human details to be added later.

Application to known discourse phenomena
To further ground this framework and illustrate its relationship to empirical phenomena in human communication, we
will look at three different concepts described in the literature and show how the idea of interactive communicative inference offers each of them a stronger theoretical foundation.

Common ground
The idea of common ground, first proposed by H. H. Clark
and Brennan (1991), suggests that people accumulate a
shared repository of knowledge when they interact, and
that subsequent interactions are facilitated by this common
knowledge. This proposal has received a substantial amount
of theoretical analysis, which has lead to a rich account of
how humans establish common ground and make use of
it in conversation (H. Clark, 1996). There is also a solid
foundation of experimental evidence supporting the theory
(Brennan & Clark, 1996; Hanna, Tanenhaus, & Trueswell,
2003). Perhaps the most notable experiment–known as the
“tangrams experiment”–involved a pair of interlocutors who
were given a set of cards depicting images of blocky figures–
i.e. tangrams–and were tasked with getting the other person to arrange their cards in an order perceivable only to
the designated speaker for the round. Complicating this significantly was the fact that the participants were separated
by a visual wall and so could only communicate verbally.
H. H. Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986) found that the participants quickly established shared conventions for referring to
the cards, which resulted in a decrease in the amount of communication required to complete the task as they continued to
interact through multiple task rounds.
While this story is compelling both theoretically and empirically, it is missing a mechanistic account of the inference

2775

processes that these interlocutors go through when building and making use of common ground. Dead reckoning
models cannot capture this progressive coordination behavior, and so we turn to interactive communicative inference.
The basic component of interactive communicative inference,
the utterance-response contingency, accounts for how an exchange can allow the speaker to update their understanding
of the listener’s beliefs and therefore facilitate the listener’s
comprehension. When this occurs, the speaker can choose to
use a referring term that they know the listener will understand, which allows the speaker to communicate more efficiently with the listener via this ad hoc convention. If both
communication partners make use of such processes in their
interaction, then they will come to a shared understanding
of how to use language to communicate particular meanings.
Over an extended interaction, such interlocutors can build a
common communication system. This predicts the increasing communicative concision throughout an interaction that
H. H. Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986) observed. We can even
imagine that, if this process involves additional people over
multiple interactions, a complete conventionalized communication system should emerge from this process of building
shared knowledge via interaction.

Conversational alignment
Martin Pickering and Simon Garrod have developed a compelling theory of discourse as an interactive alignment process, which has a number of useful relations to the present
theory of interactive communicative inference (Pickering &
Garrod, 2006, 2004; Garrod & Pickering, 2004). Their theory
claims that local lexico-syntactic priming in discourse produces a series of cascading effects that causes all participants
in a conversation to produce similar surface structures and
even to align on semantic content. Using this theory, they argue that the fundamental mechanisms operating in discourse
are these alignment processes and construct an account of language processing that does not require a speaker to maintain
an explicit and complex model of their interlocutor (Garrod
& Pickering, 2004). While this theory accounts for a wide
range of phenomena, it does not offer any account of conceptual alignment phenomena. Conceptual alignment cannot
arise from priming-based mechanisms because it is defined as
the alignment between latent conceptual structures and surface communicative actions, and this relationship cannot be
primed by observing surface structures from an interlocutor’s
communicative actions. In order to account for the facts that
our conceptual structures tend to be relatively aligned within
a conventionalized communication system and that we have
evidence that they are aligned via interaction, an interactive
communicative inference component needs to be added to
Pickering and Garrod’s theory of discourse.
Their theory also predicts that it should be easier for humans to efficiently communicate meaning through interactive
dialog than unidirectional monologue because interaction facilitates the alignment of linguistic representations (Garrod &
Pickering, 2004). This prediction is both consistent with our

informal experience as well as predicted by the interactive
communicative inference framework. For a monological description to yield effective communication, it must necessarily contain enough information such that, for all of the likely
ways that a listener or reader might misinterpret the meaning,
there is additional information that steers them away from
these misinterpretations and towards the intended interpretation. In a discourse, however, these counterfactuals do not
need to be handled via anticipation and mitigation. Instead,
utterance-response contingencies make it so that only actual
misinterpretations by the listener need to be ameliorated.
With the addition of the present account of conceptual
alignment through interactive communicative inference, we
can add a vital component to the conversational alignment
story to yield a powerful framework for understanding human
communication.

Backchanneling and repair
Sociolinguistics and conversation analysis research has built
an account of discourse expressed in terms of the constituent
behaviors of conversations and the types of communications
they enable (Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974). Some of
the core concepts in these accounts are the ideas of backchanneling and repair. Backchanneling is invoked in a multichannel model of communication in which interlocutors communicate the majority of their content via a main channel
and provide meta-conversational signals in a backchannel
(Yngve, 1970). For example, a listener may produce the affirmative “uh huh” in a backchannel to signal to the speaker
that the she believes herself to be comprehending and that
the speaker should proceed. While these behaviors have been
convincingly shown to play a key role in natural conversation, this account leaves open the question of how the listener
forms her beliefs about whether or not she is comprehending
the speaker. As we have seen, belief of comprehension does
not necessarily imply veridical comprehension, because there
may be an undetected conceptual misalignment between the
speaker and listener. Our account of interactive communicative inference suggests that listeners may be providing these
cues to speakers in order to facilitate the speakers’ interactive communicative inferences by completing the utteranceresponse contingency. It also suggests that speakers may be
comprehending these backchannel signals, not truly as an unequivocal signal to proceed, but as a response that conveys
the listener’s beliefs about their comprehension. The following dialog illustrates a scenario with a distinction between
the affirmative backchannel as an unequivocal signal of comprehension and an account of backchanneling as concurrent
response. (Tyra and Tyler are roboticists at different universities.)
TYRA ( UTTERANCE ):

“STEVE can walk on two legs
now!”
TYLER ( BACKCHANNEL ): “Oh”
TYRA ( REPAIR ): “Not Steven the child, STEVE (SelfTaught-EVacuative-Entity) my robot. It’s a ground-

2776

Acknowledgments

breaking achievement!”
Here Tyra infers Tyler’s miscomprehension through his affectless backchannel response to her achievement. She knows
that he would be really excited to hear about this research
achievement and therefore infers that he must believe her to
be talking about a child instead. Tyler mistakenly believes
himself to have comprehended Tyra’s utterance and produces
a backchannel response, but Tyra does not interpret it blindly.
Instead, she uses the resultant utterance-response contingency
to infer the miscommunication and repair the misunderstanding. As predicted in the classical account, the backchannel
provides feedback to Tyra about Tyler’s interpretation. However, the response does not reflect Tyler’s veridical comprehension, but facilitates a more complex interactive communicative inference.
Miscommunications in conversations are corrected via repairs. These come in many forms, but are often divided into
two classes: self-initiated and other-initiated. While the literature provides substantial experimental and ethnographic detail about the role of repairs in conversation, it does not offer an account of how interlocutors infer when a repair needs
to be made (Schegloff et al., 1977). The present theory of
interactive communicative inference offers a computational
mechanism by which miscommunications can be detected in
conversation, which allows speakers to repair the miscommunication by correcting their own production or by correcting
the listener’s interpretation.

Conclusion
Contemporary models of communication are incomplete.
While they offer a detailed understanding of the surface-level
phenomena present in discourse, they do not provide a satisfactory explanation of the inferential mechanisms necessary
for these phenomena. They are unable to account for the robustness of communication in spite of uncertainty, how people know when to update their beliefs about their interlocutors, and how people establish conventions. I have provided
theoretical evidence tied to the empirical to show how all of
these types of missing accounts can be derived from the idea
of interactive communicative inference.
While researchers have long understood that discourse is
not a unidirectional and isolated activity, we have demonstrated that treating it as such, even for the sake of delimiting the domain of a theory or a model, can have the effect of
removing an important property of language. When the idea
of interactive communicative inference is taken seriously, we
can begin to construct a scientific study of communication
that can account for how, despite the fact that we can never be
in someone else’s head to see first-hand what they believe and
how they feel, they are able to show us these things simply by
engaging us in a cooperative dance of action and interpretation.

I would like to thank Sean Trott for helping motivate me to
write this article as well as for his invaluable feedback. I
would also like to thank Dorothy Howard for her time helping me polish the article. Finally, I am deeply indebted to the
UCSD Department of Cognitive Science and all of its members for their continued support.

References
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6),
1482.
Clark, H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. Perspectives on socially shared cognition, 127–
149.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1), 1–39.
Degen, J., Tessler, M. H., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). Wonky
worlds: Listeners revise world knowledge when utterances
are odd..
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science, 336.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in cognitive sciences, 8(1), 8–11.
Goodman, N. D., & Lassiter, D. (2014). Probabilistic
semantics and pragmatics: Uncertainty in language and
thought. Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Hanna, J. E., Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. C. (2003).
The effects of common ground and perspective on domains
of referential interpretation. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(1), 43–61.
Kao, J. T., Wu, J. Y., Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2014).
Nonliteral understanding of number words. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(33), 12002–12007.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and brain sciences,
27(02), 169–190.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2006). Alignment as the basis
for successful communication. Research on Language and
Computation, 4(2-3), 203–228.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A
simplest systematics for the organization of turn-taking for
conversation. language, 696–735.
Schegloff, E. A., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The
preference for self-correction in the organization of repair
in conversation. Language, 361–382.
Yngve, V. H. (1970). On getting a word in edgewise. In
Chicago linguistics society, 6th meeting (pp. 567–578).

2777

