Interruptions Reduce Confidence Judgments: Predictions of Three Sequential
Sampling Models
Kevin Zish (kzish@gmu.edu)
George Mason University
4400 University Dr, Fairfax, VA 22030

Malcolm McCurry (malcolm.mccurry.ctr@nrl.navy.mil)
Harris
4555 Overlook Ave SW, Washington, DC 20375

Nathan Aguiar (naguiar@masonlive.gmu.edu)
George Mason University
4400 University Dr, Fairfax, VA 22030

J. Gregory Trafton (greg.trafton@nrl.navy.mil)
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory
4555 Overlook Ave SW, Washington, DC 20375

Abstract
The relationship between confidence and accuracy has been
modeled many times. This paper compares and contrasts three
decision-making mathematical models (2DSD, Poisson,
RTCON2) of confidence and investigates how each model
predicts the effects of interruptions on accuracy, decision
response time, confidence, and confidence response time.
Keywords: 2DSD; Poisson model; RTCON2; confidence;
accuracy; interruptions; response time; decision-making

Introduction
In 2016, the U.S. Justice Department released guidelines for
law enforcement on how to collect confidence judgments
for witness identification (“Justice Department Issues New
Guidance On Securing Eyewitness IDs,” 2016). These
evidence-based guidelines consider the role memory plays
in confidence judgments.
Memory researchers have found that the more an item is
rehearsed in memory, the more confident a person will be in
the accuracy of that retrieval (Busey, Tunnicliff, Loftus, &
Loftus, 2000). For witnesses, repeating a testimony prior to
trial is not uncommon. As a result, by the time a trial occurs,
the confidence a witness has about their testimony has
increased beyond the confidence of their first testimony
(Wixted, Mickes, Clark, Gronlund, & Roediger III, 2015).
Inflated confidence is a concern for the justice system
because of the often replicated finding that the relationship
between accuracy in memory and confidence is positive
(DeSoto & Roediger, 2014; Dunlosky & Metcalfe, 2008;
Roediger & DeSoto, 2014; Roediger III & Desoto, 2012;
Roediger III & DeSoto, 2014; Wixted et al., 2015). Because
this positive relationship is often noticed by laypersons,
jury’s mistake inflated witness confidence for accuracy. The
Justice Department encourages law enforcement to guard
against inflated confidence by recording confidence during

the first testimony so as to better reflect the accuracy that
the testimony happened as described.
.Although this policy change at the U.S. Justice
Department is likely to result in higher quality evidence in
courtrooms, formally modeling the relationship between
confidence and accuracy has been very difficult because it
has been hard to determine when confidence judgments
begin. There have been many attempts to model the
relationship between confidence and accuracy (see
Dunlosky & Metcalfe, 2008; Pleskac & Busemeyer, 2010;
Ratcliff & Starns, 2013 for a review). It seems intuitive that
the process of forming a confidence judgment should begin
after some choice has been made. However, Petrusic &
Baranski (2003) showed that when a confidence judgment
was required, participant’s response times for the primary
choice were longer than when the confidence judgment was
not required. Petrusic & Baranski (2003) interpreted this
finding to mean that at least some of the processing for a
confidence judgment occurs during the primary judgment.
As a result, many researchers have attempted to extend
previous models of primary choice to account for
confidence judgments.
Three of the most popular models to attempt to explain
confidence judgments are 2DSD (Pleskac & Busemeyer,
2010), the Poisson model (Merkle & Van Zandt, 2006; Van
Zandt & Maldonado-Molina, 2004), and RTCON2 (Ratcliff
& Starns, 2009, 2013). Each model relies on sequential
sampling to determine the selection of a choice. Sequential
sampling models assume that information is collected from
memory or sensory input and summatively translated to
evidence towards a particular choice.
Evidence collection through sequential sampling is a
common theme across all three models. According to each
model, choice is based on the collection of evidence.
Evidence is collected until a threshold is reached for one of

3664

the choice alternatives. Crossing a threshold and the
subsequent response (e.g key-press) is the decision time for
a primary choice. The primary choice is the evidence
accumulation and response to questions like “Did you see
item ‘A’ or item ‘B’ before?” Confidence time is the time it
takes to make a confidence judgment about the probability
that the primary choice was correct. The confidence
judgment is a secondary choice in response to questions like
“How would you rate your confidence on a Likert scale of 1
to 6?” Thresholds are variable and so can be determined in a
trial-by-trial and person-to-person basis (Audley, 1960; D.
Vickers, 1970; Douglas Vickers, 2014).
Below is a description of each of the three models. The
goal is to briefly summarize each model and highlight how
each model suggests confidence judgments are calculated
from evidence accumulation and how primary choice may
relate to confidence judgments (when specified).

2DSD
The 2-stage-dynamic-signal-detection theory (2DSD) was
first introduced by Pleskac & Busemeyer in 2010 and
suggests that confidence judgments involve post-decision
processing of the primary choice. 2DSD is specifically
adapted to a 2-alternative forced-choice task (2AFC).
In the 2DSD model, participants make a primary choice
by collecting evidence that pushes a single counter towards
one choice alternative or the other. When the counter
reaches a criterion for one alternative, a primary choice is
made. If a decision is prompted before a threshold is passed,
the alternative choice that is closest to the counter is
selected.
After a primary choice is made, evidence continues to be
collected for a confidence judgment. Evidence continues to
accrue for the single counter until evidence passes a
threshold for a particular confidence judgment and a
secondary choice is made. Each possible confidence
response has a separate threshold. Similar to primary choice,
if a choice is prompted before a threshold is passed; the
confidence judgment that is closest to the counter is
selected.
According to 2DSD decision time for primary and
secondary choice is the product of drift rate. Drift rate is
determined by the quality of the evidence collected. Because
drift rate towards one alternative or the other determines
how fast a choice is made, response time is a function of the
quality of the evidence.
2DSD extends the idea that high drift rates lead to fast
choices to confidence judgments. The often replicated
finding that there is a negative relationship between
confidence judgments and response times (Baranski &
Petrusic, 1998; Petrusic & Baranski, 2003) suggests that
lower drift rates will produce lower confidence responses.

Poisson Model

there is one counter of evidence for each of the possible
primary choice alternatives. Counters accrue evidence for
each alternative. Whichever counter reaches its respective
choice threshold first is the primary choice. If the decision is
prompted, whichever counter is closest to the criterion
threshold is selected.
After the primary choice is made, evidence collection
stops and a secondary choice for confidence is ready to be
made. In the Poisson model, confidence is a function of the
difference in evidence between counters. If the difference
between the collected evidence is large, confidence is high.
If the difference between the collected evidence is small,
confidence is low.
The idea of confidence being generated by separate
counters was made most popular by the balance of evidence
hypothesis (D. Vickers, 1970; Douglas Vickers, 2001,
2014). The balance of evidence hypothesis suggests that the
difference in evidence between counters is scaled to produce
a confidence response. The Poisson model is unclear about
whether or not confidence is scaled immediately after a
choice is made or a computation is required first.
According to the Poisson model, decision time for the
primary choice is the sum of the time to retrieve each piece
of evidence and increment the winning counter. The model
does not specify confidence as a second choice that is
calculated as a post-decision. However, Van Zandt &
Maldonado-Molina (2004) have suggested that additional
evidence collection and post-processing could occur after a
primary choice but may not always be necessary.

RTCON2
RTCON2 is a model of making confidence judgments
only and not of primary choice (see Ratcliff, 1978 for their
diffusion model of primary choice). As a result, it is unclear
from RTCON2 how primary choice influences confidence
judgments.
RTCON2 suggests that there is a separate counter for
each of the possible confidence responses. A confidence
judgment is selected when a counter reaches a predefined
threshold. According to RTCON2, participants do not have
access to the amount of evidence each counter has accrued
and therefore can only make a choice when a counter has
reached a threshold. In addition, because people do not have
access to the evidence, there is no comparison between the
amount of evidence for different confidence judgments.
Importantly RTCON2 differs from the original RTCON
(Ratcliff & Starns, 2009) in that each counter for a
confidence judgment is affected by the behavior of other
counters so as to maintain no net difference. As a result, if
evidence facilitates an increment in one counter, the other
counters decrease so as to have a net zero effect.
Similar to 2DSD, RTCON2 also uses higher drift rates to
explain faster response times and higher confidence
responses.

The Poisson model was introduced by Pike (1971;1973)
and modified for confidence by Merkle & Van Zandt,
(2006). The Poisson model assumes that in a 2AFC task,

3665

Memory
One major component of the 2DSD, Poisson model, and
RTCON2 models is their reliance on memory for their
evidence counters. A sufficient model should be able to
predict what happens when memory quality changes.
Many researchers have investigated the relationship
between accuracy and confidence by manipulating memory
(see Dunlosky & Metcalfe, 2008 for a review). One wellresearched way of manipulating memory is using
interruptions. A long history of research has shown a
decrease in task performance (e.g increased response time,
decreased accuracy, increased time to return to the task)
following an interruption (Altmann & Trafton, 2007;
Altmann, Trafton, & Hambrick, 2014; Cades, BoehmDavis, Trafton, & Monk, 2011; Gillie & Broadbent, 1989;
Trafton, Altmann, & Ratwani, 2011; Trafton, Jacobs, &
Harrison, 2012).
More recently, confidence in the accuracy of a memory
has been shown to be lower after an interruption (Aguiar,
Zish, McCurry, & Trafton, 2016; Zish, Hassanzadeh,
McCurry, & Trafton, 2015). In an experiment we replicate
these findings and discuss the predictions of each of the
three models.

Model Predictions
All of the models suggest that decision-making is the
result of some form of sequential evidence collection. There
are two primary differences between each of the models.
First, decisions are either the result of the use of one counter
for evidence (2DSD) or multiple competing counters
(Poisson and RTCON2). Second, confidence judgments are
the result of the winning counter choosing the confidence
response (2DSD and RTCON2) or the winning counter
choosing the time when the delta between multiple counters
is used to calculate confidence (Poisson).
The number of counters (one or multiple) and the role of
the counter (choosing a response or calculating the delta
between counters) results in testable predictions for how
interruptions will affect performance.
For all three models accuracy should be lower after an
interruption because drift rates will experience more
fluctuations when the quality of the evidence collected
decreases. Fluctuations in drift rates can result in an error if
noise allows for evidence to increment towards the incorrect
choice threshold.
Drift rates also drive response time for all three models.
Any decrease in the drift rate should increase response time.
Because interruptions increase the amount of time to
retrieve an item from memory, interruptions should increase
decision response times and confidence response times.
As for confidence, 2DSD and RTCON2 predict that
confidence decreases whenever drift rate decreases.
Although 2DSD relies on one counter and RTCON2 uses
multiple counters, both models suggest that confidence is
chosen when one counter crosses a threshold for a
confidence judgment. Alternatively the Poisson model uses
two counters where confidence is the delta between the two

counters. An interruption is likely to slow the increment of
both counters equally. Therefore, the Poisson model
predicts that confidence should be no different after an
interruption trial than a non-interruption trial.
Given the predictions of these three models, the number
of counters clearly does not matter when it comes to
predicting accuracy or response time. The primary
difference between the predictions of the three models is
whether or not confidence will be the same after an
interruption trial as compared to a non-interruption trial.

Methods
Participants
Fifty-five George Mason
participated for course credit.

University

undergraduates

Tasks
Primary Task The primary task consisted of a simulated
stock exchange where participants filled out Buy and Sell
orders. Each order had 12 widgets that needed different
information about the state of the stock market and the Buy
or Sell request (e.g Stock Symbol, Exchange, Transaction
Type).
To begin, participants were presented with an autoselected Buy or Sell request at the bottom of the screen
(colored gray) and a red arrow designating which of the 12
widgets required information first. The red arrow’s location
was randomized so that participants learned to start from
multiple widgets.
Participants located and selected a “Start” button on the
side of the widget designated by the red arrow. Selecting
“Start” would teleport the widget to the bottom middle of
the screen so that it became the main focus of the task.
Participants would use information from the gray-colored
request and the stock market information along the middle
of the screen to fill in the widget with the correct
information. When the correct information was selected
from the widget’s dropdown menu, the widget would return
to its original place on the screen (Figure 1). Participants
repeated the process by finding information for the next
widget. Widgets were completed left-to-right and top-down.
A trial ended when the active order was replaced by
another auto-selected Buy or Sell request.

3666

Confidence Question Once the signal detection question
was complete, the screen was replaced with a question that
asked: “How confident are you that the [widget name] was
the next correct step?” The participant selected a button on
the bottom of the screen that represented their confidence on
a scale of 1 through 6 with 1 being “Not at all Confident”
and 6 being “Entirely Confident.”

Design

Figure 1: Primary task with auto-selected order and widget.
Interruption Task For half of the trials, participants were
given a secondary task that served as an interruption. The
interruption lasted for 20-seconds after completing an order.
The interruption consisted of a series of addition problems.
Addition problems completely occluded the screen until the
secondary task was complete. Participants were instructed to
complete the addition problems as quickly and as accurately
as possible.
Signal Position Question After a trial ended or after a trial
and interruption ended, participants were presented with a
facsimile of the stock order screen. A blue arrow pointed to
one of the 12 widgets with the question: “Is the arrow
pointing to the next correct step?” Participants would
respond by clicking the word “Yes” in the top left corner or
the word “No” in the top right corner (Figure 2). Once the
participant made a selection, they were presented with the
next order to complete with a new Buy or Sell request.
The placement of the blue arrow was evenly split between
the next correct or incorrect step.

The study was a 2 factor (interruption/non-interruption)
repeated measures design.
Each participant had 32 interruptions across 64 trials. The
order of screens participants saw was the primary task for 25 completed widgets, a 20-second secondary task after half
of the trials, a signal position question, and a confidence
question.
The 64 trials were equally divided between 2, 3, 4, and 5
completed widgets in length. The length of the trial was
varied to reduce the likelihood that participants could
prepare for an interruption and/or signal position question.
Each participant had half of the signal position arrows
pointing to the next correct step.

Procedure
Participants filled out an approved IRB consent form as well
as biographical information. Participants were seated
approximately 47cm from the computer monitor. The task
was first described using screenshots of the primary and
secondary tasks as well as the signal position and question.
Three practice trials were completed that were each 12
widgets long. This was to give the participant the
opportunity to experience the order of the widgets before
being given partial orders to fill. The experimenter provided
the opportunity for participants to ask clarifying questions
about the behavior of the task. Participants could begin once
the experimenter left the room and were debriefed and
dismissed once finished.

Measures
Behavioral data based on mouse clicks was collected for all
participants in addition to screen recordings. Accuracy for
identifying the next correct step in the task, response time
(RT) for identifying the next correct step in the task,
confidence in identifying the next step of the task, and
response time for the confidence judgment were calculated.

Results
Fifty-five participants made 3176 correct responses and
3520 confidence responses.

Behavioral Results

Figure 2: Signal Position Question with a blue arrow
pointing at a possible next correct step.

A within-subjects ANOVA between interruption and noninterruption trials show that interruptions hurt performance
metrics for accuracy (F(1,54) = 132.4, MSE = 0.59, p < .05,
η2=.56), confidence (F(1,54) = 135.7, MSE = 22.813, p <
.05, η2=.73), decision response time (F(1,54) = 134.8, MSE

3667

= 78,277,425, p < .05, η2=.75), and confidence response
time (F(1,54) = 30.47, MSE = 844,342, p < .05, η2=.11). A
summary of the means of each performance metric across
interruption condition can be found in Table 1.
Table 1: Means of performance measures.
Performance Metric

Interrupted
Trials

Accuracy

82.9%

NonInterruption
Trials
97.5%

Confidence
Decision RT (ms)
Confidence RT (ms)

4.95
4493.96
1492.30

5.86
2806.82
1317.08

Empirical Data and Model Predictions
All three models predicted the decrease in accuracy, the
increase in decision response time, and the increase in
confidence response time that appeared after an interruption
trial compared to a non-interruption trial. Most importantly,
only 2DSD and RTCON2 predicted a decrease in
confidence after an interruption.

Discussion
In this paper we describe three sequential-sampling models
of decision making and apply their predictions to the results
of an experiment.
2DSD used one counter to make a primary choice and
then subsequent post-decision processing to provide a
confidence judgment once the single counter passed a
threshold. The Poisson model used two counters to make a
primary choice where the first counter to cross a threshold
determines the time when a delta between the two counters
is calculated for confidence. Finally, RTCON2 is a multiple
counter confidence-only model where the winning counter
crosses a threshold that informs the confidence judgment.
We compared the predictions of these three models to the
results of an experiment where participants completed a task
in a simulated stock market. Participants were interrupted
50% of the time and then asked to choose if a widget was
the next correct step of the task followed by a confidence
judgment.
This study replicated the results of many other
interruption-based studies in that performance suffered after
an interruption. An addition to previous work is that
confidence response times are slower following an
interruption.
In terms of model predictions, all three models can
account for a decrease in accuracy after an interruption. All
three models suggest that accuracy is a function of the
fluctuations in the drift rate. Counters can reach the
threshold for the incorrect choice first when there is more
noise in the drift rate, particularly when the thresholds are
lowered. To fully explain a decrease in accuracy after an
interruption, each model would need to explain why there is

more noise in drift rate and/or lower choice thresholds after
an interruption trial than a non-interruption trial.
A strength of each model is a fairly comprehensive
explanation for decision response time and confidence
response time after an interruption. All three models suggest
that response times are a function of the speed of evidence
collection. As a result, anything that reduces the speed of
evidence collection should reduce response time. While no
link has been produced that shows that quality of evidence
decreases after an interruption, there is certainly a large
amount of literature showing interruptions increase retrieval
time (Altmann & Trafton, 2007; Altmann et al., 2014;
Cades et al., 2011; Trafton et al., 2011, 2012). An increase
in retrieval time would slow down evidence collection and
lead to longer decision and confidence response times.
As for confidence only 2DSD and RTCON2 were able to
predict lower confidence judgments after an interruption. In
both models confidence decreases when the drift rate is
lower. Therefore, interruptions are likely to lower the drift
rate.
The Poisson model is unclear about explaining a change
in confidence after an interruption. Confidence in the
Poisson model is driven by the balance of evidence
hypothesis and calculated by scaling the delta between the
counters. According to the Poisson model, confidence after
an interruption should stay the same as before an
interruption because both counters in a 2AFC would be
affected by the interruption equally. Thus, the Poisson
model does not predict the difference in confidence found in
this study.
This paper compared and contrasted three mathematical
models of decision making. The 2DSD, Poisson model, and
RTCON2 can explain changes in accuracy with drift rate but
do not provide a clear mechanism to explain the effect of
interruptions. However, each model does have a fairly
robust explanation of decision response times and
confidence response times via speed of evidence collection.
As for confidence judgments, it is easier for models to
explain changes in confidence judgments when there is a
single counter that chooses a response than models that use
multiple counters to calculate the delta between alternatives.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research to
JGT. The views and conclusions contained in this document
should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the
official policies of the U. S. Navy.

References
Aguiar, N., Zish, K., McCurry, J. M., & Trafton, J. G.
(2016). Interruptions Reduce Performance across All Levels
of Signal Detection When Estimations of Confidence are
Highest. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 60, pp. 254–
258).
SAGE
Publications.
Retrieved
from
http://pro.sagepub.com/content/60/1/254.short

3668

Altmann, E. M., & Trafton, J. G. (2007). Timecourse of
recovery from task interruption: Data and a model.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(6), 1079–1084.
Altmann, E. M., Trafton, J. G., & Hambrick, D. Z. (2014).
Momentary interruptions can derail the train of thought.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(1), 215.
Audley, R. J. (1960). A stochastic model for individual
choice behavior. Psychological Review, 67(1), 1.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1998). Probing the
locus of confidence judgments: experiments on the time to
determine confidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 24(3), 929.
Busey, T. A., Tunnicliff, J., Loftus, G. R., & Loftus, E. F.
(2000). Accounts of the confidence-accuracy relation in
recognition memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 7(1),
26–48.
Cades, D. M., Boehm-Davis, D. A., Trafton, J. G., &
Monk, C. A. (2011). Mitigating disruptive effects of
interruptions through training: what needs to be practiced?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(2), 97.
DeSoto, K. A., & Roediger, H. L. (2014). Positive and
negative correlations between confidence and accuracy for
the same events in recognition of categorized lists.
Psychological Science, 0956797613516149.
Dunlosky, J., & Metcalfe, J. (2008). Metacognition. Sage
Publications.
Retrieved
from
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=eVUXBA
AAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&dq=dunlosky+and+metcalfe&
ots=pQQ0zHb8sp&sig=T44q3ZPgczKMKHKEIGsf20Ez2Y
Gillie, T., & Broadbent, D. (1989). What makes
interruptions disruptive? A study of length, similarity, and
complexity. Psychological Research, 50(4), 243–250.
Justice Department Announces Department-Wide
Procedures for Eyewitness Identification. (n.d.). Retrieved
January
23,
2017,
from
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-departmentannounces-department-wide-procedures-eyewitnessidentification
Merkle, E. C., & Van Zandt, T. (2006). An application of
the poisson race model to confidence calibration. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 135(3), 391.
Petrusic, W. M., & Baranski, J. V. (2003). Judging
confidence influences decision processing in comparative
judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 10(1), 177–
183.
Pike, A. R. (1971). The latencies of correct and incorrect
responses in discrimination and detection tasks: Their
interpretation in terms of a model based on simple counting.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 9(6), 455–460.
Pike, R. (1973). Response latency models for signal
detection. Psychological Review, 80(1), 53.
Pleskac, T. J., & Busemeyer, J. R. (2010). Two-stage
dynamic signal detection: a theory of choice, decision time,
and confidence. Psychological Review, 117(3), 864.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85(2), 59.

Ratcliff, R., & Starns, J. J. (2009). Modeling confidence
and response time in recognition memory. Psychological
Review, 116(1), 59.
Ratcliff, R., & Starns, J. J. (2013). Modeling confidence
judgments, response times, and multiple choices in decision
making: recognition memory and motion discrimination.
Psychological Review, 120(3), 697.
Roediger, H. L., & DeSoto, K. A. (2014). Understanding
the relation between confidence and accuracy in reports
from memory. Remembering: Attributions, Processes, and
Control in Human Memory: Essays in Honor of Larry
Jacoby, 347–367.
Roediger III, H. L., & Desoto, K. A. (2012). The Curious
Complexity between Confidence and Accuracy in Reports
from Memory. Memory and Law, 84.
Roediger III, H. L., & DeSoto, K. A. (2014). Confidence
and memory: Assessing positive and negative correlations.
Memory, 22(1), 76–91.
Trafton, J. G., Altmann, E. M., & Ratwani, R. M. (2011).
A memory for goals model of sequence errors. Cognitive
Systems Research, 12(2), 134–143.
Trafton, J. G., Jacobs, A., & Harrison, A. M. (2012).
Building and verifying a predictive model of interruption
resumption. Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(3), 648–659.
Van Zandt, T., & Maldonado-Molina, M. M. (2004).
Response reversals in recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30(6), 1147.
Vickers, D. (1970). Evidence for an accumulator model of
psychophysical discrimination. Ergonomics, 13(1), 37–58.
Vickers, Douglas. (2001). Where Does the Balance of
Evidence Lie with Respect to Confidence? na. Retrieved
from
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/d16d/ba06d352494962e03c
1c00bed1c1944bd7f4.pdf
Vickers, Douglas. (2014). Decision processes in visual
perception.
Academic
Press.
Retrieved
from
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=LXAAwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=Vickers,+D.+(1979).+
Decision+processes+in+visual+perception.+New+York:+A
cademic+Press.&ots=KJ1kVOlGDJ&sig=vx20Bf_g8X_4y
W10c2DuWXse510
Wixted, J. T., Mickes, L., Clark, S. E., Gronlund, S. D., &
Roediger III, H. L. (2015). Initial eyewitness confidence
reliably predicts eyewitness identification accuracy.
American Psychologist, 70(6), 515.
Zish, K., Hassanzadeh, S., McCurry, J. M., & Trafton, J.
G. (2015). Interruptions can Change the Perceived
Relationship between Accuracy and Confidence. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
Annual Meeting (Vol. 59, pp. 230–234). SAGE
Publications.
Retrieved
from
http://pro.sagepub.com/content/59/1/230.short

3669

