Interpretation and Processing Time of Generalized Quantifiers:
Why your Mental Space Matters
Alice Ping Ping Tse (tse@tf.uni-freiburg.de) and Marco Ragni (ragni@tf.uni-freiburg.de)
Institut für Informatik, Technische Fakultät, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Georges-Köhler-Allee, Geb. 052, 79110 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

Abstract
Classical quantifiers (e.g., “all”, “some” and “none”) have
been extensively studied in logic and psychology. In contrast,
generalized quantifiers (e.g., “most”) allow for fine-grained
statements about quantities. The discrepancy in the underlying
mental representation and its interpretation among interpreters
can affect language use and reasoning. We investigated the
effect of quantifier type, quantification space (set size) and
monotonicity on processing difficulty (in response time, RT)
and response diversity of 77 generalized quantifiers. Shannon
entropy was employed to measure response diversity. Our
findings indicate: (i) Set size is a significant factor of response
diversity, which implies that the underlying space is relevant
for the interpretation. (ii) Quantifiers possess a rather static
underlying representation within and across tasks within a
participant. (iii) Quantifier type and monotonicity can affect
response diversity; while the response diversity can predict
RT. (iv) In reasoning, the number of generalized quantifiers
versus classical quantifiers in a syllogism is a factor of response diversity. Diversity in the interpretation of generalized
quantifiers may be a cause of human’s deviation from logical
responses.
Keywords: generalized quantifiers; syllogism; total set size;
monotonicity, individual differences

Introduction
“Quantifiers” can have two definitions: In logic, a quantifier
acts as the binder to denote the relationships between sets. In
natural language, a quantifier is a determiner or pronoun
indicative of quantity or amount. In daily English, it limits
and modifies the quantity of the noun it is attached to. They
map categories to types. Hence, they are the basis for many
fundamental concepts in different fields, especially logic,
linguistics and psychology. In first-order logic, there are
only two basic quantifiers: the universal “for all, ∀” and the
existential quantifier “there exist (or for some), ∃”, which
denote quantities. In Aristotelian logic (Austin, et al., 1971;
Westerståhl, 2011), there are three quantifiers, “all/every”,
“some” (also for “some… not”), and “no”. However, the
aforementioned first-order quantifiers are too restricted in
daily language use. Generalized quantifiers (also known as
the second-order predicates or binary quantifiers) are in a
wider use in language, for example, when the exact amount
is not available (which is quite usual in daily situations) or
to emphasize a rather qualitative property of the amount
(e.g., “more than half”, “most”, “a few”). Generalized quantifiers (or just quantifiers) include words and phrases like
‘most’, ‘many’, ‘few’, ‘a few’, ‘some’, ‘more than half’,
‘commonly’, ‘typically’ and cardinal numbers (e.g., more
than one, and exact numbers such as two, a hundred).

Since the first articles by Barwise and Cooper (1981) in
the field of linguistics and Lindström (1966) in the field of
logic, an increasing number of research articles have focused on generalized quantifiers. The interpretation of generalized quantifiers can be affected by factors like the quantification space – its total set size (Newstead, Pollard, &
Riezebos, 1987), word frequency (Chase, 1969), monotonicity (Szymanik & Zajenkowski, 2013), common belief and
background knowledge (Newstead & Collis, 1987; Moxey
& Sanford, 1993), and context and working memory
(Zajenkowski, Szymanik, & Garraffa, 2014). Some psychological studies (e.g., Newstead et al., 1987; Ragni, Eichhorn,
Bock, Kern-Isberner, & Tse, 2017) have demonstrated that
many quantifiers do not have a precise true/false cutoff for
the quantity they represent, on a scale from 0 to 100. Even
more, the minimum and maximum values of human’s subjective valuation responses to individual quantifier can vary
a lot (Ragni et al., 2017). This may hint at a fuzzy underlying space of quantifiers among people, in terms of using and
interpreting quantifiers (Budescu & Wallsten, 1985).
Generalized quantifiers have been recently employed in
studies of syllogisms1, such as the Probability Heuristics
Model (PHM; Oaksford & Chater, 1994). A recent study
(Ragni, Singmann, & Steinlein, 2014) has extended three
syllogistic reasoning theories (Matching Hypothesis, Mental
Model Theory and Preferred Mental Models) to generalized
quantifiers. However, only the two quantifiers – “most” and
“few” were included. The interpretation of generalized
quantifiers plays a role in most reasoning theories, especially regarding the set relationship. For example, in mental
model theory, it is the basis for the construction of mental
models. Endorsement of invalid conclusion can be resulted
when reasoners commit the illicit conversion fallacy of
interpreting “All As are Bs” as equivalent to “All Bs are As”
and make a mistake in the initial mental model construction.
This is indeed a very common error in syllogistic tasks.
While for PHM, it is relevant to the selection of the preferred quantifier in the conclusion.
Knowing the factors affecting the underlying representation of generalized quantifiers is essential for cognitive
theories for reasoning. One example is that “most As are
1

Syllogisms are deductive reasoning problems in which one or
more conclusions are derived from two premises. The two premises are categorical propositions which are assumed to be true. For
example, the conclusion “All As are Cs” can be drawn from the
two premises “All As are Bs” and “All Bs are Cs”. The abstract
terms, A, B and C can be substituted by concrete categorical terms
like “apple” and “fruit”.

3380

Bs” is “equivalent” to “most Bs are As” if A and B have the
same set size. However, if B has a much larger set size or
cardinality than A, then the proposition does not hold after
the switch (also known as illicit conversion). About 50% of
the participants in the experiments of a previous study chose
“most” as the conclusion quantifier for a syllogism with
“most” as the quantifier for both premises2 (Chater &
Oaksford, 1999). It is interesting that half of the participants
considered A, B and C as having the same cardinality while
the other half of the participants may not. About 15% of the
participants in experiment 1 and 20% of the participants in
experiment 2 chose “no valid conclusion” as their responses.
It is very possible that these participants may be aware of
the fact that the differences in total set sizes of A, B and C
can lead to different conclusions for the syllogism.
Factors affecting the variety in the interpretation of quantifiers and underlying space have to be controlled in studies
employing these quantifiers. Besides, are there individual
differences in the underlying representation of a quantifier?
Does the underlying space affect the response diversity? The
answers may provide insight for the questions why human
participants do not always draw the same or logical conclusions but some particular irrational conclusions are preferred
and why more response diversity was found for more difficult reasoning problems (e.g., Khemlani & Johnson-Laird,
2012). Also, would the degree of vagueness/uncertainty of a
quantifier cause more individual differences? What are the
factors of the response diversity in the interpretation of generalized quantifiers? Will the degree of uncertainty cause a
larger processing difficult which can be reflected by a longer
processing time? And what are the factors of processing
difficulty of generalized quantifiers? This analysis investigates these questions regarding the underlying space and
processing time (difficulty) of generalized quantifiers. More
precisely, we focus on three levels of tasks: 1. Spontaneous
valuation of the quantity or frequency the quantifier represents in the Subjective Valuation Task. 2. A Truth Judgement Task in which participants were asked to judge if a
quantified statement holds true for a picture. 3. Finally, a
syllogistic reasoning task with generalized quantifiers that
participants were asked to reason and derive a conclusion
from two premises of quantified statements. Please refer to
the Method section for details about the three tasks.
Two measures of response diversity were employed in
this study, namely the standard deviation and Shannon entropy. In information theory, Shannon entropy calculates the
expected value of the information transmitted in a message
(Shannon & Weaver, 1949), as a function of the probability
of the occurrence of each possible message. For each quantifier, the entropy in the Truth Judgement Task, was calculated by the aggregated normalized probabilities of the truth
responses for each of the pictures/scenarios presented (see
Method for the details) by the Shannon equation: -∑pilog2pi,
where pi is the probability of a truth response. There will be
2 The syllogism mentioned here is the MM4 syllogism in the
study: Premise 1 as “Most As are Bs”; Premises 2 as “Most Bs are
Cs”; and conclusion as “Most Cs are As”.

several “small” probabilities if the response is more diverse.
Conversely, if the responses are condensed to a few values,
the probabilities of these selected values will be high. The
smaller the probability, the larger the entropy value calculated by the equation. And thus, a larger Shannon entropy
value indicates more discrepancy in the responses. It was
used to measure the response diversity in syllogistic reasoning in a meta-analysis study (Khemlani & Johnson-Laird,
2012). Standard deviations of the responses in the Subjective Valuation Task and Truth Judgement Task were calculated as well to check if the two measures of diversity agree
with each other. For answering the question regarding
underlying space, Newstead et al. (1987) found that the
amount of entities represented by certain quantifiers (e.g.,
“some”) could be affected by the assumed total set size of
the experimental scenario. However, does this hold for all
generalized quantifiers? Besides the extra-linguistic factor
of total set size, several properties of the quantifier itself can
also affect the diversity of human responses (interpretation)
and response time. They include, among others, quantifier
type, monotonicity, and word frequency. We will elaborate
two aspects below.

Quantifier Types
There are many different ways of classifying quantifiers
(e.g., logical quantifiers versus different types of binary
quantifiers; simple versus complex quantifiers). In this
study, the quantifiers were classified in the sense of natural
language, namely frequency versus quantity quantifiers.
Many studies have been conducted for quantity quantifier,
while there are only few for frequency ones. For instance,
Newstead and Collis (1987) studied the context effect in the
interpretation of ten frequency quantifiers. In contrast to
some previous findings for quantity quantifiers (Chase,
1969; Newstead & Griggs, 1984; Newstead et al., 1987), no
significant set size effect or effect due to the presence of
other quantifiers were found. This supported that processing
of quantifiers of different types may be different due to their
specific properties.

Monotonicity
A generalized quantifier Qup is upward monotone/entailing
(or monotone increasing) if and only if for all M and all A,
B ⊆ B′ ⊆ M, QM(A,B) implies QM(A,B′). That means Qup
license the inference from subsets to supersets. Similarly, a
Qdown is downward monotone/entailing if and only if for
all M and all A, B ⊆ B′ ⊆ M, QM(A,B’) implies QM(A,B).
Contrastive to Qup, Qdown license the inference from supersets to subsets. For example, “Some men are Germans implies some men are Europeans”. With the fact that “Germans” is within the set of “Europeans”, “some” is an upward monotone quantifier. Similarly, “No men are birds”
implies “No men are eagles”. With the fact that eagles are
birds, “no” is downward monotone. There are nonmonotone quantifiers also, e.g., “exactly three”. For example, “exactly three men are Germans” does not imply “exactly three men are Europeans” or vice versa. According to

3381

the definition, many natural language quantifiers are (either
upward or downward) monotone, including the three Aristotle quantifiers, “all”, “some” and “no”. Barwise (1981) suggested that monotone quantifiers are easier to process than
non-monotone ones.

word frequency are expected to be processed faster. We
hypothesized that the entropy measures and word frequency
are significant predictors of RT; and the quantifier type may
affect the RT as well.

Method
Aims of the Study and Research Questions
We aimed to examine human’s interpretation of a large
number of generalized quantifiers and factors affecting the
response diversity and processing time of these quantifiers
to facilitate further studies of generalized quantifiers in
different fields. As mentioned before, the significant properties have to be controlled in studies involving these quantifiers in order to eliminate some confounding factors. The
analyses focus on three factors, namely total set size, quantifier type (quantity quantifier and frequency quantifier), and
monotonicity (upward, downward and non-monotone),
according to two domains, namely degree of variation in
underlying representation space (among interpreters, in
terms of response diversity) and processing difficulty (in
terms of processing time) of the generalized quantifiers.
Research Question 1: Factors of Response Diversity
Unlike “All”, “No” or “Seven” (numerical quantifiers), the
amount (or proportion) represented by most generalized
quantifiers can be rather fuzzy. Humans do not agree with
each other regarding the representation space of individual
quantifier. What are the factors affecting the differences in
the underlying representation space of quantifiers? In other
words, are total set size, quantifier type and monotonicity
the factors affecting response diversity? Research question 1
(RQ 1) was examined by analyzing the standard deviation
(SD) and Shannon entropy measures in both the Subjective
Valuation and Truth Judgement Tasks. We hypothesized
that the smaller set size condition, quantity quantifiers and
upward monotone quantifiers may exhibit smaller response
diversities, i.e., smaller standard deviation and entropy
measure values.
Research Question 2: Processing Time
Does greater degree of fuzziness cause a longer processing
time (in terms of response time)? Besides, is the monotonicity a factor of processing time as well? Szymanik and
Zajenkowski (2013) found a significant interaction effect of
monotonicity and the truth value of the quantified statement
in a verification task of four quantifiers but failed to find a
significant main effect of monotonicity. We extended the
study with more quantifiers of different quantifier types.
Word frequency was included as a covariant because it has a
general effect in word recognition3. Quantifiers of higher

Participants
104 native English speakers (M = 40.8 years; range = 21-75
years; 63 females) participated in the online experiment on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. We controlled for one participant
from a given computer. They received a nominal fee.

Materials, Design and Procedure
A search for common quantity and frequency quantifiers
was performed in Google with the keywords “quantifiers”,
“frequency quantifiers”, “frequency adverbs”, “determiners”, “how often”, “how many”, and “how much”. 77 generalized quantifiers were selected4, with 34 frequency quantifiers (frequency adverbs); and 14, 13 and 16 quantity quantifiers which can be used with countable, uncountable and
both countable and uncountable nouns (type-both) respectively. Each participant had to perform two tasks:
A Subjective Valuation Task Participants were asked to
provide a subjective value of the amount the quantifier represents. They had to move a slidebar to indicate their responses in terms of percentages (from 0% to 100%). Each
quantifier was evaluated once.
A Truth Judgement Task Participants had to evaluate the
validity of a quantified statement presented above a picture.
For the effect of total set size, participants were randomly
assigned to either the smaller-set group or larger-set group.
The number of participants in each group was counterbalanced. For countable and type-both quantifiers, pictures of
10 circles or 100 circles were displayed, with 0 to all of
them colored black (see Fig. 1). While for uncountable and
type-both quantifiers, pictures of a heap of sand or desert
(composed of 10 heaps of sand) were presented with 0 to
100% of the sand or desert colored brown (see Fig. 2).

3

Quantifiers with higher word frequencies are supposed be processed faster due to the availability heuristic or ease of retrieval,
having a faster response time in a spontaneous timed task. A significant decrease of the recognition time for words with higher word
frequency (e.g., O’Malley & Besner, 2008) is generally found. The
word frequency measures were taken from the British National
Corpus: http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk.

3382

Figure 1: Pictures for countable space in the Truth
Judgement Task. Participants received the left (10 circles)
or right picture (100 circles) and had to evaluate whether
a quantified statement like “Some circles are black”
(presented at the left hand upper corner) is a true
description of the picture or not.
4

The list can be retrieved from www.cc.uni-freiburg.de/data.

For frequency quantifiers, timelines of a week with a coffee cup icon for 0 to 7 days or a monthly schedule with an
icon of football for 0-31 days were presented. Each quantifier was tested 2 times for each participant in two blocks.
Pictures displayed were counterbalanced within participants
in the sense that if the participant received less than or equal
to half positive situation (e.g., 3 out of 10 circles colored
black) in the first block, he/she would receive more than or
equal to half positive situation in the second block (e.g., 7
out of 10 circles are black) and vice versa. The same manipulation was applied to all the three scenarios (circles,
sand/desert, and timeline/calendar). Type-both quantifiers
were tested four times for each participant as they were
presented twice in both the circle and sand/desert scenarios.
The possible picture options were counterbalanced among
participants. For countable and type-both quantifiers, the
statement was in the form of “Quantifier (of the) circles are
black” or “These circles are Quantifier black” (for “commonly” and “typically”). For the sand/desert situation, the
statement was “Quantifier sand is colored brown”. The
statement was in the form of “Tim Quantifier drinks coffee”
or “Tim drinks coffee Quantifier” for the weekly timeline
scenario; and “Tim Quantifier plays soccer” or “Tim plays
soccer Quantifier” for the monthly calendar scenario. Participants were asked to judge as accurately and quickly as
possible whether the statement was a truth description of the
picture. Participants always performed the Subjective Valuation Task first.

Figure 2: Pictures for an uncountable space in the Truth
Judgement Task. Participants had to judge whether a
statement like “Most sand is colored brown” is a true
description of the picture or not.

Results
The Underlying Representation Space
For the first research question, the diversity in the responses
was evaluated by the Shannon entropy and standard deviation measures of the responses in both the Truth Judgement
Task and Subjective Valuation Task, as the indices. The
standard deviation and entropy measures of the responses
were calculated according to the two different set size conditions in the Truth Judgement Task (SD1, Entropy1; and
SD2, Entropy2). SD1 and Entropy1 are the standard deviation and entropy measure of the smaller set size pictures (10
circles, 1 heap of sand and weekly timeline). SD2 and Entropy2 are the standard deviation and entropy measure of the
larger set size condition (100 circles, desert and monthly
schedule). The Spearman’s rank correlations between the
three SDs and entropy measures were tested both within and

across the two tasks. Significant correlations were found
except for SD2 with the entropy in the Subjective Valuation
Task and Entropy1, see table 1 for the results. For the effect
of set size on the response diversity, significant differences
were found between both SD1 and SD2; and Entropy1 and
Entropy2, t(76) = -6.142, p < .001 and t(76) = -7.268, p <
.001, respectively, with SD2 and Entropy2 being significantly larger. The two measures (SD and entropy) provided
similar results, as the entropy measures were more reliable
indices for the response diversity (according to the positive
correlations across tasks), we used the entropy measures for
the following analyses for the sake of simplicity.
Regarding the property of monotonicity, the quantifiers
were classified into 28 upward monotone, 23 downward
monotone, 11 monotone and 12 non-monotone quantifiers.
The effects of the three quantifier properties on the two
entropy measures (for underlying space) in the Truth
Judgement Task were then tested. The 2 (quantifier type:
frequency and quantity) x 4 monotonicity (monotonicity:
upward, downward, monotone and non-monotone) MANOVA, with word frequency as a covariate, for the two entropy measures showed that the quantifier type had a significant multivariate effect on the two entropy measures, F(2,
64) = 179.820, p < .001, Wilk’s λ = .151, ηp2 = .849; as well
as monotonicity and word frequency, F(6, 128) = 5.568, p <
.001, Wilk’s λ = .629, ηp2 = .207 and F(2, 64) = 10.130, p <
.001, Wilk’s λ = .760, ηp2 = .240, respectively. The interaction effect of quantifier type and monotonicity was not significant.
The following post-hoc tests were performed according to
quantifier type (frequency versus quantity) and monotonicity (upward and downward). The t-tests showed that the two
entropy measures (Entropy1 and Entropy2) were reliably
different for frequency quantifiers, t(33) = -23.426, p <
.001, but not for quantity quantifiers. Regarding the monotonicity, the two entropy measures were reliably different
for upward and downward monotone quantifiers, Entropy1:
t(49) = 2.328, p = .024; Entropy2: t(49) = 3.198, p = .002.
Differences between the response diversity indices for the
first half and second half of the tasks were also examined.
Regarding Entropy1 and Entropy2, both t-tests were not
significant, Entropy1: t(76) = 1.236, p = .220, Entropy2:
t(76) = .455, p = .650. For the Subjective Valuation Task,
there was no difference between the first and second half of
the task neither, t(73) = -.067, p = .946.

Processing Time
We filtered out the response times which exceed average RT
+/- 2 SD according to individual participant. Firstly, a stepwise regression was performed to test if the word frequency
and the three entropy measures significantly predicted the
response time. The results of the regression analysis showed
that the two entropy measures in the Truth Judgement Task
explained 38.6% of the response time (adjusted R2 = .386,
F(2, 74) = 24.928, p < .001, Entropy1: β = .975, p < .001,
Entropy2: β = -.603, p < .001. As the response times of the
two quantifier types were significantly different,

3383

Table 1: Results of Spearman’s rank correlation of the standard deviation (SD) and entropy measures of the responses in the
Subjective Valuation Task (SD and entropy) and Truth Judgement Task (SD1 and SD2; and Entropy1 and Entropy2).

Valuation
Judgement

entropy
SD
Entropy1
Entropy2
SD1

Valuation
SD
-.359**

Entropy1
.566**
-.257*

Judgement
Entropy2
SD1
.425**
.450**
-.326**
-.485**
.503**
.483**
.557**

SD2
0.188
-.444**
-0.086
.599**
.555**

*Correlation is significant at the .05 level (2-tailed).
**Correlation is significant at the .01 level (2-tailed).

t(75) = 7.188, p < .001, the regression was repeated according to the two quantifier types. For frequency quantifiers,
word frequency was the only significant predictor, adjusted
R2 = .157, F(1, 32) = 7.128, p = .012; β = -.427, p = .012.
While for quantity quantifiers, entropy in the Subjective
Valuation Task was the only significant predictor of the
response time, adjusted R2 = .136, F(1, 41) = 7.609, p =
.009; β = .396, p = .009. The effect of monotonicity on
response time was not significant. Do generalized quantifiers affect the response diversity in syllogistic reasoning?
Syllogisms are chosen as quantifiers are the essence of syllogistic reasoning and so their effect may be most visible.

Entropy in Reasoning with Generalized
Quantifiers: Additional Empirical Support
We reanalyzed the data from Ragni et al. (2014) with the
entropy measure for response diversity. Twenty-five native
English speakers participated in the online experiment on
Amazon Mechanical Turk. Each participant had to solve 40
syllogistic problems with at least one of “most” and “few”
being the quantifier of one of the two premises. Participants
had to choose the conclusion quantifier of the syllogism
among the four classical Aristotle quantifiers and the two
generalized quantifiers “most” and “few” (i.e., all, no, some,
some…not, most and few), to the question “what follows?”
after reading the two premises. The conclusion direction
presented (a-c or c-a) was counterbalanced. 20 problems
were tested for each conclusion direction. “Most” and “few”
appeared in the first premise respectively in 6 of the syllogisms, with the second premise being one of the six quantifiers (6 x 2 = 12 problems). For the 8 remaining syllogisms,
“most” and “few” appeared in the second premise, with the
first premise being one of the four Aristotle quantifiers.
The entropy measure of the responses for each syllogism
was calculated and an ANOVA and a t-test were performed.
The 2 (conclusion direction: a-c vs. c-a) x 2 (position of the
generalized quantifier: first premise vs. second premise)
ANOVA showed a significant main factor of the position,
F(2, 39) = 4.738, p = .015, ηp2 = .218, but both conclusion
direction and the interaction effect were not significant.
Post-hoc analysis showed that syllogisms with generalized
quantifier in the first premise had a significantly higher
entropy, t(30) = 2.174, p = .038 (2-tailed). The number of

generalized quantifier affects the entropy as well. If both
premises contained generalized quantifiers, the entropy was
marginally smaller, Independent Samples Test: t(38) =
1.957, p = .058 (2-tailed)5. The marginal result might due to
the fact that only 8 syllogisms have two generalized quantifiers but 32 problems have only one generalized quantifiers.

General Discussion
While extensive research in psychology of reasoning and
logic has dealt with the four classical quantifiers (“all”,
“some”, “some…not”, and “none”), few cognitive reasoning
theories for syllogisms have been extended to generalized
quantifiers – and often to “most” and “few” only. Different
quantifiers possess different specific properties which affect
their interpretation (especially in terms of interpretation
diversity) in daily language. For example, for universal
quantifiers like “All” and “No”, most participants would
select 100% and 0%, respectively, in the Subjective Valuation Task, with few selecting values within 95% to 99% and
0% to 5%, respectively. In contrast, the more “fuzzy” generalized quantifiers elicit a greater diversity in the responses.
For example, for “some”, we got 6 responses for 20% and
35%, 5 responses for 25%, and 10 responses for 45%
(among 104 responses). In total, 47 different percentages
(out of 101 possible choices) were selected as the responses
in the Subjective Valuation Task. It seems that the right tool
to analyze the interpretation diversity is missing. We argue
that Shannon entropy, which was developed for communication, is an excellent method which can be employed to
measure the response diversity of generalized quantifiers.
Using Shannon’s entropy to measure response diversity
was introduced in this study as it is a binary-based element
which fits the dichotomous experimental design of the Truth
Judgement Task. It shows reliable correlated results with the
classical standard deviation measure within and across tasks.
Shannon entropy seems a better measure for response diversity across tasks than the SD. Our results show that the total
set size, quantifier types (frequency versus quantity) and
monotonicity can affect the interpretation diversity of a
quantifier; while the interpretation diversity (in terms of
5 We performed the Levene's test for equality of variances and
the results were not significant, i.e. equal variance can be assumed.

3384

entropy measures) can in turn affect the response time. In
accordance with the findings of Szymanik and Zajenkowski
(2013), we did not find a reliable effect of the monotonicity
of quantifiers on RT. One can speculate that the difference
in processing difficulty applies to cardinal quantifiers only.
The smaller set size condition has a smaller entropy value
as hypothesized, in contrast to the frequency quantifiers and
downward monotone quantifiers. Further studies are required to explain this finding. Quantity quantifiers have a
slower RT in general and this might be affected by the larger
discrepancy in the underlying representation space, which
hints a fuzzier underlying representation of quantity quantifiers among participants. However, our results suggest that
quantifiers possess a rather static underlying mental representation space within participants, not changing within or
across tasks, as there is no difference for the response diversity measures between the first and second half of the tasks.
Despite our finding of total set size being a factor in the
interpretation of generalized quantifiers, it is still possible
for human to interpret quantifiers without the knowledge of
total set size (Van Tiel & Geurts, 2013). But we can speculate that participants usually represent the underlying set by
a default mental model for the respective quantifiers.
Our study shows that total set size, quantifier type, and
monotonicity (and word frequency) are all contributing to
the possible diversity in the use or reasoning of generalized
quantifiers. Based on these factors, natural extensions of
theories which already assume models of different sizes and
are analogous representations of the state of affairs (like the
mental model theory) to incorporate the proposed results is
possible. Extension to generalized quantifiers is increasingly
important for cognitive reasoning theories to avoid a selfcentered focus, which renders them ultimately useless for
explaining or predicting complex everyday communication.
Large-scale studies of these generalized quantifiers in reasoning tasks can test if the diversity in the interpretation of
these quantifiers is the factor of the response diversity in
reasoning tasks. It is possible that differences in the interpretation of the quantifier contribute to the deviation from logical responses, other than reasoning/heuristic processes.
Controlling the above significant factors is important for
studies involving quantifiers, to avoid hidden experimental
confounds. Also, for theories with predictions on response
time, it is possible that interpretation diversity is a significant factor. Further studies on this hypothesis are necessary.

Acknowledgement
This work is supported by DFG-Projects under grant numbers RA 1934/2-1, RA 1934/3-1, and RA 1934/4-1.

References
Austin, J. L., Strawson, P. F., Grice, H. P., Chomsky, N.,
Katz, J. J., Goodman, N., et al. (1971). The philosophy of
language (Vol. 39). London: Oxford University Press.
Barwise, J., & Cooper, R. (1981). Generalized Quantifiers
and Natural Language. Linguistics and Philosophy, 4(2),
159-219.

Brysbaert, M., Buchmeier, M., Conrad, M., Jacobs, A. M.,
Bölte, J., & Böhl, A. (2011). The word frequency effect.
Experimental psychology, 58(5), 412-424.
Budescu, D. V., & Wallsten, T. S. (1985). Consistency in
interpretation of probabilistic phrases. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36(3), 391-405.
Chase, C. I. (1969). Often is where you find it. American
Psychologist, 24(11), 1043.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1999). The probability
heuristics model of syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive
psychology, 38(2), 191-258.
Khemlani, S., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2012). Theories of
the syllogism: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
138(3), 427-457.
Lindström, P. (1966). First order predicate logic with
generalized quantifiers. Theoria, 32(3), 186-195.
Moxey, L. M., & Sanford, A. J. (1993). Prior expectations
and the interpretation of natural language. European
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5(1), 73-91.
Newstead, S. E., Pollard, P., & Riezebos, D. (1987). The
effect of set size on the interpretation of quantifiers used
in rating scales. Applied ergonomics, 18(3), 178-182.
Newstead, S., & Collis, J. M. (1987). Context and the
interpretation of quantifiers of frequency. Ergonomics,
30(10), 1447-1462.
O'Malley, S., & Besner, D. (2008). Reading aloud:
Qualitative differences in the relation between stimulus
quality and word frequency as a function of context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 34(6), 1400-1411.
Ragni, M., Eichhorn, C., Bock, T., Kern-Isberner, G., &
Tse, A. P. P. (2017). Formal Nonmonotonic Theories and
Properties of Human Defeasible Reasoning. Minds &
Machines, 27(1), 37-77.
Ragni, M., Singmann, H., & Steinlein, E. M. (2014). Theory
Comparison for Generalized Quantifiers. Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 1330-1335). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Segui, J., Mehler, J., Frauenfelder, U., & Morton, J. (1982).
The word frequency effect and lexical access.
Neuropsychologia, 20(6), 615-627.
Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical
theory of communication. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Szymanik, J., & Zajenkowski, M. (2013). Monotonicity has
only a relative effect on the complexity of quantifier
verification. Proceedings of the 19th Amsterdam
Colloquium, (pp. 219-225). Amsterdam.
Van Tiel, B., & Geurts, B. (2013). Truth and typicality in
the interpretation of quantifiers. Proceedings of Sinn und
Bedeutung 18, (pp. 451-468). Basque Country.
Zajenkowski, M., Szymanik, J., & Garraffa, M. (2014).
Working memory mechanism in proportional quantifier
verification. Journal of psycholinguistic research, 43(6),
839-853.

3385

