Interpreting actions by attributing compositional desires
Joey Velez-Ginorio1 (joeyv@mit.edu), Max Siegel1 (maxs@mit.edu), Joshua B. Tenenbaum1 (jbt@mit.edu),
& Julian Jara-Ettinger2 (julian.jara-ettinger@yale.edu)
1

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT. Cambridge, MA. 02139
2
Department of Psychology, Yale University. New Haven, CT . 06520

Abstract
We cannot see others’ mental states, so we infer them by
watching how people behave. Bayesian inference in a model of
rational action – called inverse planning – captures how
humans infer desires from observable actions. These models
represent desires as simple associations between agents and
world states. In this paper we show that by representing desires
as probabilistic programs, an inverse planning model can infer
complex desires underlying complex behaviors—desires with
temporal and logical structure, which can be fulfilled in
different ways. Our model, which combines basic desires via
logical primitives, is inspired by recent probabilistic grammarbased models of concept learning. Through an experiment
where we vary behaviors parametrically, we show that our
model predicts with high accuracy how people infer complex
desires. Our work sheds light on the representations underlying
mental states, and paves the way towards algorithms that can
reason about others’ minds as we do.
Keywords: social cognition; theory of mind; computational
modeling; Bayesian inference.

Introduction
As social creatures, humans routinely have to make sense
of what other people are doing, and we do so by appealing to
mental states such as beliefs, desires, and intentions. Because
we cannot see these internal mental states we need to infer
them by watching how people act.
Research into this capacity, called a Theory of Mind
(Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Dennett, 1989), suggests that
mental state inferences are driven by the assumption that
agents act efficiently, subject to constraints imposed by their
environment (Gergely & Csibra, 2003). If, for instance, an
agent takes a straight path towards a cookie jar, we can guess
that her goal is to get a cookie, even before she has reached
it. By contrast, if she gets there after wandering around for a
while, we may infer that she found it without having
deliberately searched.
In such scenarios, it makes sense to equate goals with
desires. But in more complex scenarios it is important to
distinguish between the two: a one-to-one correspondence
between desires and goals is rare. Consider, for instance, if
Bob wants to have breakfast. He can do this in several
different ways that each require a different plan: he can stay
home and prepare breakfast; he could go to the local café near
his house; or he could go to a coffee shop that is out of the
way. If he chooses to eat at the local café, he can show up and
request food. By contrast, if he chooses to cook, he may have
to go to the grocery store first and then go to his kitchen, in
that order. While Bob is at the grocery store, he may need to

buy coffee and milk, but the order in which he buys them does
not matter. Finally, before Bob has had breakfast, many states
of the world are rewarding (eating at the café or having a
scone at home, for example), but once he eats something, all
rewards associated with breakfast disappear.
These examples reveal three key properties of desires.
First, desires can often be fulfilled in more than one way. So
from an observer’s standpoint, goals cannot be equated with
desires. Second, desires can have logical and temporal
structure: they can be fulfilled in different ways (get tea or
coffee), they can break into subgoals (get coffee and milk),
and they can have temporal structure (go to the café and then
buy a scone). Finally, the logical and temporal structure of
desires interacts with the underlying rewards. If Bob is
thirsty, then both soda and water are rewarding. But once he’s
had one of them, the other loses its immediate appeal. If Bob
wants to exercise and then bathe before work, he has to do
them in that specific order; doing them in the wrong order
does not suffice. In other cases, the order does not matter, but
the reward is only achieved once all the necessary
prerequisites are fulfilled. If Bob likes his coffee with milk,
then having coffee and milk together is rewarding, but having
only one of them is not.
Computational models of mental-state attribution that
successfully explain human mental-state inferences assume a
relatively simplistic representation of desires: each desire can
only be fulfilled in one way, and it is fulfilled by reaching one
and only one physical state of the world (e.g. Baker et al.,
2017; Baker et al., 2012). This assumption implicitly blurs
together desires, intentions, goals, and physical states of the
world. As our examples show, this is overly limiting; people
may require conjunctions (A and B) or disjunctions of goals
(A or B), with temporal properties (A then B).
In this paper we develop a richer representation of desires,
and clarify the multiple computational levels that transform
desires into actions. To solve the representational challenges,
we draw on advances in concept learning that support
concepts of unbounded complexity (Piantadosi et al., 2012;
Goodman et al., 2008, 2014). To solve the inferential
challenges that arise with more sophisticated representations,
we draw on advances in mental-state attribution beyond goal
inference (Lucas et al., 2014; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016, under
review). In the remainder of the paper, we sketch out the
computational framework and we present an experiment
testing quantitative predictions of our model.

1284

(Fig 1b), her space of intentions is {get tea and then a scone;
get milk, coffee, and then a scone; and get coffee, milk, and
then a scone}.
To model how the agent selects an intention and transforms
it into an action plan, we rely on advances in commonsense
psychology that suggest that we interpret other people’s
behavior through the assumption that they act to maximize
their subjective utilities – the difference between the rewards
they obtain and the costs they incur (Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016,
under review; Lucas et al., 2014). This assumption operates
at two levels: given a space of intentions, the agent will
choose the one that maximizes her subjective utilities, and
given an intention, the agent will attempt to complete it as
efficiently as possible (for an agent to maximize utilities, they
must also minimize costs).

Figure 1. (a) schematic of the generative model. (b)
example of how an expression combines primitives and
objects to determine how to satisfy a desire. This
expression corresponds to an agent who first wants either
coffee and milk, or just tea, and then a scone afterwards.
The tree below shows the space of possible intentions that
can fulfill the desire.

Computational model
We take as a starting point the idea that social cognition is
supported by a probabilistic generative model that determines
how mental states lead to actions (Baker, et al., 2017). We
expand on this approach by building a more powerful
representation of desires, and how they relate to behavior.
Figure 1a shows the overall schematic of our model. We
argued that a realistic model of commonsense psychology
should distinguish between desires, goals, intentions, and
actions, and our model attempts to do so.
At the top level we place desires, which combine logical
(and/or) and temporal (then) primitives with simple goals
(such as arriving to certain physical locations). This approach
enables us to represent desires that directly map onto a single
goal (e.g. “go to get coffee”) as well as desires that can be
fulfilled in different ways (e.g. “eat breakfast first, and then
either get coffee and milk, or alternatively get tea”). This
representation is inspired and based on computational models
that combine logical primitives with unitary concepts to
explain the productivity and compositionality of conceptual
knowledge (Piantadosi et al., 2012; Goodman et al., 2008,
2014).
Following Goodman et al. (2008), we model the space of
desires with a probabilistic grammar, which builds arbitrarily
complex desires by composing simple ones. The grammar
implements production rules that recursively conjoin
primitives and units to yield desire expressions. We endow
the grammar with several primitives – And, Or, and Then –
but the framework is general. These primitives are motivated
by common-sense intuitions, but our primary goal is to
develop a framework for compositional desires, not to
identify the exact primitives that underlie goal-directed
behavior.
To connect desires to actions, we rely on an intermediate
representation of intentions (see Jara-Ettinger et al., under
review). Given a composite desire, our model derives the
space of intentions as the set of all ordered sequences of subgoals that satisfy it. For instance, if an agent desires to get
either coffee and milk, or just tea, and then a scone afterwards

Figure 2: Examples of the experimental stimuli. (a-b)
examples of stimuli that consist of a single event. (c)
example of stimuli that consists of two events.
To compute each intention’s utility, we rely on planning
algorithms developed in the robotics literature (Puterman,
2014) that have been successfully applied to model mentalstate attribution (Baker et al., 2009; 2017): Markov Decision
Processes (MDPs). Given a set of states, a set of actions, and
an underlying reward function, MDPs allow us to determine
the sequence of actions that an agent should take to fulfill her
goal as efficiently as possible. By using MDPs, we can
compute the expected cost of achieving each goal, and
define an intention’s utility as the reward gained by fulfilling
the desire minus the sum of the costs for achieving each goal
in the intention. Given each intention’s utility, we assume that
agents probabilistically select an intention:

1285

𝑝(𝐼) ∝ exp⁡(

𝑈(𝐼)
)
𝜏

(1)

Figure 3: Detailed results from the experiment. Each plot represents one trial from the experiment. The x-axis shows the
model’s top three hypotheses and the y-axis shows the z-scored prediction with participant judgments. Blue lines and dots
show model predictions and red lines and dots show participant judgments. Vertical bars show 95% confidence intervals. In
each plot, the schematic represents the paths the agent took in the event (see Figure 2 for examples of the actual stimuli).
where 𝜏 is a parameter that captures expectations about the
agent’s rationality. When 𝜏 is low, the agent invariably
selects the intention with the highest utility; as 𝜏 increases,
the agent is more likely to choose a suboptimal intention.
Finally, once the agent has selected an intention, we define
the action plan as the ordered sequence of goals along with
the motor programs that complete each goal (computed
through MDPs).

Inference in the generative model
We have specified a generative model for compositional
desires, intentions, and action plans. To recover a desire

given some observed actions, we use Bayesian inference to
invert the generative model. Given an observable set of
actions A, the posterior belief for each underlying desire D is
given by:
𝑝(𝐷|𝐴) ∝ 𝑙(𝐴|𝐷)𝑝(𝐷)

(2)

where the prior p(D) is set to favor simpler explanations using
a simple penalization for the length of the expression (as in
Goodman et al., 2008).
To compute the likelihood, l(A|D), we integrate over the
space of all possible intentions the agent could have:

1286

𝑙(𝐴|𝐷) =

∑

𝑝(𝐴|𝐼)𝑝(𝐼|𝐷)

(3)

𝐼∈𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

Both the probability of the intention given the desire (p(I|D)),
and the probability of the action, given the intention (p(A|I))
are computed through the assumption that agents act to
maximize their utilities—the difference between the
subjective reward for fulfilling their desires minus the cost
for fulfilling it. This expectation implies that agents are more
likely to act efficiently given their intention, but that they are
also more likely to select the intention that can fulfill the
desires with the overall lowest cost. We enumerate a set of
desires using breadth-first-search over the grammar, and then
approximate the posterior over that space using Bayesian
inference.

Simplicity prior alternative model
To better understand our model, we developed a simple
alternative that uses a deterministic likelihood function,
where the probability of a desire generating an action
(p(A|D)) is 1 if the action satisfies the desire and 0 otherwise.
This model continues to have much of the power of the full
model: it has access to rich representations of desires and the
prior over hypotheses creates a preference for simpler
explanations. Unlike the main model, this model is
insensitive to the intermediate representations of intentions,
as it does not account for how the agent chooses the intention
that will fulfill their desires.

Experiment
Design
To evaluate our model, we designed a simple task where
participants watched an agent’s behavior across one or two
days and were asked to determine their belief that the agent
had certain desires (see Figure 2).

Methods
Participants 33 participants, mean age (SD) = 32.13 years
(9.38 years), range = 20-61 years from the US (as determined
by their IP address) were recruited using Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk Framework.
Stimuli
Figure 2 shows an example of the stimuli. Stimuli consisted
of 19 two-dimensional images of an agent traveling to one or
more of three potential static locations. Eight of these trials
consisted of a single event and the remaining 11 consisted of
two events. The one event trials were built by designing all
possible efficient paths agents could take to reach between 1
and 3 of the locations and removing equivalent paths (i.e.
identical under a rotation or reflection of the map).
Trials with two events were built by first creating a set
including possible efficient paths between 1 and 2 of the

Figure 4. Comparison between our model (simplicity &
efficiency) and the alternative model (prior only). Each dot
represents a judgment of a hypothesis for a given trial. The
x-axis shows the model’s prediction and the y-axis shows
participant judgments.
locations, omitting paths between 3 locations to prevent the
stimuli set from growing too large. In contrast to the single
event set, we keep the equivalent paths, as they become
necessary to construct the most primitive desires occurring
over two events e.g. (A or B). This creates a base set of 9
paths. To generate the trials with two events, we first split the
9 paths into two classes, one for paths that go to only one
location (3 paths) and another for paths that go to two
locations (6 paths). For each class we compute the cartesian
product of itself, and after removing duplicate pairs of stimuli
in each class, (e.g. A,B = B,A), this provided a set of 27 two
event trials. From that set, events that violated the principle
of rational action were removed (10 trials). Additionally, if a
trial with repeated events was the reflection or rotation of
another trial with two events, it was removed (5 trials); e.g.
between (A,A) and (C,C), we kept (A,A). Last, trials with two
events were removed if only one possible hypothesis could
explain the trials (2 trials), these trials trials impact our ability
to get graded responses on alternative plausible hypotheses
(an ideal trial would have more than one plausible
explanation, to determine if the model captures the same
graded measure humans have for alternatives). For example,
if the agent only goes to the farthest location on event 1 and
2, it's clear the only compatible hypothesis is that the agent
wants to go that location. As an exception, we included one
of these cases in the final set, just to show that the model was
capable of inferring the only plausible hypothesis. After
filtering the original 27 two event stimuli, 11 remained. These
11 plus the 8 one event trials result in the 19 stimuli used in
the experiment.
Procedure
Participants first read a tutorial that explained the logic of the
task. Participants then completed a short survey that ensured
they had read the instructions, and the test phase followed
immediately after.
During the test phase, participants completed 19 trials. In
each trial participants saw the stimuli on the left side, and
they were asked to rate their belief that the agent had each of
three different desires. Each desire was rated on a scale from
0-10 for each, with 0 indicating “Definitely not”; 5 “Maybe”;

1287

and 10 “Definitely.” The three desires were obtained by
selecting the three hypotheses with the highest posterior
distribution according to the model. In order to present these
hypotheses to participants, we translated the description from
the model into descriptions in English. To ensure their
accuracy, two coders blind to the original hypotheses backtranslated the descriptions into the model’s original
representations. The two coders showed 100% agreement and
recovered the correct model hypothesis in all trials.

right location), and then travels diagonally to the bottom right
location. Our full model gives a high probability to the desire
that the agent wanted to visit those two locations in that
specific order (A then C), an average probability to the desire
that she could have wanted to visit the locations in any order
(A and C), and a low probability to the desire that the agent
wanted to visit either A or B first, then C ((A or B) then C).
Although all hypotheses explain the actions, our model is
sensitive to the probability that each desire would generate
the observed actions relative to competing ways to fulfill the
same desire (driving the difference between the first and
second hypotheses) and to the baseline complexity of the
desires (driving the difference between the second and third
hypotheses). That is, our model recognizes that there are two
equally good intentions that fulfill the desire “A and C” (A
and then C, or C and then A), but only one that fulfills the
ordered desire “A then C” (A and then C). This makes our
model favor the ordered explanation, as participants do (see
Figure 5). This is not captured in the prior only model, as it
is only sensitive to expression complexity. These results
show how people are both sensitive to the likelihood that a
desire would generate the observed actions, and to the
complexity of the ascribed desire. Figure 6 shows how this
failure becomes even stronger in the case where participants
watch the agent behave identically across two events.

Discussion

Figure 5. Detailed results one of the trials. The top left plot
shows the schematic of the stimuli we used. The top right
plot shows participant judgments (z-scored); the bottom
two plots show the predictions of the full model and the
alternative model (z-scored). This example illustrates how,
by removing the probabilistic nature of the likelihood
function, the model loses sensitivity to variability in
participant judgments.

Results
Figure 3 shows the results from the experiment.
Qualitatively, our model fit participant judgments well. Our
model predictions showed a correlation of r=0.92 with
participant judgments (95% CI: 0.86-0.95). See Figure 4. By
contrast, the alternative model (prior only) showed a weaker
correlation (r=0.80; 95% CI: 0.69 -0.88). A bootstrap over the
correlation difference showed that the full model performed
reliably better than the alternative model (correlation
difference = 0.11; 95% CI: 0.009-0.18).
Figure 5 shows the detailed results of a single trial that
illustrates how the alternative model with a deterministic
likelihood function fails to capture participant judgments. In
this trial the agent begins by going to the top left location
(which is one of the closest ones, together with the bottom

Here we presented a formal model of action understanding
that represents desires as composite entities sampled from a
probabilistic context free grammar. Desires get transformed
into intentions and then into action plans by the assumption
that agents act to maximize their utilities. By performing
Bayesian inference over this generative model, we showed
how we can capture desires that have rich logical and
temporal structure, as well as enabling us to represent desires
that can be fulfilled in more than one way. We tested our
model by comparing its inferences with those made by human
participants, finding that it closely mirrors their judgments,
and that an alternative model is less successful.
Our model shows that combinations of primitives and
objects using a probabilistic context free grammar supports
rich representations of desires in Theory of Mind. The
primitives, composing over objects, generate structured
desires that capture temporal and logical structure.
Our goal was to develop a more nuanced representation of
desires, and the framework we propose works for any
arbitrary set of primitives and objects. To test our model, we
focused on three specific primitives: And, Or, and Then. Our
results do not imply that these are the only primitives people
use when they reason about others’ desires, or even that they
are central in action-understanding. Other primitives such as
If, Any, and Not, are likely also at play when we reason about
other people’s behavior. More research is needed to
characterize the primitives we use in action-understanding,
and their developmental origins.
To characterize desire complexity, we used a simple prior

1288

that penalized the length of the expression (based on
Goodman et al., 2008). Although this is a useful
approximation, different primitives may have different priors
which capture both their conceptual complexity and the
extent to which they are useful in explaining behavior. Future
work may attempt to uncover primitive-specific priors and
the forces that shape these priors.

light on how we learn about the world by watching more
competent agents (see also Jara-Ettinger, Baker &
Tenenbaum, 2012).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Simons Center for the Social
Brain. This material is based upon work supported by the
Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines (CBMM), funded by
NSF-STC award CCF-1231216.

References

Figure 6. Results from the trial where participants watch two
repeated events. While the prior only model continues to
make the same predictions, both participants and our model
have a stronger belief that the order mattered, in comparison
to the trial with a single event (Figure 5)
In our current work, we focused specifically on desires and
we assumed that the agents had full knowledge about the
environment. In more realistic cases, agents can be uncertain,
ignorant, or wrong about the world, and people’s reasoning
about others is sensitive to this fact (Baker et al., 2017;
Kovács, Téglás, & Endress, 2010). Our grammatical
approach to desires may also support more structured
representations about beliefs. Intuitively, people’s beliefs are
often structured logically (e.g. my laptop is in my backpack
or at home; she thinks he is hungry and tired). In future work
we will investigate the power and limitations of applying this
approach to the representations of beliefs, and to the
interaction of beliefs and desires.
Although in our work we focused on these representations
as applying to desires, these desires often inherit their
structure from how the world works. If Bob wants to shoot a
water gun, he needs to pour water into the tank first, then
pump air into valve, and then press the trigger, in that order.
The fact that Bob’s desire takes this structure is a reflection
of how water guns work. This opens the possibility that,
through the ability to reason about other people’s desires, we
may simultaneously learn procedural knowledge about how
to make changes to the world. As such, our model may shed

Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3).
Baker, C. L., Jara-Ettinger J., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B.
(2017). Rational quantitative attribution of beliefs,
desires, and percepts in human mentalizing. Nature
Human Behavior
Dennett, D. C. (1989). The intentional stance. MIT press.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning in
infancy: The naıve theory of rational action. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 7(7), 287-292.
Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., Feldman, J., & Griffiths,
T. L. (2008). A Rational Analysis of Rule‐Based Concept
Learning. Cognitive Science, 32(1), 108-154.
Goodman, N. D., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gerstenberg, T.
(2014). Concepts in a probabilistic language of thought.
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM).
Gopnik, A., Meltzoff, A. N., & Bryant, P. (1997). Words,
thoughts, and theories (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: Mit Press.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Schulz, L. E., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (under
review). The naïve utility calculus as a rational,
quantitative foundation of action understanding.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Baker, C. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012).
Learning What is Where from Social Observations.
In CogSci.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Schulz, L. E., & Tenenbaum, J.
B. (2016). The naïve utility calculus: computational
principles underlying commonsense psychology. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 20(8), 589-604.
Kovács, Á. M., Téglás, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010). The
social sense: Susceptibility to others’ beliefs in human
infants and adults. Science, 330(6012), 1830-1834.
Lucas, C. G., Griffiths, T. L., Xu, F., Fawcett, C., Gopnik, A.,
Kushnir, T., ... & Hu, J. (2014). The child as
econometrician: A rational model of preference
understanding in children. PloS one, 9(3), e92160.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Goodman, N. D.
(2012). Bootstrapping in a language of thought: A formal
model of numerical concept learning. Cognition, 123(2).
Puterman, M. L. (2014). Markov decision processes: discrete
stochastic dynamic programming. John Wiley & Sons.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman,
N. D. (2011). How to grow a mind: Statistics, structure, and
abstraction. Science, 331(6022), 1279-1285.

1289

