Is Structural Priming in Children Facilitated by Interactions between Animacy and
Syntax?
Leone Buckle (leone.buckle@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk)
ESRC International Centre for Language and Communicative Development (LuCiD),
Coupland 1, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL

Anna Theakston (anna.theakston@manchester.ac.uk)
ESRC International Centre for Language and Communicative Development (LuCiD),
Coupland 1, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL

Elena Lieven (elena.lieven@manchester.ac.uk)
ESRC International Centre for Language and Communicative Development (LuCiD),
Coupland 1, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PL
Abstract
Sentence production relies on the activation of both semantic
information (e.g. noun animacy) and syntactic frames that
specify an order for grammatical functions (e.g. subject
before object; Levelt, Roelofs & Meyers, 1999). However, it
is unclear whether these semantic and syntactic processes
interact (Gámez & Vasilyeva, 2015), and if this changes
developmentally. We thus examined the extent to which
animacy-semantic role mappings in dative prime sentences
and target scenes influenced choice of syntactic structure. 143
participants (47 three year olds, 48 five year olds and 48
adults) alternated with the experimenter in describing
animations. Animacy mappings for themes and goals were
either prototypical or non-prototypical and either matched or
mismatched across the experimenter’s prime scenes and
participants’ target elicitation scenes. Prime sentences were
either double-object datives (e.g. the girl brought the monkey
a ball) or prepositional datives (e.g. the girl brought the ball
to the monkey). Participants’ target sentences were coded for
syntactic form. All age groups showed a main structural
priming effect. For the youngest group, animacy-semantic
role mappings facilitated prepositional dative priming. No
animacy facilitation was found for the older groups. Our
results demonstrate the changing influence of animacy cues
on sentence production through interactions with syntactic
structure over the course of development. The theoretical
implications of our findings are discussed.
Keywords: structural priming;
production; semantics; syntax.

animacy;

language

Introduction
In order to communicate ideas, speakers must map concepts
to syntactic structures. Where one idea can be expressed
using multiple structures, speakers tend to use the most
recently heard structure (Bock, 1986). For example,
structural priming occurs where speakers are more likely to
describe the transfer of a ball between a girl and a monkey
using the double-object dative (DOD) sentence the girl
brought the monkey a ball instead of the prepositional dative

(PD) structure the girl brought a ball to the monkey,
following a DOD, rather than a PD prime. This occurs in
children (Rowland, Chang, Ambridge, Pine & Lieven,
2012) and adults (Bock, 1986).
In their residual activation theory, Pickering and Branigan
(1998) argue that abstract representations of verbs,
grammatical roles (e.g. direct object) and combinatorial
notes are activated upon hearing a DOD sentence (i.e. NPNP). Structural priming occurs where speakers reuse the
currently activated NP-NP node to produce another DOD
construction rather than activating the alternative NPprepositional phrase (PP) node to produce a PD sentence.
The residual activation theory cannot, however, account
for instances where structural priming is enhanced by
animacy-syntax interactions. Gámez and Vasilyeva (2015)
found that priming of passive sentences in children was
greatest where primes and targets both contained animate
patients and inanimate agents. For datives, animacy may
interact with semantic role-grammatical function mappings
(e.g. theme-direct object), before these mapped constituents
are ordered, to determine syntactic structures (de Swart,
Lamers & Lestrade, 2008). Prototypical DOD sentences
contain animate goals before animate themes, whereas
prototypical PD sentences feature inanimate themes before
animate goals (Bresnan, Cueni, Nikitina & Baayen, 2007).
Demuth, Machobane, Maloi and Odato (2005) found that
children best understood double object applicatives in
Sesotho where they contained human, rather than inanimate,
benefactives before inanimate, as opposed to animate,
themes. These studies suggest that structural and semantic
information may be inseparable and represented at varying
levels of granularity (Ambridge, Kidd, Rowland &
Theakston, 2015).
However, methodological problems with structural
priming studies have made it unclear whether animacysyntax interactions could drive priming effects (Chang,
Bock & Goldberg, 2003). DOD sentences (e.g. the girl
brought the monkey a ball) may prime participants to repeat
the abstract syntactic frame and produce DOD targets.
Alternatively, they may prime speakers to reuse the

1691

animate-inanimate noun ordering, leading them to produce
PD sentences where targets contain animate themes and
inanimate goals (e.g. the boy brought the tiger to the zoo).
Studies manipulating both prime and target animacy cues
are needed to identify whether semantic processes influence
structural priming (Goldwater, Tomlinson, Echols & Love
(2010).
Priming could be greater with semantically prototypical
primes (e.g. Vasilyeva & Waterfall, 2015). Alternatively,
priming might be greater with non-prototypical primes
because they are more salient, according to Chang, Dell and
Bock’s (2006) error-based learning theory. Error-based
learning effects may decrease with age due to increased
exposure to uncommon sentence types (Peter, Chang, Pine,
Blything & Rowland (2015). Priming is greater in children
(Goldwater, et al., 2010) and adults (Cleland and Pickering,
2003) where primes and targets are semantically similar.
Sensitivity to animacy and its effects on structural priming
may also decrease with age (Corrigan, 1988).
Priming research may provide insight into how children
extract representations of grammatical functions and
animacy-semantic role mappings from caregiver speech to
produce their own sentences (Bock, Dell, Chang & Onishi,
2007; Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). By investigating possible
specification of semantic, and not just lexical, information
in children’s sentence representations, we can more
accurately conclude whether or not representations are
entirely abstract (Rowland & Noble, 2010).
We assessed the extent to which structural priming in
three year olds, five year olds and adults was influenced by
interactions between animacy cues and syntax by
manipulating prime structures (DOD/PD), prime animacysemantic role mappings (prototypical [AN goal & IN
theme]/non-prototypical [AN theme & IN theme]), and
prime-target match in animacy-semantic role mappings
(match/mismatch).
Prior research implies relatively strong interactions
between animacy and syntax and that these effects on
sentence processing are greater in younger children than in
older children and adults. Thus, we tested the following
hypotheses: (i) structural priming effects will be greater
where primes have prototypical animacy cues.
Alternatively, error-based learning may entail greater
priming with reversed cues, (ii) priming will be greater
where primes and targets have matching animacy-semantic
role mappings, (iii) the relative increase in priming where
animacy-semantic role mappings are prototypical and
matching across primes and target pairs will decrease with
age.

independent variables. Prime animacy-semantic role
mappings (prototypical [AN goal & IN theme]/ nonprototypical [AN theme & IN goal] and prime-target match
in animacy-semantic role mappings (match/mismatch) were
within-subjects independent variables. The production of
DOD target responses was our dependent variable.

Participants
We tested 143 monolingual British English speakers; 47
three year olds (24 females), 48 five year olds (25 females),
and 48 adults (35 females). One three year old was excluded
for their failure to produce any dative sentences.

Visual Stimuli
Sixty-eight 10-second animations were created in Anime
Studio Pro 10 and presented on a laptop using Microsoft
PowerPoint. Forty-eight (24 for primes and 24 for targets)
portrayed ditransitive events (e.g. a girl bringing a monkey a
ball). Twenty depicted intransitive events featuring two
characters simultaneously acting in the centre of the screen
(e.g. a boy and girl jumping). Eight of these were used as
practice scenes (four each for the experimenter and
participant) and 12 were used as fillers (six each).

Sentence Stimuli
Eighty- two sentences were created as descriptions for the
68 animations. These included:
• Practice Items (4): Intransitive sentences for the
experimenter’s turn in practice trials to introduce
participants to the task.
• Fillers (6): Present-tense intransitive sentences for the
experimenter’s turn in filler trials to limit priming
effects across prime-target pairs.
• Primes (48): Past tense dative sentences which included
24 DOD and 24 PD counterparts corresponding to the
24 prime scenes. Six different prime sentences were
assigned to each of the four experimental conditions.
• Targets (24): Six different verbs were included in
sentence initiations for target sentences (e.g. the boy
brought). Primes and targets always contained the same
verb and participants completed these sentence
initiations to produce the full target sentence. See Table
1 for example prime sentences and target elicitation
scenes.

Procedure

Method
Design
We used a 3x2x2x2 mixed design. Age (3 years/5
years/adults) and prime structure (double-object dative
[DOD]/prepositional dative [PD]) were between-subject

The experimenter played the animations on a laptop,
beginning with four practice-practice trials, followed by
alternating prime-target and filler-filler trials. She described
the first scene and produced the first sentence in each pair,
producing all primes and participants described the second
scene in each pair, including all targets. On target trials, the

1692

experimenter produced initial sentence initiations (e.g. the
girl brought…) to encourage participants’ use of datives.
Participants formed their own target structures as they
finished the sentence (e.g. the monkey a ball or the ball to
the monkey). Adult participants often produced entire target
sentences including the initial subject and verb.
Table 1: Example prime sentences and target elicitation
scenes for each condition

Condition

DOD Prime

PD Prime

Target
Elicitation
Scene

Prototypical
Prime
(AN goal &
IN theme) /
Matched
Target

The girl
brought the
monkey a
ball

The girl
brought a
ball to the
monkey

Transfer of a
flower from
boy to a snail

Prototypical
Prime
(AN goal &
IN theme) /
Mismatched
Target

The girl
The girl
brought a
brought the
flower to
bee a flower
the bee

Transfer of a
monkey from
a boy to a zoo

Nonprototypical
Prime
(AN theme &
IN goal) /
Matched
Target

The girl
brought the
zoo a tiger

The girl
brought a
tiger to the
zoo

Transfer of a
bee from a
boy to a zoo

Nonprototypical
Prime
(AN theme &
IN goal) /
Mismatched
Target

The girl
brought the
garden a
snail

The girl
brought a
snail to the
garden

Transfer of a
ball between
a boy and a
tiger

PD: sentences with a theme – preposition - goal structure
(e.g. the boy brought a tiger for the monkey). Both to and
for were suitable prepositions.
OTHER: Such responses were excluded from the analyses
and included:
1. Sentences without a DOD or PD structure (e.g.
intransitive and/or incomplete sentences with only one
noun such as the boy threw the whale, or locatives
such as the boy threw the way into the sea).
2. Incomplete sentences with one object and a preposition
but no second object (e.g. the boy threw the food to)
3. Sentences where nouns were assigned to the wrong
semantic role (e.g. the boy brought the ball [goal] a
tiger [theme], where the target scene actually showed
the transfer of a ball [theme] between a boy and tiger
[goal]. A misunderstanding of the target scene may
influence target structures where animacy cues might
interact with syntactic structures.
4. Sentences with incorrectly named nouns, indicating
participant’s misunderstanding of the event shown in
the target scene (e.g. the boy brought the zoo/mouse a
ball instead of the boy brought the tiger a ball).
The percentage of OTHER target responses was 38% in
three year olds, 28% in five year olds and 27% in adults.
This is to be expected because although our events involved
three participants, it is perfectly acceptable to focus on only
a subset of these in a linguistic description of the scenes.

Results

Coding
Target responses were coded for syntactic structure (doubleobject dative [DOD], prepositional dative [PD] and
OTHER). Only DOD and PD target sentences were included
in the analyses.
DOD: sentences with a goal – theme structure (e.g. the boy
brought the tiger a ball).

The data were analysed using logistic mixed effects models
in R, using the glmer function of the lme4 package (lme4
version 1.1-11: R Core Team 2012). Fixed effects for all
final models included: age (3 years = -1; 5 years = 0; adult =
1), prime animacy-semantic role mappings (prototypical
[AN theme – IN goal] = 1; non-prototypical [IN theme –
AN goal] = 0) and prime-target match in animacy-semantic
role mappings (match = 1; mismatch = 0). All variables
were centred to reduce multicollinearity (Neter, Wasserman
& Kuttner, 1985). Participant was always included as a
random effect. Sentence item was excluded as a random
effect and the analyses were separated by age since the
model initially fitted to the full data set did not converge.
For each individual age group, the Bonferroni method was
used with a corrected alpha level of .025 for post-hoc
analyses. The mean proportion of DOD target responses
produced in each condition is shown in Figure 1.

Age Three
The model initially contained only main effects of prime
structure, prime animacy-semantic role mappings and
prime-target match, but was significantly improved by
adding a three-way interaction term and all the two-way
interaction terms that are derived from it (p = .03). We
found a significant main effect of prime structure whereby

1693

more DOD targets were produced following DOD (M =
0.27, SE = 0.02) as opposed to PD primes (M = 0.06, SE =
0.01) and a significant three-way interaction between prime
structure, prime animacy-semantic role mappings and
prime-target match.
To interpret the three-way interaction a model was fitted
for each level of prime structure (DOD and PD). Analysis of
DOD primes failed to reveal any significant effect for prime
animacy-semantic role mappings, β = 0.20 (SE = 0.31), z =
0.65, p = .518, prime-target match, β = -0.12 (SE = 0.31), z
= -0.40, p = .688, or the interaction between the variables,
β = 0.61 (SE = 0.61), z = 1.02, p = .31. Analysis of PD
primes, however, revealed a significant two-way interaction
between prime animacy-semantic role mappings and primetarget match, β = 3.89 (SE = 1.39), z = 2.81, p = .005.
Two further models were run for PD primes, one for each
level of animacy-semantic role mapping (prototypical [AN
goal & IN theme]/non-prototypical [AN theme & IN goal]).
Where PD primes featured non-prototypical animacysemantic role mappings, there was a marginally significant
effect of prime-target match, β = -2.33 (SE = 1.07), z = 2.19, p = .029. Fewer DOD responses were produced where
targets contained matched (non-prototypical) animacysemantic role mappings (M = 0.01, SE = 0.03) as opposed to
mismatched (prototypical) animacy-semantic role mappings
(M = 0.11, SE = 0.03). However, where PD primes
contained prototypical animacy-semantic role mappings
there was no significant effect of prime-target match, β =
1.47 (SE = 0.85), z = 1.73, p = .08.

mismatched (prototypical; (M = 0.09, SE = 0.03) animacysemantic role mappings.

Age Five

Adults

The model originally featured only main effects but was
significantly improved by adding two-way interaction terms
between the variables (p = .007). There was a significant
main effect of prime structure whereby more DOD targets
were produced following DOD (M = 0.30, SE = 0.02) as
opposed to PD primes (M = 0.02, SE = 0.01) and a
significant two-way interaction between prime animacysemantic role mapping and prime-target match β = 1.15 (SE
= 0.51), z = 2.28, p = .002.
To interpret the two-way interaction, a model was fitted
for each level of prime animacy-semantic role mapping
(prototypical [AN goal & IN theme]/non-prototypical [AN
theme & IN goal]). For prototypical prime animacysemantic role mappings there was a significant effect of
prime-target match, β = 0.83 (SE = 0.35), z = 2.35, p = .018.
DOD production was higher where targets featured matched
(prototypical; M = 0.18, SE = 0.02) as opposed to
mismatched (non-prototypical; M = 0.09, SE = 0.02)
animacy-semantic role mappings. However, where primes
contained non-prototypical animacy-semantic role mappings
there was no effect of prime-target match, β = -0.48 (SE =
0.36), z = -1.35 p = .177. There was no difference in the
production of DOD targets where targets featured matched
(non-prototypical; M = 0.14, SE = 0.03) as compared with

Figure 1: The mean proportion of DOD responses following
DOD and PD primes where primes contained either
prototypical or non-prototypical animacy-semantic role
mappings and these mappings were either matched or
mismatched across primes and targets (SE in error bars).

The model originally featured only main effects but was
significantly improved by adding two-way interaction terms
between the variables (p < .001). We found a significant
effect of prime structure with more DOD targets produced
following DOD (M = 0.64, SE = 0.02) than PD primes (M =
0.07, SE = 0.12) and a significant two-way interaction
between prime animacy-semantic role mapping and primetarget match.
To interpret the two-way interaction a model was fitted
for each level of prime animacy-semantic role mapping
(prototypical [AN goal & IN theme]/non-prototypical [AN
theme & IN goal]). For primes with prototypical animacysematic role mappings we found a significant effect of
prime-target match, β = 2.608 (SE = 0.51), z = 5.09, p <
.001. DOD production was higher where targets featured
matched (prototypical; M = 0.43, SE = 0.03) as opposed to
mismatched (non-prototypical; (M = 0.25, SE = 0.03)
animacy-semantic role mappings. Where primes contained
non-prototypical animacy-semantic role mappings, there
was also a significant effect of prime-target match β = -1.33
(SE = 0.43), z = -3.12, p < .001. Fewer DOD responses were
produced where targets contained matched (nonprototypical; M = 0.30, SE = 0.03) as opposed to
mismatched (prototypical; (M = 0.40, SE = 0.03) animacysemantic role mappings.

1694

Results Summary
All age groups showed an effect of structural priming,
producing more DOD responses following DOD primes, as
compared to PD primes. Three year olds also exhibited
effects of animacy-semantic role mappings on the
magnitude of structural priming, showing an increase in PD
sentence priming effects where primes and targets contained
matching non-prototypical mappings (AN theme & IN goal)
(although no effects were observed for DOD primes). Our
hypothesis that priming would be greater with prime-target
match was met, indicating that animacy mappings were
represented to a relatively strong degree. However, priming
increased with non-prototypical rather than prototypical
primes providing support for error-based learning accounts.
As expected, animacy effects decreased with age; they had
no influence on structural priming in five year olds or
adults. Nevertheless, animacy did influence DOD target
production in five year olds and adults, independently of
prime structure. They produced more DOD sentences where
targets (and also primes in the case of five year olds)
contained prototypical animacy-semantic role mappings
(AN goal & IN theme).

Discussion
Our results support claims of structural priming effects in
children (Rowland et al., 2012) and adults (Bock, 1986) and
more importantly, they provide further clarification as to
how structural priming works. Our results reveal that
priming relies, first and foremost, on the repetition of
abstract syntactic frames and not the repetition of animacy
noun orders. This was previously unclear due to
methodological issues with earlier research (Chang, Bock &
Goldberg, 2003). Non-prototypical (AN theme & IN goal)
DOD primes with an inanimate-animate noun order (e.g. the
girl brought the zoo a monkey) were just as likely to yield
DOD targets as prototypical (AN goal & IN theme) DOD
primes with an animate-inanimate noun order (e.g. the girl
brought the monkey a ball). Mere repetition of animacy
noun ordering would have resulted in more prototypical PD
targets with an inanimate-animate noun order (e.g. the girl
brought the flower to the snail) following non-prototypical
DOD targets. All age groups showed a main structural
priming effect, suggesting that children’s linguistic
representations do not need to specify animacy-semantic
role mappings for priming to occur.
PD sentence priming was enhanced in three year olds
where there was prime-target match in non-prototypical
(AN theme & IN goal) animacy-semantic role mappings.
This is consistent with Gámez and Vasilyeva’s (2015)
finding that prime-target match increased priming in five
and six year olds. Our results are thus at odds with Pickering
and Branigan’s (1998) residual activation theory as it cannot
explain how semantic information could influence structural
priming. We found that animacy-semantic role mappings
were specified and represented to a relatively strong degree
and could influence priming through error-based learning in

support of Chang, et al (2006). We suggest that error-based
learning may have been less likely to occur following DOD
primes as three year olds generally use fewer DOD than PD
constructions (Rowland, et al., 2012). They might not have
been sensitive enough to the typical animacy mappings in
DOD sentences for surprisal priming effects to occur.
Five year olds and adults showed no evidence of
increased priming where primes contained non-prototypical
(AN theme & IN goal), as opposed to prototypical (AN goal
& IN theme) animacy-semantic role mappings. This
developmental decrease in error-based learning may be due
to increased exposure to such lower frequency sentence
types and is consistent with Rowland, et al., (2012) and
Peter, et al.’s (2015) results. Our results also complement
those of Corrigan (1988) who found animacy effects on
children’s sentence interpretations to decrease with age.
Nevertheless, five year olds and adults produced more
DOD targets where targets (and also primes for five year
olds) contained prototypical (AN goal & IN theme)
mappings, regardless of prime structure. This indicates a
preference to use animate goals and inanimate themes in
DOD as opposed to PD constructions. These data therefore
support claims that animacy interacts with semantic rolegrammatical function mappings and can influence
subsequent word order (Zorzi & Vigliocco, 1999; Goldberg,
1995; Garrett, 1975). Animate goals tended to be realised
as indirect objects more than as oblique objects and were
often placed before inanimate theme-direct objects, resulting
in DOD constructions (e.g. brought the monkey [animate
goal] a ball [inanimate theme]).
Speakers’ tendency to encode animate goals and
inanimate themes in DOD constructions increased with age.
Very small surprisal effects may have moderated five year
olds’ DOD production. Non-prototypical (AN theme & IN
goal) PD primes may have subtly increased PD sentence
priming through error-based learning. Non-prototypical
DOD primes may have sometimes primed participants to
reuse noun animacy orders in prototypical PD constructions.
E.g. the DOD prime the girl brought the zoo [inanimate] a
monkey [animate] could have prompted the PD response the
boy brought the ball [inanimate] to the tiger [animate]).
We should however, also seek to clarify whether animacy
could influence word orders in sentence production
independently of syntax and/or grammatical roles. Bock,
Loebell and Morey (1992) provide evidence to suggest that
this is possible. Following primes with animate subjects
before inanimate objects, participants were more likely to
produce targets with the same noun animacy order than an
inanimate subject-animate object order. It did not matter
whether subjects were agents or patients of active or passive
sentences. Little research has been conducted to address this
topic in adults and it is yet to be explored in children.

Conclusion
In our study animacy-syntax interactions appeared to
facilitate structural priming in young children but this effect
was subject to a developmental decrease. The extent to

1695

which animacy-semantic role mappings could influence
speakers’ choice of syntactic structure independent of
structural priming, rather increased with age. Animacysyntax interactions can therefore influence sentence
production. We consequently propose that theories of
structural priming and sentence production in general should
seek to consider the role of animacy-syntax interactions.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC) North West Doctoral Training Centre
(NWDTC) 1+3 PhD award, grant number: 1512180
(Buckle) and was additionally supported by The University
of Manchester President’s Doctoral Scholar Scheme
(Buckle, PhD). Professors Elena Lieven and Anna
Theakston are supported by the ESRC Centre for Language
and Communicative Development (LuCiD, ESRC grant
number: ES/L008955/1).

References
Ambridge, B., Kidd, E., Rowland, C. & Theakston, A.
(2015). The ubiquity of frequency effects in first
language. Journal of Child Language, 42(2), 239-273.
Bock, J. K. (1986). Meaning, sound, and syntax: Lexical
priming in sentence production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12(4),
575.
Bock, K., Dell, G. S., Chang, F., & Onishi, K. H. (2007).
Persistent
structural
priming
from
language
comprehension to language production. Cognition,
104(3), 437-458.
Bock, K., Loebell, H., & Morey, R. (1992). From
conceptual roles to structural relations: bridging the
syntactic cleft. Psychological review, 99(1), 150.
Bresnan, J., Cueni, A., Nikitina, T., & Baayen, R. H. (2007).
Predicting the dative alternation. Cognitive foundations of
interpretation, 69-94.
Chang, F., Bock, K., & Goldberg, A. E. (2003). Can
thematic roles leave traces of their places?. Cognition,
90(1), 29-49
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological review, 113(2), 234.
Cleland, A. A., & Pickering, M. J. (2003). The use of lexical
and syntactic information in language production:
Evidence
from
the
priming
of
noun-phrase
structure. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(2), 214230.
Corrigan, R. (1988). Children's identification of actors and
patients in prototypical and nonprototypical sentence
types. Cognitive Development, 3, 285–297.
de Swart, P., Lamers, M., & Lestrade, S. (2008). Animacy,
argument structure, and argument encoding. Lingua,
118(2), 131-140.

Demuth, K., Machobane, M., Moloi, F., & Odato, C.
(2005). Learning animacy hierarchy effects in Sesotho
double object applicatives. Language, 421-447.
Gámez, P. B., & Vasilyeva, M. (2015). Exploring
interactions between semantic and syntactic processes:
The role of animacy in syntactic priming. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 138, 15-30.
Garrett, M.F. (1975). The analysis of sentence production.
In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning
motivation. New York: Academic Press.
Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: a construction
grammar approach to argument structure. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Goldwater, M. B., Tomlinson, M. T., Echols, C. H., &
Love, B. C. (2011). Structural priming as structure
Mapping: Children use analogies from previous
utterances to guide sentence production. Cognitive
Science, 35(1), 156-170.
Levelt, W. J., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory
of lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and
brain sciences, 22(01), 1-38.
Neter, J., Wasserman, W., & Kutner, M. H. (1985). Applied
linear statistical methods. Richard D. Irwin. Inc.,
Homewood, IL.
Peter, M., Chang, F., Pine, J. M., Blything, R., & Rowland,
C. F. (2015). When and how do children develop
knowledge of verb argument structure? Evidence from
verb bias effects in a structural priming task. Journal of
Memory and Language, 81, 1-15.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The
representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming
in language production. Journal of Memory and
Language, 39(4), 633-651.
Pickering, M. J., & Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Structural
priming: a critical review. Psychological bulletin, 134(3),
427.
R Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. 3-900051-07-0. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing
Rowland, C. F., & Noble, C. L. (2010). The role of syntactic
structure in children's sentence comprehension: Evidence
from the dative. Language Learning and Development,
7(1), 55-75.
Rowland, C. F., Chang, F., Ambridge, B., Pine, J. M., &
Lieven, E. V. (2012). The development of abstract syntax:
Evidence from structural priming and the lexical boost.
Cognition, 125(1), 49-63.
Zorzi, M., & Vigliocco, G. (1999). Compositional semantics
and the lemma dilemma. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
22(01), 60-6

1696

