Iterated Teaching Can Optimise Language Functionality
Vera Kempe (v.kempe@abertay.ac.uk), Kamil Cichon (1301137@abertay.ac.uk)
University of Abertay, Dundee, Scotland

Nicolas Gauvrit (ngauvrit@me.com)
Université Paris 8 & École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris, France

Monica Tamariz (m.tamariz@hw.ac.uk)
Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, Scotland
Abstract

operate on observational learning drive the emergence of
structural features like learnability, expressivity (i.e. lack of
ambiguity), combinatorial and compositional structure, that
support effective communication (Kirby, Cornish and
Smith, 2008; Kirby, Tamariz, Cornish & Smith; 2015;
Verhoef, Kirby & de Boer, 2014). These studies use the
iterated language learning method whereby the result of
learning in one generation of learners serves as input for the
next generation. The picture that emerges from these studies
is that cognitive capacity constraints in human learners
promote compressibility of individual signals and entire
languages, and that the requirements of efficient
communication drive languages to be expressive. In tandem,
these constraints – the need for transmission efficiency and
for referential efficiency – lead to emergence of
combinatorial linguistic structure, i.e. systematic
associations of components of the signal with dimension of
meaning (Kirby et al., 2015).
However, research on language development in children
has presented substantial evidence that child language
learners receive input that is specifically tailored to support
learning, in the form of child-directed speech (e.g.
Burnham, Kitamura, & Vollmer-Conna, 2002; Kempe &
Brooks, 2005; Soderstrom, 2007). While there is
considerable debate about whether child-directed speech is
universal (e.g. Broesch & Bryant, 2013; Falk, 2004;
Schieffelin, 1985), whether it constitutes intentional
teaching or whether it predominantly supports affective
bonding and emotion regulation (e.g. Singh, Morgan &
Best, 2002; Uther, Knoll & Burnham, 2007), functionally it
qualifies as a behaviour that not only provides local
enhancement by directing the learner’s attention to relevant
information (Kline, 2015) but also pre-samples the input in
a way that can support correct learner inferences about
language (Eaves, Feldman, Griffiths & Shafto, 2016). For
learning to occur, no ostensive cues or direct feedback are
required as long as the statistical properties of the modified
input ensure improved learning. In this study, we explore
how tailoring the input in such a way for the learner shapes
language structure over the course of language transmission.
If teaching leads to modification of the input that promote
correct inferences about language then we can make
predictions about the directions in which iterated teaching
will change the structure of the emerging system, compared
to simple transmission that is only constrained by cognitive

Experimental studies of the cultural evolution of language
have focused on how constraints on learning and
communication drive emergence of linguistic structure. Yet
language is typically transmitted by experts who adjust the
input in ways that facilitates learning by novices, e.g. through
child-directed speech. Using iterated language learning of
binary auditory sequences, we explored how language change
is affected by experts’ intention to teach the language to
novices. Comparison between teaching chains and simple
transmission chains revealed that teaching was associated
with a greater rate of innovation which led to emergence of
more expressive languages consisting of shorter signals. This
is the first study to show that during cultural transmission,
teaching can modify, and potentially optimise, functional
characteristics of language.
Keywords: Teaching; iterated language learning; cultural
transmission;
algorithmic
complexity;
compositional
structure; combinatorial structure

Introduction
Cultural transmission of knowledge proceeds via the social
learning mechanisms of imitation, emulation and teaching
Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Richerson & Boyd, 2005). Of
these, the adaptive value of teaching has recently received
increased attention (Cavalli-Sforza & Feldman, 1981; Kline
et al. 2013; Kline, 2015; Csibra & Gergely, 2009),
highlighting in particular the ostensive use of language in
the transmission of technological knowledge required for
production of tools and other cultural artifacts (Caldwell &
Millen, 2009; Morgan, Uomini, Rendell, Chouinard-Thuly
et al., 2015). In its most general sense, teaching can be
defined as any kind of behaviour, intentional or not, that
promotes learning by narrowing the range of inferences or
behavioural options that another individual can pursue
(Kline, 2015). Teaching is especially important for
transmission of cognitively opaque cultural traits and
traditions, i.e. those whose function is not immediately
obvious, thereby contributing to cumulative culture
(Mesoudi 2011). While transmission of simpler cultural
traits may not benefit from additional teaching (Caldwell &
Millen, 2009), once culture becomes more complex,
teaching delivers additional benefits for the transmission
process (Morgan et al., 2015).
In contrast, studies of the cultural transmission of
language have mainly researched how constraints that

651

limitations of the learner. Previous iterated language
learning studies have highlighted a number of structural
features that emerge because languages need to be both
learnable and communicatively efficient. We predict that
emergence of these features should be facilitated under
conditions of teaching: First, if teaching accommodates
learnability constraints one would expect transmission
fidelity to improve even faster in chains where teaching
takes place, compared to simple transmission. Second, as
languages evolve to be efficient signalling systems
individual signals acquire combinatorial structure by which
smaller meaningless subcomponents are recombined to
improve signal discriminability, a feature that improves
transmission across noisy channels (Verhoef, 2012; Verhoef
et al., 2014; Roberts, Lewandowski & Galantucci, 2015)
and should be enhanced through teaching. Third, in order to
be communicatively efficient, languages also need to
maintain expressivity by avoiding under-specification and
ambiguity, another feature we expect to emerge faster under
conditions of teaching. Fourth, languages become more
systematic and self-similar, a property that, akin to
phonotactic rules, supports learnability by reducing
combinatorial freedom. This feature should also be
enhanced by teaching. Finally, emerging compositional
structure serves to systematically link meaningless
components of signals to underlying dimensions of their
meanings. Although compositional structure requires
communicative pressure in addition to language
transmission (Kirby et al., 2015; Nowak & Baggio, 2016),
to isolate the effect of teaching, and in the interest of
feasibility, we decided to start our exploration with a simple
transmission study that did not impose communicative
pressure on learners. Despite the lack of communicative
pressure, it is still conceivable that teachers modify the input
so as to enhance compositional structure in order to
highlight this functional aspect of language.

were called into the test area when the previous participant
had finished the training phase. Performance of these
participants was compared to that of sixty other participants
who had been tested in a different simple transmission study
conducted earlier (Kempe, Gauvrit, Gibson & Jamieson,
submitted). The ‘alien’ language used in this experiment
consisted of high and low tones assembled into 6 or 8-tone
sequences. This signalling system was developed to
eliminate any familiarity with signals that could bias
learners towards preferences for specific aspects of
combinatorial structure.
Materials: Two 500 ms sine-wave tones (high: 440 Hz =
musical note a; low: 293.7 Hz = musical note d) were
synthesised and recorded onto differently coloured answer
buzzer of 9 cm diameter each. The fixed tone duration made
it impossible to modify the length of the tones if pressing
the buzzers for longer periods of time thus eliminating
duration as a property of the signals. Seed languages
consisted of random sequences of high vs. low tones, which
were either six or eight tones long. These binary sequences
instantiating the ‘words’ in the ‘alien language’ were paired
with eight coloured objects differing in shape (spiky ‘kiki’type vs. fluffy ‘bouba’-type), size (2 x 2 cm vs. 4 x 4 cm)
and brightness (25% vs 75% saturation) (see Figure 1),
which were printed on laminated cards sized 5 x 8 cm. All
objects also had unique properties due to differences in
specific shapes and hues.

Figure 1: Meanings associated with the signals (binary
sequences) in the ‘alien buzzer language’.
Procedure: After signing a consent form, participants in
both conditions were told they would learn an ‘alien’
language used by a species of aliens that had no mouth and
therefore used buzzers for communication. Participants were
then shown six of the eight cards one at a time to familiarise
them with the ‘alien’ objects. Training proceeded in an
incremental fashion: In the Simple Transmission condition,
participants were given a demonstration of the binary buzzer
sequence for each card, and were asked to repeat it.
Demonstration and practice were then immediately repeated
resulting in incremental training consisting of two
consecutive trials per card, before proceeding to the next
card. Order of cards was randomised for each participant by
shuffling the cards. After training, participants were shown
the cards one at a time, and asked to produce the ‘alien
buzzer words’ to the best of their abilities. Their responses
were videotaped, coded and then presented unaltered to the
next participant. To prevent the languages from
degenerating, a ‘homonymy filter’ (Kirby et al., 2008) was
applied by which up to two identical sequences (i.e.
homonyms) were withheld and only six items were

Method
The present experiment compares transmission of an ‘alien’
language along chains of learners where each learner’s
output generated during testing is faithfully represented as
input to the learner in the next generation (Simple
Transmission condition) with transmission of the language
through chains of learners who, after training, are asked to
teach the language to the learner in the next generation
(Teaching condition). Teaching in this set-up constitutes
demonstration of the language to the next learner without
any verbal explanation or instruction. The crucial question is
whether teachers modify the input when presenting the
language to the next learner in a way that goes beyond those
modifications that are due to constraints on learning and
reproduction.
Participants: Sixty undergraduate students were
recruited at the University library for participation in a
transmission chain study. Participants were assigned
numbers corresponding to their slot in one of six chains, and

652

presented during training. In case of no homonyms, two
cards were withheld at random; in case of just one pair of
homonyms, the card corresponding to one of the homonyms
was withheld at random along with one other randomly
chosen card. This manipulation was used to encourage
productivity and to prevent languages from degenerating
into ambiguous systems.
In the Teaching condition, chains were also seeded with
six out of eight cards, to maintain compatibility with the
Simple Transmission condition. In Generation 1, training
proceeded in exactly the same way as in the simple
transmission condition. However, from Generation 1
onwards, after training, participants were asked to ‘teach’
the language to the next participant in the chain who was
called into the testing area at that time. When teaching,
participants were instructed not to provide any verbal
comments or instructions but to simply demonstrate the
buzzer sequences twice to the next participant, allowing
them to repeat the sequence after each demonstration.

Figure 2: Number of unique sequences (out of 8) in
Simple Transmission and Teaching chains.
Transmission Accuracy: We used length-normalised
Levenshtein edit distance (LED) as an inverse measure of
transmission accuracy. LED decreased faster in the Simple
Transmission condition (Figure 3), as evidenced by a
significant interaction between Condition and the linear
effect of Generation, β = -0.03, t = -2.13, p < .05. In other
words, when participants were asked to teach they
introduced more innovations than when they simply tried to
reproduce the binary sequences.

Results
Participant buzzer responses were videotaped and coded for
further analyses. Inter-coder reliability, determined for 17%
of trials, was 94%. All dependent variables were analyzed
using Growth Curve Analyses (GCA). To see whether
trends were linear or tended to level off we included a
quadratic term of Generation following Beckner,
Pierrehumbert & Hay (2017). Thus, our model contained
fixed effects of Condition (Simple Transmission vs.
Teaching) and linear and quadratic effects of Generation,
and random intercepts of Chains as well as random slopes of
Generation (Winter & Wieling, 2016), resulting in a model
of the structure Condition + Generation + Generation2 +
Condition*Generation
+
Condition*Generation2
+
(1|Chain)
+
(0+Generation|Chain)
+
(0+Generation2|Chain). In all cases, the quadratic model
provided a better or the same fit to the data compared to the
linear model as determined by likelihood-ratio tests.
Expressivity: Languages in the teaching condition
contained fewer homonyms than languages in the simple
transmission condition. The outputs in the transmission
condition were more prone to degenerate into
underspecified, more ambiguous languages, as indicated by
an interaction of Condition with the linear, β = -0.44, t =
2.50, p < .05, and the quadratic effect of Generation, β =
0.05, t = 2.78, p < .01. These findings are depicted in Figure
2. Note that in this and all subsequent figures error bars
correspond to one S.E.M.

Figure 3: Mean length-normalised Levenshtein edit
distance in Simple Transmission and Teaching chains.
Self-similarity: Average pairwise length-normalised LED
between all pairs of sequences in a language served as an
inverse measure of within-language similarity. This selfsimilarity increased (i.e. LED decreased) overall as
indicated by a main effect of Generation, β = -0.06, t = 3.80, p < .001. The significant quadratic term suggests that
increase of self-similarity was mainly due to the drop from
the seed language and levelled off in subsequent generations
(Figure 4).

653

d represents the low note, are more structured than
sequences like aadaddda. GCA did not yield any significant
effects although the interaction between Condition and the
linear effect of Generation, β = -0.13, t = -1.82, p = .08, fell
short of significance, suggesting that there may have been a
trend for algorithmic complexity to decrease somewhat
during simple transmission.

Figure 4: Mean inverse self-similarity (within-language
LED) in Simple Transmission and Teaching chains.
Length: Sequences had started out with an average length
of 7 tones in the seed language at Generation 0. In the
Teaching condition, sequences remained of roughly the
same length, which was significantly shorter than in the
Simple Transmission condition, β = -0.81, t = -2.60, p < .05.
The interaction between Condition and the linear effect of
Generation, β = 0.66, t = 2.46, p < .05, confirmed that
sequence length increased only during simple transmission
(Figure 5).

Figure 6: Mean length-normalised algorithmic complexity
in Simple Transmission and Teaching chains.
Compositional Structure: To determine compositional
structure for each language, we calculated the Pearson
product-moment correlations between differences in the
three meaning dimensions of all meaning pairs and
differences between associated signals pairs within each
language, using 10,000 iterations of a Monte Carlo process
to obtain a standardised score. This measure remained
below the value associated with p = .05, and did not differ
between conditions and generations indicating that no
compositional structure had emerged (Figure 7).

Figure 5: Mean sequence length in Simple Transmission
and Teaching chains.
Combinatorial structure: Structure of individual signals
was operationalised as algorithmic complexity, using an
estimate developed for short binary strings based on the
coding theorem method (Gauvrit, Soler-Toscano, Zenil &
Delahaye, 2014; Zenil, Soler-Toscano, Delahaye & Gauvrit,
2015). This measure provides an inverse estimate for the
amount of structure of a given sequence relative to the
variation in structure possible for all sequences of the same
length (Figure 6). It captures the intuition that sequences
like adadadad or aaaadddd, where a represents the high and

Figure 7: Mean compositional structure in Simple
Transmission and Teaching chains. The horizontal line
indicates z = 1.96, p = .05.

654

Discussion

with this conjecture, the trend towards self-similarity was
less pronounced in the Teaching condition, although the
difference between conditions did not reach statistical
significance.
We also had hypothesised that teaching would lead to a
faster increase in combinatorial structure to improve
transmission efficiency. For the binary sequences used as
signals in this study, introducing combinatorial structure
would entail establishing subcomponents (e.g. ad or aad)
that can be recombined using operations like repetition or
mirroring, as in strings like adadad (-0.75 [numbers in
parentheses are the associated values of length-normalised
algorithmic complexity) or aadaadaad (-1.43). In contrast,
complex strings like ddaaad (1.43) or ddaaaadda (2.02) do
not contain combinations of discernible subcomponents.
According to our hypothesis, the Teaching condition should
have given rise to more sequences of the former than the
latter type. However, our data showed exactly the opposite
trend: Although not significantly so, length-normalised
algorithmic complexity tended to be higher in the Teaching
condition, indicating less combinatorial structure than in the
Simple Transmission condition. One possible explanation
for this finding is that when trying to produce as many
different sequences as possible while maintaining brevity of
the signals, teachers sample more densely from the
distribution of shorter sequences thereby inevitably utilising
more sequences of higher complexity. On the other hand,
when the brevity constraint is relaxed, learners in the Simple
Transmission condition may produce longer sequences yet
processing capacity limitations will force them to settle for
more structured ones, which are made up of a limited
repertoire of subcomponents.
This pattern of results shows that when teaching, which in
this study entailed knowingly serving as input-generating
models, participants changed their behaviour to adjust the
input so as to constrain learner hypotheses in accordance
with their own tacit knowledge about how languages
function. Specifically, they were negotiating a trade-off
between referential efficiency and transmission efficiency
by introducing innovations that allowed them to generate
unique sequences for each meaning, to prevent languages
from degenerating into under-specified systems, while at the
same time facilitating transmission fidelity by stabilizing the
length of these sequences. It can be argued that the biases
that shaped this teaching behaviour reflect participants’
knowledge about the functionality of language as it was
acquired through their native language use and, thus, these
biases may not be informative about of the role teaching
may have played in language evolution. However, learners
in the simple transmission condition had access to exactly
the same knowledge yet without the motivation to teach
those biases were overridden by the drive towards
compressibility. Thus, whatever the origins of the
knowledge about the functionality of language are, our
findings suggest that this knowledge affects teaching.
To summarise, the results of this study support the idea
that teachers modify the input to learners in ways that reflect

We compared six teaching chains with six simple
transmission chains to explore the effect of teaching during
cultural transmission of language. As this was an
exploratory study, we did not include a requirement to
engage in referential communication. Thus, it was not
unexpected that compositional structure did not emerge
(Kirby et al., 2015), and we found no evidence that teachers
would introduce it spontaneously.
What we found was that although transmission accuracy
increased overall, it was significantly lower in the Teaching
condition, counter to our expectations. Thus, considerably
more innovations were introduced into the signals when
participants were asked to teach rather than just to reproduce
what they had learned. We suggest that these innovations
served to stabilise certain features of the languages that the
teachers considered crucial. The most notable change from
Simple Transmission performance achieved through
innovation in the Teaching condition was to maintain
expressivity of the language: The number of different
sequences within the taught languages remained high thus
preventing these languages from degenerating by
accumulating homonyms. This is an interesting result
because previous research had demonstrated that without a
strong incentive to communicate, capacity constraints of the
learners drive languages towards under-specification and
ambiguity (Kirby et al., 2015). What our findings suggest is
that teaching can override this tendency, presumably due to
strong biases about the functional destination of language,
which is to be expressive, i.e. referentially efficient. It is
noteworthy that the expressivity advantage in the Teaching
condition arose even though we applied a homonymy-filter
in the Simple Transmission condition to prevent the
languages from degenerating. Without this filter, languages
in the Simple Transmission condition would have
accumulated even more homonyms (Kirby et al., 2008),
presumably further deviating from the Teaching condition.
Another feature that remained stable in the Teaching
condition was sequence length: Teachers managed to
maintain sequence length at around the original 7 tones
while in the Simple Transmission condition, sequence
length increased dramatically. Stabilising or even reducing
length is a strategy that can ensure learnability and
transmission accuracy by keeping the form of signals within
the limits imposed by working memory constraints. As this
brevity constraint operated only in the Teaching condition it
may reflect a cooperative adjustment on the part of the
teacher designed to aid the learner.
We observed little further increase of self-similarity of
languages beyond an initial gain following exposure to the
initial random binary sequences. Self-similarity can be
thought of as a measure of systematicity that is somewhat
akin to phonotactic rules. If teachers attempted to resolve
the trade-off between expressivity of the language and
brevity of the signals, they would be more likely to use the
full space of distinct binary sequences of shorter lengths,
which restricts opportunity to achieve self-similarity. In line

655

their biases about the functional utility of a cultural trait.
Applying this idea to the study of the cultural evolution of
language means that theories of language transmission need
to include teaching into the suite of transmission
mechanisms under consideration. We hope that our findings
will inspire more detailed explorations of the role of
teaching in the cultural evolution of language in the future.

Kline, M. A. (2015). How to learn about teaching: An
evolutionary framework for the study of teaching
behaviour in humans and other animals. Behavioural and
Brain Sciences, 38, E31.
Kline, M. A., Boyd, P. & Henrich, J. (2013). Teaching and
the life history of cultural transmission in Fijian villages.
Human Nature, 24, 351-374.
Mesoudi, A. (2011). Cultural evolution: How Darwinian
theory can explain human culture and synthesize the
social sciences. Chicago and London: University of
Chicago Press.
Morgan, T. J. H., Uomini, N. T., Rendell, L. E., ChouinardThuly, L., Street, S. E., Lewis, H. M., ... & Whiten, A.
(2015). Experimental evidence for the co-evolution of
hominin tool-making teaching and language. Nature
Communications, 6.
Nowak, I., & Baggio, G. (2016). The emergence of word
order and morphology in compositional languages via
multigenerational signalling games. Journal of Language
Evolution, lzw007
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2005). Not by genes alone.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Roberts, G., Lewandowski, J., & Galantucci, B. (2015).
How communication changes when we cannot mime the
world: Experimental evidence for the effect of iconicity
on combinatoriality. Cognition, 141, 52-66.
Schieffelin, B. B. (1985). The acquisition of Kaluli. In D. I.
Slobin (ed.), The crosslinguistic study of language
acquisition: Vol. 1: The data (pp. 525–594). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Singh, L., Morgan, J. L., & Best, C. T. (2002). Infants'
listening preferences: Baby talk or happy talk? Infancy,
3(3), 365-394.
Soderstrom, M. (2007). Beyond babytalk: Re-evaluating the
nature and content of speech input to preverbal infants.
Developmental Review, 27(4), 501-532.
Uther, M., Knoll, M., & Burnham, D. (2007, January). Do
you speak E-NG-L-I-SH? A comparison of foreigner- and
infant-directed speech. Speech Communication, 49(1), 2–
7.
Verhoef, T. (2012). The origins of duality of patterning in
artificial whistled languages. Language and Cognition,
4(4), 357–380.
Verhoef, T., Kirby, S., & de Boer, B. (2014). Emergence of
combinatorial structure and economy through iterated
learning with continuous acoustic signals. Journal of
Phonetics, 43, 57-68.
Winter, B., & Wieling, M. (2016). How to analyze linguistic
change using mixed models, Growth Curve Analysis and
Generalized Additive Modeling. Journal of Language
Evolution, 1(1), 7-18.
Zenil, H., Soler-Toscano, F., Delahaye, J.-P., & Gauvrit, N.
(2015). Two-dimensional Kolmogorov complexity and an
empirical validation of the coding theorem method by
compressibility. PeerJ Computer Science, 1, E23.

References
Beckner, C., Pierrehumbert, J. B., & Hay, J. (2017) The
emergence of linguistic structure in an online iterated
learning task. Journal of Language Evolution, ahead of
print.
Boyd, R. & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the
evolutionary process. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Broesch, T. L., & Bryant, G. A. (2015). Prosody in infantdirected speech is similar across western and traditional
cultures. Journal of Cognition and Development, 16(1),
31-43.
Burnham, D., Kitamura, C., & Vollmer-Conna, U. (2002).
What's new, pussycat? On talking to babies and animals.
Science, 296(5572), 1435-1435.
Caldwell, C. & Millen, A.E. (2009) Social learning
mechanisms and cumulative cultural evolution: Is
imitation necessary? Psychological Science, 20, 1478-83.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Feldman, M. W. (1981). Cultural
transmission and evolution: A quantitative approach.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Csibra, G. & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Science, 13, 148-153.
Eaves Jr, B. S., Feldman, N. H., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto,
P. (2016). Infant-directed speech is consistent with
teaching. Psychological Review, 123(6), 758.
Falk, D. (2004). Prelinguistic evolution in early hominins:
Whence motherese? Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 27,
491–541.
Gauvrit, N., Soler Toscano, F., Zenil, H., & Delahaye, J.-P.
(2014). Algorithmic complexity for short binary strings
applied to psychology: A primer. Behaviour Research
Methods, 46(3), 732-744
Kempe, V. & Brooks, P. J. (2005). The role of diminutives
in the acquisition of Russian gender: Can elements of
child-directed speech aid in learning morphology?
Language Learning, 55, Supplement: The Best of
Language Learning, 139-176.
Kempe, V., Gauvrit, N., Gibson, A. & Jamieson, M.
(submitted) Adults are more efficient in creating and
transmitting novel signalling systems than children.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative
cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental
approach to the origins of structure in human language.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(31), 10681–10686.
Kirby, S., Tamariz, M., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2015).
Compression and communication in the cultural evolution
of linguistic structure. Cognition, 141, 87-102.

656

