‘It’s More Fun With My Phone’:
A Replication Study of Cell Phone Presence and Task Performance
Ulrik Lyngs (ulrik.lyngs@cs.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
Oxford, OX1 3QD United Kingdom

Ryan McKay (ryan.mckay@rhul.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London
Egham, Surrey, TW20 0EX United Kingdom

Abstract
From distracted driving, to work focus on a computer,
increasing amounts of research is investigating how digital
technology influences users’ attention. A couple of widely
cited studies have found that the mere presence of cell phones
interferes with social interactions and cognitive performance,
even when not actively in use. These studies have important
implications but they have not yet been replicated, and also
suffer from methodological shortcomings and lack of
established theoretical frameworks to explain the observed
effects. We improved the methodology used in a previous
study of phone presence and task performance (Thornton,
Faires, Robbins, & Rollins, 2014), while testing an
‘opportunity cost’ model of mental effort and attention
(Kurzban, Duckworth, Kable, & Myers, 2013). We were
unable to replicate Thornton et al.’s finding that presence of
cell phones reduces performance in a specific cognitive task
(additive digit cancellation). Moreover, contrary to our
expectations, we found that participants who used their
phones more, and who were more attached to them, found the
tasks more fun/exciting and effortless, if they completed them
with their phone present.
Keywords: attention; distraction; cell phones; smartphones;
effort; task performance

Introduction
A growing amount of research in the cognitive science of
attention studies how workers and students navigate a
workspace with ample opportunities for distraction and/or
multitasking (Cain & Mitroff, 2011; Mark, Voida, &
Cardello, 2012; Ophir, Nass, & Wagner, 2009; Pea et al.,
2012; Ralph, Thomson, Cheyne, & Smilek, 2014). Recently,
this strand of research has moved on to how smartphones
influence their users’ attention. This is an important topic,
since more than 72% of the US population own
smartphones (Pew Research Center, 2016), and because it
has very real consequences: the US Department of
Transportation recently urged mobile companies to develop
a simplified ‘Driver Mode’ for smartphones, due to an
alarming rise in traffic accidents related to distracted driving
(NTHSA, 2016).
A couple of widely cited studies have reported negative
effects of the mere presence of cell phones on social
interactions. Przybylski & Weinstein (2012) varied whether
or not a mobile phone was placed next to strangers engaged

in a conversation task and found that participants reported
lower relationship quality and partner closeness when a cell
phone was present. A follow-up observational study found a
similar effect in a coffee-shop setting (Misra, Cheng,
Genevie, & Yuan, 2014). However, the results from these
studies are open to a multitude of interpretations (e.g.
various meanings of phone presence in a social context).
Our point of departure was a controlled study by
Thornton et al. (2014) who in a non-social context
investigated effects of cell phone presence on performance
in simple cognitive tasks. They varied whether or not a cell
phone was present on a participant’s table while he/she
completed a series of tasks (digit cancellation: searching for
and crossing out target numbers among other numbers, or
trail making: connecting consecutively numbered or lettered
circles displayed in random order). They found that people
performed worse in more challenging versions of these tasks
(crossing out pairs of target numbers that add up to a
specific number; connecting circles so that consecutive
numbers and consecutive letters alternate, e.g. 1-A-2-B-3-C…), when a cell phone was present. The authors concluded
that the mere presence of a cell phone, even when not in
use, can be distracting and cause performance deficits on
tasks that require full attention for optimal performance.
The experiments by Thornton et al. have potentially widereaching implications, from distracted driving to
performance in schools and workplaces (Thornton et al.,
2014). However, no replication studies have been conducted
to establish the reliability of their findings. Moreover, their
study had limitations: In their first experiment, they
manipulated the presence of an experimenter’s cell phone
rather than the participant’s own. In their second
experiment, they varied the presence of participants’ own
phone but did not check whether their procedure for doing
so made participants suspicious about the purpose of the
experiment. They also did not test any theoretical
frameworks that would explain their observed effects.

The present research
We followed up on Thornton et al.’s study, addressing these
limitations: We i) conducted a replication study using their

2646

original stimuli for the digit cancellation task1 (responding
also to general calls for replication studies, cf. Francis,
2012; Nosek, Spies, & Motyl, 2012); ii) improved the
original procedure to study effects of presence of
participants’ own smartphones while ruling out suspicion;
and iii) tested a new theoretical framework for
understanding the effects. In relation to the latter, we
applied Kurzban et al.’s ‘opportunity cost’ model of
attention and mental effort (Kurzban et al., 2013).
According to this cognitive model, the human mind
continuously computes the opportunity costs of our
available tasks, i.e. the value of options that one is missing
out on by persisting on the current task. The higher the
perceived opportunity costs, the more the current task will
feel mentally effortful and/or boring, with decreased quality
of performance to follow. This model is well suited to
predict effects of smartphones: Smartphones give immediate
access to a virtual infinity of stimulating and relevant
content, from global news to social gossip and video games.
Insofar as they therefore afford opportunities for highly
rewarding activities other than the task at hand, smartphone
presence should increase the current task’s opportunity
costs. In turn, this might make one’s current task feel more
boring or effortful, and cause decreased quality of
performance. Hence, our predictions were:
Prediction 1 (replication): Average scores in the additive
digit cancellation task will be lower when a smartphone is
present than when it is absent.

every instance of two consecutive numbers that, when
added, equal the digit specified at the beginning of each row
(e.g. 5: 1237814…). In the ‘simple’ version participants
cross out as many numbers as possible in 90 seconds; in the
‘additive’ version they cross out as many pairs of numbers
as possible in 180 seconds.
Effort Measure The participants filled in a brief
questionnaire about how effortful they thought each task
was to do. Participants indicated a) how boring or exciting
the task was (1 = Very boring, 7 = Very exciting), b) how
effortless the task was (1 = Intensely effortful, 2 =
Completely effortless), c) how fun the task was (1 = Not fun
at all, 7 = Intensely fun), and d) how difficult the task was
(1 = Not difficult at all, 7 = Intensely difficult). We
constructed the questionnaire to probe the experiences
mentioned by Kurzban et al. (2013) as dimensions of effort
that correspond to perceived opportunity costs.
Individual Difference Questionnaires Following Thornton
et al., participants completed a) the Attentional Behaviour
Rating Scale (Ponsford & Kinsella, 1991), a measure of
general attentional difficulties, b) a Cell Phone Usage
survey (Thornton et al., 2014), a measure of overall cell
phone use, c) the Possession Attachment survey (Weller,
Shackleford, Dieckmann, & Slovic, 2013), a measure of
how attached participants feel to their phone, and d) general
demographics.

Procedure

Prediction 2: The digit cancellation tasks will feel more
effortful to complete when a smartphone is present than
when it is absent.

Methods
Participants
53 participants (50 female) were recruited at the University
of London, Royal Holloway2. Mean age was 18.8 years (SD
= 1.4, range 17-27).

Materials
Digit Cancellation Task Participants completed two
versions of a digit cancellation task, using Thornton et al.’s
original stimuli. In both tasks, participants were given a
piece of paper containing 20 rows of 50-digit strings. In the
‘simple’ version, participants cross out every instance of the
number specified at the beginning of each row (e.g. 3:
7301638…). In the ‘additive’ version, participants cross out
1

Thornton et al. had observed the largest effect size in the digit
cancellation task, so we chose to include only this task to make
room for additional measures testing the opportunity cost
framework.
2
Thornton et al. found no effects of gender in the original study,
so we did not attempt to balance the gender representation in our
sample of participants.

Figure 1: Experimental procedure
After signing a consent form, participants were asked to use
their phone to photograph one of four objects placed on a
desk. After the participant took the photo, an RA asked to

2647

look at it and made a note of the object photographed and
the photo’s orientation. (What the participant photographed
was irrelevant – the purpose of this initial task was to check
if the participant had a smartphone, and to give the RA
control of the phone’s placement without making the
purpose of the experiment obvious.) Next, participants were
seated. In the phone-present condition, the RA placed the
phone face-up near the edge of the table and said “I’ll just
leave this here, if that’s okay”. In the phone-absent
condition, the RA placed a stack of post-it notes near the
edge of the participant’s table, and asked the participant to
turn off their phone and put it away in their bag. Participants
were then given one of the digit cancellation tasks to
complete (order was counterbalanced). After completing the
task, they filled in an effort measure. Then they completed
the second digit cancellation task, and filled in another
effort measure. Finally, the participants filled in an openended question about what they thought the purpose of the
experiment was, followed by the questionnaires. The
procedure is summarized in figure 1.

Results
No participants reported suspicion that the purpose of the
experiment was to study effects of phone presence.

Prediction 1: Phone presence and cancellation
score
In the simple digit cancellation task, there was no significant
difference between cancellation scores in the phone-present
(Mdn = 65.0, IQR = 11) and phone-absent (Mdn = 69.5,
IQR = 14.2) conditions, W = 348.5, p = 0.303. Similarly, in
the additive cancellation task there was no significant
difference between scores in the phone-present (Mdn =
20.0, IQR = 4.5) and phone-absent (Mdn = 18.0, IQR = 6)
conditions, W = 259.5, p = 0.62.
As will be discussed, scores in the additive cancellation
task were highly left-skewed, with very few participants
obtaining a score higher than 23 (see Fig. 2).

Table 1: Scores in the individual difference measures

Attentional behaviour
Cell phone use
Possession attachment

Phone present
Mean
SD
43.3
1.2
57.0
2.3
17.4
0.9

Phone absent
Mean
SD
41.9
1.2
58.3
1.6
17.3
1.0

Prediction 2: Phone presence and subjective effort
To test effects on subjective effort, we first did a principal
component analysis of responses on the effort measure.
Scores for the simple cancellation task clustered on a
‘fun/excitement’ and a ‘difficult/effortful’ factor, whereas
scores for the additive cancellation task clustered on a single
factor of ‘effortlessness’. We computed a score for each
participant on these three factors and used them as our
measures of ‘effort’.
There was no main effect of phone presence on how
effortful participants found the tasks, neither in the simple
cancellation task (‘fun/excitement’: phone-present, Mdn =
4.75, phone-absent: Mdn = 4.50, W = 285, p = 0.65;
‘difficult/effortful’: phone-present: Mdn = 3.0, phoneabsent: Mdn = 3.5, W = 358.5, p = 0.32) nor the additive
cancellation task (‘effortlessness’: phone-present: Mean =
3.81, SE = 0.17, phone-absent: Mean = 3.48, SE = 0.21,
t(43.58) = -1.25, p = 0.22).4

Interactions: Effects of personality variables
To explore whether the personality variables interacted with
effects of phone presence, we split participants into ‘high’
and ‘low’ scoring groups on the questionnaires (Attentional
Behaviour, Cell Phone Usage, and Possession Attachment),
separating the groups at the median. We conducted factorial
ANOVAs for each effort dimension, using ‘high’/’low’
questionnaire category as predictors. In the simple
cancellation task, there was a significant interaction between
smartphone presence and Cell Phone Usage, F(1, 41) =
5.00, p = 0.03: When a phone was present, participants high
on Cell Phone Usage rated the task as more fun/exciting
(Mean = 5.17, SD = 1.05), than did those low on Cell
Phone Usage (Mean = 4.47, SD = 0.72), p = 0.039. In other
words, participants who generally use their phones more
found the task less boring when they completed it with their
phone next to them. See Figure 3.

Figure 2: Distribution of scores
in the additive cancellation task.
3

The distributions of cancellation scores were not normal, so we
applied Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test. (t-test gave similar results)

4

The distribution of effort ratings was not normal for the simple
cancellation task, but conformed to normality for the additive task.

2648

Figure 1: Interaction between phone use and phone presence
on 'fun/exciting' ratings for the simple cancellation task.
Error bars show standard errors.
Similarly, in the additive cancellation task, there was a
significant interaction between smartphone presence and
Possession Attachment, F(1, 41) = 4.40, p = 0.04. When a
phone was present, participants high on Possession
Attachment found the task more effortless (Mean = 4.04,
SD = 0.90), than those less attached to their phones (Mean =
2.94, SD = 1.02), p = 0.10. In other words, participants more
addicted to their phones felt that the task required less effort
if they had their phone next to them. See Fig. 4.

Figure 2: Interaction between phone attachment and overall
scores on 'effortlessness' in the additive cancellation task.

Discussion
In terms of task performance, we, similarly to Thornton et
al., did not observe any statistically significant effect of
phone presence on performance in the simple digit

cancellation task. More importantly, however, we did not
replicate Thornton et al.’s central finding that phone
presence causes diminished performance on the additive
version of the task. Two things should be noted: Even
though our sample size was similar to the original study, it
may have been too small to reliably detect this effect. We
ran a post-hoc power analysis of Thornton et al. and found
that their experiments (n = 54 and n = 47) only had a power
of .65 to detect an effect in a two-tailed t-test. Sample size
should have been n = 66 just to obtain a power of .8. Note,
however, that we did not even observe a trend towards
replication – in fact, in our study, additive cancellation
scores were marginally larger in the phone-present than the
phone-absent condition. Moreover, recall that scores in the
additive task were left-skewed with very few participants
obtaining a score higher than 23. When we went over
Thornton et al.’s stimuli, we discovered that one row of
numbers (row nine), located when most participants were
running out of time, had no targets at all. Moreover, the two
rows before this one contained only one target each, in
contrast to the first six rows which contained from two to
four targets each. This will have reduced variation in
performance between participants in the higher end of the
performance distribution. For example, if one participant
just managed to cross out the single target in row eight
before running out of time, whereas another were ahead and
managed to search through also all of row nine, these two
participants will still have been given the same score.
Hence, the material design is likely to have reduced our
power to detect an effect, because it will have masked some
of the variation in performance between participants.
Another issue is that in our setup, each participant only
completed two versions of the cancellation task, whereas in
Thornton et al.’s original study each participant completed
two versions of the cancellation task and two versions of the
trail making test. Whereas Thornton et al. did not discuss
this, it is possible that effects of phone presence on task
performance in this particular lab scenario is contingent on
some degree of mental fatigue or shift in motivation from
performing more tasks (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven,
& Tice, 1998; Inzlicht, Schmeichel, & Macrae, 2014).
However, we did add an effort measure for participants to
complete after each task, which reduced the difference in
participant investment between the original study and ours.
In terms of subjective effort, there was also no main effect
of smartphone presence. However, we observed an
unpredicted effect in which participants using their phones
more often, and participants more attached to their phones,
found the tasks more fun/exciting and effortless,
respectively, if they completed them with their phones next
to them. We cannot draw any strong conclusions due to our
limited sample size and the post-hoc nature of this analysis,
but future studies should test if the relationship replicates.
The interaction ran in the opposite direction from what we
had initially predicted from Kurzban et al. (2013)’s
‘opportunity cost’ framework. Nevertheless, we still expect

2649

this framework to be useful to approach cognitive effects of
information communication technologies. From ‘fear of
missing out’ to popular anti-distraction apps like Freedom
and SelfControl that people use to restrict the functionality
of their own devices, many current phenomena suggest that
opportunity cost models remain important to explore.
However, if the interaction effect replicates, it might mean
that factors like anxiety from separation from one’s phone
(Cheever, Rosen, Carrier, & Chavez, 2014) or positive
feelings from having more stimulation available (Gazzaley
& Rosen, 2016) provides better explanations than Kurzban
et al. (2013)’s opportunity cost model.
Finally, Kurzban et al.’s paper offered a persuasive, but
abstract model. The effort measure we developed here is the
first attempt to operationalize their opportunity cost model
for experimental studies. Despite the present paper’s mixed
findings, we encourage future studies to apply Kurzban et
al.’s model to human-computer interaction research and to
test the reliability and validity of our effort measure.
In sum, follow-up research should establish whether
Thornton et al.’s finding of a detrimental effect of phone
presence on performance in the additive cancellation task is
valid, by using larger sample sizes and adjusting the
experimental stimuli to better pick up variation between
participants. Future studies should also test whether heavy
phone users really do feel that tasks are less, rather than
more, effortful to complete when they have their phones
present. With smartphone use now ubiquitous, it should be a
priority in cognitive science research on executive
functioning to establish conclusive findings on how
smartphones affect users’ attention and performance, and
why.

Acknowledgements
This research would not have been possible without the hard
work of our research assistants Alexandrina Vasilichi and
Ken Petalcorin.

References
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D.
M. (1998). Ego depletion: is the active self a limited
resource? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74(5), 1252–1265.
Cain, M. S., & Mitroff, S. R. (2011). Distractor filtering in
media multitaskers. Perception, 40(10), 1183–1192.
Cheever, N. A., Rosen, L. D., Carrier, L. M., & Chavez, A.
(2014). Out of sight is not out of mind: The impact of
restricting wireless mobile device use on anxiety
levels among low, moderate and high users.
Computers in Human Behavior, 37, 290–297.
Francis, G. (2012). Publication bias and the failure of
replication in experimental psychology. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 19(6), 975–991.
Gazzaley, A., & Rosen, L. D. (2016). The Distracted Mind:
Ancient Brain in a High-Tech World. Cambridge,

MA: MIT Press.
Inzlicht, M., Schmeichel, B. J., & Macrae, C. N. (2014).
Why self-control seems (but may not be) limited.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(3), 127–133.
Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J. W., & Myers, J.
(2013). An opportunity cost model of subjective effort
and task performance. The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 36(6), 661–79.
Mark, G. J., Voida, S., & Cardello, A. (2012). “A Pace Not
Dictated by Electrons”: An Empirical Study of Work
Without Email. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(pp. 555–564). New York: ACM.
Misra, S., Cheng, L., Genevie, J., & Yuan, M. (2014). The
iPhone Effect: The Quality of In-Person Social
Interactions in the Presence of Mobile Devices.
Environment and Behavior, 1–24.
Nosek, B. A., Spies, J. R., & Motyl, M. (2012). Scientific
Utopia: II. Restructuring Incentives and Practices to
Promote Truth Over Publishability. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 7(6), 615–631.
NTHSA. (2016). Visual-Manual NHTSA Driver Distraction
Guidelines for Portable and Aftermarket Devices.
Washington, DC.
Ophir, E., Nass, C., & Wagner, A. D. (2009). Cognitive
control in media multitaskers. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 106(37), 15583–15587.
Pea, R., Nass, C., Meheula, L., Rance, M., Kumar, A.,
Bamford, H., … Zhou, M. (2012). Media use, face-toface communication, media multitasking, and social
well-being among 8- to 12-year-old girls.
Developmental Psychology, 48(2), 327–336.
Pew Research Center. (2016). Smartphone Ownership and
Internet Usage Continues to Climb in Emerging
Economies.
Ponsford, J., & Kinsella, G. (1991). The use of a rating scale
of
attentional
behaviour.
Neuropsychological
Rehabilitation,
1(4),
241–257.
http://doi.org/10.1080/09602019108402257
Przybylski, A. K., & Weinstein, N. (2012). Can you connect
with me now? How the presence of mobile
communication technology influences face-to-face
conversation quality. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 30(3), 237–246.
Ralph, B. C. W., Thomson, D. R., Cheyne, J. A., & Smilek,
D. (2014). Media multitasking and failures of
attention in everyday life. Psychological Research,
78(5), 661–669.
Thornton, B., Faires, A., Robbins, M., & Rollins, E. (2014).
The mere presence of a cell phone may be distracting
implications for attention and task performance.
Social Psychology, 45(6), 479–488.
Weller, J. A., Shackleford, C., Dieckmann, N., & Slovic, P.
(2013). Possession Attachment Predicts Cell Phone
Use While Driving. Health Psychology, 32(4), 379–
387.

2650

