It’s not just what we say, it’s how we move: An examination of postural activity
during a disclosure event
Hannah M. Douglas (douglahh@mail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, ML 0376, 4150 Edwards
Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Stacie Furst-Holloway (furstse@ucmail.uc.edu)
Human Resource Effectiveness Lab, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, ML 0376, 4150 Edwards Cl.,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Michael J. Richardson (richamo@ucmail.uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, ML 0376, 4150 Edwards
Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Rachel W. Kallen (rachel.kallen@uc.edu)
Center for Cognition, Action and Perception, Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, ML 0376, 4150 Edwards
Cl., University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221-0376 USA

Abstract
The current study incorporates concepts from dynamical
systems theory (DST) and embodied cognition to
propose a novel method of answering traditional
questions in social psychology. Namely, we were
interested in understanding postural sway complexity
during the important interpersonal task of disclosing a
hidden stigmatized identity (e.g., mental health disorder,
history of sexual abuse). Using detrended fluctuation
analysis and multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis,
we captured postural activity while people shared their
personal secrets to an imagined other. Results suggest
that disclosure context, defined by both disclosure
confidant and antecedent goals, is indeed embodied in
our complex postural activity.
Keywords: Postural Sway; Concealable Stigmatized Identities;
Detrended Fluctuation Analysis; Multifractal Detrended
Fluctuation Analysis

Introduction
The current project applied concepts from dynamical
systems theory (DST) to common social-psychological
phenomenon through the analysis of complex postural
activity. Postural sway refers to subtle, unintentional
movements that all people exhibit even when standing
still. These nearly imperceptible fluctuations have
demonstrated a functional role in maintaining balance
and even efficiently exploring the environment (i.e.,
detecting depth) (Era & Heikkinen, 1985). Generally,
healthy adults tend to sway approximately 1 cm in the
anterior-posterior (AP) direction and .5 cm in the mediolateral (ML) direction during quiet stance leading to
great variability in postural activity within individuals
(Baldan et. al., 2014). Research has found that there is
meaningful structure to this movement variability in both

the AP and ML planes that exhibits fractal scaling, or
self similarity across different timescales (Delignières,
Torre, & Bernard, 2011). This complex structure of
postural sway allows us to adapt to different types of
constraints—either personal, task relevant, or
environmental—that exist across different time scales.
The current project utilized two nonlinear data analytic
techniques well suited to postural sway time series
including detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA), and
multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis (MFDFA) to
characterize the spatio-temporal structure of postural
activity during a social psychological event.
The complex (i.e., fractal) structure of postural
variability can be influenced by a number of factors
including schizophrenia (Kent et al., 2002), age, and
movement disorders such as Parkinson’s disease and
Huntington’s disease (lipsitz, 2004). A change in
complexity is characterized by shifts from persistent
pink noise to either anti-persistent white noise, or
deterministic Brownian motion. As such, fractal, or pink
noise, in postural sway has been consistently found in
healthy adult populations, and a decline in complexity
towards either white or Brownian noise is associated
with a decline in health (Lipsitz, 2004).
While a change in the complex structure of postural
variability is typically associated with poor health, recent
research has found that cognitive activity can also impact
postural behavior. For example, Riley, Baker, and
Schmit (2003) found that postural sway standard
deviation was reduced when participants were asked to
complete a difficult digit rehearsal task. This change in
postural sway as a function of a cognitive tasks, paired
with the fractal nature of sway suggests a functional link
between the brain and the body whereby the dynamics of
human perceptual, motor, and cognitive processes are
interaction-dominant (Riley, Shockley, van Orden,

1949

2012). Interaction dominant-dynamics further suggest
that each component system are coupled and therefore
are reciprocally linked. This means that the behavior of
each component, in this case the brain, the motor system,
and the environment, depends on the activity of the other
components (van Orden, Hollis, & Wallot, 2012). To
examine this phenomenon in a social psychological
context, we will determine how postural activity changes
while people disclose a concealable stigmatized identity
(CSI) to an imagined other.

Concealable Stigmatized Identity Disclosure
A CSI is any identity that is not immediately available to
others, but could be socially devaluing if revealed, for
example a mental health disorder, LGBT status, or a
history of sexual abuse. While avoiding discrimination
through concealment seems like an ideal solution, the
extant literature has noted the numerous positive
outcomes to disclosing (e.g., building trust, greater
quality of life, etc.) as well as the negative impact of
concealing (e.g., social isolation, anxiety, etc.) (Chaudoir
& Quinn, 2010).
Disclosure of a CSI, or the interpersonal process of
sharing personal information, is a complicated process.
The discloser must first decide how and when they want
to share their identity with someone. Further, the
discloser should be constantly evaluating their
confidant’s reaction to determine if they can expect a
positive reaction with the desired social support, or a
negative reaction and little or no support. Research
suggests that, when disclosing a CSI to a confidant
people will have specific goals for disclosing such as to
build intimacy in a relationship, or to explain certain
behaviors. Research suggests that the numerous goals for
disclosure are either approach oriented—focused on
achieving positive outcomes—or avoidance oriented—
focused on avoiding negative outcomes (Chaudoir &
Fisher, 2010).
Approach and Avoidance Goal Motivation Research
on goal motivation suggests that approach and avoidance
systems result in differential exploration of the
environment such that those who possess approach goals
are interested in “reducing the discrepancy between
themselves and their goal” (e.g., closing the gap between
the discloser and the confidant; Chaudoir & Fisher,
2010). Further, individuals who utilize approach goals in
their disclosure may attend to positive stimuli in the
environment. Conversely, when utilizing avoidance
goals, individuals are interested increasing the distance
between themselves and potential negative outcomes
(e.g., increasing distance between the discloser and the
confidant; Carver & White, 1994). As research from
embodied cognition suggests, changes in emotional or
motivational systems would be reflected in behavioral

outcomes. Therefore, postural sway behavior provides a
unique look into the embodiment of goal during the
disclosure of a CSI. Further, as research has found a loss
of complexity in postural sway as a function of increased
cognitive load, it is likely the case that avoidance
motivation, which is associated with attuning to negative
environmental cues and less relaxed behaviors, would
also lead to a loss of complexity. Further, there are many
people in our lives with whom we can disclose such as
with our friends and family (close others) and with our
coworkers and bosses (professional others).
Disclosure Confidant Disclosure of a CSI can occur
across all life domains and within different types of
relationships. Our relationships with others can vary
greatly as a function of domain context (e.g., workplace,
family life, and social setting, etc.). Often, our
relationships with family members will be different from
our relationships with a boss or a coworker due to social
norms associated with these contexts. Therefore, the
level of detailed disclosure of a CSI is likely less for
those we have a professional relationships with
compared to our close friends or family members. In
fact, many people may feel motivated to keep a CSI
hidden completely from their coworkers as revealing
such information could have a detrimental impact on
their career path and job outcomes (Jones & King,
2014).
Despite the potential for negative outcomes due to CSI
disclosure, disclosure in the workplace should not be
discounted. Research suggests potential negative
workplace consequences of concealing including less job
satisfaction and attention (Day & Scheonrade, 1997).
With a large portion of the workforce continuously
making decisions about the information they reveal and
conceal in a workplace setting, it is becoming
increasingly apparent that a better understanding of
workplace disclosure is necessary. However, the
increased tension and threat involved with disclosing
across different life domains might also impact the
behavioral expression via postural sway behavior.
Postural Activity While the current literature has noted
the importance of positive interpersonal disclosure
outcomes across multiple life domains (i.e., home life,
work life) utilizing different goals, little is known about
how these different contexts impact the embedded nature
of our cognitive and behavioral systems within the
world. The present study is the first of its kind to
examine the disclosure experience through the lens of
embodied cognition in order to understand how the
disclosure context is differentially manifested in
measurable behavioral outcomes (i.e., postural activity).
Despite attempts to understand the impact of
nonverbal behaviors on personal self-disclosure (see
Derlega & Berg, 2013), the existent literature has

1950

focused on general self-disclosure, not disclosure of a
CSI specifically. Further, nonverbal behaviors have
typically been characterized by discrete, observable
behaviors (e.g., facial expression, nods, and openness).
The current project examines time dependent postural
sway by utilizing dynamic data analytic tools that can
capture the disclosure process as it occurs. By examining
postural sway behavior during the disclosure of a CSI we
can gain a better understanding of how our mental
processes are manifested in our bodies relationship with
the environment. Further, support for this claim would
suggest that shifting motivation systems might lead to
more positive behaviors, both verbal and nonverbal,
during a disclosure event, and therefore more positive
disclosure outcomes.

to recruitment, participants were prescreened to
determine their eligibility. In order to participate in this
study, participants had to self-identify as living with a
CSI. One participant was excluded from data analysis
due to technical errors resulting in a sample of 42
participants. The majority of participants were female
(36) and identified as white (35). The mean age was
20.21 (SD = 3.09). See table 1 for a breakdown of each
CSI represented in this study.
Table 1. Table 1 shows the number of
participants with each CSI type
CSI Type
N
Mental Health Disorder
16
Sexual Assault
7
Gender/Sexual Minority
10
Eating Disorder
4
Multiple CSI’s
2
Other
3

Current Project
This project hopes to be the first to bridge the gap
between the three discussed areas of research: disclosure
context (i.e., close other and professional other
disclosure), antecedent goals for disclosure events, and
embodied cognition during the disclosure of a CSI. With
this project, we hope to integrate theory from stigma,
embodied cognition, and interaction-dominant dynamics
to capture a holistic understanding of the cognitive and
movement processes at play during CSI disclosure. As
such, this project will utilize theory unique to postural
sway literature, and measurement and data analytic
techniques novel to disclosure. Finally, our results and
discussion will be presented in such a way that both
social and ecological psychologists might be able to
utilize theory and methods from each other in future
research endeavors. Based on previous postural sway
research, we expect disclosures utilizing approach goals
to close others would exhibit pink noise compared to
avoidance disclosures to professional targets.

Method
Design
This study employed a 2 (goal motivation:
approach/avoidance) × 2 (target: close other/professional
other) mixed design with goal motivation is the between
subjects variable and disclosure target the within
subjects variable. The primary dependent variables are
postural sway dynamics measured at the head and waist
(via mono-fractal and multi-fractal scaling) and
responses
on
the
Behavioral
Approach
System/Behavioral Avoidance System (BIS/BAS) scale.

Participants

Procedure
In the first portion of the study participants were seated
at a computer equipped with Media Lab software
(Empirisoft, 2014) where they completed the majority of
the experiment. They were first asked to think about and
describe a secret that they often keep hidden. Each
participant was then instructed to write two disclosure
letters sharing this secret to a close friend/family
member and the other to someone with whom they have
a professional relationship. Specifically, they were asked
to think about a person in their life that they have not
told this secret, but would like to. Prior to writing each
letter, participants were told to write 3-5 goals they have
for their disclosure. To manipulate approach and
avoidance goals, participants were simply told to either
“think about achieving positive outcomes with their
letter” or “think about avoiding negative outcomes with
their letter” respectively.
After writing both disclosure letters, participants acted
out their disclosure as if the person they wrote the letter
to was standing in the room. During the disclosure event,
two Polhemus sensors (one attached to a headband on
the back of the head, the other attached to a belt just
bellow the belly button) recorded postural activity at 60
Hz (FASTRAK, Polhemus, VT, USA). The
experimenter explained that they should act as though
they were talking to the person that they chose, using
their letter as a guide. After completing the disclosure for
both written letters, participants completed a number of
self-report measures including the BIS/BAS scale
(Carver & White, 1994).

43 undergraduates were recruited from a large Data Analysis
Midwestern University to participate in this study. Prior

1951

To capture the time dependent structure of postural
variability as a function of both goal priming and
disclosure confidant during the disclosure of a CSI, both
DFA and MFDFA were used. Because postural data
exhibits non-stationary, time-dependent variation, these
data are characterized by fractional Brownian motion
(fBm) making it particularly well suited to DFA (et al.,
2000; Delignières, Torre, & Bernard, 2011).
DFA provides the scaling exponent, α, which
describes the fractal scaling of a time series whereby: α
≈ .5 indicates random, white noise scaling; α ≈ 1
suggests persistent pink noise scaling; and α ≈ 1.5
indicates Brownian motion.
MFDFA is an extension of the DFA and examines
differences in the scaling exponents between small and
large fluctuations. The relevant outcome parameter of
interest in MFDFA is a characterization of the width of
the multifractal spectrum hMAX-MIN. Because MFDFA
tells us whether there are different scaling exponents that
exist at fast and slow fluctuations, if hMAX-MIN is greater
than 0, we can assume the time series exhibits
multifractality. See Ihlen (2012) for a detailed
description of both DFA and MFDFA procedures.
Finally, Prior to analyzing each postural sway time
series in the AP plane at the head (APHEAD) and waist
(APWAIST) and the ML plane at the head (MLHEAD) and
waist (MLWAIST), the data were downsampled from 60
Hz to 30 Hz, linearly detrended, and, low-pass filtered at
20Hz using a 2nd order Butterworth filter. A surrogate
analysis (detailed below) was also performed for DFA
and MDFA for validation purposes.

Results
A series of separate mixed method ANOVA’s were
performed on all relevant outcome parameters for DFA,
and MFDFA to test our hypotheses that approach and
avoidance goal motivation and target confidant would
impact the dynamical structure of postural activity
during a disclosure event. Four separate 2 (goal:
approach/avoidance) × 2 (target: close other/professional
other) ANOVA’s were performed on all outcome
parameters, one each for APHEAD, MLHEAD, APWAIST, and
MLWAIST sway. Prior to statistical analysis, outliers 3 SD
above and below the mean were identified and replaced
with the mean value.

Detrended Fluctuation Analysis
A series of ANOVAs were performed to capture
differences in sway as a function of α. To verify that
there was a difference between the original time series
and the randomly reshuffled, surrogate time series, a
third 2 level term in the ANOVA (data:
original/randomly reshuffled) was included making the
analysis a 2 × 2 × 2 design. There was a main effect of

data type for all APHEAD, APWAIST, MLHEAD, and
MLWAIST,, (for all F(1,40) > 2097, p < .0001) such that
the original data results were significantly larger from
the randomly reshuffled, surrogate time series. That is,
the original time series produced an average α around
1.3 for all directions of sway and the reshuffled time
series produced α of .5 for all directions of sway. There
were 2-way interactions of goal and data type for
MLHEAD, and MLWAIST (F(1,40) = 5.52, p = .024, and
F(1,40) = 4.74, p = .035, respectively), however, these
results simply reflect a main effect of goal priming for
the original data; no differences emerged in the
reshuffled time series as a function of goal priming. As
such, below is the planned 2 × 2 ANOVAs on the
analysis of real (non-shuffled) data.
The ANOVA comparing the α exponent for APHEAD
revealed a significant target by group interaction,
F(1,40) = 4.32, p = .04, ηp2 = .098. Bonferroni post hoc
comparisons were used to examine differences between
α for close other and professional other disclosures for
each approach and avoidance primed disclosures
separately. Results indicate a marginally significant
difference in the α exponent between close other and
professional other target disclosures in the avoidance
primed condition, whereby close other disclosures
exhibited less persistent fractal scaling in their postural
sway (M = 1.36, SD = .11) compared to professional
other disclosures; which were more persistent and closer
to pink noise (M = 1.3, SD = .1). There was no
difference between close other and professional other
disclosures during approach primed disclosures (T(21) =
.49, p > .05). There were no other main effects for
APHEAD sway (all F(1,40) < 1.8, p > .05).
Next, an ANOVA comparing the alpha exponent from
MLHEAD revealed a significant main effect of goal
priming (F(1,40) = 5.81, p =.02, ηp2 = .13) such that
approach primed disclosures exhibited more persistent
fractal scaling in their postural sway (M = 1.28, SD =
.13) compared to avoidance primed disclosures; which
were less persistent and closer to Brown noise (M = 1.35,
SD = .13). There were no other main or interaction
effects for MLHEAD (all F(1,40) < 2.1, p > .05). Similar to
the results found in MLHEAD sway, a significant main
effect of goal priming emerged in MLWAIST sway
(F(1,40) = 4.56, p = .04, ηp2 = .1), whereby those in the
avoidance condition exhibited a loss of complexity
compared to those in the approach primed condition (M
= 1.34, SD = .14 and M = 1.28, SD = .14 respectively).
No other main effects or interactions were significant for
MLWAIST (all F(1,40) < 1.9, p > .05). Finally, there were
no significant effects of α on APWAIST sway (all F(1,40)
< 2.47, p > .05) (see Figure 1).

1952

approach-primed disclosures (M = 1.04, SD = .22) than
avoidance primed disclosures (M = .89, SD = .22).
Similarly, the MLWAIST width was larger for approachprimed disclosures (M = 1.02, SD = .18) than avoidance
primed disclosures (M = .9, SD = .18) (Figure 2).

Figure 1: This figure represents mean α.
* p < .05, ** p < .01

Multifractal Detrended Fluctuation
Analysis
The final series of ANOVA’s compared the hMAX-MIN
value for each independent variable. To check that there
is a difference between the original time series and the
surrogate time series, a third 2 level term (data:
original/surrogate) was included in the initial analysis.
The surrogate time series was developed by shuffling the
time series using an inverse amplitude-adjusted Fourier
transform to maintain the same scaling relation α (see
Ihlen & Vereijken, 2010 for detailed description) There
was a significant main effect of data type for all MLHEAD,
MLWAIST, APHEAD, and APWAIST (all F(1,40) > 54.7, p <
.0001) whereby the hMAX-MIN was greater in the original
data compared to the phase reshuffled time series. There
were no 2-way interactions including data type
suggesting there was no impact of goal priming or target
confidant on results of the surrogate analysis (all F(1,40)
< 3.9, p > .05). Therefore, results of the planned 2-way
ANOVA examining goal priming and target confidant
are reported below.
The analysis of hMAX-MIN for APHEAD revealed a main
effect of goal priming (F(1,40) = 4.95, p = .03, ηp2 = .11)
such that the width was larger for approach primed
disclosures (M = .97, SD = .04) compared to avoidance
primed disclosures (M = .85, SD = .04). There were no
other significant results for APHEAD (all F(1,40) < 3.01, p
> .05). The same pattern of significant results emerged
for MLHEAD and MLWAIST, such that a main effect of goal
motivation was revealed for both (F(1,40) = 8.57, p =
.006, ηp2 = .18 and F(1,40) = 7.62, p = .009, ηp2 = .16
respectively). The width for MLHEAD was larger for

Figure 2: This figure demonstrates mean hMAX-MIN.
p < .05, ** p < .01

Discussion and Conclusion
Taken together, these results support our hypotheses that
both goal motivation and disclosure confidant would
impact unintentional postural activity. We sought to
examine the disclosure event on a very small scale (i.e.,
postural behavior) in order to understand how context
shapes the way people communicate through behavior.
These results broadly support the idea that our cognition
and emotional content are manifested and embodied in
measureable behavioral outcomes (Marsh, Ambady, &
Kleck, 2005). Most notable in these results is the
influence of antecedent goal priming on the structure of
postural variability. By utilizing nonlinear data analytic
techniques novel to disclosure research, we have
provided support that our cognitive and motor systems
are functionally linked as a complex dynamical system.
Specifically, the significant interaction of the scaling
exponent α, which revealed that close other disclosures
exhibited more deterministic behavior than professional
other disclosures at APHEAD, is contrary to our hypothesis
that professional other disclosures would be more
deterministic. However, since this effect was only found
in the avoidance condition, which is associated with
negative outcomes, these results may indicate that
participants expected greater threat to their intimate
relationships during close other disclosures when they

1953

were utilizing avoidance goals. Because this effect was
only found in the AP direction, it is important that future
work seek to replicate these results.
Finally, results of the MFDFA support the mounting
evidence that postural sway behavior exhibits multiple
scaling exponents, as well as our hypothesis that
disclosure context would functionally impact movement
variability. Importantly, a significant difference in the
hMAX-MIN parameter suggests that approach primed
disclosures exhibit a wider range of scaling exponents
than avoidance primed disclosures. This supports the
theory that approach systems are associated with
attuning to more positive stimuli in the environment. As
theory of postural sway variability suggests, our postural
system aids in efficiently exploring the environment.
Because we see differences in the smallest and largest
scaling exponents, this suggests participants are able to
explore different stable states in the approach condition
compared to the avoidance condition. This could make
approach primed disclosures more adept at adjusting
behaviors with new information.
The results of this project provide evidence that both
disclosure confidant and antecedent goals can affect the
disclosure event itself. Further, this research suggests
that postural sway behavior is an emergent property of a
complex system and serves a functional role in both
attaining environmental information and embodying
ones cognitive and emotional processes. This has
implications for developing tools for people who want to
disclose a CSI. For example, by simply shifting internal
motivation from avoidant to approach a reciprocal
distribution across behaviors at different time scales
could cascade, from very fast processes including
postural sway, to slower timescale behaviors such as
gross body movement, language, and confidant
reactions. Future research should examine this
relationship as well as how number of disclosures or fear
of disclosure impacts these effects.

References
Baldan, A. M. S., Alouche, S. R., Araujo, I. M. G., &
Freitas, S. M. S. F. (2014). Effect of light touch on
postural sway in individuals with balance problems: a
systematic review. Gait & posture, 40(1), 1-10.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral
inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective
responses to impending reward and punishment: the
BIS/BAS scales. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 67(2), 319.
Chaudoir, S. R., & Fisher, J. D. (2010). The disclosure
processes model: understanding disclosure decision
making and postdisclosure outcomes among people
living with a concealable stigmatized identity.
Psychological bulletin, 136(2), 236.
Chaudoir, S. R., & Quinn, D. M. (2010). Revealing
concealable stigmatized identities: The impact of

disclosure motivations and positive first‐disclosure
experiences on fear of disclosure and well‐being.
Journal of Social Issues, 66(3), 570-584.
Delignières, D., Torre, K., & Bernard, P. L. (2011).
Transition from persistent to anti-persistent
correlations in postural sway indicates velocity-based
control. PLoS Comput Biol, 7(2), e1001089.
Derlega, V. J., & Berg, J. H. (Eds.). (2013). Selfdisclosure: Theory, research, and therapy. Springer
Science & Business Media.
Eke, A., Herman, P., Bassingthwaighte, J., Raymond, G.,
Percival, D., Cannon, M., ... & Ikrényi, C. (2000).
Physiological time series: distinguishing fractal noises
from motions. Pflügers Archiv, 439(4), 403-415.
Era, P., & Heikkinen, E. (1985). Postural sway during
standing and unexpected disturbance of balance in
random samples of men of different ages. Journal of
Gerontology, 40(3), 287-295.
Ihlen, E. A. (2012). Introduction to multifractal
detrended fluctuation analysis in Matlab. Fractal
Analyses: Statistical And Methodological Innovations
And Best Practices, 97.
Jones, K. P., & King, E. B. (2014). Managing
Concealable Stigmas at Work A Review and
Multilevel Model. Journal of Management,
0149206313515518.
Kent, J. S., Hong, S. L., Bolbecker, A. R., Klaunig, M.
J., Forsyth, J. K., O’donnell, B. F., & Hetrick, W. P.
(2012). Motor deficits in schizophrenia quantified by
nonlinear analysis of postural sway. PLoS one, 7(8),
e41808.
Lipsitz, L. A. (2004). Physiological complexity, aging,
and the path to frailty. Science's SAGE KE, 2004(16),
pe16.
Marsh, A. A., Ambady, N., & Kleck, R. E. (2005). The
effects of fear and anger facial expressions on
approach-and avoidance-related behaviors. Emotion,
5(1), 119.
Riccio, G. E., & Stoffregen, T. A. (1991). An ecological
theory
of
motion
sickness
and
postural
instability. Ecological psychology, 3(3), 195-240.
Riley, M. A., Baker, A. A., & Schmit, J. M. (2003).
Inverse relation between postural variability and
difficulty of a concurrent short-term memory task.
Brain Research Bulletin, 62(3), 191-195.
Riley, M. A., Shockley, K., & Van Orden, G. (2012).
Learning from the body about the mind. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 4(1), 21-34.
Smart, L., & Wegner, D. M. (2000). The hidden costs of
hidden stigma. The social psychology of stigma, 220242.
Van Orden, G., Hollis, G., & Wallot, S. (2012). The
blue-collar brain. Scale-free Dynamics and Critical
Phenomena in Cortical Activity, 822, 114.

1954

